TENDER COUNSEL AND ADVICE, BY WAY OF EPISTLE, To all those who are sensible of
Their DAY of VISITATION, And who have received The CALL of the LORD, By the
light and spirit of his SON in their hearts, to partake of the great salvation,
wherever scattered throughout the world; FAITH, HOPE and CHARITY, which
overcome the world, be multiplied among you.

By WILLIAM PENN.

THE FIFTH EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA. PRINTED BY ENOCH STORY, IN STRAWBERRY ALLEY. 1783.

TENDER COUNSEL AND ADVICE, BY WAY OF EPISTLE, To all those who are sensible of
THE DAY OF THEIR VISITATION, etc.
My dearly beloved FRIENDS,
WHO are sensible of the day of your visitation, by the light of the LORD JESUS
in your hearts, and who have gladly received the holy testimony thereof, by
which you have beheld the great apostasy that is in the world, from the life,
power and spirit of GOD, and the gross degeneracy that is amongst those called
Christians, from the purity, self-denial, and holy example of CHRIST JESUS, and
his primitive followers, and how pride, lust and vanity reign, and how
christendom is become a cage of unclean birds: Who have mourned under the sense
thereof, and have cried in your souls, How long, how long, how long O Lord God,
holy and true, will it be, ere thou take to thyself thy great power, and
reignest! To whom the world is become a burden and the vanities and glory of it
but vexation of spirit: Who despise the things that are seen, which are
temporal, for the sake of the things that are not seen, which are eternal:
Whose eyes look through and beyond time and mortality, to that eternal city,
whose builder and maker is GOD: Whose daily cries and travels are to follow
JESUS in the way of regeneration; to live as pilgrims in this world, for the
sake of that glory which shall hereafter be revealed, that can never fade away,
that you may attain unto the eternal rest of GOD: To you my dear Friends, to
you it is, that the God and Father of him that was dead and is alive, and
lives for evermore, CHRIST JESUS, the faithful and true witness, who has
loved and visited my soul, has now moved upon my spirit to write, and visit
you with this Epistle. Receive it then, and with it the endeared salutation of
that love and life which are not of this world, but overcome the world. Great
and frequent are my travels for you, that you may persevere and not faint, but
endure to the end; that you may obtain that glorious salvation and redemption
that is in CHRIST JESUS. Yea, for this are my knees bended before the God of
the spirits of all flesh, that you may be entirely kept; that you may so run,
as you may obtain; and so fight, as you may overcome; that an immortal crown
and kingdom may be your portion, when all sins and sorrows shall be done away.

AND that this you may do, hear my exhortation to you in the spirit of truth.
Dwell in the sense that GOD has begotten in your hearts by the light and
spirit of his Son, who is now in you, reconciling you unto himself. Watch, that
this blessed sense be preserved in you, and it will preserve you. For where the
holy sense is lost, profession, even of the highest truths, cannot preserve
against the enemies assaults; but the gates of hell will prevail against them
and the enemy's darts will wound them, and they will be carried again captive
by the power of his temptations. Wherefore I say again, live and abide in that
light and life which has visited you, and begotten an holy sense in your
hearts, and which has made sin exceeding sinful to you, and you weary and
heavy laden under the burden of it; and has raised in you a spiritual travail,
hunger and thirst after your SAVIOR, that he might deliver you: That ye might
be filled with the righteousness of his kingdom that is without end.

DEAR FRIENDS, GOD has breathed the breath of life in you, and in measure you
live; for dead men and women do not hear, or hunger or thirst; neither do they
feel weights and burdens as you do. The day of the LORD is dawned upon you, and
it burns as an oven; you know it; and all works of iniquity are as stubble
before it; you feel it so, they cannot stand before the LORD: His judgments
take hold of them and consume them. O love his judgments! that with those of
old you may say, In the way of thy judgments, O LORD, have we waited for thee;
the desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee. With our
souls have we desired thee in the night, yea with our spirits within us will we
seek thee early. For when thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of
the world will learn righteousness. Part, part with all, my dear Friends, that
is for judgment, let him arise in your hearts, that his and your enemies may be
scattered: That you may witness him to be stronger in you, than he that is in
the world. If the desire of your soul be to his name, and the remembrance of
him, you will love his judgments and abide there the days he allows for your
purification. Behold his blessed visitation is upon you: His angel has saluted
you, and his holy spirit has overshadowed you: He has begotten holy desires
in you; I pray that they may never be extinguished, and that you may never
faint. Wherefore look to JESUS that is the author, that he may be the finisher.
I testify for GOD, he has appeared to; yea, he has said to you, as to Andrew,
Phillip, etc. "follow me" And I say unto you follow him: Come and see where he
dwells; do not lose sight of him, let him be lifted up in you and your eye be
to him: Who, wherever he is lifted up, draws all such after him. This is the
reason why people are not now drawn after CHRIST, because he is not lifted up
in their hearts, he is not exalted in their souls; he is rejected, oppressed,
crucified and buried; yea they have rolled a stone upon him, and set guards,
that he should not rise in them to judge them.

But blessed are you, whose eyes have seen one of the days of the Son of Man:
Blessed are you at whose doors he has knocked, to whose hearts he has
appeared, who have received his holy visitation, who believe it is he and not
another; and therefore have said in your hearts, with Nathaniel of old, Thou
art the Son of GOD, thou art the King of Israel; and with Thomas, "My Lord and
my God." O what have you my dear Friends, to do, but to keep with him for ever!
For whither should you go, the words of eternal life dwell with him? He is full
of grace, and full of truth, and of his fullness ye have received grace for
grace. And this is that grace which brings salvation to all that receive it,
embrace it, and will be led by it. For it teaches such, as it did the ancient
Christians, to deny all ungodliness, and the world's lusts, and to live soberly
and godlikely in this present evil world, looking for that blessed hope, and
glorious appearing of the great God, and their Savior Jesus Christ, who has
given himself for them, to deliver them from all sin, and to redeem them from
all iniquity. You know that you are bought with a price, now you feel it, and
in measure discern the preciousness of that price which has bought you,
namely, the life of the dear son of God. Grieve not his spirit that is ready to
seal you to the day of your perfect redemption; but give up your bodies, souls
and spirits to his service, whose they are, that they may be ordered by him to
his glory.

I write not to you as to the world, for you are called out of the world by him
that has overcome the world; that as he is not of this world, so you may not
be of this world. Come then out of it more and more, out of the nature, out of
the spirit, out of the fruits, and out of the fashions of the world! They are
all for the fire. Christ said, The world loves its own. Search with the light
of the Lord Jesus, what there is in you that the world owneth and loves: For
that is its own. And consider what it is, that the world is offended with: Not
with that which comes from itself, of its own making and inventing, but that
which crosses its inventions; which is of another nature, and springs from
another root. O be not conformed to the fashions of this world, that please the
lust, which grieveth the spirit of God; but be ye renewed in your minds; and
being so within, you will be as a new people without.

They that have been truly with Christ are quickly discovered; they cannot be
hid. So it was of old; the Jews said of the disciples, these men have been with
Jesus; their speech and carriage bewrayed them; their outsides were not like
the outsides of other men; they were not current with the fashions and customs
of that time. Nor can they that have been with Jesus, conform to the vain
fashions and customs of this world; wherefore be not you, in any sort, of this
world, but give diligence to make your holy high calling and election sure: For
many are called and few are chosen; and the reason is, they are slothful
servants, they hide their talent in a napkin, neglect the day of their
visitation, and work not out their salvation with fear and trembling: And then
the night overtaketh them, in which they can never work the works of
repentance; and the things that belong to their peace are hid from their eyes
for ever.

But the Lord forbid, that it should be so with any of you: No, no, I hope,
yea, I believe better things of you. And I am assured, that as you keep your
hearts chastely to the light and grace, with which you have been visited of the
Lord; you shall be kept to eternal salvation. For they are saved that walk in
the light: Into the light the enemy cannot come; for the light is Christ Jesus,
and the enemy has no part or place in him; he is driven out of the holy place
by transgression, and he is now a fugitive from heaven; but he goes up and
down the earth, seeking whom he may devour, whom he can catch and carry away
with his baits and snares.

Wherefore, Woe to the inhabitants of the earth, that is, the earthly
inhabitants, such as love and live in the earthly nature; for all such shall be
a prey to him, he shall have power over them, and keep up his kingdom in them.
But those that receive and abide in Christ Jesus, the light, life and truth,
are out of his reach; they are in the munition of rocks, under the pavilion of
the Lord, in the safe ark of the most high God. However, he is permitted to
tempt and try, till the time shall come, that he is not only trodden under
foot, but also bound and cast into the lake, that burns with fire and
brimstone. And he is the greatest enemy to those that turn their backs upon
him; wherefore he watches to surprise them, that he might take them at
unawares, and triumph over their failings^ And for that reason Christ Jesus
preached "the watch" earnestly, and with repetition to his disciples.

Now, my Dear Friends, several things (or, the enemy in several appearances)
will attend you in this holy march you are making to the eternal land of rest;
of which I would caution you, that you may, none of you, make shipwreck of any
of those holy beginnings you have experienced, by the light and spirit of the
Lord. Beware of vain thoughts, for they oppress and extinguish the true sense.
These vain thoughts arise from the enemy's presentation of objects to the mind,
and the mind's looking upon them, till they have made impressions thereupon,
and influenced the mind into a love of them. This is a false liberty, a
dangerous, yea, a destructive liberty, to the holy sense that GOD has begotten
in any. For as this is not received, but hindered by such thoughts, so it is
not improved, but destroyed by them. The divine sense in the soul is begotten
by the LORD: It Is his life and spirit, his holy breath and power, that
quickens the soul, and makes it sensible of its own state, and of GOD's
will; and that raises fervent desires in it to be eternally blessed. This is
that which Satan rages at; he fears his kingdom, he finds that he is come
that will cast him out of his possessions. He cries out, Why art thou come to
torment me before my time? He is the father of vain thoughts, he begets them
in the mind, on purpose to draw off the mind from that sense, and to exercise
it in variety of conceptions, in a self-liberty of thinking and imagining
concerning persons and things. Here he offers his baits, and lays his
snares, and never fails to catch and defile the unwatchful soul.

Now if you should say, What are these vain thoughts? I tell you, my friends,
all those thoughts and conceptions that either bring not real profit to the
soul, or that grieve, hurt, or oppress that holy sense which is begotten of GOD
in the soul. And that, by which thoughts are to be examined, is the light of
CHRIST JESUS: For as that which may be known of GOD is manifest in men, for GOD
has shown it unto them, as says the apostle Paul to the Romans; so all things
that are reproved, are made manifest by the light; for whatsoever makes
manifest, is light, says he to the Ephesians. By this light of CHRIST JESUS
examine your own thoughts; see whence they rise, from whence they come, and
what they tend to. O friends, here is a mystery; and the evil one works here
in a mystery! For where he cannot prevail to draw out the mind from its
sensible habitation, to embrace his representations of old lusts and pleasures,
that are wicked in themselves, he will present you with lawful objects, your
outward enjoyments, business and calling, and steal in upon your minds in the
crowd of these lawful things, and there lay his snares hid and covered, and at
unawares catch you.

My Dear Friends, blessed are they that see JESUS their captain going before
them, and counselling and leading them in all their outward and lawful
concerns, that they offend not. For this know, you may unlawfully think of
lawful things, either in thinking on them unseasonably, when your souls should
be wholly retired, and exercised in the LORD's light to feel his presence, in
which is heavenly life: Or in thinking on lawful things carelessly, not with
regard to your guide: He that has bought you throughout with his own precious
blood, that he might have the government of your bodies, souls and spirits;
that is, of your bodily concerns, as well as of the things relating to your
souls and spirits. This prevents much harm and mischief in business and
families, and preserves the divine sense that GOD has begotten, and the
creature in it; so that its fellowship and peace with the LORD runs as a
river, it is not stopped or hindered by the designs of the enemy. Or lastly, in
thinking on lawful things excessively, too much, more than is needful, without
just limits, thereby gratifying the fleshly mind, which is enmity with GOD, and
that sense which he begets in the soul. O the mountains that are raised by
such vain thoughts, betwixt GOD and the soul! How does the soul come under an
eclipse, lose sight, and at last all sense of the living GOD, like men drowned
in great waters! And thus many have lost their condition, and grown insensible;
and then questioned all former experiences, if they were not mere imaginations;
till at last they arrived at Atheism, denying and deriding GOD and his work,
and those that kept their integrity: For whom is reserved the blackness of
darkness for ever, unless they timely and truly repent.

But when this subtle enemy of man's salvation sees, that he cannot make you
bow to the glory of this world, that all his snares that he lays in the
things that are seen, which are temporal, are discovered and broken; and that
your eyes are directed to those things that are eternal, then will he turn
accuser. He will aggravate your sins, and plead the impossibility of their
remission: He will seem to act the advocate for the justice of GOD, that he
might cast you into despondency, that you may doubt of deliverance and
salvation. Many are the thoughts with which he perplexeth the sons and
daughters of men; but this know, that he was a liar from the beginning. For the
LORD does not visit the souls of any to destroy them, but to save them. For
this end has he sent his son a light into the world; and they that bring their
deeds to it, are not of the Devil, who hates the light. Neither does the LORD
cause people to hunger and thirst after him, and not fill them with his good
things.

Be assured, my Friends, wherever the LORD has begotten desires after him, and
wherever sin is become exceeding sinful, yea, a burden to the soul, the Devil's
kingdom is shaken, the prince of this world is begun to be judged, and GOD is
at work for the redemption of that soul. Hearken not to the voice of the
serpent, for that lost your first parents their blessed paradise: And with the
same subtle and lying spirit he would hinder you from returning into Paradise.
But when he is herein disappointed, he shifteth his temptation, and presents
another temptation, viz. That though you have begun well, yet ye will never be
able to hold out to the end. That the temptations are so many, and the enemy so
strong, they are not to be overcome by you; and that it were better never to
profess such high things, than to fall short of them; this will but bring
reproach to the way, and the people of it. Again, that it is curiosity, and
spiritual pride, and conceitedness, for you to be thought better than others;
with the like suggestions, on purpose to stagger your resolutions, and weaken
your faith. Ah! he is a devil still, a liar, and a destroyer; Look not to him,
but keep to JESUS, who has called you. Keep but your eye to him, of whom the
brazen serpent in the Wilderness was a figure, and he shall cure you of all
diseases, of all wounds and stingings of serpents and scorpions, etc. that may
attend you in the wilderness-travel* which is the hour of your temptation. GOD
is exalting him, in you, a Savior; there is he manifested, viz. to destroy
sin. Yea, stronger is he that is in you, than he that is in the world: He is
able to bind the strong man, and cast him out; So but believe truly in him, and
cleave to him. Remember there were evil spies of old, those that brought false
intelligence, that Canaan was a pleasant land, but the way impassable; yet the
faithful entered and inherited. Keep therefore in the righteous life of JESUS,
and walk in his holy light, and you shall be preserved, through all exercises
and difficulties, unto the eternal Canaan, the land of rest. Neither wonder at
these things, that temptations attend you, or that the LORD tries and proves
you; it is the way of all that are gone to GOD, for even JESUS was tempted and
tried, and is therefore become our captain, "because he overcame." Neither be
ye cast down, because the LORD sometimes seems to hide his face from you,
that you feel not always that joy and refreshment that you sometimes enjoy; I
know what work the enemy makes of these withdrawings of the LORD. Perhaps he
will insinuate, that GOD has deserted you in his displeasure, that you must
never expect to see him, that he will never come again: And, by these and the
like stratagems, he will endeavor to shake your faith and hope, and distract
you with fear, and to beget great jealousies and doubts in you; and by
impatience and infidelity frustrate your good beginnings. But though David said
of old, in the distress of his soul, One day shall I fall by the hand of Saul,
yet ye overcame him, and had the crown. Yea, the LORD JESUS himself cried out
in the agony of the cross, My GOD, my GOD, why have thou forsaken me!
Nevertheless he gloriously triumphed over all, and led captivity captive, for
the joy that was set before him: Which joy is before you; it is the mark of the
price of your great and holy calling. Wherefore faint not, neither murmur, if
your spiritual Moses seems to withdraw a while from you. Do not you make images
in his absence, neither wax wanton; but possess your souls in holy fear and
patience, waiting with holy reverence and diligence for his appearance, who is
your victorious leader.

All these things are for your good, that proud flesh may be debased, and that
the soul may be redeemed. Wherefore bear the hand of the LORD, whom he loves,
he chasteneth; his anger lasts not for ever, but his mercies endure for ever.
Shrink not from the pure operations of his holy word, let it divide asunder
between the soul and spirit, the joints and marrow in you; suffer your right
hands to be cut off, and your right eyes to be plucked out, that do offend, let
not the pain scare you. O bear the pure searchings of this heavenly word! Yea,
if your minds be stayed in it, you will find it to be a word of patience which
will keep you; for all virtue is in it. Keep it and be still: It is good, said
one of old, that a man should both hope, and quietly wait for the salvation of
GOD. Yea, it is good for a man, that he bear the yoke in his youth (this is
your youth) and such an one sits alone, and keeps silence, because he has
borne it upon him. Ah blessed are they that bear this holy yoke, who are come
to this silence, who die daily; that not they, but CHRIST may live and rule in
them; therefore hear him, and take up his cross and follow him. Follow him,
keep him company, he has beaten the path, and trod the way, start not aside at
his cup, neither shun his baptism: Go with him to Caiaphas, to Pilate, and to
the cross; die with him to world and you shall rise with him unto life eternal.
Honor, glory and immortality are at the end of this holy race: O that you may
run it with cheerfulness and perseverance!

But this is not the utmost stratagem of the enemy; he has yet a more
plausable and a more dangerous device, wherewith to destroy the holy sense that
GOD has quickened, where he sees these temptations resisted, and that he
cannot hinder a religious work in the soul, by any of his baits taken from the
things that are seen; and that is, his drawing you into imaginations of GOD and
CHRIST and Religion; and into religious duties, not in GOD's way or time; (...)
with CHRIST's spirit. Here he is transformed into the appearance of an angel of
light and would seem religious now, a saint, yea a leader into religion, so
that he may but keep him out of his office, whose right is to teach, prepare,
enable and lead his Children with his Holy Power and Spirit. Yea, if he can but
keep the creature's will alive, he knows there is a ground for him to work
upon; a place that he can enter, and in which his seed will grow. If this Will
of Man be standing, he knows that the will of GOD can not be done on earth as
it is done in heaven. O this Will is GOD's enemy, yea the soul's enemy; and all
will worship arises hence; Yea, it is the offspring of the serpent, and of the
will of man and it can never please GOD. Let all beware of this; GOD is a
Spirit, and he will be worshipped in his own Spirit, in his own life. The
worship of GOD stands in the Will of GOD; and is not brought forth of the
will of the flesh, or of the will of man. Remember that the word came not to
Esau, the first birth, the hunter that staid not at home; but to Jacob the
plain man that dwelt in tents; to him came the Word of the LORD, that dwelt in
a still and quiet Habitation. For in the true silence is GOD's Word heard, into
which the hunting nature of Esau, the first birth, can never come. It can never
stand still, and therefore it can never see the Salvation of God. Against this
nature watch, and know Jacob, that inherits the birthright; the election of
God, (though now a worm) to wrestle and prevail. The worm Jacob, is Israel a
Prince, to whom belong the statutes and the ordinances. The Word came to Jacob
and the Statutes to Israel: Here is dominion government, exaltation: This is
the lot of worm Jacob. Wait therefore, till the Angel move upon the waters,
before you step one step. Are ye followers of the Lamb that has visited you,
the captain of your Salvation? Run not in your own wills, wait for his word of
command, do nothing of your own heads and contrivings, yet do all with
diligence that he requires. Remember what became of them of old that offered
false fire: O stay till a coal from his holy altar touch your hearts and your
lips. Jesus told his mother at the marriage in Cana in Galilee, his hour was
not yet come: He rejected the will in her, and staid till his time was come,
that is his Father's time, in whose hands are the times and (...): Whose Will
he came to do, and (...) own: Leaving us therein a blessed example, that we
should also follow his steps; that is not to attempt to perform even things of
God in our own wills, nor out of God's season and time, which is the best: for
in his seasons he is with us; but in our own seasons and wills he withdraws
himself from us. And this is the cause that the nation's worshippers have
little sense of God in their hearts and that their Priests cry out against
inward sense; lest the people should go alone, and come to a more acceptable
worship.

My dear FRIENDS, as you would enjoy God's presence, love and life, and be
acceptable with him, wait in his holy light and spirit that has visited you,
against these stratagems of Satan, and wake not your beloved before his time:
Watch against the Will, that instrument of Satan and enemy of God's glory and
your own comfort. Let it be bridled, subjected and kept under CHRIST's yoke,
yea, subdued, that the Will of God may be done in you and by you, which
brings glory to the Lord and eternal peace to the soul. One sigh rightly
begotten, out-weigheth a whole volume of self-made prayers: For that which is
born of flesh, is flesh, and reaches not to God's kingdom, he regards it
not; and all that is not born of the spirit is flesh. But a sigh, or a groan,
arising from a living sense of God's work in the heart, it pierces the clouds,
it enters the Heaven's; yea, the living God hears it, his regard is to it,
and his spirit helps the infirmity. He loves that which is of himself, and
has care over it, though as poor as worm Jacob. For the cries of the poor and
the sighings of the needy I will arise, says the LORD: The poor in spirit,
that have parted with all, that they may win CHRIST, that need him only and
seek him above all: Who have no helper in the earth, but have denied all
earthly helps, that he might bring and work their salvation for them. And as
you are not to run in your own wills, nor to offer up sacrifices of your own
preparing, so have a care how you touch with those that do; how you bow to
their wills, and join with their sacrifices. For all these things greatly help
to extinguish the divine sense begotten in your hearts by the word of life. And
as you are faithful to the Light and Spirit of CHRIST, which gives you to
discern and relish between that which stands in your own will, and the will
and motion of the Spirit of God in yourselves; so will you by the same light
discern and savor between that which proceeds from the will of man, and the
will and motions of the Spirit of God in others; and accordingly either to
have, or not to have fellowship with them: For what has light to do with
darkness? Or what has spirit to do with flesh? Or what has life to do with
death? For the grave cannot praise thee, O Lord; Death cannot celebrate thee:
They that go down into the pit cannot hope for thy truth. The living, the
living, he shall praise thee, as does my soul this day. This was the testimony
of the blessed prophet Isaiah, and it stands true forever. According to the
prophet, Thou have ordained peace for us, for thou have wrought all our works
in us.

Wherefore I exhort you in the spirit of truth, and in the counsel of the God
of truth, keep in the divine sense and watch, if you would endure to the end in
the will of GOD. And I say again, touch not with man-made ministers, nor
man-made worships, let their words be never so true: It Is but man, it is but
flesh, it is but the will, and it shall have no acceptance with GOD: O this is
the golden cup of the whore, that is gone from the leadings of the Spirit, with
which the nations are defiled; have nothing to do with it. Keep to CHRIST
JESUS, God's great light, follow him as he shines in your hearts, and ye will
not walk in darkness, but have the light of life; not of death to condemnation,
as in the world; but unto life, which is justification and peace. And remember,
that nothing brings to CHRIST, that comes not from CHRIST. Wherefore all
ministry that comes not from CHRIST, GOD's great prophet and high priest to
all true born christians, can not bring people to CHRIST. Man only gathers to
man, to hear and believe in man, and depend on man: And if the church of
Corinth sought a proof of Christ speaking in Paul, that had begotten them, and
had wrought the signs and works of an apostle in them; how much more reason
have you to demand a proof of Christ's speaking in the Priests and Ministers of
this world, who have not wrought the signs and works of apostles or true
ministers? And by what should you try them, but by the light and Spirit of
CHRIST in you? Yea, it is Christ Jesus in you that gives you to savor, if
others speak from Christ in them. And this the apostle refers the
Corinthians to, for a proof of Christ's speaking in him: For nothing leads to
God, but that which came from God, even Christ Jesus the Son of God. O let him
be your Vine, and know him to be your Fig Tree: Sit under his holy teachings,
whose doctrine shall drop as myrrh upon your souls: He will seed you with the
Bread of God that comes from Heaven, that feeds and leads them thither
that feed upon it: And he is that Bread.

Therefore wait and watch unto his daily and hourly visitations to your souls,
and against all the approaches of the enemy that so he may not take you at
unawares; but that you may be preserved from the power of his darts, and the
force of his temptation, by the holy armor of light, the defense of the
faithful ancients: If you be willing and obedient, you shall eat the good of
the land. Now is your day, now is your time, work while the light is with you;
for the night comes, in which no man can work. Not only the night of eternal
darkness to the wicked; but the night of death unto all: For in the grave there
is no repentance, neither can any man there work the works of GOD. You know the
foundation: Is he elect? Is he precious to you? Have ye chosen him? Yea, I am
satisfied you have: See what you build upon him. Have a care of hay, straw, and
stubble. Have a care of your own wills and spirits. Labor not for the bread
that perishes, as all the bread of man's making does: But labor you in the
light and strength of the LORD, for the bread that never perishes, that bread
that comes from Heaven, that nourishes the soul in that life that is
heavenly, that is hid with CHRIST in GOD, the root and father of life; that of
this fountain you may drink, that is clear and pure, that comes from the
Throne of God and the Lamb, and not of the muddy puddle of man's invention.
There is a bread that perishes, and there is a drink that perishes; and woe
to them that feed thereon, for their souls shall perish also if they repent
not. But there is a bread that never perishes, and there is a fountain that
springs up unto eternal life, and blessed are they that feed and drink
thereof, for they shall have eternal life with GOD. This is that which only
satisfies what is born of GOD; it will feed on no other bread nor drink of any
other water. I cannot but warn you all that are come to the LORD's day, that
you cease from all other food, from man and man's will and invention, for that
stifleth the divine sense; that overlayeth and kills this heavenly birth.
There are no grapes to be gathered of thorns, nor figs of thistles: Keep to
your own vine and fig tree, CHRIST JESUS, sit under him, that you may eat of
his fruit, which is the fruit of life, the hidden manna; hid from the nature
and spirit of this world, a mystery thereunto. Two things consider; first, you
must wait till the manna comes; and then you are not to be idle; you are to
work; and next, as it daily comes, so it must be daily gathered and fed upon:
For the manna that was gathered yesterday, will not be food for to day; it will
not keep for that use. And as it was outwardly, so it is inwardly. Time past is
none of thine: It Is not what thou wast, but what thou art; GOD will be daily
looked unto. Did thou eat yesterday? That feeds thee not to day: Therefore
JESUS taught his disciples, and us in them, to pray for our daily bread; for
the present sustenance, and to look no farther, but depend upon the Lord; and
live by faith in him, that raised up JESUS from the dead, so that the time to
come is no more ours, than the time past can be recalled.

Wherefore, blessed are they that fear the LORD, and confide in him, they shall
never be confounded: They shall lack no good thing; for the LORD loves Israel,
he is good unto Israel and all that are of an upright heart; whose hearts look
up to Heaven, and not down to the earth; neither love nor live in the vain
lusts of the world: Such shall abide in his holy Tabernacle, such shall dwell
in his holy hill, even they that walk uprightly, that work righteousness, and
speak the truth in their hearts; in whose sight a vile person is condemned, but
who honor them that fear the Lord.

O my Dear Friends, I know experimentally, that this is hard to flesh and
blood; that which is born of the corruptible seed; but that can never enter
into the kingdom of GOD: That must be crucified by CHRIST, that has crucified
Christ: Blood requires blood. Wherefore give that which is for the famine, to
the famine: For the fire, to the fire: And for the sword, to the sword. Let all
the sinful lusts be famished; let the stubble be burnt; and the corrupt, yea,
and the fruitless tree that cumbereth the ground, be cut down and cast into the
fire. Let the work of the LORD be done in you; let him purge his floor, and
that thoroughly; that you may come out as pure as gold seven times tried,
fitted for his use that has chosen you; that you may bear his mark, and wear
his inscription, Holiness to the LORD; so you will be vessels of honor in his
house. Therefore I say, let your houses be swept by the judgment of the LORD,
and the little leaven of the kingdom, leaven you in body soul and spirit, that
holy temples you may be to his glory. This I know is your desire, that are on
your travel to this blessed enjoyment.

Well, you believe in GOD, believe also in CHRIST the light that has visited
you: And if you truly believe, you will not make haste: You will not make haste
out of the hour of judgment; you will stay the time of your trial and
cleansing, that you may be as I said, as pure as gold seven times tried; and so
receive the LORD's mark and stamp, his image and approbation; that you may be
his throughout, in body, soul and spirit; sealed to him in an eternal covenant.

Dear FRIENDS, gird up the loins of your minds, watch and hope to the end; be
not slothful, neither strive; despond not, nor be presumptuous: Be as little
children; for of such is the kingdom of GOD. Dispute not, neither consult with
flesh and blood: Let not the prudence of this world draw you from the
simplicity that is in CHRIST JESUS. Love and obey the Truth; hide his living
word in your hearts, though it be as a hammer, a fire, a sword, yet it
reconcileth and brings you to GOD, and will be sweeter to you that love it,
than is the honey and the honeycomb. Fear not, but bear the Cross, yea,
without the camp, the camp of this world's lusts, glory, and false worships.
But this know, when the enemy cannot prevail by any of these stratagems, if you
resist him as the God of this world's glory, the Prince of the air, and the
false Prophet, then he turns Dragon; then he declares open war; then you are
Heretics, Fanatics, Enthusiasts, Seducers, Blasphemers, unworthy to live upon
the earth. But in all these things rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great
shall be your reward in the kingdom of the Father. What if your parents rise up
against you; if your brethren betray you; if your companions desert and deride
you; if you become the song of the drunkard, and the scorn and merriment of the
vile person? Yea, though the powers of the earth should combine to devour you,
let not your hearts be troubled. Shun not the cross, but despise the shame, and
cast your care upon the LORD, who will be afflicted with you in all your
afflictions: In the fire he will be with you, and in the water he will not
forsake you. O let your eye be to him, whose name is as a strong tower, the
sanctuary of the righteous in all ages; that you may be able to say in your
hearts, with David of old, The LORD is my light and my salvation, whom shall I
fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? Though an
host should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear; though war should rise
against me, in this will I be confident. One thing have I desired of the Lord,
that will I seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the LORD all the days
of my life, to behold the beauty of the LORD and to enquire in his temple. For
in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his pavilion, he shall set me upon a
rock. When my father and my mother forsake me, then the LORD will take me up. I
had fainted unless I had believed to see the goodness of the LORD in the land
of the living. Wait on the LORD, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen
thine heart. Wait I say on the LORD.

O, My dear FRIENDS, let it be your daily and hourly work to wait upon GOD. How
often does David speak of waiting upon GOD? He felt the sweetness of it;
therefore retire into your holy chamber. Be still, and the LORD will speak
comfortably unto you. Blessed are they that wait upon him; whose expectations
are only from him. For though the youth shall faint and be weary, and the young
men shall utterly fail, they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their
strength, they shall mount up with wings as eagles, they shall run and not be
weary, they shall walk and not faint. I waited (said David) patiently for the
LORD, and he inclined unto me, and heard my cry. And this was his testimony,
Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, to deliver their soul
from death, and to keep them alive in famine: For the LORD is nigh unto them
that are of a broken heart, and saves such as be of a contrite spirit: David
knew it therefore he could speak it.

O, My dear FRIENDS, who are compassed about with many tribulations; the Lord
God, your staff and strength, is near you to sustain you. Have you borne the
holy reproach of JESUS, and despised the shame of his cross, and did he ever
desert you? Be not cast down, though to the eye of reason there seems none to
help, no, not one to save. Though enemies within, and enemies without, encamp
themselves about you; though Pharaoh and his host pursue you and great
difficulties be on each hand of you, and the dismal red sea be before you,
stand still; make no bargains for yourselves, let all flesh be silent before
the LORD, and his arm shall bring you salvation. Yea, when you are ready to go
down into the pit, that your throat is dry with crying, and your eyes seem to
fail with waiting, his salvation shall spring as the morning; because his
mercies are to all generations, and that the seed of Jacob never sought his
face in vain. "The poor man cries" says David: -- What poor man was this? He
that is poor in his own eyes, that has no helper in the earth but GOD. This
poor man cried, and the LORD heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles.
Our souls, said the righteous of old, waited for the LORD, for he is our help,
and our shield for ever.

Wherefore my dear Friends, be not you discomforted, for there is no new thing
happened unto you: It Is the ancient path of the righteous: For thy sake (says
David) have I borne reproach: I am become a stranger to my brethren, and an
alien unto my mothers children. When I wept, and chastened my soul with
fasting, that was to my reproach. I made sackcloth also my garment, and I
became a proverb to them: They that sit in the gate, speak against me; and I
was the song of the drunkards. Save me, O GOD, for the waters are come in unto
my soul: And the water-floods are ready to swallow me up. They persecute him
whom thou have smitten; and they talk to the grief of those whom thou have
wounded. Do you not know this, Dear Friends? Are not your tears become a
reproach, your fasts a wonder, your paleness a derision, your plainness a
proverb, and your serious and retired conversation a bye-word? Yea, when the
LORD has wounded, have not they also grieved? And when the LORD has smitten
you, have not they mocked? But this was David's joy; The LORD is my shepherd, I
shall not want: He restores my soul, he leads me in the path of
righteousness for his name's sake; he makes me to lie down in green pastures:
He leads me beside the still waters. Yea, though I walk through the valley of
the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me, thy rod and thy
staff comfort me: Who was the comforter and preserver of Shadrach, Meshach and
Abednego, that refused to obey the King's command against the commandment of
GOD? They would not bow to his image; but rather chose the fiery furnace, than
to commit idolatry, or bow to another thing than to the living God. Did not we
cast three men into the midst of the fire? said Nebuchadnezzar; lo, I see four
men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt: And the
form of the fourth is like the Son of GOD. O, my Friends, the fire obeys him
as well as the winds and seas: All power is given to the Son of GOD, who is
given to you for your salvation. Well, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, the
King calls out of the fire, and they have no harm; though the mighty men that
cast them into the fiery furnace, were consumed. The GOD of Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abednego, is magnified by the King's decree; and Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego, are by the King highly prefered. Here is the end of faithfulness;
here is the blessing of perseverance: GOD will bring honor to his name,
through the patience and integrity of his people.

And it was this Son of GOD that preserved Daniel in the lion's den; it was his
voice, that David said Divides the flames of fire; he rides upon the winds,
he sits upon the floods. The voice of the LORD is powerful; the voice of the
Lord is full of Majesty: They that trust in him shall never be confounded.
Blessed are they whose God is the Lord: For he is a present help in the needful
time of trouble. The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them that fear him
and he delivers them. O taste and see that the Lord is good: Blessed is the
man that trusts in him. O fear the Lord, for there is no want to them that
fear him. The young lions shall lack and the old lions suffer hunger; but they
that seek the Lord, shall not want any good thing. Many are the afflictions of
the righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of them all; for the Lord
redeemeth the souls of his servants and none of them that trust in him, shall
be made desolate.

For which cause, My dear Friends; cast away every weight and every burden and
the sin that does so easily beset you. Neither look at the enemy's strength,
nor at your own weakness; but look unto JESUS, the blessed author of your
convincement and faith: The mighty one, on whom GOD has laid help, for all
those that believe in his name; receive his testimony and live in his doctrine,
who said to his dear followers of old, Be of good cheer, I have overcome the
world: Fear not little flock; it is your father's good pleasure to give you the
kingdom: And they that endure to the end shall be saved. I will not leave you
comfortless (said he) I will come to you; he that is with you shall be in you.
This was the hope of their glory; the foundation of their building, which
stands sure. And though sorrow comes over night, yet joy shall come in the
morning. Ye shall weep and lament (said Jesus) but the world shall rejoice; and
ye shall be sorrowful, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy and their
rejoicing into howling. and lo I am with you to the end of the world. Be ye
therefore encouraged 'in the holy way of the LORD; wait diligently for his
daily manifestations into your souls, that you may be strengthened in your
inward man, with might and power to do the will of God on earth as it is done
in Heaven. O watch that ye enter not into temptation: Yea, watch unto prayer,
that ye enter not into temptation, and that you fall not by the temptation.
CHRIST said to Peter, Can not thou watch one hour? Every one has an hour of
temptation to go through; and this is the hour that every one is to watch.
JESUS the captain of our Salvation, was under great temptations; he was sad
unto death; he did sweat-drops of blood; but he watched, he prayed, he groaned;
yea, he cried with strong cries: But through suffering overcame: and remember,
how in the wilderness he was tempted, but the Angels of the Lord ministered to
him. So they that follow him in the way of the tribulations and patience of his
kingdom, God's Angel shall minister unto them all: Yea, he will keep them in
the hour of temptation: He will carry their heads above the waves and deliver
them from the devouring floods.

Wherefore finally, My Friends, I say unto you, in the name of the Lord, be of
good cheer: Look to JESUS, and fear not man whose breath is in his nostrils;
but be valiant for the truth on earth. Love not your lives unto the death, and
you shall receive a crown of life and glory; which the God of the fathers, the
God of the prophets, the God of the apostles and the God of the martyrs and
true confessors of Jesus; yea, the God and father of our LORD JESUS CHRIST,
shall give unto all those that keep the pure testimony of his Son in their
hearts, and patiently and faithfully endure to the end.

Now to him that is able to keep you from falling, and to present you faultless
before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy: To the only wise GOD our
SAVIOR, be glory and majesty, dominion and power both now and ever. Amen.

I am your FRIEND that sincerely loves you and earnestly travels for your
redemption. WILLIAM PENN.
Wrote in the YEAR 1677.

