OBSERVATIONS ON A LATE PAMPHLET, ENTITLED, "Considerations upon the Society
or Order of the Cincinnati," CLEARLY EVINCING THE INNOCENCE AND PROPRIETY OF
THAT HONORABLE AND RESPECTABLE INSTITUTION. In ANSWER to Vague CONJECTURES,
False INSINUATIONS, and ILL-FOUNDED OBJECTIONS.

BY AN OBSCURE INDIVIDUAL.

HEROES arose,
Who, (scorning coward self) for OTHERS lived,
Toiled for THEIR ease, and for THEIR safety bled.
THOMSON'S Poem on Liberty. Men who HONESTLY engage themselves in the public
cause, must prepare themselves for events, which will at once demand their
patience and rouse their indignation.

JUNIUS. PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by ROBERT BELL, in Third-Street. Price,
one-fourth of a Dollar. M,DCC,LXXXIII.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE CINCINNATI, etc. etc.
IT has been long ago observed (and every day's experience evinces with how
much truth and propriety) "That there is no gift of nature, nor effect of art,
however beneficial to mankind, which is not sometimes perverted to a
mischievous purpose." Whatever may be the cause of happiness, may also be the
cause of misery. The same medicine which skilfully applied has power to cure,
when ignorance or malice dictates, the prescription has an equal power to
destroy.

This preliminary observation holds strictly true with regard to the liberty of
the press, and will not (I trust) be thought to be here improperly applied, by
the attentive readers of a late pamphlet, entitled, "Considerations on the
Society or Order of the Cincinnati." The LIBERTY OF THE PRESS however (that
PALLADIUM of the rights of nature) is very properly protected in this country,
as the PILLAR that supports the whole fabric of freedom, and considering the
advantages which society derives from it, every member of the community ought
to rest satisfied with this conciliating reflection, "That in no single
instance is perfection the lot of humanity."

In this age of literary intelligence, no sooner has a popular pamphlet escaped
from the groans of the press, than it flies, (as it were instantaniously) to
every point of the compass, and if impregnated with venom, every where wafts
its poison from center to circumference. The press (in this enlightened era of
the world) finds employment for all the purposes of civil and of social life;
the most abstruse political reasonings are no longer held impervious to vulgar
eyes. The tippling philosopher, and the village politician, familiarly discuss
the most important subjects by the means of it, and sagaciously predict the
fate of kingdoms by the revolutions of the tankard. It must also be confessed,
that there is no character, no station of life, no man so just, no set of men
so respectable, to which it does not afford food for calumny to reproach, or
envy to malign. Perhaps there is nothing more important to the welfare of a
state, than that the channel of public information should slow pure and
incorrupt, and that citizen is at least respectable who only endeavors to
clear the stream from the filth with which it is impregnated. TO DO THIS is the
object of the ensuing sheets; and to dissipate error, as it confers no
inconsiderable benefit, surely it merits no vulgar praise.

The advantages of nature or of fortune have been observed in all ages (says
Johnson) to contribute little to the promotion of happiness. Those (whom the
splendour of their rank, or the extent of their capacity have placed upon the
summit of human life) have seldom given any just occasion to envy, in those who
look up to them from a lower station. Such is the infirmity of human nature,
that every appearance of superiority (however necessary to the policy and
government of a state) naturally excites sullen suspicion in the breasts of the
subordinate; and the misfortune is, that the best characters and the noblest
institutions are often marked out as the first objects of popular resentment.

"The fairest blossom is the reptile's food."

The very illiberal reflections and aggravated consequences deduced from the
institution of the order of the Cincinnati, will, I trust, be added as one more
to the innumerable proofs which history and experience already offers of this
melancholy truth.

It is recorded of the celebrated English poet Pope (who felt the full force of
detraction, from the peer at St. James's down to the porter at St. Giles's)
that when he published his poem of the Dunciad, he carefully collated all the
pieces that envy and ignorance had generated, and gave them (HIMSELF) entire to
the world.

Truth certainly derives double advantage from the effect of contrast. Light is
the more dazzling to him who emerges out of darkness, and the diamond has a
luster more brilliant by comparison. Induced by the same motives, I shall beg
leave to introduce here THE PLAN ITSELF, and those Rules and Orders of the
Society, which have raised so much ill grounded cavil, and ill supported
exception.

Cassius considers them BY RETAIL; let the people view them TOGETHER.

The PLAN for ESTABLISHING the SOCIETY or ORDER of the CINCINNATI.
IT having pleased the Supreme Governor of the universe, in the disposition of
human affairs, to cause the separation of the colonies of North America from
the domination of Great Britain, and, after a bloody conflict of eight years,
to establish them free, sovereign, and independent states, connected, by
alliances founded on reciprocal advantage, with some of the great princes and
powers of the earth.

To perpetuate, therefore, as well the remembrance of this great event, as the
mutual friendships which have been formed under the pressure of common danger,
and in many instances cemented by the blood of the parties, the officers of the
American army do hereby in the most solemn manner associate, constitute, and
combine themselves into one SOCIETY OF FRIENDS, to endure as long as they shall
endure, or any of their eldest male posterity, and in failure thereof, the
collateral branches, who may be judged worthy of becoming its supporters and
members.

The officers of the American army, having generally been taken from the
citizens of America, possess high veneration for the character of that
illustrious Roman, LUCIUS QUINTUS CINCINNATUS, and being resolved to follow his
example by returning to their citizenship, think they may with propriety
denominate themselves, THE SOCIETY OF THE CINCINNATI.

The following principles shall be immutable, and form the basis of the Society
of the Cincinnati.

An incessant attention to preserve inviolate those exalted rights and
liberties of human nature, for which they have fought and bled, and without
which the high rank of a rational being is a curse instead of a blessing.

An unalterable determination to promote and cherish between the respective
states, that union and national honor, so essentially necessary to their
happiness, and the future dignity of the American empire.

To render permanent the cordial affection subsisting among the officers: this
spirit will dictate brotherly kindness in all things, and particularly extend
to the most substantial acts of beneficence, according to the ability of the
society, toward those officers and their families, who unfortunately may be
under the necessity of receiving it.

The general society will, for the sake of frequent communications, be divided
into state societies, and those again into such districts as shall be directed
by the state societies.

The societies of the districts to meet as often as shall be agreed upon by the
state societies, those of the state on the fourth day of July annually, or
oftener if they find it expedient; and the general society on the first Monday
in May annually, so long as they shall deem it necessary; and afterward at
least once in every three years. At each meeting the principles of the
institution will be fully considered, and the best measures to promote them
adopted.

The state societies will consist of all the members residing in each state
respectively; and any members removing from one state to another is to be
considered in all respects, as belonging to the society of the state in which
he shall actually reside.

The state societies to have a president, vice president, secretary, treasurer,
and assistant treasurer, to be chosen annually, by a majority of votes, at the
state meeting.

Each state meeting shall write annually, or oftener if necessary, a circular
letter to the other state societies, noting whatever they may think worthy of
observation respecting the good of the society or the general union of the
states, and giving information of the officers chosen for the current year:
Copies of these letters shall be regularly transmitted to the secretary general
of the society, who will record them in a book to be assigned for that purpose.

The state society will regulate every thing respecting itself and the
societies of its districts, consistent with the general maxims of the
Cincinnati: judge of the qualifications of the members who may be proposed and
expel any members who, by a conduct inconsistent with a gentleman, and a man of
honor, or by an opposition to the interests of the community in general, or
the society in particular, may render himself unworthy to continue a member.

In order to form funds which may be respectable, and assist the unfortunate,
each officer shall deliver to the treasurer of the state society one months
pay, which shall remain for ever to the use of the state society, the interest
only of which, if necessary, to be appropriated to the relief of the
unfortunate.

Donations may be made by persons not of the society, and by members of the
society, for the express purpose of forming permanent funds for the use of the
state society, and the interest of these donations appropriated in the same
manner as that of the month's pay.

Moneys, at the pleasure of each member, may be subscribed in the societies of
the district, or the state societies, for the relief of the unfortunate
members, or the widows and orphans, to be appropriated by the state societies
only.

The meetings of the general society shall consist of its officers, and a
representation from each state society, in number not exceeding five, whose
expenses shall be borne by their respective state societies.

In the general meeting, the president, vice president, secretary, assistant
secretary, treasurer, and assistant treasurer generals, shall be chosen to
serve until the next meeting.

The circular letters which have been written by the respective state societies
to each other, and their particular laws, shall be read and considered, and all
measures concerted which may conduce to the general intention of the society.

It is probable that some persons may make donations to the general society,
for the purpose of establishing funds for the further comfort of the
unfortunate; in which case, such donations must be placed in the hands of the
treasurer general, the interest only of which to be disposed of, if necessary,
by the general meeting.

All the officers of the American army, as well those who have resigned with
honor, after three years service in the capacity of officers, or who have been
deranged by the resolutions of Congress upon the several reforms of the army,
as those who shall have continued to the end of the war, have the right to
become parties, to this institution; provided that they subscribe one month's
pay, and sign their names to the general rules in their respective state
societies; those who are present with the army immediately; and others, within
six months after the army shall be disbanded, extraordinary cases excepted. The
rank, time of service, resolution of Congress, by which any may have been
deranged, and place of residence must be added to each name. And as a testimony
of affection to the memory and the offspring of such officers as have died in
the service, their eldest male branches shall have the same right of becoming
members as the children of the society.

Those officers who are foreigners, not resident in any of the states, will
have their names enrolled by the secretary general, and are to be considered as
members in the societies of any of the states in which they may happen to be.

And as there are and will at all times be men in the respective states,
eminent for their abilities and patriotism, whose views may be directed to the
same laudable objects with those of the Cincinnati; it shall be a rule to admit
such characters, as honorary members of the society for their own lives only:
Provided always, that the number of honorary members in each state does not
exceed a ratio of one to four of the officers or their descendants.

Each state society shall obtain a list of its members, and at the first and
annual meeting the state secretary shall have engrossed on parchment, two
copies of the institution of the society, which every member present shall
sign; and the secretary shall endeavor to procure the signature of every
absent member; one of these lists to be transmitted to the secretary general,
to be kept in the archives of the society, and the other to remain in the hands
of the state secretary.

From the state lists the secretary general must make out, at the general
meeting, a complete list of the whole society, a copy of which he will furnish
each state secretary.

The Society shall have an Order by which its members shall be known and
distinguished, which shall be a Medal of Gold, of a proper size to receive the
emblems, and suspended by a Deep Blue Ribbon, two inches wide, edged with
White, descriptive of the union of America and France, viz.

The principal figure to be CINCINNATUS, three senators presenting him with a
sword, and other military ensigns; on a field in the back ground, his wife
standing at the door of their cottage, near it a plough and instruments of
husbandry; round the whole, Omnia reliquit servare rempublicam. On the reverse,
Sun rising; a city with open gates, and vessels entering the ports; Fame
crowning Cincinnatus with a wreath, inscribed, Virtutis permium. Below, Hands
joining, supporting a heart, with the motto, Esto perpetua, Round the whole,
Societas Cincinnatorum instituta, A. D. 1783.

The world gives the credit of this pamphlet to the pen of a celebrated lawyer,
and the many rhetorical flowers that decorate the performance, manifestly tends
to show the hand that planted them. The report, however has gained ground from
the silent acquiescence of the person to whom the production is attributed. And
if the child is not of his lawful issue, the sanction of bearing his name has
given it a title by adoption. For my own part I consider the learned gentleman
as publicly wearing his laurels, and not a little vain of his literary
accomplishments. Gentlemen of the long robe from their professional practice
acquire a wonderful fluency of expression and an uncommon facility of argument.
Engaged in the indiscriminate defense of right and wrong, from the force of
habit only, they argue a bad cause with the same zealous ardour that they would
defend a good one; and this too, I am willing to believe, without any very bad
design or malevolence of intention. With different sentiments I should feel an
inclination (too strong perhaps to resist in the present instance) to pay a
compliment to his understanding that might operate a little at the expense of
his integrity.

Conceiving myself addressing a lawyer (without using legal language) I shall
adopt a legal idea, for where there is a latitude that affords me the choice of
two constructions, that only will be taken by me which is the most agreeable to
candor and humanity.

Viewing only the back ground of the picture -- how gloomy would be the
prospect -- It might be urged, that the external appearance of patriotism was
often deficient in its constituent qualities -- That many assume that highest
of all human titles who have no other pretensions to such claims than
disseminating discontent -- propagating reports of dangerous councils, violated
rights and encroaching usurpations -- Instigating the people with outcries,
uttered with malignity and echoed by folly -- To which might be added, a very
sincere lamentation, that (as it were by some unfortunate fatality) loud and
empty declamation is always accepted by the multitude as the trumpet of truth
and fame, while the zephyr breath of wisdom and moderation is altogether
neglected or received with the most mortifying indifference. Certainly, however
that patriotism is questionable which professes to be disturbed by
incredibilities, and it is equally certain that the common marks of patriotism
are such as artifice may counterfeit or folly misapply.

I do not -- cannot -- will not -- attribute the considerations on the Society
or Order of the Cincinnati to such motives, they may be traced, I fancy, to
others which have their source in the weakness of human nature. The man of
genius and literature, who has toiled for his acquisitions, who has wasted the
midnight oil over his lucubrations, naturally pants after distinction, he feels
an ardent but honest ambition to show those talents to an admiring world, which
have cost him so much care to polish and improve. The institution of the order
of the Cincinnati springs up -- The author of the Considerations feels his
talents -- the cacoethes scribendi seconds -- stimulates this desire of
distinction -- the ardour of composition heats the imagination and (what flesh
alive) "With pulse that riots and with blood that glows," Could resist such an
opportunity, and when it was considered too how many fine things might be said
upon it, no wonder the learned gentleman was led captive by delusion!

Oh Vanity! Thou universal passion of the human breast! Not only the gay
blossoms of youth, but the bosom of age expands under thy influence. Thou art
the magnet which can attract every human passion with force irresistible! By
thee the idle are animated to action, the dissipated and luxurious to an
abandonment of their pleasures, and by thee, alas! the good are sometimes led
from the path of integrity to the road of vice.

Wanting leisure as well as books necessary to give that ample refutation of
the sheets before me which I could wish, I am principally urged to this weak
endeavor with a view to rouse some abler pen in defense of this honorable
order and valuable institution, not wanting in these advantages. It is my
intention, however, to observe upon the author's principal arguments, and
endeavor to show the people the subterfuges by which reason is eluded; and if
in the course of my observations I should exercise considerable freedom, the
author of the considerations ought not to be offended at a liberty of which he
has himself given an example.

THAT to which all would otherwise be indifferent, often attracts notice from
the appendage of a name, and the magnitude of the performance. But I must beg
my readers to emancipate their minds from that captivating delusion, and not to
set off with an idea, that much has been proved because much has been said.

The learned gentleman INTRODUCES his observations with an account of the Order
itself (the object of animadversion) and a splendid display of his talents for
description in a minute history of the medal and the ribband (in our author's
eyes) things most odious and constituting his chief charge of criminality. That
ribbands are most dangerous things what mortal can deny! Cupid in the person of
a pretty woman often shoots his most pointed arrows from behind them; but as an
article of male attire, to no other breast than Cassius's can they possibly
convey any apprehension of danger.

THEN follows an enumeration of the many great public characters who have
dignified the order by becoming honorary members of it, and who (if Cassius
supports his charge) certainly owe him an acknowledgment for making them
accessaries to a crime which our patriot lawyer reprobates in the bitterest
terms of asperity and reproach.

No task (however ardous) will the spirit of enterprise forego! Washington
himself cannot escape him -- by a novel idea, and argument inverted, our great
general is made to show his disapprobation of the Order, by condescending to
become a member of it.

CASES may undoubtedly be supposed (which practice I belive would warrant)
where a man may talk nonsense to a jury without injury to his character as a
lawyer; but to deliver deliberate nonsense to the world in writing is tempting
fortune too far, and committing an act of voluntary suicide upon reputation.

Discretion is called the leading feature of our great general's character --
he is made by Cassius to disapprove this Order, and as a signal instance of
this discretion to avow his disapprobation -- by becoming a member of it.

AGAIN -- To become a member of a society (and in the present instance,
certainly the first and most important member) is, according to Cassius -- to
act a neutral part.

LOGIC is surely exploded the bar of South Carolina, she certainly has quitted
her seat upon the bench.

Cassius is astonished -- that this self-created order has not excited the
least attention -- is apparently disappointed, that it is not even made a
subject for the tattle of a tea-table, and concludes with this affecting
apostrophe -- HOW BLIND ARE THE MULTITUDE! Yet this same people, in the very
same page, are represented as restless, vigilant, and active, feelingly alive
to suspicion, and prone to resentment upon such objects as are in the least
calculated to excite it.

It is a truth which can no longer be concealed, that in some parts of these
Oracular Leaves (where Cassius is so piteously doleful) that he sometimes nods
toward dullness, and in others (where he is argumentative) that contradictions
are set staring one another in the face, in a state of enmity that excludes
every hope of reconciliation.

TWO positions standing in direct opposition of equal authority, afford me, I
apprehend, the liberty of choosing, and from the general appearance of reasoning
which pervades the whole, it may, I think, be collected, as Cassius's meaning.
"That dullness holds her empire over the people at large with whom I suppose he
includes their representatives and that the discovery of the dreadful political
consequences with which this institution is pregnant, was left to the Lynx's
eye of the penetrating Cassius." They are indeed such in representation, as
made me tremble, and it is not to be denied, but that they are told in such a
melancholy tale of serious sadness, and with as much appearance of sincerity,
as if the learned gentleman himself really believed them.

Let us examine the grounds upon which this immense political superstructure
has been raised, and we shall find it built upon a sandy foundation.

The Congress (it seems) are dull as the people, or, what is worse, that which
they do see is winked at -- Yes! and winked at, Cassius (I dare apprehend) for
substantial reasons -- because they foresee no consequences resulting from this
society, likely to be injurious to the community. The silence of that
respectable body (the watchful guardians of the commonwealth is the strongest
argument of the innocence of the institution; but it is, at all events, as fair
for me to infer approbation from the silence of the Congress, as for Cassius to
urge the ^^^approbation of General Washington, from his being a member of it.

If the Congress do not see the consequences stated by Cassius, they are as
dull as the people, and this is in that case, a very unlucky country; if they
do see them in the light suggested by Cassius, and disregard them, this is
assuredly a very unhappy country. But having an eye upon the institution from
its birth, and taking no measures to destroy it in the embrio, it is most
likely the danger exists no where but in the imagination of the visionary
Cassius.

What inducements would Cassius suggest in Congress to make them wink at
enormities? Is it to be inferred from their conduct? -- How has it happened
that the house of representatives have been silent too? Are they also infected
with this stupor, or are they in conspiracy with the Congress to betray the
people, and consequently themselves?

PROPERTY alone constitutes POWER, and POWER is conferred by Congress and the
representatives of the people. Honors indeed) like impressions upon coin, may
give an ideal value to base metal, but it is gold and silver alone that will
pass without any recommendation but from its weight.

The examples drawn from Rome, of Sylla and of Caesar are not in point. Caesar
disbanded no army, nor Sylla till he had accomplished the mischief he
meditated. -- How different the conduct of our greater Caesar! Having restored
the Goddess Liberty to her country and built her a permanent habitation there,
he quietly retires to the rural shade, the glory and wonder of the age. There
has indeed been a reciprocity of good offices between the American army and
their country -- They have blessed her with freedom, and she has rewarded them
with immortality. To use the metaphorical language of Junius, Recorded honors
shall gather round their monument and thicken over them, it is a solid fabric,
and will support the laurels that adorn it.

Besides -- the means of rising to military fame in the Roman republics, was
through the channel of civil employments, men figured as statesmen in the
closet before they were chosen generals in the field, The means of doing injury
to their country was consequently greater than in modern republics.

Cassius affects the phrase of a plain level state of civil equality. I dare
say that even Cassius will not contend that, absolute, perfect, equality is
possible to the government of any state. As the mind must govern the hands, so
the man of intelligence must direct the man of labor. History is the best
school to improve the minds of the people, and the whole weight of its evidence
tends to show. That infant society is always in a progressive state, and that
distinctions have been made in all ages, as the rewards of services: and I
believe have seldom failed to benefit the country that bestowed them.
Distinction necessarily excites a spirit of emulation, a spirit which when once
diffused among a people, gives vigor to every spring of government and
vibration to the heart of every member of the community.

The institution of the order of the Cincinnati is backed by no power, and
consequently attended with no danger, -- The arm of civil authority surrounds
it -- only to will its destruction would be instant annihilation. If this
institution has any tendency to create distinctions, it is, I again assert, a
distinction without power, and without any other luster than what it borrows
from virtue. Not like the coronets and garters of modern ambition, but
analagous to the wreath of parsley or of the olive branch which decorated the
foreheads of our ancient heroes, distinctions too which as they are the rewards
of merit, reflect an unequalled brilliancy upon the wearer of them.

Distinctions (it feems) are inconsistent with a republican government -- Why
so Cassius? Every republic confers them -- Is not Holland a republic, rich,
free, and powerful? And has she not a nobility to whom too are confided the
highest offices of the state, civil as well as military?

But these are trifling flights to the towering Cassius -- he scorns deducing
his inferences from a nearer fountain than from heaven itself, He appeals to
Homer and Virgil to prove that Hector, Achilles and Aeneas were set up as idols
to be worshipped by future generations, and to show in what depth of design and
extent of artifice, the order of the Cincinnati is founded, INFERS, that, this
order will shortly receive the same homage from the people -- In other words --
That the Cincinnati will set themselves up as idols, and the virtuous citizens
of America will become idolaters. But I beg pardon -- In this he is consistent,
for dealing in fiction, it was very natural for him to call in aid the evidence
of the muses.

I beg now to refer the reader to the description of the order itself, and the
rules of the order, page 6, upon which Cassius comments with so much triumph.
It purports to be an order, instituted (among others) for the following
purposes (viz.)

To perpetuate the memory of the revolution, their own mutual friendship, etc.

To preserve inviolate the exalted rights of human nature, for which they have
fought and bled.

To promote and cherish between the respective states union and national honor.

To render permanent cordial affection and the spirit of brotherly kindness
among the officers, and to extend acts of beneficence toward those officers,
and their families who may unfortunately be under the necessity of receiving
it, etc. etc.

IN DIRECT CONTRADICTION TO CASSIUS, I ASSERT, That, if words are to be taken
in their plain sense and common acceptance, and to be construed according to
their real import, history furnishes no single instance of an institution more
apparently the offspring of PATRIOTISM, FRIENDSHIP, and HUMANITY. To use the
expression of a profound and elegant writer, IT abounds with sentiments which
find a mirror in every good mind, and to which every honest bosom returns an
echo.

But if on the other hand they are to be explained by innuendos, I would not
answer that the same words did not convey a charge of an intention to murder
every citizen of the state, and devour them afterward. The Bible may be made
treason -- and treachery extracted from the decalogue -- by construction.

An extensive knowledge of the common law, was (I dare say) one of the
qualifications that recommended Cassius to his seat upon the bench. In his
judgments from that seat of elevation, it is not to be doubted but he strictly
adopts its rules as the grounds of his decisions -- Why omit the practice of
them in a serious appeal to the people? THEY would inform Cassius that
constructions should be favorable and as near as possible to the minds and
intents of the party -- VERBA INTENTIONI DEBENT INSERVIRE. And BENIGN
INTERPRETAMUR CHARTAS PROPTER SIMPLICITATEM LAICORUM. Therefore the
construction must also be REASONABLE AND AGREEABLE TO COMMON UNDERSTANDING.

That -- QUOTIES IN VERBIS NULLA EST AMBIGUITAS IBI NULLA EXPOSITIO CONTRA
VERBA FIENDA EST. -- When the intention is clear, too minute a stress ought not
to be laid upon the precise signification of words NAM QUE HAERET IN LITERA,
HAERET IN CORTICE. Query. Has not the neglect of this rule occasioned Cassius
sometimes (as we emphatically express it) to STICK IN THE MUD.


And lastly -- THAT THE CONSTRUCTION BE NOT MADE UPON DISJOINTED PARTS, BUT ON
THE WHOLE TOGETHER.

If the intention of the Order is apparently innocent in the WORDS of the
institution, this very obvious question very naturally arises.

Has every single ACT of the society tended to ground a suspicion or
apprehension of the consequences suggested?

What! Every tongue locked in silence!

If Cassius had not known (as a lawyer) HUMANITY might have told told him (as a
man) that the presumption of inocence, ought always to precede the imputation
of guilt. Let Cassius frolic in conjecture as much as he pleases, his
suppositions are as unfavourable to him as his facts. The good sense of the
people will only be led by reason and argument, and not the labor of the most
minute researches of the most microscopic eye, will second his discoveries. No
great depth of design will ever be found in the institution of the order of the
Cincinnati. For my own part I concur in the remark of a very attentive observer
of human life. "That a soldier seldom looks further forward than to the end of
his musket or backwards beyond his knapsack."

Cassius would discover singular ingenuity in in reconciling the following
contradictions.

The citizens of America (although they fought and bled as well as the
Cincinnati) are already (says Cassius) as much below them as the earth is below
the Heavens. Yet this vile medal and ribband would set the Cincinnati SO MUCH
HIGHER that it would very justly excite the jealousy and suspicion of every man
throughout the continent.

Cassius's Sagacity has discovered (page 3 of his pamphlet) that in all great
societies there are some bad men, and consequently that there are men of that
description among the Cincinnati, yet (in page 9) were their country as well
acquainted as I am (says Cassius) with the temper of GOODNESS and humanity
which runs through the WHOLE OF THEM, they would be as much beloved as they are
admired.

Can the same people excite love, admiration and SUSPICION?

The reasons upon which he grounds his apprehensions are singularly novel,
namely, the uncommon merit of the officers.

Had they, says he, less merit and claim to the applause of their countrymen at
home and fame abroad, I should not be alarmed, etc. Men of little worth, (i. e.
bad men) COULD NOT render this institution detrimental to the freedom of their
country, but it must be remembered (and I heartily join my prayers that it may
never be FORGOTTEN) That a series of hardy gallant spirited actions through a
fierce and desperate conflict, through toil and sufferings, and their patience
under them, and above all the glorious success which crowned the whole, have
rendered the officers of the American army the most renowned band of men that
this day walk on the globe.

Cassius is certain that this dreadful institution will entail on the people of
America all the evils he has stated, and that he has PROVED it, to the
satisfaction of every one, NEVERTHELESS he has not the most distant idea that
it will ever come to a dissolution.

Might it not be asked then, why Cassius did not spare himself so much trouble.
If it could not answer a good purpose, it must answer a bad one, namely, that
of giving the people (fruitless) uneasiness.

Cassius concludes with observing, that although his remarks may appear trivial
to some of his readers, that they are worthy, in his opinion, the attention of
the philosopher and historian. They serve to show, says he, that the freedom of
a country may be overturned by causes imperceptible to the multitude.

The matter seems to HINGE upon this question, viz. Are the people such as
Cassius represents them or not? i. e. Are they thoughtless, ignorant and
inattentive to the most important concerns; or are they, on the contrary,
vigilant, active, attentive, and jealous of every thing that has relation to
government?

I contend for the truth of the latter supposition; and if that is the case,
what danger can threaten or invade a people, who conquered the arms of Britain;
who fought and bled with the Cincinnati -- Men who could protect their country
so invaded from without, are surely competent to the task of defending it from
within.

That a free people are ever vigilant and suspicious of the slightest invasion
of their rights, may be deduced from every volume of history, the power (I had
almost said the Omnipotence) of the people (when that suspicion is once
awakened) from every page. To take two examples out of a thousand: this appears
strongly from the revolution of England, in the year ^^60; and of Holland, in
the year 1672. The first is in the knowledge of the meanest citizen of the
continent. The usurped powers that had either designed no root, or at least
drawn none, but in the affections and interests of those who were engaged with
the government, thought themselves secure in the strength of an unfoiled army
of sixty thousand men, and in a revenue proportionable, raised by the awe of
their forces, though with the mock forms of legal supplies; yet they were
forced to give way to the vent and current humor of the people. And this
mighty army lose their heart and their interest, and content themselves to be
again molded into the mass of the people.

THE COMMON PEOPLE (says Sir William Temple) constitute the bulk and strength
of all great kingdoms. -- Whenever they conspire and unite in one common
passion or interest, for the nobles without them are like an army of officers
without soldiers, and make only a vain show unless raised and increased by the
VOICE OF THE PEOPLE which for this reason is called THE VOICE OF GOD.

To go back into English history -- William the Conqueror experienced this
truth in the many troubles of his reign, and which would have proved fatal to
him if he had been distracted with the common discontents of his English
subjects.

SOME of Cassius's arguments may look flattering to the eye, but when brought
to the test of palpability, they elude the touch and melt in idle air.

The services RECEIVED by the states from the American army, are not denied --
They stand alone, unparalleled in history. -- The only recompense expected is
-- A MEDAL AND A RIBBAND, TO PERPETUATE THE RECORD OF THEM.

If this is denied, will it not recall to every man's recollection the
following story of Aesop.

A poor man asked charity of a priest -- a guinea! -- he was refused with
astonishment -- a shilling -- he was refused with contempt -- a farthing --
still he was refused -- Give me then your blessing, continued the mendicant. --
"That you shall have, friend," answered the priest. It was now the beggars turn
to reject. No (says he) I will not take it, for if it had been worth a
farthing, thou would not have given it away.

I leave the application to my readers.

An Obscure Individual.

NEW PUBLICATIONS Just Imported from various parts of Europe; Also, several New
Books and Pamphlets Lately printed and now selling, at BELL's Book-Store, near
St. Paul's Church, in Third Street, Philadelphia.
1 THE Works of Andrew Marvel, the Honest Republican, Poetical, Controversial,
and Political; containing many original Letters, Poems, and Tracts, never
before printed, with a New Life of the Author, by captain Edward Thompson, in
three Quarto Volumes. N. B. A few Copies of this most excellent Work, are now
offered to the public at THREE GUINEAS being the same price they are sold at in
London; that Republicans in America, by the illuminations of this famous
apostle of republicanism, may have an opportunity of knowing, and practicing
true liberty, at least equal, if not superior, to any royalists in the
universe. 2 Postlethwayt's Universal Dictionary of Trade and Commerce, 2 Vols.
A New Edition, with great additions, very elegant, thirty two Dollars. 3
Captain Cook's First Voyage round the World, published by Hawkesworth, 2 Vols.
Four Dollars. 4 Cook's Second Voyage toward the South Pole, and round the
World. Illustrated with Maps, Charts, and a Variety of Portraits of Persons,
with Views of Places, drawn during the Voyage by Mr. Hodges, and engraved by
the most eminent Masters, 2 Vols. Sixteen Dollars. 5 Captain Cook's Third and
last Voyage, the Voyage in which he was killed; With an Introduction,
exhibiting an Account of the several Voyages round the Globe, by an Officer on
Board the Discovery, 2 Vols. Two Dollars. 6 Cruden's Concordance to the Bible,
Nine Dollars. 7 Boyer's Royal French and English Dictionary, with the English
and French Dictionary, 2 Vols, Nine Dollars. 8 Shakespeare's Works, by Johnson,
8 Vols. Sixteen Dollars. 9 Gibbons's History of the Decline and Fall of the
Roman Empire 6 Vols. Twelve Dollars. 10 Hooke's Roman History, 8 Vols. Sixteen
Dollars, 11 Emma Corbet, on the Power of Love, and the miseries of War, with
the Man of Feeling, Two Dollars.
N. B. For more particulars in the American Book-World, please enquire, for
BELL'S SALE CATALOGUE Of NEW and OLD BOOKS, with the price printed to each,
consisting of Several Thousand Volumes in ARTS, SCIENCES, and ENTERTAINMENT,
for Persons of all DENOMINATIONS.

Just published and New Selling at BELL's Book-Store. OBSERVATIONS ON THE
COMMERCE OF THE AMERICAN STATES WITH EUROPE AND THE WEST INDIES; Including the
several ARTICLES of IMPORT AND EXPORT. ALSO, AN ESSAY ON CANON AND FEUDAL LAW.

BY JOHN ADAMS, ESQUIRE; AMBASSADOR PLENIPOTENTIARY, from the UNITED and
INDEPENDENT STATES of NORTH AMERICA, TO their High MIGHTINESSES the STATES
GENERAL of the UNITED PROVINCES of HOLLAND.

To which is Annexed, the Political Character of the said JOHN ADAMS, ESQUIRE;

BY AN AMERICAN. PRICE HALF A DOLLAR.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED and SOLD BY ROBERT BELL, IN Third-Street, M,DCC,LXXXIII.

Now Selling at BELL 's Book-Store near St. Paul's Church, in Third Street,
Philadelphia. Price, one-sixth of a Dollar.

CONSIDERATIONS ON THE SOCIETY OR ORDER OF CINCINNATI; LATELY INSTITUTED By the
Major-Generals, Brigadier-Generals, and other officers of the AMERICAN ARMY.
PROVING THAT IT CREATES A RACE OF HEREDITARY PATRICIANS, OR NOBILITY.
INTERSPERSED WITH REMARKS On its CONSEQUENCES to the FREEDOM and HAPPINESS of
the REPUBLIC. Addressed to the PEOPLE of SOUTH CAROLINA, and their
REPRESENTATIVES.

BY CASSIUS.

Supposed to be written by AEDANUS BURKE, Esquire, one of the Chief Justices of
the State of South Carolina.

Blow ye the Trumpet in Zion. THE BIBLE.
