A NEW SYSTEM OF PHILOSOPHY; OR THE NEWTONEAN HYPOTHESIS EXAMINED. BY AN
AMERICAN.

POUGHKEEPSIE: Printed for the Author, by JOHN HOLT, Printer to the STATE of
NEW YORK.

M,DCC,LXXXIII.

PREFACE.
MANY of the rules of philosophizing, which Sir Isaac Newton adopted, I think
are good, and cannot be mended -- In the following piece, I have been careful
to attend to his four cardinal rules, especially the first, which is recited
there at large.

But I can by no means approve of Sir Isaac's Hypothesis, viz. That all matter
is originally the same; to support such an hypothesis, I am under the necessity
of calling in to my aid, an almost infinite number of causes; most of which are
banished, upon the supposition of the original division of matter, possessed of
different qualities, as set forth in the following discourse. A deviation from
Sir Isaac, may possibly be thought presumptuous; but, I humbly conceive, I am
kept in countenance from his fourth rule of philosophizing, viz. That
propositions collected from phenomenon by induction, are to be deemed,
(notwithstanding contrary hypothesis) either exactly, or very nearly true,
until other phenomenon occur, by which they may be rendered either more
accurate, or liable to exception.

The discovery that Doctor Franklin has made, in his electrical experiments,
will I conceive, warrant both a departure from Sir Isaac's hypothesis, and also
an yattention to another, more agreeable to his own rule; which ought to be
held sacred among Philosophers, as a polestar, and not teaze nature to find out
a first cause for almost every effect -- For if, in order to explore the
operations of nature, experiments are to be attended to in one day, they are
doubtless also to be attended to in another, with equal assiduity and care.

I have a great veneration for Sir Isaac, and esteem him as one of the
brightest luminaries, that ever enlightened the philosophic world: But I think
it no diminution to his character, to suppose that Doctor Franklin has, by a
course of experiments, brought things to light, which were never before
sufficiently explored, and discovered a genius equal to any that ever went
before him.

As most of the illustrations were written on different topics, and delivered
before the medical society at different times, and never were designed to be
published; and as this publication is insisted on by a number of gentlemen,
some at least, of the best characters; and as present Inconveniences will not
allow sufficient time to prepare the work for the press, I beg the reader would
excuse the inaccuracies as well as digressions, which may appear in some of
them -- And should this publication meet with a favorable reception, a new
edition, with large additions and illustrations, is in contemplation. But
should any object to the general principle, I desire they would state their
objections fairly, that the public may be under advantages to judge for
themselves, whether the general sentiments advanced in the following Piece, are
well founded or not.

DISCOURSE on FLUIDITY.
ONE principal character of a fluid, as laid down by Mr. Martin, and seems to
be warranted by Sir Isaac Newton* is (viz.) That the particles composing the
same, are exceeding small, for, that the smallness of the particles conduces to
fluidity, say they, is evident from hence: That the points of contact between
spheres, are in proportion to their diameters, and therefore grow less with
their spheres, and the less their points of contact, the less will be the
cohesion, and the greater (of course) their disposition to fluidity, etc. --
upon which I would observe first; That if any given point of the contact of a
sphere, even against a plane, is of any measure of distance across, it is plain
and evident, it is not an entire sphere; for that given distance, must be a
plane also, or it could not rest upon a plane. Hence it is also plain and
evident, that let their spheres be great or small, it makes no odds in respect
to the largeness of their points of contact; But in respect to their number, it
does; for the larger the spheres, the fewer the number of their points of
contact, in any given quantity of matter. Therefore, if we account for fluidity
in their way, the larger the spheres, the more fluid must that body be; which
we know is contrary to fact.

Fill any vessel with musk^^ ball, and elevate (for instance) the south side of
the vessel, until some of the balls begin to roll, not one of them will roll,
until you bring the center of its gravity, north of the northermost point of
its contact; It Is certain also, that you must elevate the vessel just as many
degrees, in order to make fine pigeon shot to roll, as to make cannon ball roll
-- And it is just as certain, that the same vessel, being filled with any known
fluid, and elevated on one side, the whole surface, instantly alters
accordingly, and forms a level -- Thus I think I have made it fully to appear,
that those philosophers are mistaken in this matter.

In the 2d. and 3d. place, they affirm, that they are both round and smooth;
here I would just observe, that if they are perfectly round, they must, of
course be smooth, for there can be no other idea of smoothness, but equality in
surface -- Moreover, smoothness, they make an absolute requisite to a fluid,
for want of this quality, say they, although the particle were possessed of all
other mentioned in the definition, yet they would never constitute a fluid,
since nothing can be of greater obstruction thereto, than asperity or roughness
of the superficies.

Now I would just observe, for a moment, in what manner our theory must run (in
order to have it consistent upon the hypothesis, that smoothness is absolutely
necessary to a fluid; it must run thus, viz. That the particles composing
oleaginous substances, such as lard, tallow, etc. together with the whole train
of metallic substances; also most saline substances, such as sea salt, pot-ash,
lap. infern. and even lunar caustic itself, when melted, are exceeding smooth
-- Surely then, we ought to leave off the term acrid, as applied to them --
However, what has been said, I think sufficient to prove, to any curious mind,
that the account given by those philosophers concerning a fluid, is at least,
altogether unsatisfactory -- It were to be wished therefore, that they had
adhered more strictly to the incomparable Sir Isaac's first rule of
philosophizing, viz. More causes of natural things are not to be admitted, than
are both true and sufficient to explain the phenomenon; for nature does nothing
in vain, but is simple, and delights not in superfluous causes of things.
Accordingly the poet, although with a different view, observes,

"The universal cause,
'Acts not by partial, but by general laws;'
and again,

'In human works, though labored on with pain,
'A thousand movements scarce one purpose gain;
'In God's one single can its end produce,
'Yet serves as second to some other use:'
It remains therefore, to account for fluidity on some more rational
principles, and more agreeable to what we find to be fact -- First then, we
will attend to the following axiom, viz. Whenever we can procure a number of
particles or corpuscles of common matter, of a suitable configuration to
attract the electrical effluvia on all sides, so as to form an electrical
atmosphere around each; we then have a fluid, without which electrical
atmosphere, there can be no proper fluid; because, if the particles touch each
other, although it should be even only in points, yet they would not be a fluid;
although perhaps, they might be a pretty fine powder: Now there are two grand
divisions into which all the matter composing this system, ought to be divided,
because, attended with opposite qualities and attributes -- The first is
repulsive matter, which is, by far, the most abundant, By this, it is not meant
that the cubic measure of all the solid minutissimals of repellent matter, is
more than the cubic measure of all the solid minutissimals of attractive
matter; for this is undeterminable: But that the extent of the aggregate sum of
all the parts of space, which are occupied chiefly by repellent matter, is more
than that of the aggregate sum of all the parts of space, occupied chiefly by
attractive matter -- If we should attend to the great Sir Isaac's 4th rule of
philosophizing, viz. That propositions collected from phenomenon by deduction
are to be deemed (notwithstanding contrary hypothesis) either exactly, or very
nearly true, til other phenomenon occur, by which they may be rendered either
more accurate, or liable to exception: And if, according to the great Doctor
Franklin, we conclude that spheres are kept asunder by electrical atmospheres,
which I think experiment fully evinces, we shall then readily determine, that
the grand spheres composing this system, are kept asunder by the same kind of
repelling atmospheres; and that the repelling atmosphere, which keeps this
earth from a nearer approach to the sun, may extend many hundreds of miles
above, or beyond the surface of the air; and consequently, near the surface of
said atmosphere, the repelling particles must stand at very great distances
from each other -- That there are distances, vacuums, or interstices, between
the impenetrable, or solid particles of both attractive and repellent matter is
undeniable, since otherwise there could be no motion: But the various phenomena
of things, render it probable, at least, that there is no one point, in the
universe, in which the influence of both attractive and repellent matter is not
extended; and this influence, being a physical entity: Therefore, in this view,
there can be no vacuum.
and secondly attractive or common matter, Attractive matter is called common
matter, because its principal characteristics are commonly understood; its
figure or shape, being plainly discoverable by the eye; whereas repulsive
matter can never be discoverable by the eye, because the rays of light, which
paint the figure of all objects of sight, are doubtless, no other, than
particles of repulsive matter.
which occupies but a small proportionate part of space. One very principals,
as well as peculiar attribute of the former, is an invariably repulsive
quality, whereby its particles constantly and violently repel each other; but
as constantly attract, and of consequence, are attracted by all common matter
-- Which last, in respect of repulsive matter, may be sub-divided into plus and
minus, or more and less attractive powers. Again there is a sub-division to be
made in repellant matter also, as appears from electrical experiments on the
vitrious and resinous electricity; but to determine precisely, how they are
disposed toward, or affected by each other, must be referred to more accurate,
as well as a greater number of experiments. -- The pecular characteristic and
principal attribute of common matter, is, that its particles constantly and
powerfully attract each other, and also those of repulsive matter -- And when
by any When, by violence, any attempt is made to rob any portion of attractive
matter, of its natural proportion of the repulsive, the extraordinary
proportionate increase of attraction, in regard to the repulsive, shows the
wisdom of the creator, in disposing that immaterial essence, which is connected
with said attractive matter, thus to act, in order that there should not be a
coalessence of attractive matter, upon every trivial occasion.
violence, they are robbed of their natural proportion of the repulsive, (in
any degree) in the same proportion are their attractions, in regard to the
repulsive, both stronger, and to a greater distance; and all these attractions,
and repulsions are, coeteris paribus, proportionate to the quantity of matter,
and their nearness; and from these axioms, together with the consideration of
the vis inertiae of matter may be deduced, the general laws, to which are
subjected all the fluids and solids, hitherto known; and all the motion in the
material world, where spirit is not the immediate and efficient cause -- Here
it may be asked what then, are rays of light, which the great Sir Isaac affirms
to be material substances? and certainly they produce much motion, rarify air,
and other substances, produce that brisk action called fire, etc.

If I was to attend to the aforesaid rule of Philosophizing, viz. not to admit
more causes, than are, both true and sufficient to explain the phenomenon, I
would answer, that a solar ray of light, is no other than a particle of this
same repulsive matter, just now described, projected forth from the surface of
the sun, with such force as to overcome the resistance made by the attracting
matter in that body; and suddenly passing into a repelling medium, with little,
or no resistance, it almost instantaneously passes in the interstices, or seams
near the verge of their several spheres of repulsion; much after the manner
that a honey-bee passes, when the hunter takes his line -- When it arrives at
the air's surface, it finds more resistance; but from thence to the earth, is a
small proportionate distance -- When the rays of light arrive at the earth,
according to Sir Isaac, they are there mostly absorded -- How that great
philosopher means to be understood by this, I am at a loss; whether he means
that they are annihilated, or that they have assisted, in increasing the bulk
of this earth for near six thousand years; in consequence whereof, the sun has
grown less, in that proportion -- True, I don't find, that he gives us any
account of them after this; but I rather think, that had he lived in this day,
with advantage of the discoveries of that equally great philosopher, Doctor
Franklin, he would have employed them in supplying the place of those large
quantities of electricity, or repulsive matter, which are continually passing
from this globe, to other parts of the system, to restore an equilibrium in the
same; and that some of them assisted in preserving a fluid state in air, some
in water. etc.

I would here take notice of a very curious experiment, that now occurs to my
mind, that has been often tried, though not attended to -- I mean the collection
of nitre from air; a principal part of which last, consisting of plus
attractive matter, thence collects around each particle, a very large
atmosphere of the repulsive -- When the wind, in this country, blows from the
N. W. and these repelling atmospheres, are from any cause considerably
lessened, the projectile motion of the air, being a force added to that of the
natural attraction there is between the aerial particles, and that of the
terrene alkaline salt; urges the former (notwithstanding its repulsive
atmosphere) directly on to the saline point; which being accute, more easily
enters, taking off the said repelling atmosphere as it approaches, from the
known laws of electricity; whence the said aerial and terrene particles,
becoming one, are now of a figure not fit to hold a repelling atmosphere, on
all sides, having a point that is constantly throwing off, as fast as the other
part, though plus attractive, can take on; and thus polarity being formed between
these two primogenial particles, (both which now conjunctly form one corpuscle)
a number of those corpuscles, being immerg'd in a fluid capable to suspend
them, easily form into shoots which we call nitre; and thus the original fluid
and solid particles forming this corpuscle, are generally, both continued in a
solid form, until some ignited particle is projected, with such force, as to
knock off the said saline particle, leaving the aerial naked, and in its
original figure; whence it immediately demands its original quantity of
repulsive atmosphere; in gaining of which, there being such violent and
instantaneous demand for room, there are numbers more of those spiculae knocked
off by the sudden motion of the repellent matter; as also nearly all the
adjacent particles of common matter, projected from thence, with an ignited
force, in among the adjacent mass; and thus is produced a general explosion of
the whole -- The terrene and aerial particles, being thus separated, the former
precipitates to the earth from whence it originated, and there lies ready,
either to assist in forming nitre again, or to perform all the offices of
vegetation, etc. that belong to that particular substance; and the latter is
now become a fluid again: And as soon as it has had sufficient time to part
with its extraordinary quantity of repulsive atmosphere, is fitted to perform
all the purposes of respiration, etc.

Let us next take a view of human blood; I mean, in an athletic person. This we
may consider as an heterogeneous mass, consisting of particles or corpuscles of
common matter, differing, not only in magnitude, but figure also; whence they
are both plus and minus attractive -- Now the constant friction, occasioned by
the action of the heart and arteries, collects such large quantities of
repulsive matter, that the proportion that each of the minus attractive
particles naturally take to themselves, proves sufficient to produce a fluid
state in them; lessen that friction, to a sufficient degree, by taking the
blood from those vessels, or by any means prevent this extraordinary quantity
of repulsive matter collecting in their neighborhood, so that the proportion
of the repulsive that belongs to each minus attractive corpuscle, is not
sufficient to counteract the natural attraction there is between themselves,
and they immediately coalesce; and then, we say the blood is coagulated.

And on these principles only, have I ever been able to account for the
coagulation of any fluid whatever -- But here comes a question, viz. How comes
it to pass then, that the fluids in an egg are coagulated by an extraordinary
degree of heat? I answer, that the plus attractive particles, which, by their
intervention, render fluid all the rest, are so shaped, and so extremely minute
with-all, that upon any considerable addition of repulsive matter, they make
their escape, even through the shell; hence the remaining particles immediately
coalesce.

In farther illustration of this subject, let us next take a view of the
effects of frost on human flesh; and in order to a right understanding of this
matter, it may be necessary first to inquire, what sort of substance may be the
proper subject of frost -- And here first negatively, it is neither air, nor
earth, nor spirit, nor any of the oleaginous substances; for neither of those
having been placed in a situation ever so cold, do we agree to call frozen --
But 2dly and positively, water alone is, perhaps, the only proper subject of
frost; and therefore a discovery of the mechanical operation of frost on water,
will naturally lead the mind to a right view of its effects on human flesh --
Now then, we are to consider the effects of frost on water; and here I would
make the following observations, viz. 1st. That water, in an open vessel,
cannot be heated beyond the 212th degree by Farenheit's thermometer; because,
if you add to the water any farther degree of heat, the aqueous particles
instantly take to themselves, such large and complete repelling atmospheres, as
to cast them out of the spheres of the corpuscular attraction of each other,
and thence they become air; for there is doubtless no essential difference
between water and air, only the particles composing the one are within, but the
other without the spheres of their corpuscular attractions. 2dly. That water
will decrease in its quantity or bulk, exactly according to the increase of
cold, from the highest possible degree of its rarefaction, viz. From the 212th
degree of heat, even down to the 32d degree -- Now it is plain, that in all this
process, the aqueous particles are constantly approaching nearer to each other;
but when it comes to the 32d degree, which is the freezing point, and the
particles are about to come in contact, the quantity or bulk of the water will
instantly be enlarged, by reason that the particles of the same, in order to
present their more angular or pointed parts to each other, will alter their
situation, by suddenly turning out of that close and compact position,
respecting each other, in which they were before constantly kept, by common
gravitation. Hence, ice occupies more cubic measure, and of consequence, is
specifically lighter than water.

These things being premised, it is easy to see how human flesh must be affected
by frost; especially when we consider that the whole of human flesh is composed
of fluids, (the basis of which is water) and the vessels which contain them;
which vessels are continually contracting and growing stronger, as the cold
advances, until it arrives at the freezing point; at which time, the fluids,
with which the vessels are already filled, being instantly enlarged, by a force
that is not to be resisted; the effect which this must have on the containing
vessels, needs no description.

I beg leave here to recite the following, nearly as it was delivered before
the society:

Discourse on Burns and Scalds.

THE chief design of the following discourse, being to point out a method of
treating those wounds received by fire, (commonly called burns or scalds)
better, and more rational than is commonly practiced in the country; and it
being generally necessary to investigate the cause of a disease, before we can
proceed to prescribe a rational method of cure; it may be necessary to observe
the following method, viz. First to say something on the essence of fire; 2dly,
on the mechanical operation in its action; 3dly, its effects on human flesh;
and then proceed to the general intention:

First then, I am to say something concerning the essence of fire -- This has
been thought, (perhaps by some of the greatest geniuses in all ages, from the
first creation of the world, even down to the present day) to be one of the
most surprising and unaccountable creatures of God: some of the ancients
observed that wherever a man was (and could himself subsist) whether on
Pizgah's top, or in the deepest vault, on board a ship, many leagues off at
sea, or in the hold of the same, many feet beneath the surface of the water, in
open day, or even in the darkest dungeon, if he should only do this small
homage, viz. To strike two hard substances together, such as a flint and a bit
of steel, or the like -- This wonderful essence would instantly make its
appearance to his assistance, presenting him a comfortable degree of both light
and heat -- This circumstance looking so much like omnipresence, many of them
mistook this creature for the creator, and worshipped it accordingly; and no
wonder, for I think, that without the light of a divine revelation the mistake
must have been, in their day, pretty easy and natural -- Among the modern of
all the writers on the essence of fire, that I have had the perusal of, I think
the great Boerhaave, appears to be the most ingenious; but he, grossly mistook
his point -- He gave us no satisfactory account of the essence of fire, neither
is this to be wondered at, for he sought it where it was not to be found, viz.
In material substance -- But he who rightly attends to the very interesting
discoveries of the great Doctor Franklin, will find, that the essence of fire
consists in motion; and that this motion is a particular effect of certain
qualities, viz. Attraction, and repulsion, and the vis inertiae of matter; and
that nothing appears, but that the same particle that did once attract, ever
continues to attract, and that the particle that did once repel, continues so
to act, and that they both constantly and invariably observe all the laws of
attraction and repulsion, whether they assist in composing the body which we
call frozen, or that of a hot flame. I come now to consider the mechanical
operation in its action -- And here, first I would consider that most eminent
of all, that appears in the explosion of nitre, which the reader may reflect
has been before particularly treated of, under the head of the formation of
that substance, where we have a view of the mechanical operation of a fire, the
most sudden and violent -- Now, in order to render this fire less violent and
more lasting, (such as might answer to a culinary fire) you have nothing
farther to do, but to add thereto and intimately mix with the nitrous mass, a
sufficient quantity of attractive matter, whose intervening particles, are less
attractive, in regard to the repulsive; and you then have a view of a culinary
fire, which will be more or less violent, according to the quantity of
intervening matter, and according as the said intervening matter is more or
less attractive, in regard to the repulsive; thus much for the mechanical
operation of fire in its action -- I am now thirdly to consider the effect of
this action of fire, on human flesh; and here first I would observe, that
whenever any body of matter, heated to a high degree, is opposed so near to
human flesh, as that the ignited particles that are projected from said heated
body, enter, and pass through the interstices of the solid flesh, with such force
and in such abundance, as by their extraordinary friction, to invite such large
quantities of repelling, into the region of the flesh, as that the particles or
corpuscles composing the solid fiber of the flesh, beginning to take to
themselves such large and complete repelling atmospheres, as wholly to overcome
the resistance made by that attraction, whereby they subsist in a natural
fiber; then we may justly say, that flesh is burned or scalled: And it is
doubtless impossible, by any art whatever, to re-vivificate, or restore this
flesh to proper life again -- But there is a seam or space between this dead
flesh, and that which has suffered nothing as yet by this extraordinary flux of
repellency, in which the plus attractive ends or parts, of the component
particles or corpuscles, stand at distances from each other; while the other
ends or parts, that are more pointed, and therefore minus attractive, adhere
still to the healthy part -- This gives to the patient, the idea of extreme
pain, and is, according to the great Boerhaave's definition of pain, viz. A
tendency toward a dissolution of continuity, in the component parts of a fiber
-- Thus much for its effects on human flesh -- I am now to point out a method
of treating those wounds received by fire; and the first intention appears to
be, to preserve from putrefaction, that portion of flesh, which is betwixt the
healthy and the dead flesh; which can be done in no way, but by applying,
externally, those substances as will so violently attract the repellency from
the interstices of its component parts, as that its particles will coalesce
with each other, in the same manner as they did in the healthy state. The
substance which most strongly attracts, and is the best conductor for the
electricity, is cold water -- But that it may be holden, with convenience to
the part, I have made a cataplasm therewith, by the admixture of some
farinaceous substances; such as Indian meal, scraped potatoes, or the like --
Some object to this practice and say, it subjects the patient to take cold, so
much cold water, etc. being applied: But it ought to be considered, that as
taking cold is no other than perspiration being obstructed -- Perspiration, in
this case, cannot be obstructed, for that is already done, by an absolute
destruction of the cutaneous glands; therefore not the least danger from this
quarter.

As soon as your poultice is on, the pain ceases; but when the pain returns,
change your poultice, for the part next to the flesh has, by the heat of the
flesh, become so warm, that it does not attract the repellency strongly enough
-- And thus we ought always to proceed, until this kind of incipient gangrene
is entirely gone; and then apply digestives, etc. as in case of other wounds,
and it will be found to heal as fast as any other whatever -- Thus much for
external application -- But it often happens, that so great a part of the cutis
is destroyed by a burn or scald, that such a proportion of the materia
perspirabila is retained in the habit, as that (by a coalescence of its
particles, and so forming obstructions) a fever is the consequence; and this
fever is generally very highly inflammatory, and therefore very dangerous; for
being ardent, it very often turns malignant -- Therefore, when a person is
considerably burned or scalled, he ought always to be carefully watched by the
physician; and upon the very first appearance of a fever, either phlebotomy or
a cathartic febrifuge, or both, ought forthwith to be administered; and in this
way, may the fever be entirely prevented, and a perfect cure will succeed, as
fast as the wheels of nature can advance -- Now if these sentiments are just,
and this practice warrantable, and I think they can be vindicated, upon the
most strict theoretical principles, as well as reiterated experiments; then how
may we deplore, the excruciating torture, experienced chiefly by those who are
in their tender years of childhood, as well as loss of life occasioned by a
contrary practice?

I would next, take a view of that perpetual motion in an animal, called
respiration -- The reader may remember, that when speaking about the particles
of attractive matter, it was observed, that when, (by any violence they are
robbed of their natural proportion of the repulsive in any degree) in the same
proportion are their attractions, in regard to the repulsive, both stronger,
and to a greater distance.

This appears from the manner of collecting the repellent matter, by the
electrical apparatus; for by rubbing the globe against the cushion, and so
constantly robbing the outermost vitreous particles, of their natural
proportion of the repulsive; you not only, hence charge your apparatus with
electricity, but impregnate the region round about; nay, the whole electric
room is so filled with repellent matter, that atoms, floating in the air, take
to themselves such large repelling atmospheres, that they are seen for a long
time after, to repel each other at considerable distances; but in time, an
equilibrium is restored. Now the body of an animal, may be compared to the
electric room, the blood and arteries, which keep a constant friction, to the
glass globe and cushion, and perhaps the nervous vessels to the conductor, or
common recepticle of the repellent matter; now by the friction, occasioned by
the motion of the blood, there are large quantities of repellent matter
collected therein, which is generally pretty equally distributed throughout the
whole mass. In a faetus in utero, where the fluids in the faetus, amnios, and
mother, are all so connected, as that if you lessen the quantity of repellency
in the one, you also diminish it in the other -- They all conjunctly forming
one general mass, the mother breathing for the whole, they are generally all
equally fraught with repellent matter.

In all faetuses, both of viviparous, and oviparous animals, although the lungs
are found collapsed, the mouth shut, etc. yet the aspera arteria, and bronchii,
are ever found nearly empty, open, and not collapsed, as the lungs are; yet the
fluids in the amnios (being equally fraught with repellent matter) are not
attracted by the blood in the lungs, which is the reason, why the lungs are not
filled with the fluids contained in the amnios; but as soon as the cold air
takes place in lieu of the said fluids, it being most violently attracted by
the blood in the lungs, immediately rushes in qua data porta, and inflates them
-- But, when the air has entered the lungs, it cannot stay there for a moment
-- But being divided into an almost infinite number of streams, that are
surrounded by so great a proportion of blood, in the pulmonie and other
arteries, and their returning veins, the arteries coming in a direct course
from the right ventricle of the heart, and fraught with as much repellent
matter, as any part of the juices; hence the aeriel particles, (taking to
themselves an equal quantity of repellent matter, and thereby forming exceeding
large repelling atmospheres) are thence immediately forced out, by way of the
mouth or nose -- Here, at first thought, it would be natural to suppose, that
no more air would be forced out, than to restore an equilibrium; and that
therefore there was nothing to occasion a second inspiration -- But it ought to
be considered, that the pulmonic blood, that has just suffered a great loss of
repellent matter, which was taken out of it, and carried off, in the aeriel
atmospheres of the last expiration, is directly replete with its proportion of
repellency, from the remainder of the mass of blood; hence the same cause
obtains, to produce a second inspiration, as did in the first, and so on --
Thus, I think, I have given a mechanical account of the true cause of
respiration.

I am now to say something concerning its use, which is very great indeed; for
without it, animal life, by the known laws of nature, could not exist: All
animals that have fallen under our inspection, do breathe; even from an
elephant, down to the smallest reptile; from a stork, to an house-fly; and from
a whale, even down to a sprat; they all breathe, that is, they do inspire, or
suck in; and then, at short intervals, puff out again some kind of fluid; some
have their lungs seated in one part, some in another; the common house-fly has
here is seated near the middle of the back, and the trachea comes out a little
behind the wing; but she does breathe -- And it doubless answers the same grand
purpose, as in other animals, that is, it preserves a constant stream or
current of electricity or repellent matter, through some certain tubes in the
body of the animal; which stream or current, is doubtless the primum mobile,
and efficient cause of all involuntary animal motion; on which immediately
depends, all those motions which are voluntary, in which a muscle acts by the
same laws, and in the same manner, as it does in that motion which is
involuntary -- Thus much appears to me easy, plain and natural; but here we
must stop with our researches -- If we proceed any farther herein, we get on
hallowed ground -- This is too near the immediate finger of the creator -- We
know, the will does determine the time and quantity of motion, in every
voluntary act of a muscle -- But a knowledge of the manner, in which that
something, which is capable of volition, acts on the body, presupposes a
knowledge of the modus of union between soul and body; which, I should think,
necessarily implied in it, a knowledge of the modus in the operation of the
divine spirit, in the exercise of creating power, which doubless is a matter
too deep, even for the highest created intelligence in Heaven to look into:
Therefore, it can be no impeachment of the character of any gentleman, as a
physician -- A wise man, or philosopher, to say that he knows nothing about the
matter.

The following is inserted by particular desire:

THE mechanical operation of mercury, on the human juices, which has long since
been described by the learned Boerhaave, in the 5th vol. of his institutes, to
those gentlemen of the faculty, who have been honest in the pursuit of their
proper business, is generally known -- In which description, it plainly appears
by the laws of projectiles, that not the solids, but the fluids are primarily
and principally acted upon; in this view, there can be no irritation of the
vessels; hence nothing of drasticity in its operation -- But the chief design
of this part of my discourse, being to recommend the use of the above medecin
in severs, it may be proper to have recourse chiefly to facts -- First then, in
all inflammatory fevers, such as pleurisies, peripneumonies, measles, what is
commonly called rattles in children, smallpox, etc. I have for a course of
about 12 years, given it as my most common febrifuge; and it has proved in
almost all, a most speedy, safe and effectual remedy -- The morbid serous
cohesions, which we call inflammatory lentor, stand no more chance before it,
than so many snow-balls would, before the projectile force of cannon ball --
Those fevers flee before its operation, as the dew before the sun. I very often
find no occasion to exhibit it more than once, seldom more than twice, and
don't remember an instance that I ever gave it more than thrice, before the
fever subsided; but I have not had opportunity to exhibit it, in a proper
manner, to more than six or seven persons, who had the smallpox the natural
way: But in those it had a very good effect, the patients recovered, and had
the disorder light -- When I consider the operation of it in the above cases, I
call it the most expeditious, safe and effectual febrifuge, that I ever knew;
and it has no less salutary effect on fevers of the putrid or malignant kind,
by its projectile force, flying in the arteries so much swifter than the rest
of the juices; it knocks off the angles or spicula of the morbific or putrid
corpuscles, which carries on the work of putrefaction, in such manner, and so
absolutely, as to entirely prevent any farther putrefaction of the juices; at
the same time, opening the emunctories, and carrying off what is already
rendered unfit for circulation -- I have given it in many of the above
mentioned cases; and one instance I remember, in particular, where the blood
was so dissolved, as that when I was first called to the patient, he bled at
the nose, voided blood by urine and by stool, and spit blood; I immediately
gave him down about 35 grains of calomel, and it happened very lucky, for it
operated not as a cathartic, short of about six hours, and then gently passed
off by stool; by which time, all the haemorrhages ceased, and by the help of a
strong decoction of the bark, in large doses, the patient recovered.

When I also consider its operation in putrid fevers, I am constrained to call
it, not only expeditious, safe and effectual, but the most universal febrifuge;
and in its effects, the greatest antiputrescent, hitherto known -- Neither
should the physician fear to give it, on account of its desolving the blood,
and so hastening the putrefaction of the same; for it has no such tendency: If
a liberal use of it does any mischief to the juices in general, it is in
rendering them aqueous and so bringing on a dropsy, a state of the juices very
opposite to that of malignancy -- Moreover, it ought to be considered, that if
by passing swifter in the arteries, it should break a few of the red globules
of blood; yet millions of morbid corpuscles, are hereby so trimmed of their
numberless spicula as that they become innocent -- But to return to the
consideration of the operation of this medicine, in inflammatory fevers, and
here I would observe, that the higher, and more ardent the fever, the more
difficult to raise a ptyalism -- In short, in an acute fever, you can retain
the mercury in the habit but for a very few hours, unless the fever subside.

If therefore, I find my potion suddenly pass off by stool, and the fever very
little abated, I conclude then, either that not much has entered the lacteals,
and so passed into circulation, or rather, that what of the calomel, that has
entered the lacteals, has too soon passed out, by the hepatic vessels -- As
soon therefore as the catharsis is a little over, I give a dose or two of
calomel, 3 or 4 grains at a time, waiting a few hours between; and then in six,
eight, or 12 hours, more or less, give a sufficiency of the same to purge -- My
common dose for an adult, is from eight to thirty five grains; and I by no
means give much less to children, on account that daily experience shows, that,
for a general rule, about the same quantity of any kind of physic, as will
purge the child, will also purge the adult; by reason that a great part of the
potion is commonly inveloped in the phlegm, which is apt to collect in large
quantities, in the stomach and intestines of youthful persons -- Very great
indeed have been the prejudices, against this most useful and salutary
medicine; arising chiefly, from a mistaken notion, that a fever rendered the
use of it dangerous, and so it was given only where a fever was absent, and in
low cases, the only case in which it ever lodges in the habit, and is
mischievous in the bones, etc. and in which case special care ought always to
be taken, to keep up a proper tone to the sanguiferous vessels, either by well
timed epispasticks, or some other proper stimulants, which would entirely
prevent the evil -- A neighbor of mine, a man of about thirty years of age*
who had been laboring under an hectic fever, for upwards of a year, which he
had acquired from a surfeit by over exercise, I visited him often, for about
six months, but gave him nothing of consequence besides calomel, and balf.
tolu, with loaf sugar; which, being wet with water, would form into pills, that
would easily dissolve in the stomach -- This he took every day or two, through
the whole term, and then the acrimony being all destroyed by force of the
calomel the fever left him; and by the help of a tincture of the bark, in a
syrup of the opening roots, he in a very few weeks, recovered his strength, and
is now in health -- Moreover, if I give not my patient over at first view, I
never think I am called in too late; neither wait I for, nor pay the least
regard to an approaching critical hour -- My patient being ever so weak, I
administer calomel, which by resolving the obstructing matter, and fitting it
to pass the emunctories, etc. brings on a crisis forthwith, and all this, is
without the least force on nature -- I think little, or nothing more needs be
said to the ingenious, entirely to prevent any future mischief being done by
this inestimable medicine -- One word therefore to the sick, and their friends,
and I have done -- And here I would observe, that among the deceased, more than
nine tenths of them would probably recover, only living in that abstemious way,
which is generally natural to the sick, merely by force of the operations of
that honest physician nature, who is constantly using her endeavor, and
doctering for no pay, cares not how soon she makes a cure; nay, I have often
known her endeavors so forcible, that she has finally perfected a cure, in
spite of both patient and quack, constantly affording her, all the interruption
in their power; and such favorable opportunity as this, (being all the
knowledge the quack has in physic) is instantly embraced, and by him published
in Gath, and affords him large opportunity to murder numbers with impunity. The
want of proper regulations among practitioners at present, renders it almost
impossible effectually to guard against this prenicious evil, which I verily
believe, has been the destruction of more American lives, than have fallen in
battle for five years past -- However, it is to be hoped that the time is
approaching, when this country will acknowledge no Initiation into the practice
of physic, without a public examination before some respectable body of
physicians.


