AN ORATION ON THE ADVANTAGES OF AN EARLY EDUCATION, DELIVERED AT EXETER, IN
THE STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE, MAY 1, 1783, AT THE OPENING OF THE PHILLIPS EXETER
ACADEMY FOUNDED BY THE Hon. John Phillips, L.L.D.

By DAVID M'CLURE, A. M. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH AT NORTH-HAMPTON; AND ONE OF THE
TRUSTEES OF SAID ACADEMY.

NEW HAMPSHIRE: PRINTED AND TO BE SOLD AT THE PRINTING-OFFICE IN EXETER.
M,DCC,LXXXIII.

An ORATION, etc.
RESPECTABLE AUDITORS,
TO form the minds of youth to the principles of useful knowledge, and to the
esteem and practice of virtue, is at once to communicate the greatest
benevolence to mankind, and to receive the most rational satisfaction of which
a generous mind is capable.

At the auspicious Era of the birth of an institution, founded here, to
promote piety, virtue and literature, permit me to solicit your attention to
this pleasing theme -- A theme on which I cannot flatter myself, that I shall
offer any thing new, since it has received its deserved Eulogies, from the
enlightened of all ages, in which learning has flourished.

Were I to speak of the importance of the good education of youth, in order to
their passing through life with decency, reputation and usefulness, and acting
their part well on the theater of the world; or in praise of the various
branches of academic science; or of the success which has attended the pious
labors of those who have laid the foundations of such institutions, in which
the gentle hand of instruction has led the steps of expanding genius, in the
path of virtue and of knowledge; or were I to show that the virtuous education
of the rising generation, lays the sure foundation of that righteousness which
exalts a nation; my attempt would be anticipated by the celebrated masters of
instruction, not only of Athens and of Rome, but of these more enlightened days.

But, notwithstanding the subject has not novelty to recommend it, the occasion
must apologize for me, generous auditors, while I shall attempt, for your
entertainment, to offer a few thoughts on the advantage derived to mankind from
the improvement of the understanding in knowledge, and the importance of the
virtuous education of youth.

The divine architect, in the creation of the world, has poured abroad in rich
profusion his benignity among the countless variety of beings, its inhabitants;
each representative of his omnipotence, his knowledge, his wisdom and his
goodness. To man, the favorite of heaven, is given a preeminence; in that it
has pleased the sovereign goodness, to endue him with the powers of reason;
uniting to the divine workmanship of the body, an immortal spirit, capable of
thought and reflection, and of everlasting improvement in knowledge and virtue;
and so wisely constituting those, that the animal powers and senses shall be
happily subservient to the rational improvement of the mind.

It is by the cultivation of this noble power, that man attains to superior
dignity among his fellow men. by this he is brought to the knowledge of his
end, and of the wisdom of that being, to whom, true science teaches him to
refer, with unceasing gratitude, the tribute of sublime praise. This is the
glorious end of all science, and for which the father of spirits confered the
gift of reason on man. -- The cultivation then, of our rational powers in
knowledge and in virtue, is a duty as profitable as it is binding, and as
pleasing as it is profitable.

If we confine our prospect to those great characters which have rose to
eminence and glory on the stage of life, we shall find that they have attained
that greatness by the improvement of their minds in knowledge and virtue, and
in the application of their seize to the public good. I join the esteem
and practice of virtue with useful knowledge, because there can be no true
greatness without goodness; and deeds however illustrious that originate not in
solid virtue, are but the splendour of false greatness; it is virtue that gives
them consistancy, dignity and merit.

From the dawn of life the mind gradually expands to receive the rays of truth,
presented by an endless variety of objects, which, if neglected by salutary
instruction, contracts a sordid selfishness, and is absobed in ignorance; and
by such neglect, deprived of receiving and communicating that rational
happiness of which it is capable.

Sensible of the vast importance of education, that the prosperity and
happiness of individuals, of families and of nations, depend upon it; wise
legislators, heathen as well as christian, have paid particular attention to
it, and encouraged and supported institutions of learning. They have sought
for, and maintained, in this honorable employment, men qualified to guide the
youth to knowledge and virtue; hence colleges and schools of learning have been
founded and endowed in early days; and the encouragement and support of
literature and of the arts and sciences interwoven with their systems of
government and laws.

This was the case with the wiser heathen of Greece and of Rome; and in their
public schools were formed those renowned statesmen, patriots, orators, poets,
philosophers and heroes; who by their abilities and generous labors, raised
their respective republics to eminence and glory in the history of mankind.
They rose to opulence and dominion, more by the aids of superior knowledge,
than martial bravery. By informing the minds of their youth with the knowledge
of the rights of mankind, and warming them with patriotic virtue, they were
animated to such active deeds as rendered them great in the estimation of
mankind, and reflected at the same time, the highest honor on the wisdom of
their government. Great and good men in all ages, have ever esteemed it their
honor and felicity to encourage and support institutions of learning.

Justness of thinking and propriety of reasoning on subjects within the ken of
human comprehension, with a suitable application of the principles of knowledge
to the great purposes of living, are the happy fruits of a well regulated
education: and in this consists the dignity and glory of man.

By learning and virtue the civilized man is distinguished from the savage, and
raised as far above the uncultivated part of his species, as they are above the
animal. Learning enlarges the mind -- frees it from its "native barrenness and
rusticity" -- collects and strengthens the mental powers -- reduces the
passions to a proper subordination to the law of reason, and restores harmony
to the soul. It cherishes a manliness of spirit -- it flourishes under the
shield of virtuous freedom -- it is the enemy of slavery -- the support and
ornament of every profession of the gown, the sword, the bar and the pulpit. It
is the delight of our youthful days; an agreeable and profitable companion in
active life; and the solace of advanced age. Cicero


To a mind engaged in the search of truth, time imperceptibly passes away --
and is regaled with the repast of angels. On the wings of virtue and knowledge,
it soars toward perfection, and with the steadiness of the eagle, enjoys the
beams of science, unclouded by prejudice or error.

Learning expands the heart with universal philanthropy -- stimulates the soul
to a generous emulation -- the good of mankind is the noble rule of its conduct
-- it is the light of human life. Happy the people whose sons pursue the paths
of knowledge and of virtue! They will attain the purposes of life, by
cultivating the arts of peace, manufactures, agriculture and commerce; and by
the practice of that righteousness which consists in justice, mercy and truth,
reach the summit of human greatness.

On the contrary; ignorance degrades the soul -- the man is lost in the
uncultivated savage -- and the "human form divine" but little superior to the
irrational creation. By ignorance the mind is not only deprived of those
enlarged improvements in knowledge, and of that perfection of which it is made
capable, but it is the slave of the sensitive passions, and like a ship without
a pilot, overwhelmed and lost in the storms of life.

" Ignorance and vice,
"In consort foul agree, each heigt'ning each,
"While virtue draws from knowledge, brighter fire."
The savage tribes of our western wilderness, in their mode of life, exhibit a
striking contrast to the advantages and felicity of a civilized people.
Destitute of any regular forms of government, life and property are not secure;
while no laws restrain the licentious, or protect the peaceable subject. They
are the perpetual slaves of fierce and cruel passions and gloomy imaginations;
the passive votaries of the prince of darkness, who rules uncontrouled in those
dark corners of the earth. But, what a happy change even among savages, is made
by the introduction of knowledge! Their barbarous tempers are softened by the
genial warmth of science; darkness no longer obstructs the mental ray. There,
"witchcraft, magic and sorcery," and the answers of the oracles of demons
disappear -- to the shades of ignorance they fly -- they flourish only in those
dark regions of the earth, where the light of science never shines.

To ignorance, as the prolific cause, must be attributed, the complication of
miseries which tyranny and persecution have brought upon mankind in the
different ages of the world.

Detestable ignorance! thou, offspring of sin, and fruitful parent of evil!
with foul assiduity thou nourishest blind bigotry, gloomy superstition,
unresisting slavery, and bloody persecution! too long have thou held mankind in
thy chains. Thy charm shall be broken. In thy ruin shall science, liberty and
virtue triumph!

The introduction of knowledge opens the minds of a people to comprehend the
great purposes of living; and to pursue the means of attaining happiness. It
disposes them to suppress lawless ambition and revenge; which, among the
uncivilized, speedily kindle the flames of war -- for mankind, uncultivated,
are prone to commence hostilities at every injury; having little to loose by
the ravages of conquest. Far different is the case with those nations with whom
manufactures, trade and commerce have made a progress: their interest and
happiness are secured by a peaceable conduct. Great indeed have been the
changes which have been made among mankind by the introduction of the arts of
civil and social life, and the happy system of evangelical truth -- by the
lighth of these the nations of Europe have emerged from gothic ignorance and
barbarism; and rose to greatness and refinement, both in a political and
religious view. Hence, the vast difference between the manners of these, and
those of the wandering herds of Tartars, the plundering tribes of Arabia and
the savage nations of America.

By improving the human understanding, great discoveries have been made,
tending to the common utility and happiness of mankind.

Enriched with the knowledge of the ancients, the moderns have excelled them in
many valuable arts and manufactures. In profitable branches of science they
have also excelled. -- As the superior luster of the sun eclipses the rays of
inferior orbs, so shines the genius of a Newton, among philosophers of former
times. Admitted to pry into the arcana of government by which the heavenly
bodies are regulated, with a force of penetration peculiar to himself, he has
struck out new paths for succeeding geniuses, and reaching the zenith of human
science, attained the glorious end, to which all knowledge is directed -- to
acknowledge and adore the allwise ruler of this stupendous frame! In the
contemplation of the universe the mind is enraptured, and anticipates the
period which shall disingage it from matter and open a field for everlasting
advancement toward perfection.

Great improvements have been made in later days in the science of geography.
The lesser divisions only of the earth were known to the ancients; their
geographical knowledge was bounded by Britain and the Ganges; all besides was
to them a Terra incognita.

The polar property of the magnet, and its uses in navigation, was to them
unknown: hence their knowledge of distant regions and nations was very
imperfect, and their ideas of them visionary and romantic: and without this
most useful discovery, we must have continued in the same ignorance; and like
the ancient Phoenicians performed our voyages only along the shores, and by the
guidance of the stars. But by the aid of this invention, the skilful mariner
can now find his way through the pathless deserts of the ocean in storms and
darkness, to the wished-for port: by this, trade and commerce, the great
sources of national opulence and power, are carried on, the nations spread over
the face of the globe become acquainted, and are no longer strangers or
enemies, but friends, allies and brethren of one universal family. Commerce
gives life and motion to the world; the spirit of industry is hereby excited,
the treasures and delicacies of various climates distributed round the earth,
and the general happiness promoted. Far different from this, was the
intercourse of nations in the darker ages; then they fought each other to
plunder or destroy; and were known only as victors and vanquished, tyrants and
slaves.

Thus, from a few instances, we may discover the happiness derived to mankind
from the improvement of the understanding.

Were we to trace the various and almost endless branches of the arts and
manufactures to their source, each of them would afford a pleasing topic of
panegyric in favor of learning; since they all owe their origin and perfection
to the application of the principles of philosophy and the powers of mechanics:
but our time will not indulge a further pursuit of the agreeable theme.

Come we now to speak of the importance of the virtuous education of youth.

From the acknowledged advantages which are enjoyed by those nations who
cultivate the arts and sciences, and train up their youth in useful knowledge,
and the practice of moral virtue, the necessity of education must strike every
mind with conviction: and learning can have no enemies, the "ignorant
excepted." Reflections on learning.
No man, respected auditors, can be truly great, who is not a friend to
learning; since no man can be truly great without an enlightened understanding
and a benevolent heart. The importance then of the proposition which I would
attempt to illustrate, must, by the wise and good, be universally acknowledged.

As the skill of the Artist gives beauty and luster to the rude diamond taken
from the mine; so does the polish of education discover the just value of the
rational immortal mind.

The design of education is to qualify youth for an active, useful and virtuous
life; and to direct them into the path of piety and endless felicity. These are
the great ends for which this institution is founded; which ordains, that the
youth be initiated into such branches of human science, as shall lay a
foundation for their after improvement; and above all, that such impressions of
moral obligation, and the great principles of natural and revealed religion, be
made on their minds; as, by the divine blessing, may make them truly good; as
well as useful in life.

Youth is a susceptible age; free from prejudice, and eager in the pursuit of
knowledge; instruction obtains a welcome admittance to their minds; the heart
receives it by an easy transition; and from thence it flows, in all the various
actions of riper days.

Those impressions which are made upon the mind in childhood and youth are most
lasting; as a new vessel long retains a tincture of the liquor which it first
receives: these form the manners, and regulate the temper through life; agreeable
to the observation of the wisest of men. Train up a child in the way he should
go, and when he is old he will not depart from it.

As education opens the mind to receive the light of revelation, it is
handmaid of religion; and the merciful parent of the whole family of Adam, is
pleased to cherish the seeds of pious instruction planted in the youthful
breast, with heavenly influence; and from those families and institutions, in
which religion is enforced by examples of goodness, and instructions of early
peity, have those persons usually been taken, whom GOD has honored with
distinguished usefulness in the world.

As without application, knowledge is not to be acquired; and the mind
gradually expands to receive it; the skilful hand of instruction is necessary
to rear it to valuable seize. As the fertile soil by proper cultivation
sends forth a rich harvest, but if neglected by the hand of industry, yields
naught but weeds and briers; so the minds of youth, well instructed, will send
forth generous and salutary fruit, to reward the labor.

In a public school, youth engaged in the same studies, will be excited by a
laudable ambition to excel. The knowledge diffused among the whole, will become
in a degree the property of each individual. There the unhappiness of some
dispositions will be cured by a constant association with those that are
pleasant and amiable -- they will polish one another. And, under the direction
of the faithful preceptor, the vicious passions will be checked as soon as they
appear; and the laudable, encouraged, protected and rewarded.

Our venerable ancestors, impressed with the importance of improving this early
period of life, founded colleges and schools; by which they have left us a
monument of their wisdom, their piety and their patriotism, as lasting as time.
This good work of theirs, it has pleased GOD remarkably to bless; -- into
those fountains he has cast the salt of divine grace; and the salutary streams
have made glad the city of GOD. This generous part of that rightousness which
consists in a zealous pursuit of duty toward the rising generation, we this
day experience the blessed fruits of, from the great father of mankind, whose
gentleness has made us great.

Let us bow the knee, my highly favored auditors, to the GOD of our fathers
and of our salvation, with never ceasing gratitude, that it is our happy lot to
draw the vital air, and flourish in this land of knowledge, of liberty and
public virtue! That we are individual members of these States, which Heaven has
crowned with the blessings of INDEPENDENCE and PEACE; and rendered prosperous
in population, commerce and wealth, and above all, that we enjoy the light of
the gospel of the blessed Jesus, in greater purity than any people on Earth!
May it be the subject of our daily solicitude -- what shall we render to the
Lord for all his benefits!

In this happy age, and even since the commencement of our successful struggle
to be free, we behold a spirit of enquiry on the great subject of the natural
rights of mankind, rapidly spreading over the earth; and the eyes of despotic
princes and of their oppressed subjects opening to the conviction of liberty
and justice; national prejudices disappearing before the dawn of science; error
dropping the mask; and dismissing bigotry and persecution from her train; and
mankind embracing each other as brethren. No more shall the suspicion of heresy
condemn the innocent victim to the torture; the weapons of infernal revenge
shall forever sleep; and the blind votaries of delusion receive the glorious
light of heavenly PEACE.

On the wide theater of this new world, upon the threshold of which we are just
entering, what chearing prospects open before us! Here, virtuous freedom
crowned with the laurels of victory ever opposing ambition, will cherish future
geniuses that will arise, to eclipse the glory of former ages! This prodigious
continent, extending through various climates and regions, luxuriant in soil,
will crown the arts and sciences with the productions of her worthy sons. --
Empire having reached the limits of the globe, will probably here rest, after
it is long travel from the eastern hemisphere; and the arts and sciences attain
their last polish of perfection. A growing taste for useful knowledge is an
important characteristic of the people of this new world; -- and seems to be
the happy effect of that well regulated freedom and equality, enjoyed by them;
and a pleasing omen of future advances, to that perfection of knowledge and
social happiness, which may be attained by the united exertions of the human
powers. This taste for literature has laid the foundations of ten colleges,
several of them well endowed, in these thirteen states; in which there are
resident, from 800 to 1000 students: besides a number of public academies,
which are designed to prepare youth for admittance into those colleges; and to
give a good english education, to those whose circumstances may forbid their
passing through a course of classic learning. There are also formed, several
societies of the literati, for advancement of knowledge; and those institutions
have been established under all the disadvantages attending the settlement of a
new country; and several of them, even while our enemies, though undesigned by
them, were assisting, in laying the foundations of the august edifice of a
rising empire, cemented by the blood of our countrymen!




A happy presage of future glorious days, yet to open on this continent, seems
afforded, by the rapid progress of population, and of the arts and sciences, in
the course of a century and a half past: Long concealed from the knowledge of
mankind, and happily sequestered from the old world deluged in ignorance and
slavery -- may we not indulge the pleasing thought, that Heaven has reserved
it, for the stage, on which the last and most glorious displays of the divine
goodness to the children of men, shall be ushered in -- when, in a sublime and
perfect sense, there shall be given to the inhabitants, a pure language -- the
language of PEACE and everlasting love! Paradise, long lost to the children of
Adam, shall be found in this western world; and become the residence of the
favorites of Heaven!

Hail, happy days! we congratulate you, O ye people, yet unborn, in the joyful
prospects, when the wilderness of America shall become cultivated; and the
forest which now conceal the murderous Indian, watching for his prey, shall
adorn the banks of yonder majestic lakes and rivers; and the sails of
merchantmen, whiten the watery prospect; and the muses flourish under the
protection of FREEDOM and PEACE; when schools of virtue, colleges and
academies, shall adorn her plains, and temples erected to Jehovah, reach the
limits of yonder western ocean: the congregations of the saints crowd the gates
of Zion, and the incense of thanksgiving arise, from ten thousand altars, to
the throne of GOD.

Then shall those glorious events, long purposed in the eternal mind, obtain
their full accomplishment! Then shall they adore HIM from the West; the
wilderness blossom as the rose, the waste places smile like Eden; -- and the
deserts of America flourish, as the garden of GOD.

The enlightened of foreign nations, who have been looking upon us, with an
ardent curiosity, have been pleased to give us the pre-eminence, in knowledge
and virtue, to any people on the earth: and shall I go too far, when I say,
this we owe to the piety of our fathers? They wisely thought, that the most
valuable legacy they could leave their children, was a virtuous education. And
the happy effects of our contest for FREEDOM and INDEPENDENCE, under the
auspicious smiles of Providence, have been owing to men of superior talents and
enlightened genius, who rose to stand foremost in the storm; and by whom our
Republic, long tossed on the warring element, is now moored in the harbor of
PEACE!

While we revere the character of our illustrious Chief, as wise in council,
glorious in the field, and amiable in every moral and social virtue, with
warmest sentiments of thanksgiving to Heaven, who has honored him, as the
father and savior of his country; we leave it to the future sons of America,
to do justice to his unrivaled fame. The names and deeds of our worthy
patriots, statesmen and heroes, will be handed down, on the faithful page of
history, and applauding generations, will water their tombs, with the tears of
gratitude and joy!

Nor less illustrious, will be their characters, who at this dawning of
American greatness, with pious zeal for their country, have founded academies
and schools of learning.

The patrons of learning and of virtue, who with the amiable generosity of
Maecenas, have promoted the means of salutary instruction, have received the
noble epithet of Patres Patriae, and benefactors of mankind.

I must ask your indulgence, while on this occasion, I make an address, or two:
-- and were I permitted, I would honor my discourse, with a public
acknowledgement of the generous deed, which has convened us together, by laying
the deserved applause, of a grateful public, at the feet of the honorable
founder of the Exeter Academy. Her future sons will pronounce the name, with
affectionate and grateful veneration.

May the blessing of thousands, who by means of this generosity, may be rescued
from ignorance and qualified for usefulness, rest on the honorable Founder! and
the rewards of a future life be the glorious recompense of his extensive
charities, in this! The honorable Dr. PHILLIPS, has, by repeated donations,
largely extended his munificence to Dartmouth College, in his State, founded by
the late reverend and pious President WHEELOCK, D. D. whose memory will be ever
held in grateful and affectionate esteem by the author, as his patron,
benefactor and friend. That college promises fair for extensive usefulness to a
large territory between the borders of the New England States and Canada,
increasing, with an accelerated progress in population and the means of
subsistence. It now flourishes under the presidency of the son of the founder
of it, the hon'ble JOHN WHEELOCK; who possesses a happy portion of the spirit
his honored father. "The Founder of this Academy is also a Founder of that
Academy in Andover, in the Massachusetts, under the preceptorship of Mr.
ELIPHALET PEARSON; in connection with whom in that generosity, are his brother,
the honorable SAMUEL PHILLIPS, Esquire and the son of his brother, the honorable
SAMUEL PHILLIPS, jun. Esquire May Heaven succeed the labors of the honorable family
to promote the best interest of mankind!




May Heaven crown his generous wishes for the prosperity of piety, and
literature, with a success, surpassing his warmest hopes! and the example
inspire the like sentiments of liberality, patriotism and piety, in the breasts
of those whom Providence blesses with ability!

To you dear Sir, Mr. WILLIAM WOODBRIDGE, son of the reverend Mr. ASHBEL
WOODBRIDGE, of Glastenbury in Connecticut. He received his academic education
at Yale College in that State, under the presidency of the learned and
venerable EZRA STYLES, D. D.
on whom the eyes of the public are fixed, as the Preceptor of the academic
youth, allow me to address myself. By a mind enlightened with knowledge, and
warmed with the love of virtue, and a generous zeal to promote the best
interests of the rising generation, the importance of this subject, is readily
comprehended. A sacred trust now devolves upon you -- the care and direction of
youth, into the path of virtuous knowledge. We are happy in the prospect of
having the youth placed under one who has such ample testimonials of his
qualifications, for the important trust, as are given you, by the learned and
the good. Yours dear Sir, is the laborious, yet delightful task,

"To rear the tender thought,
To teach the young idea how to shoot,
To pour the fresh instruction over the mind,
-- and fix
The generous purpose, in the glowing breast."
Thompson.
In this we cordially wish you success. In the name of the honorable board of
Trustees, and the parents of the youth, allow me to observe, that we place full
confidence in your wisdom and fidelity, to discharge the important duties of
your office, toward your pupils, as the Preceptor and guide of their youth.

You will consider, them as the lambs of the flock, for whom the Savior shed
his blood Rollin.
-- that by your instructions, a foundation will be laid, as we hope, in the
breasts of very many, not only for their usefulness in this, but for their
endless felicity in the future life -- and while, with a heart warmed with zeal
to promote their happiness, you give them daily lessons of instruction -- that
the success depends, upon the blessing the comes from the father of spirits,
who alone can speak to the heart. May Heaven crown your faithful labors with
success! May you have the joy to see, your pupils walking in the truth; and
when satisfied with life -- a life of honor and of usefulness, may you receive
an immortal crown!

To the respectable inhabitants of this Town, I would beg leave to address my
discourse: -- Allow me, Gentlemen, to observe, that it must afford every friend
of virtue, a satisfaction, that we may congratulate you on the birth of this
public Institution, and its establishment, by the honorable Legislature of the
State; in which, your sons -- the rising hope of your declining days, may be
placed under promising advantages, for an early education. The success of the
instructions which they will receive at the Academy, will greatly depend, on
your kind endeavors to co operate with the Preceptor, in his faithful labors,
for their benefit. Behold the man! respectable parents! who relinquishing his
connections in a distant part of the country, embraces the lot, which an
all-diposing Providence points out, and becomes the guardian and Preceptor of
your sons! Your zeal to succeed his labors, will not be wanting; -- he will
find them light'ned by your kind attention to his comfort and usefulness, while
directing the studies, and forming the principles, and morals, of your beloved
offspring.

The commodious edifice, which you, Gentlemen, have erected, is an honorable
testimonial of your zeal to promote the laudable Institution. May it be made a
rich blessing to our Towns, and to this, in a particular manner!

We humbly dedicate and recommend this Academy to the Father of mercies -- to
him who has loved the children of men -- and to the enlight'ner of the world;
beseeching Him to take it into his holy protection; and that it would please
him, to preserve it, and long continue it an extensive blessing; that the would
smile on the means of education, and succeed our united efforts, to spread the
honors of his name, among mankind, in this, and succeeding generations!

O may a glorious multitude of plants of renown, reared and cultivated in this
nursery of knowledge and virtue, after bearing much fruit to bless mankind, be
transplanted to a happier soil, and flourish in immoral bloom, in the Paradise
above! May the generous Founder there behold the fair fruits his labors!

May this Institution live 'till nature dies! and suns and stars and worlds are
rapt in universal ruin!

STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE.
In the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and eighty-one.
AN ACT to incorporate an ACADEMY in the Town of Exeter, by the name of the
PHILLIPS EXETER ACADEMY.

WHEREAS the education of youth has ever been considered by the wise and good,
as an object of the highest consequence to the safety and happiness of a
people; as at an early period in life the mind easily receives and retains
impressions; and is most susceptible of the rudiments of useful knowledge: AND
WHEREAS, the honorable JOHN PHILLIPS of Exeter, in the county of Rockingham,
esquire, is desirous of giving to Trustees herein after to be appointed,
certain lands and personal estate, to be by said Trustees forever appropriated
and expended for the support of a public FREE SCHOOL or ACADEMY in the Town of
Exeter: AND WHEREAS, the execution of such an important design, will be
attended with very great embarrassments, unless by an Act of incorporation,
said Trustees, and their successors shall be authorized to commence and
prosecute actions at law, and transact such other matters in a corporate
capacity as the interest of the said Academy shall require:

BE IT THEREFORE ENACTED by the COUNCIL and HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES in General
Assembly convened, and by the authority of the same, That there be, and hereby
is established in the Town of Exeter, and county of Rockingham, an Academy, by
the name of the PHILLIPS EXETER ACADEMY, for the purpose of promoting PIETY and
VIRTUE; and for the education of youth in the English, Latin and Greek
Languages; in Writing, Arithmetic, Music, and the Art of Speaking, Practical
Geometry, Logic and Geography, and such other of the Liberal Arts and Sciences
or Languages as opportunity may hereafter permit, and as the Trustees, herein
after provided shall direct.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the honorable JOHN
PHILLIPS, Esquire DANIEL TILTON, Esquire THOMAS ODIORNE, Esquire and BENJAMIN THURSTON,
gentleman, all of Exeter aforesaid, JOHN PICKERING, of Portsmouth, Esquire and the
reverend DAVID M'CLURE, of North-Hampton, Clerk, all in the county of
Rockingham and State of New Hampshire, and the honorable SAMUEL PHILLIPS, junr.
of Andover, and county of Essex and commowealth of Massachusetts, Esquire be, and
they hereby are nominated and appointed Trustees of said Academy; and they
hereby are incorporated into a body-politic, by the name of the Trustees of the
PHILLIPS EXETER ACADEMY; and that they and their successors shall be, and
continue, a body-politic and corporate, by the same name forever.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the said Trustees
and their successors, shall have one common Seal, which they may make use of in
any cause or business that relates to the said office of Trustees of said
Academy; and they shall have power and authority to break, change, or renew the
said Seal, from time to time, as they shall see fit; and that they may sue and
be sued in all actions, real, personal and mixed, and prosecute and defend the
same to final judment and execution, by the name of the Trustees of the
PHILLIPS EXETER ACADEMY.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the said JOHN
PHILLIPS, Esquire and others, the Trustees aforesaid, the longest livers and
survivors of them, and their successors, be the true and sole Visitors,
Trustees and Governors of the said Academy, in perpetual succession forever; to
be continued in the way and manner herein-after specified; with full power and
authority to elect such officers of the said Academy as they shall judge
necessary and convenient; and to make and ordain such laws, orders and rules,
for the good government of said Academy, as to them the said Trustees,
Governors and Visitors aforesaid, and their successors, shall from time to
time, according to the various occasions and circumstances, seem most fit and
requisite; all which shall be observed by the officers, scholars and servants
of the said Academy, upon the penalties therein contained: Provided
notwithstanding, that the said rules, laws and orders be no ways contrary to
the laws of this State.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the number of said
Trustees and their successors, shall not, at any one time be more than seven,
nor less than four; four of whom shall constitute a quorum for transacting
business; and the major part of the members present, at any legal meeting,
shall decide all questions that shall come before them, except in the instances
herein-after excepted; that the principal instructor for the time being shall
ever be one of the said Trustees; that a major part shall be laymen, and
respectable freeholders: also, that all elections of the said Trustees shall be
so governed in future, that a major part shall consist of men who are not
inhabitants of the Town where the Academy is situate.

And to perpetuate the succession of said Trustees:

Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That as often as one or more
of the Trustees of said Academy shall die or resign, or in the judgment of the
major part of the other Trustees, be rendered, by age or otherwise, incapable
of discharging the duties of his office; then, and so often, the Trustees
surviving and remaining, or the major part of them, shall elect one or more
persons, to supply the vacancy, or vacancies to happening.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforeiaid, That the Trustees
aforesaid, and their successors, be and they hereby are rendered capable in law
to take and receive by gift, grant, devise, bequest or otherwise, any lands,
tenements or other estate, real and personal; provided that the annual income
of the said real estate shall not exceed the sum of five hundred pounds: and
the annual income of the said personal estate shall not exceed the sum of two
thousand pounds; both sums to be valued in silver, at the rate of six shillings
and eight-pence by the ounce; to have and to hold the same to them the said
Trustees, and their successors, on such terms, and under such conditions and
limitations as may be expressed in any deed or instrument of conveyance which
shall be made to them.

Provided always, That neither the said Trustees, nor their successors, shall
ever hereafter receive any grant or donation, the condition whereof shall
require them, or any others concerned, to act, in any respect, counter to the
design of the first Grantor. And all deeds and instruments, which the said
Tustees shall make, when made in the name of said Trustees, and signed and
delivered by four of the said Trustees, at least, and sealed with their common
seal, shall bind the said Trustees and their successors, and be valid in law.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if it shall
hereafter be judged, upon mature and impartial consideration of all
circumstances, by two thirds of all the Trustees, that for good and substantial
reasons, which at this time do not exist, the true design of this Institution
will be better promoted by removing the Academy from the place where it is
founded, it shall be in the power of the said Trustees to remove it
accordingly; and to establish it in such other place, within this State, as
they shall judge to be best calculated for carrying into effectual execution
the intention of the Founder.

AND WHEREAS, the said Institution may be of very great and general advantage
to this State, and deserves every encouragement:

Be it therefore enacted by the authority aforesaid, That all the lands,
tenements and personal estate, that shall be given to said Trustees for the use
of said Academy, shall be, and hereby are forever exempted from all taxes
whatsoever.

STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE. In the House of Representatives, March 30th, 1783.
The foregoing BILL having been read a third time, Voted, That it pass to be
enacted.

Sent up for concurrence, JOHN LANGDON, Speaker.

In COUNCIL, April 3d, 1781.
This BILL having been read a third time, Voted, That the same be enacted.

M. WEAR, President.
Copy examined by Joseph Pearson, Deputy Sec'ry.




