MR. LORD'S ELEVENTH ANNUAL DISCOURSE, AFTER THE HALF-CENTURY.

THE AGED MINISTER'S SOLEMN APPEAL TO GOD, AND SERIOUS ADDRESS TO HIS PEOPLE.
BEING THE SUBSTANCE OF THE TENTH AND ELEVENTH ANNUAL DISCOURSES, AFTER THE
HALF-CENTURY. DELIVERED AT NORWICH, Nov. 29, 1778. WITH A DEDICATORY PREFACE.

BY BENJAMIN LORD, A. M. SENIOR PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH THERE.

NORWICH: PRINTED BY JOHN TRUMBULL. M, DCC, LXXXIII.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IN this discourse, I have used all plainness and simplicity, both of
sentiment, and style, agreeable to the nature, solemnity and importance of the
subject; as also suitable to the design of the aged Minister's serious address
to the People, in the case of life and death in a moral view.

THE publication hereof was desired by some in the time of it, as it is by
others since. Several of these annual discourses have taken place since this:
but if any one is published, I should choose this, because of its special
propriety for my purpose, contained in the solemn words of Moses, from which I
have formed this kind of farewell to the people of my charge.

IT is with self diffidence, that I venture it out to public notice, and must
ask the readers candor; but, would humbly commit it to the divine blessing and
influence, to render it savingly profitable to the fathers, and their children
after them.

A PREFACE. DEDICATORY TO THE CHURCH AND CONGREGATION, UNDER MY PASTORAL CARE.
DEAR PEOPLE,
AT the invitation of your fathers, long since departed, I came hither in
October, 1716. -- After some proper time, with the people on probation; had
their unanimous call, to settle with them, in the work of the ministry, and
accordingly was ordained thereunto in November, 1717.

AT the expiration of fifty years, from my ordination, I gave you an half
century discourse, in November, 1767, from 1 Pet. i. 12, 13. "Wherefore, I will
not be negligent to put you always in remembrance of these things, although you
know them, and be established in the present truth; yea, I think it must, as
long as I am in the tabernacle, to stir you up, by putting you in remembrance;
knowing that shortly, I must put off this tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus
Christ has showed me. Moreover, I will endeavor, that you may be able after
my decease, to have these things always in remembrance."

WHICH discourse, at the desire you have had among you, and at the revolution
of every year since that period, I have given you a discourse, on some suitable
subject for the occasion: to remind my self, and you, of the riches of God's
forbearance toward us: of our increasing obligations to fill up our swiftly
passing time, with duty to God, and usefulness to man. And that, with a just
and practical regard, and reverence to the invisible, untried state beyond the
grave.

At the completion of the last year, I began a discourse, from those solemn
affecting words of Moses, Deuteronomy. xxx. 19. "I call heaven and earth to record
this day against you, that I have set life and death before you; choose ye
life," etc.

AND now, at the sixty-first year of my ministry, I reassumed the important
subject, with enlargements; if possible, (through grace) to have my own heart
and yours, deeply impressed with things so solemn and interesting as are
contained therein: for it surely becomes ministers to use all means within the
compass of their office and ability, for their own, and people's safety and
happiness.

BUT, notwithstanding all the means of grace, here and there; and methods of
providence also; even the very "terrible things in righteousness;" of late,
there have been a most evident decay of piety, and growing corruption of
manners. Yea, more especially since the commencement of the present war, which
has spread iniquity more than equal to desolation; replete with all manner of
dreadfuls, and still increasing; which aggravates the diseased guilty state of
the land, and heightens their danger.

THIS with other reasons, has induced me to give you these anniversary
discourses from the solemn and awakning words of Moses, before recited: in
hopes, that by the blessing of God, the same may be of service to excite some
proper reflections in the more thoughtless class of mankind, who have exposed
themselves to the witness of God and conscience against them, for their great
neglect of religion and salvation to this day -- and to awaken resolutions in
the more serious, to improve better than ever their day, and advantages for
these worthy purposes. -- As also, to promote the revival of religion, in the
best, so much needed in this day of most awful declension.

I have always had a large field of business here; many to minister unto, not
only publicly -- but also privately, through all their changing scenes of
life. While, with as great propriety, (as in any instance) might say, "who is
sufficient for these things?" And though I fear, as to many, I have labored in
vain; yet humbly hope, that through grace have had some fruit unto God, in this
place; as I may observe to the glory of God, that in some of the first years of
my ministry, there have been several seasons, whereto appeared marks of a
divine work upon the hearts of men, attended with lasting good fruits in the
life. And though in later years, there has not been observed any thing of the
like extent, yet hopefully some instances of conversion, and spiritual
edification, some tokens of the spirit's influence, at least as the small
gleanings of the vintage.

Now the importance of our subject from the words of Moses, when just (...) his
life and ministry, together with the probability that this may be the last
discourse from me, of this kind; may excuse me in giving them on to you, that
they may be with you, ^hen I can speak to you no more, but in such a form as
this. And this by the grace of God, be more effectual to you, and children
after you, than the perfect mode of speaking has been.

You will then take it as a kind of last and dying advice to you and yours in
after time -- Oh receive in unto the very heart, that "life and death are set
before you," and see to it, that you are not witnessed against for refusing
life, and rushing on to death a (...) all authority and grace, until the door
of hope be shut, and there be no remedy -- Agreeable hereunto, suffer me to
urge it (...) you in the language of the text, that "ye choose life that both
you and your children may live." And for particulars, refer you to the counsel
given you and children, in the closing part of the following discourse.

To say no more here, only this -- in all your religion, rest not without
integrity of heart; for without this, all fails of God's acceptance, and of
saving advantage to ourselves, therefore it is of the highest importance that
we do not rest in pompous ceremonies, parod^, and show in religion, not yet in
attending the externals of it, even though the whole circle thereof; but
realize the necessity of being God's workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto
good works. Can there be a right spirit in our religion, without a new heart at
bottom? And it is uprightness with God and men that is connected "with the
Savior of God, which is life." Now, as religion is the best thing any have,
better than riches, honor, etc. So the corruption of it by errors in doctrine,
especially capital ones; or by hypocrisy in practice, is the worst; most odious
to the God of truth and purity. It must be fixed in our minds, that a right
evangelical temper of the heart, is the soul and life of all religion; the
ornament and glory of them that have it; the very dress of the "King's
daughters that is all glorious within," and much so without. It Is the upright
that God beholds with approbation and pleasure now: and who shall have dominion
in the morning of the resurrection, when they shall rise to reign and be with
Christ forever? Beyond all expression and conception, happy in the everlasting
abodes of consummate felicity above.

Norwich, Jan. 1, 1779. Presented by your affectionate, aged Pastor, BENJAMIN
LORD.

THE AGED MINISTER'S SOLEMN APPEAL TO GOD, AND SERIOUS ADDRESS TO HIS PEOPLE.
DEUTERONOMY. xxx. 19. I call heaven and earth to record this day against you,
that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing: therefore
choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live.
AT this season, I shall resume the subject, introduced on tho last. The
subject is important enough to bear taking up a second time. Also to have some
recapitulation of what was said the year before -- and copeous enough to admit
of the designed enlargement at this time. I have before, endeavored to explain
the solemn truths and duties, contained in the words. I shall now briefly go
over again with some of the capital articles, and leading sentiments before
given out; and then after reciting the last year's introduction to the whole,
proceed to what remains on the subject. Truly, my hearers, the words I have
read to you, most solemn and affecting, are worthy our attention, and
solicitude to share in the good of them.

I have no sooner recited this sacred striking passage, and you have reflected
on the occasion of my using it; but your thoughtful minds, with your fixed
eyes, do view me as one drawing near to the close of his life and ministry. You
will then seriously attend unto me, as a dying minister preaching to dying men,
(though now) to a congregation that will mostly survive me, who have survived
by far, the most of the congregation I began to preach unto.

WHEN Moses looked upon his work among his people to be near done, inspiration
taught him to give them a recapitulation of those things he had delivered to
them from God -- the great doctrines of religion to guide their faith -- and
precepts thereof to govern their practice -- together with the statutes and
ordinances of God, to direct their worship. As also, his promises to encourage
their obedience; yea, and his threatenings to deter them from disobedience: and
then sums up the whole, under the empharical expressions of life and death,
blessing and cursing, which he had plainly set before them in the course of his
ministry, humbly appealing to God, that he had so done; then most
affectionately addresseth himself to the people of his charge.

"THEREFORE, choose ye life, that both thou and thy seed may live." With
respect to all this, Moses says, "I call heaven and earth to record this day,"
this day of my very advanced age, when soon, very soon, you will hear me no
more. God and your own consciences testify against you, who notwithstanding all
that God has done for you, and by me, has said unto you, have continued in
your sin and neglect of duty. And so against all those, who, hereafter are
found thus disobedient. All these implying that the same which is witness
against the guilty, is witness for the obedient now and hereafter.

So that upon the whole, the solemn words of my text may be thought applicable
on the present occasion, both as they look back (in a moral view) upon the like
general course of a minister's conduct in his special office, and on the
people's behavior, under the preaching of the word; and also as looking
forward unto future duty, and the eternal state, which the moral conduct of
ministers and people stand related unto. Whence I observed.

I. THAT the sum of a minister's duty, is to set life and death the blessing
and the curse, before the people of his charge. This general phrase includes
all the particulars of a minister's duty, as it is designed to speak out the
good of religion and salvation, and the evil of sin and destruction: yea, this
does mean that the minister is to set before the people the whole system of
religion, with all the doctrines and precepts of it, etc. together with the
obligations to faith and practice, according to the divine requisition. In a
word, he is to preach the gospel of Christ, which eminently holds up life to
the believer, who is careful to maintain good works; and most certainly shuts
out from life the unbeliever, and disobedient: and all the preacher has in
charge to say to the people, he is to set before them in a plain, intelligible
and engaging manner, not hide any part of God's council from them by obscurity
of language, or artful representation of scripture, to turn off people's minds
from the just sense they have

II. OBSERVE when the minister is drawing near to the close of his life and
ministry, there is a special propriety in his reminding them of this, that he
has by the grace of God been setting life and death before them in the course
of his ministry: often opening the way of life by Jesus Christ, and displaying
the terrors of the Lord against the unbelieving and disobedient. Now the
ministers declaring this with a solemn appeal to God and their conciences, has
a tendency to put people upon solemnly examining how they have heard and
improved, under the means of grace and life. And what would likely be their
case, if they should now be called hence? This also tends to solemnize the
minister's own heart, unto the better finishing his course of ministry and
life, and to the giving account of his stewardship, with the joy of the
faithful in Christ Jesus.

III. I observed, that of the minister, upon a just examination of himself; is
conscious, that by the grace of God, he has plainly and faithfully set life and
death before the people of his charge: he may then humbly appeal to God, and
their consciences, that he has so done. -- Moses fully satisfied in this
point, could and did call heaven and earth to witness hereunto: as also to
witness against the disobedient, and for the obedient. And whoever since have
obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful; that in some measure they have been
so, may in some imitation of Moses, make the same kind of appeal.

Now, this may add weight to what ministers say in God's name, and people thus
hear from God. This also shows it is of great importance, that the word be well
spoken, and well attended unto. For, that God is witness, and that conscience
is witness to the whole, is what demands the attention both of ministers and
people, unto their duty -- Yes, surely, it must be of great importance, that
ministers "do preach only the preaching that God kids them," and that the
people do hear the word, as it is indeed the word of God, and not of man: that
they hear, as for their lives, for indeed the life of the immortal soul, is
intimately concerned herein. Again, I observed,

IV. THAT the solemnity of this appeal, together with the importance of the
whole matter, may well put ministers upon exhorting their people to choose
life. And this as excited hereunto by the good of it, to themselves and their
children, "that both they and their feed may (...)."

SUCH a solemn appeal to God (as Moses does here make) may well be attended
with a serious address to the people; when Moses had set life and death before
the people, in this striking contrast, i. e. with the glory of the one, and
terror of the other, that they might have the argument in its full force opened
to them, to gain their intelligent and free choice of life. Then like a
faithful compassionate friend to them, he adds and says, in the language of
most pathetic address -- "Therefore choose ye life, that both thou and thy seed
may live." This was to strike every passion, reach all the feelings of the
intelligent conscious heart, and these of the parent, for the dear pieces of
themselves. I then went on to the

APPLICATION.
I. USE, from this subject, we learn the high importance of minister's being
very faithful in their work, which their commission, character and sacred
office, does loudly speak them obliged unto. No room for their solemn appeal to
God, without faithfulness in his service.

II. USE, whatever there was to recommend unto Israel of old, the duty urged in
the text, viz. to choose religion and life connected therewith; taken from the
high character and signal history of Moses, which no mere man may pretend to;
-- Yet there is now and always, enough in the worth of life, and terror of
death; as well as argument enough from the author, and nature of religion, to
recommend the advice in our text. Therefore choose life, and so enough to
recommend religion, to men's attention, and practice, in all ages. Life in the
sense of the text is what it is, some permanent good, which is known in
scripture as that important something, which connects the soul of man with the
Deity, in whose favor is life. So that it may be described and known by the
name of (...) to God, nearness to him, as fixed in the favor and friendship of
God forever, -- (...) (...) the same as unlikness to God, separation from him,
and (...) forever, the same as everlasting distance from God, the only source
of life, which must amount to destruction, "for so they that are far from him
do of course perish." God is the same, without the least shadow of change, his
perfections, authority, and grace do always require religion, the same for
substance under all dispensations, and as the nature of true and saving
religion, is always the same; so it always has reference to another state of
Being. Therefore it is of eternal consequence to us, that we be found to have
chosen life and the way that leads unto it, omitting any mention of several
affecting sentiments in the application, the last year, I shall now, go on, to
the designed enlargement -- and infer from the subject.

III. THAT religion is no vague, uncertain trifling business, very far from
this; when it is our conformity to God, and communion with him, our only road
to eternel life. It Is indeed, too serious, solemn, and interesting a business
to be trifled with. Due thoughts of the author, and object of it; as also of
the dignity and consequences of it; utterly forbid treating (...), in a loose
way, with a licentious mind, that breaks over rule, and rangeth wantonly in the
field of wild imagination. It must rather be treated with solid judgment and
exactness; for it is a very critical and delicate business, by no means to be
trifled with.

RELIGION is a very critical business; just so, and no otherwise, than the word
of God describes it. -- Its Principles, truth, and nothing but the truth, so
all error is its derect opposition its precepts, "concerning all things
perfectly right," opposite to every false way -- its motives; simple and free of
unhallowed self -- its exercises, spiritual, and superior to every thing of
nature and art. -- its end and design truly sublime, the glory of God and
happiness of man.

RELIGION, is also a very delicate thing, and cannot bear any thing to fully
its beauty; and darken its glory, it will not bear with heterogeneous things;
jaring principles, and especially discordant with the standard of orthodoxy.
Nor will it bear with instability, off an on, as if it were a vague business
neither certainly this or that, it implys unexampled precession, the very
thing, that God has determined; exactly this, and no other. It is of God, and
must be esteemed what he has said, and does require, and so to remain permanant
like his "word which abide, for ever." never to be altered at the will of man,
as if he may show himself weary of truth, and strictness. We must abide by its
very principles, and continue steaddy in the practice, for God's honor, and our
own happiness, as he has designed it; view, and use it as an institution worthy
of God; fitted for us, both dignifying and beautifying to us, so that, God is
jealous for the honor due to him, in the way of our faithfullness and steady
practice. There must not be any shifting here, to suit the times, no kind of
trifling here. In a word, true religion will not bear with fickleness,
hypocrisy or sloth; or any such thing that is unfriendly to the power of it.

Now then, if religion be of so fine and delicate a constitution, so
susceptible of injury by opposition, and even by mistake, taking that for
doctrine and principle, which was no place in religion; and that for its
business, which the laws of religion admit not; also considering the noble end
which religion is fitted to promote. The glory of the Deity, and our own happy
immortality; it must certainly be of the greatest importance, that we have just
notions of, and pay a faithful regard thereunto. And this, as ever we would not
be found to have affronted the author of its and ourselves suffer accordingly.
For religion is stamped with a divine authority, and trifling in it threatens
our loss of heaven.

SURELY then the instituting it for the end above said, is not a waste of
divine wisdom, goodness, etc. which strongly argues, that it must not be
neglected or trifled with. Here the life and death set before us, in the most
solemn manner, and will it do, (my hearers) to trifle in the case of life and
death.

IV. USE of exhortation to you and yours; "therefore choose life, that you may
live, that both you and your children may live." But as life is a personal
happiness, and religion a personal thing, how will the parent's religion and
choosing life serve the life of the children? Why to be sure it may be so, as
here is a fair example, by the wisdom and religion of the parents, for the
children to copy after; they beholding their parents strictly religious, and
conducting as persons who have chosen the better part, and bound for heaven;
may be awakened to a just solicitude about these important things, according to
that, "train up a child in the way wherein he should go," etc.

HERE is Moses's address to the people of his charge, that they choose life to
the end, that both they and their seed may live. Well explained and urged in
the following words, "that thou might love the Lord, and that thou might
cleave unto him, for he is thy life;" which all shows that to choose life,
implies the choice and exercise of religion here summed up, in loving the Lord
our God, with all our hearts, and cleaving to him in our whole life.

Now then, so far as I may use the words of Moses, which indeed are expressive
of the divine council and compassion; let them be duly regarded by us, and this
be seen in a practical respect to the one thing needful, in the well proved
"choice of that better part, which cannot be taken away."

HOWEVER sensible of my failures in the office of a minister of Christ; yet, I
hope I may, in some feeble imitation of Moses, call heaven and earth to record
this day; that I have by the grace of God been setting life and death before
you, in the course of my ministry among you, which now completes sixty-one
years, since my ordination: and may I not hope that through the divine blessing
accompanying the word, I have been instrumental of the conversion and
edification of some; while yet justly to be lamented, that many have not
believed the report of the gospel, may there in future time, be greater numbers
believe and turn to the Lord.

I am thankful that you have been sensible that my old age called for stated
help, and that you have been disposed to call and settle a colleague with me,
in the important service of Christ. May you by him, have a rich supply of
ministerial service, attended with the happiest success. And the God of all
grace and God of peace, be with you and bless you and yours, in all their
generations.

Indeed, the times we are now fallen into, are exceeding difficult and
distressing, yet carry in them much argument to keep up the worship of God in
public and private, with utmost care to transmit religion to future
generations: for if religion fail from among a people, what is there left that
is very worthy of their solicitude to hold and enjoy? But however distressing
the present times, such as America never knew before, for expense of blood and
treasure in our defense: and however great and general the declension from
virtue and piety, even unparalleled, you have in the midst of such
embarrassments, and well indeed that you have set forward and accomplished the
settlement of another minister, to preserve the public worship of God among you
in future time. May God have the glory and you and yours, the lasting benefit
of it.

THE importance of our subject, and my situation as near done speaking to you,
may give me warrant to give, and engage you to take the following as a kind of
last and dying advice to you and your children, all agreeable to that of Moses,
"therefore choose life, that both thou and thy seed may live." To be more
particular in some set form of advice,

I. BE established firmly in the belief of this prime truth, viz. that " God
is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him," which is the
foundation of all religion. In this Athiestical age, very eminently so, when so
many, at least practically deny the existence of a God, as supreme lawgiver
and judge -- that "live without God in the world," as if there was no God to
give law unto them and judge them; let me solemnly repeat it, and pressingly
urge, that you have your hearts assured of this great truth, that certainly
there is a God, one all perfect Being, necessarily and unchangeably what he is;
the grand basis of all religion. For, if there is no God, it could not with any
propriety be said, "if there be any virtue, if there be any praise think on
these things," as there could not be any such thing to employ the mind, since
virtue and Godliness has a necessary relation to the certain existence and
perfections of deity, to require and reward the same. Therefore if any
Athiestical thoughts or desires be ever suggested to you, resist them, with
vehement indignation, as infinitely impious and absurd. For it is " the feel
that even in his heart, says there is no God," which is to deny both his Maker
and his own existence at one stroke, and at once dislodge all thoughts of
religion, virtue and happiness; and what a strange kind of being must man be,
without virtue and religion, as his proper exercise and business, and without
God as the only true happiness of an intelligent creature.

II. BE established in this, that God (most high, yet conversable with men)
has by his own gracious revelation, opened a converse with fallen man, through
his own son Jesus Christ, the great medium of our intercourse with heaven, and
only Mediator of our prayers and praises, and all our religion: in a word,
God's way to us, and our's to him by faith.

III. BE assured of this, that the scriptures of the old and new Testament, are
the word of God: that they naturally prove the divinity of each other, as the
former predictions in the old Testament, having their accomplishment by facts
of later date related in the new Testament, do prove that all scripture is
given by inspiration of God. Thus Christ himself alleges that his Messiahship
and character, as he, son of God, and Savior of men, is given out and proved
by the writings of Moses; for says he, "they are they, which testify of me; of
me as I now appear, and am manifested in the very character foretold of the
Messiah." Moreover, as the miracles of Moses proved the divinty of his
writings, so the uncontestable miracles of Jesus Christ proved the divinity of
his gospel: especially his resurrection from the dead, evident to his
disciples, was, and is clear proof of this. Further the divinity of the sacred
scriptures, appears from the divine excellency of the matter the inimitable
majesty of the style, composed of greatness and simplicity, as no other
writings are. So is the power and efficacy of the word of God upon the mind and
conscience, strong proof of the point in hand. Yea, this same especial evidence
of the divine authority of the word, according to the design of Jer. iii. 28,
29. adduced to this very purpose; "for, what is the chaff to the wheat? Is not
my word like fire, and like as a hammer that breaks the rock in pieces?" Now
then, is not the given characters of the word of God, when verified by the work
of the divine spirit on the mind and heart, good proof of the divine authority
thereof. Take it in these instances out of many. It is said, "by the law is the
knowledge of sin. The law of the Lord is perfect (...) the soul. The statutes
of the Lord are right rejoicing the heart." And all this effected by the
spirit. So it follows, that when persons are convinced of sin, converted to
God, and comforted in this way, by this means; and all this evidenced by
fruits, which the word marks out as genuine; here is good proof of the divinity
of the scriptures; in that God himself, does hereby set to his seal, in
confirmation of the truth of them. By this it appears, that his authority is
really stamped upon them; and that they are indeed the word of God, and not of
man, and to be taken by us, as "the faithful saying, worthy of all
acceptance." Then let it be settled upon your hearts, that the divine
Revelation is to apostate man, the only sure and sufficient rule of faith and
practice, morally fitted to be the means of our conversion to God, and forming
for heaven.

THUS, you see what weight is to be laid upon the word of God, in this its true
character, most aptly framed and designed for our best good. And so, of what
importance it is, that we receive the sacred scriptures as they are; not to be
wrested from their genuine meaning by any artifice of men, by no means to be
mangled and divided; some passages rejected, and others only received, which
suit some preconceived favorite scheme of principles, agreeable to men's
erroneous sentiments, and carnal lusts, by which indeed, denying the authority
of the whole.

THEREFORE, very gladly may we receive the friendly caution of our Savior,
"take heed what you hear, how you hear, etc." As a good guard against
skepticism and cavil, that tend directly to Deism, which discards the divine
Revelation, and so aims by one stroke, to destroy all religion, especially the
Christian re^^gon, and thus shut up the only door to heaven, opened in this
way, through Jesus Christ the only Savior.

IV. BE then very careful to set out right in the theory of religion; for a
mistake here, if it be a mistake as to the grand essential doctrines of it; is
a fundamental error, and not corrected, will be fatal by erring in vision, we
are exposed to stumble in judgment, and practice too. You are also in
experience, but to receive and be well established in the truth, as it is in
Jesus in his gospel; is the way to be sound in the faith: as also in all
practical and experimental religion. Else, why do we read of Christ's doctrine
being according to Godliness? And of the truth as being after Godliness?
Plainly showing that every doctrine, not taken from the word of God, and that
stands not connected with true piety and religion, and no ways adapted to
promote the same, is false doctrine; not fit to be preached; not safe to be
heard, and believed. Express is the Apostle upon this subject. "If any man
teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and the doctrine which we preach (that is according to Godliness) he is
perverse, and knows nothing," therefore, "take heed what you hear, and that
no man deceive you," and turn you aside from those wholesome words, and so from
the right ways of the Lord; and you wander in the wild maze of ignorance and
error, and perish forever. Oh! my brethren, see that you set out right, and
keep the road of truth and duty:" be not deceived, God "is not mocked;" the
heart is very deceitful; self flattery "but too natural to depraved man." And
so there is an imbred proness to yield to the flattering sentiments of those
that lie in wait to deceive with their doctrines, pleasing to corrupt nature.
Therefore, be on your guard, "not to be carried away with strange doctrines, --
with every wind of doctrine, to turn you from the faith once delivered to the
saints," and yet continued unto them. Study your bible well, not to have
revelation subject to reason; but this guided and governed by that

V. BE well established in the connection of internal religion and salvation;
the same as a connection of heart purity with a Christ. For as it is most
evident there is salvation in no other, but Christ the one Mediator between God
and man; and no interest in Christ without union to him; so no union to him
without faith, which is ^^ought in us in our effectual calling. Not some time
after, but in it. According to such plain passages of scripture as these. Ephesians.
ii. 10. "We are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus, unto good works."
John, i. 12. "As many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons
of God." The regenerate are sons of God, born of him by his spirit: these are
his workmanship created in Christ, i. e. renewed in him as united to him. So
that it seems not agreeable to the language and spirit of the bible; that we
conceive of regeneration in the order of time, before faith in Christ. Does God
by his spirit take a poor creature all in the rough, renew him in the whole man
after his image, that he shall love God supremely, love his law as holy, and
yet know nothing of Christ, and have no union to him by faith, while yet the
scripture speaks of men's being the children of God by faith, Gal. iii. 26. The
truth is, that regeneration is prior to faith, only in the order of nature, and
of their conception of things. We conceive of God's drawing, and then of our
coming; but really they are together. As God draws, we come. So Mr. Polbil
describes it, acta, agit. The soul acted upon, does act. Which appears to
answer well to the description of it. John, vi. 44. "No man comes to the Son,
but whom the Father draws." And what is his drawing if we come not? How is it
an effectual calling if the extarnal call does not take with us, and we don't
come to Christ as offered in the gospel?

BE well informed in this point, according to the experience of the church in
Sol. Song, i. 4. "Draw me, we will run after thee." Is not regeneration the
work of God within us, by which we are conformed to the image of his Son? Here
is a Christ included in the business. And can this be without any connection
with him; without any knowledge of him, or faith in him? In a word, it seems
that the renovation of our natures does not take place, abstract from Christ,
any more than the justification of our persons. The Apostle is full here: see I
Cor. i. 30. "But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us
righteousness and sanctification." And is it safe to think we have the
qualification for heaven? Heart purity, without a Christ formed in us the hope
of glory.

Now, as religion is not any thing saving to us, unless it be a personal
powerful principle of obedience to God; so this internal religion is what we
have in our union to Christ by faith: the new creature is what it is in him,
and cannot exist without him.

VI. BE well established in the connection of God's instituted means, and the
end proposed in our use of them. Now the scriptures abundantly show, that God
has in his infinite wisdom and goodness, appointed external means with respect
to our salvation; yea, to our obtaining of saving grace. Means, well adapted to
our nature as men, and to our state as sinners: means which he makes use of by
his spirit, for this purpose. As the spirit takes of Christ and shows it unto
us: and means which he requires us diligently and faithfully to attend on for
his influence and blessing, to make them effectual unto us. So that to say,
"there is no sort of connection between the means and the end;" is an
unscriptural assertion. Indeed, there is no causal or meritorious connection,
as if the means were thought to rise into the place and character of an
Efficant, or that by the best use we can make of them we could merit grace and
salvation; yet there is some sort of connection, such as is proper between
means and end: and that the increase or blessing, is God's prerogative to give;
yet Paul is to plant, and Apollos water, and we to attend thereon. For "faith
comes by hearing the word preached," the means instituted for that end.
Therefore, be you faithful in the use of the means left you fall under the
censure of those that "frame not their doings (or ways) to turn unto the Lord,"
and fail of the blessing to be obtained in the way of duty. This the ordinary
way of it: to be sure more likely than in the neglect of means. Examples in
scripture are full to this purpose. And is not our sanctification by the
spirit, through belief of the truth, which is revealed and preached to us,
according to that in John, 17. where our Savior is full in this? Sanctify them
through thy truth, thy word is truth. The written word containing the means by
which the spirit does his work. And is the means we are to use to this purpose,
evident by that in Romans 10? How shall they hear without a preacher? Which
shows there must be preaching the word, and hearing it. And how comes faith
ordinarily, but by hearing? Thus internal religion is formed in us.

VII. SET out early and earnestly in the business of religion, that divine
service you were eminently made for, and do owe to God that made you, and who
only can make you happy. This advice is especially addressed to the youth,
agreeable to that of Solomon's; "Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy
youth, before the evil days come," etc. Intimating that the younger part of
life is ordinarily most free of evil days. Of such wherein is no pleasure,
except it be in religion.

BUT the advice is also proper for those in elder life, delay no longer now,
but early and earnestly apply to this serious business: whatever is your age
now, delay no longer; for the putting off to a future day, under a notion of a
more convenient season, is a mere cheat, and danger enough, that be fatal: for
they who put off to a morrow, are apt and want to do just so again, when the
morrow comes; and so on, till a morrow be no more delay, will cost you bitter
repentance here or hereafter.

AND don't think that a little religion will answer for God's acceptance and
your safety: only going on in a circle of external duties (if you were come to
that) with an unhallowed heart, will not be enough to please him, "with whom
you have to do;" who sees not as man sees, but looks on the heart.
Therefore be very solicitous to have the foundation laid in the sanctification
of the spirit unto obedience; in faith repentance, with self-dedication to God,
devotedness to him without reserve, and beyond revocation.

VIII. BE frequent and faithful in self-examination into your state and wants,
etc. which may be awakning to the sinner, and improving to the saint. It Is a
good guard against every kind of temptation, and friendly to every branch of
religion. Yes, to be much at home communing with your own hearts, is a good way
to be the more with God, in communion with him.

IX. CONSCIENCIOUSLY attend God's instituted worship. Let not any trifling
excuses hinder you from constant attendance on it in public. Be steady in
family worship, in reading the word and prayer. (not passing over that of the
solitary kind) Let there be no prayerless families among you; and let no family
discord have place within your house, lest thereby your prayers be hindered.
Let heads of families be faithful in the instruction and government thereof;
teach your children and servants sound doctrine, which only is unto Godly
edifying. Train them up well, like Abraham, "command your household after you,
to keep the way of the Lord." Be firm in Joshua's resolution; "as for me and my
house, we will serve the Lord." And not a little with this view, that well
regulated families, are the nursery of the church and state in their glory; but
that the community of every kind is extremely injured by irreligion and
disorder in private families. Let children be obedient to their parents, as
ever they would hope to share in the promise annexed in the 5th commandment.
And servants cheerfully obey their masters in the Lord. Let all in early life
be far from thinking they are excused in the vanities of children and youth,
but rather attend to that advice, "young men and maidens (with old men and
children) let them praise the name of the Lord." This a fit business in all
ages, and through life. Let the aged be eminently sober, grave, and of good
behavior, bringing forth fruit in old age to the glory of God, and their own
comfort.

UNTO one and all ages and characters, let me say, that it should be a settled
point with you, to be strictly virtuous and religious: fail not of any breach
of duty, in the whole circle thereof. If moral virtue fail in your conduct,
Christianity cannot flourish. Therefore, "that which is altogether just, etc.
thou shall follow;" or can you think to be followers of Christ, act out the
Christian in every way required, etc. in every thing called for, without a
strict regard to moral virtue, in all righteousness and charity?

BUT perhaps it will be said, how can such important matters be attended to,
against the impetuous current of wickedness? Against all the embarrassments to
virtue and religion, that crowd upon us, in times so distracted and distressing
as the present? I reply, the state of our affairs, both in a political and
moral view, do indeed wear a dark aspect; especially, as our abounding
iniquities and impieties do compose the darkest part of the cloud that hangs
over us; and must needs strike a thoughtful mind with grief and lamentation;
yet, and although Ichabod in some plain characters, is written upon this land;
as the glory is awfully departed from us; still, let not the mourners in Zion,
who tremble for the ark of God, be discouraged from constant fervent prayers
for his return unto us, with his healing saving mercy; nor be discouraged from
vigorous attempts of our reformation; for as God has for his own name's sake,
saved his people of old, when on the brink of ruin: so, for his own name's sake
(still as dear to him as ever) he may appear for us in our low estate, as many
as our sins are, and heavy as his judgments are; see Ezekiel. 22. where it is said
four times over, -- "I will pour out my fury," etc. But I wrought for my name's
sake. Nevertheless, mine eye pitied and spared them from destroying them. And
for this reason, as God himself says, because I am God, and not man. As in
Hosea, xi. 9. where, open to view, the most surprising struggle between justice
and mercy, and mercy prevailing, "how shall I give thee up Ephraim, etc. mine
heart is turned within me, and my repentings are kindled together? I will not
return to destroy Ephraim in the fierceness of mine anger, but will surely have
mercy on him, for I am God and not man, says the Lord." A similar surprising
passage is that in Isa. lviii. 18. I have seen his ways, and will heal him:
yes, the ways of my people, and therefore greatly aggravated. Yet, as bad as
they are, I will heal him. So he may for his name's sake heal us of our
backslidings, and give us repentence unto life. But "for this he will be
enquired of to do it for us." And, as a just reflection on our abominable
declension from God, together with his terrible things in righteousness at this
day, may awaken us to our duty. So God's compassion (ever the same) may
encourage us to strive and pray for a reformation and the removal of his
judgments. Shall we dare to indulge our stupidity, till our iniquity complete
our ruin; till our all is gone, past recovery? The case is fairly stated thus,
if ye live after the flesh, (and continue to do so) ye shall die, and there is
no remedy. And how can the short-lived pleasures of sinful gratifications more
than balance the horrors of eternal destruction, as if it could not be wise,
to be at the pains of selfmortification to escape it.

To revert for a moment to the first paragraph under this last head of advice,
and say, by no means forsake the assembling of yourselves together for public
worship; but be faithful and constant in the attendance on the institutions of
God's house, especially on the Lord's day; for, as slackness in this, and as to
the strict observation of the Sabbath (as at this day) is an awful evidence of
great declensions already taking place; so if continued, will be a terrible
omen of most threatening declensions to follow. Oh this being weary of Sabbaths,
and God's worship, do awfully expose us to God's casting us off, to be no more
his people; for though he bear long, he will not bear always. And if (...) be
written upon us, woe to us: as said, "woe to them if I depart from them." But I
would hope better things of you; and therefore proceed one step further by way
of advice.

SPARE no pains in the Christian work, or warfare, be very solicitous for a
saving and satisfying connection with Christ, give up yourselves to him by
faith, love him supremely, make much of him, more than any other beloved,
infinitely more, especially as the Lord your only righteousness: live by the
faith of the Son of God, strictly follow him, walk circumspectly, (i. e.
looking all around you) to espy danger from every quarter, from your own
hearts, the world and Satan, as well as not to let any duty pass unnoticed: lay
up your treasure in heaven, and have your hearts there as an evidence of this.
Ever account it a prize worth contending for, and the spiritual warfare you
must be engaged in to obtain it; as you must list under Christ's banner, so
fight the good fight of faith, to lay hold, and keep hold of eternal life. Put
on the whole armor of God, especially the shield of faith, and therewith use
the sword of the spirit, the word of God, to quench the fiery darts of the
wicked one. Resist temptation early, and give no place to the Devil: resist him
steadfastly in the faith of Christ's power and merit, yea, in a humble
confidence in his grace to be sufficient for you. However arduous the struggle
may be, be resolute and courageous in the spiritual battle, with a reliance on
Christ to be your support, and to give you the victory. Never give over as to
any branch of the Christian work or warfare, however much you may be afflicted
with opposition -- but continue in well doing, and vigorous fighting. Shrink
not back from the most vigorous efforts in so noble a cause: keep a good
conscience before, toward God and man: faithfully regard the dictates of a well
enlightened conscience in living well, and settling well the grand account for
the last judgment. Oh then indulge not any thing that will not bear a look from
God's all pervading eye; that will not bear a single cast from his dread
tribunal, much less the full glare of eternity.

THROUGH all life keep death and the future world in view, realizing their
swift approach. In this view, keep up the important struggle for the prize of
the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.

IN the close of these heads of advice, respecting faith and duty, I shall only
add, that whatever men believe and do, or feel and suffer, even in the bitter
reflections of conscience, it all don't make up a righteousness to justify them
before God. No, the true faith, sincere obedience, and rich experience of
eminent Christians, in the exercise of love to God and Jesus Christ, in
repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. have not
any thing in them of the nature of an expiatory sacrifice and payment of our
immense debt to divine justice. It is most evident, from the present state of
diseased guilty man, from the whole current of the bible, and from every
constitution of God; that all his pretenses to justification and life, by any
thing of his own, are utterly vain; which must not escape our notice, or fail
of the strictest attention.

THIS sane is a very important matter to be ever in our view. Yea, a point as
clear as any in all the bible, and abundantly confirmed therein. It is
observable, that early upon the fall of man, God declares against the vanity
and folly of sealing righteousness by the deeds of the law, when once he had
transgressed it. Accordingly he soon lets Adam know he may not attempt now to
approach the tree of life: but so far from this, God drove him out of the
garden; and set cherubims, and a flaming sword which turned every way, to keep
the way of the tree of life. But oh! how surprising the divine benevolence,
that even before Adam's exclusion from Paradise, and prohibition of using the
first covenant, he opens a new and living way by the promise of the seed of the
woman to be the Savior of men; the sane that afterward, is styled the Lord
our righteousness.

VERY worthy of our remark it is, that God who is wont to speak to us,
especially the most important things by way of contrast, setting the one over
against the other, that the light may appear the stronger, and have the greater
effect; and often sets forth the gloomy part of the contrast first, though
immediately after the encouraging part, as it were in the same breath. See the
instance in Hoses, xiii. 9. "O Israel, (O man) thou have destroyed thyself, but
in me is thine help." So that in Isaiah, xxvii. 4, 5. "Who would set the briers
and thorns against me in the battle? I would go through them and burn them
together Or let him take hold of my strength and make peace with me, and he
shall make peace." I say it is worthy of remark, here in the case of Adam; he
exhibits the bright side of the contrast first: gives out the promise of a
Savior, before he fully opens upon the guilty creature the terrors of the
broken law; as if he should be prevented from any despair, (only in himself)
and have immediately ready at hand the most powerful argument, to renounce
self, and trust in an all-sufficient Savior. How thankful should we be for the
provision now made for our justification and life, upon a gospel plan, that
humbles men, and exalts the Lord.

I have finished the whole, when I have added the appendix, usual on such
occasions; the account of baptisms and deaths, in this society, with some
proper reflections.

BAPTISMS this year, 40. Deaths, 36. Of these, infants, 5. Children from 2
years, with the youth to 25, are 10. From the age of 25 to 50, are 13. From 50
to 94, are 7. And also died here in a few weeks, of the French prisoners from
New York, 20. In all, 56.

I have thus classed out the dead, that you might have before you a specimen of
demonstration, that death spares no age or character, but runs through all
ages, from the infant of days, to the eldest mortal: it seizes on persons of
all characters, without distinction; sparing not the most virtuous and useful,
within its commission. Very speaking it is, that no age or qualification,
secureth from the irresistible stroke. So that none may boast of a morrow; when
death in its rapid way to the living, may come to day suddenly, and unsuspected
as "a thief in the night."

AND now by this look into the grave, into the congregation of the dead, who
number on in all periods of life, and continually filling up that vast
collection in the silent abodes below: I say, by this view of what we are all
hastening unto, viz. to join the dead, every one in his own order and time. May
we through grace, be very solicitous to prepare each one for his own approaching
change; so as that we may then attend with faith and fortitude to the
solemnities of dying, which stand alone by themselves, and never repeated.
Indeed the solemnity of living with a just reference to dying, is next to it
and connected with it; and this to be carried on through life: but that of
dying is but once and alone; and not a little determined what it is by the
manner and kind of our life. Then let us not spend our days as a tale that is
told; soon out, and to little purpose. But may we hear of every age, capable of
reflecting on the importance of living and dying well; most faithfully apply
ourselves to our great work "while it is day, for the night comes wherein no
man can work."

IT is an old saying and a true one, delays are dangerous; especially so in the
important matters of religion The King's business requires host; the King of
Kings will not have his postponed, how express his demand, that ^e ^elay not to
keep his commands. The reason is plain; delay is keeping God out of his due; is
a kind of refusal to pay it at all. It Is very injurious to ourselves, and
threatens to be fatal. It Is certain our days hasten fast to a close; and if our
work does not go on in some good proportion thereto, we shall be sadly in the
arrears of duty; and if the one thing needful is not done, what then but
immersed in the irretrievable state of the slothful? And now having so many
arguments to awaken our attention to our duty and interest, may we seasonably
and thoroughly attend thereunto; let us see to it that our hearts are right
with God; that we make with him an everlasting covenant, and especially learn
to live the life of the righteous, and have our last end like his. Oh! let us
under the realizing views of death's approach and seizure, beyond any discharge
in that war; be acting in the full character of the Godly, and with right
Christian perceverance to the end. I conclude with the prayer of Moses, "So
teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom," that by
having through life, a just and practical reference to death, and that final
great account, we may commence the wise, that shall inherit glory. AMEN.

ERRATA. In page 5, line 11; for must, read meat. P. 8, l. 9; for Savior, read
favor. P. 15, l. 15; read beatifying; and l. 22; for was, read has. P. 21, l.
5; for you, read yea. P. 22, l. 22; for their, read our.


