AN ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE OF THAT Ancient Servant of JESUS CHRIST, JOHN
RICHARDSON, Giving a RELATION of many of his Trials and Exercises in his Youth,
and his SERVICES in the Work of the Ministry, in ENGLAND, IRELAND, AMERICA, etc.

He that hears you, hears me: And he that despises you, despises me: And
he that despises me, despises him that sent me.

Luke x. 16. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY JOSEPH CRVKSHANK. IN
MARKET-STREET, BETWEEN SECOND AND THIRD-STREETS. MDCCLXXXIII.

THE TESTIMONY OF FRIENDS belonging to Gisbrough Monthly Meeting, concerning
our worthy Friend JOHN RICHARDSON, who departed this Life, near Hutton in the
Hole, the 2d of the Fourth Month 1753, in the Eighty seventh Year of his Age,
and was buried in Friends Burying Ground at Kirby-moorside.
AS many of our Elders are removed, and but few left who had personal Knowledge
of this our Friend in his younger Years, and early Part of his Service, we
cannot give so full an Account thereof as otherwise might have been done.

Nevertheless, by Accounts transmitted to us, we have Cause to believe he was
much devoted and cheerfully given up to walk in the Way of his Duty, and
therein was of great Service to the Churches where his Lot was cast; as also an
Instrument in the divine Hand, in turning many to Righteousness.

As to the latter Part of this Life we have this Testimony to give of him, Tha^
(...) Lover of Discipline and good Order in the Church, diligent in attending
Meetings for Worship and Truth's Service, whilst of Ability; a good Example
therein, by sitting in a still, quiet, and unaffected manner in Silence, and
when raised up to bear a public Testimony, was comfortable and acceptable to
Friends.

And when his natural Faculties were somewhat impaired, and he confined at home
through old Age and Infirmities, ^e appeared more and more heavenly minded, and
seemed to grow in the Life of Religion, that we hope he is now at Rest in the
Fruition of that Happiness prepared for such as hold out to the End in well
doing.

Signed on Behalf of the said Meeting, held at Castleton the 22d of the Third
Month, 1754, by JOHN SNOWDON WILLIAM PEIRSON JOHN FLINTOFT JOHN WILSON THOMAS
WARD ONESIPHORUS HOOPUS ISAAC STOCKTON JOHN BAKER THOMAS WOOD JOHN STEPHENSON
ISAAC TAILOR THOMAS ELLERBY CALEB FLETCHER JOHN MARTIN GEORGE COATS GEORGE
MASON JOSEPH FLINTOFT RICHARD WILSON WILLIAM HARTAS JOSEPH HESLETON.


THE TESTIMONY OF FRIENDS, from the Quarterly Meeting held at YORK.
ON reading the Testimony given from the Monthly Meeting of Gisbrough,
concerning our late ancient and worthy Friend John Richardson, deceased, of
which we approve, and do find ourselves under an Engagement to add this short
Testimony; that from certain Experience of the Service he has had amongst us in
a fresh and lively Ministry, and in the exercising of the Discipline of the
Church in a Gospel Spirit, whereby many received Comfort and Edification; and
some of us having Knowledge of him from his early Appearance in the Ministry,
remember that he was acceptable to Friends, being sound in Doctrine, reaching
to the Witness of God in those to whom he ministered: He was a diligent and
faithful Labourer, traveling several Times through most Parts of this Nation,
and visited Friends Meetings in Scotland and Ireland, as also twice the English
Plantations in America, leaving many Seals of his Ministry, having had the
Approbation and Unity of his Friends with his Service both at home and abroad.
He was a tender nursing Father in the Church, over the Youth whom God had
visited, to encourage and strengthen those newly convinced, to whom also he was
a good Example; and though of a sweet and courteous Dispostion, yet careful in
the Spirit of Wisdom, to caution and guard such against the deceitful Workings
and false Representations of the Spirit of Error; and to diverse of us who
visited him toward the Close of his Time, he appeared in a heavenly Frame of
Mind, to our great Comfort, evidencing a Preparation for that eternal Bliss
whereinto (we doubt not) he is entered, and reaps the Fruits of his Labors.

Signed in and on Behalf of our Quarterly Meeting, held at York the 27th and
28th of the Third Month 1754, by BOSSELL MIDDLETON JOHN SCOTT ROBERT HENDERSON
EDWARD STABLER ROGER SHACKLETON LAYTON FIRBANK WILLIAM HIRD JOHN FLINTOFT
WILLIAM COWELL JOHN BIRKBECK JOHN KILDEN THOMAS ROWLAND SAMUEL GRIMSHAW WILLIAM
CONING THOMAS ALDAM, jun. WILLIAM PAIN JOHN GREENWOOD JOHN HUSTLER CALEB
FLETCHER WILLIAM BROWN ABRAHAM SUTCLIFF JOHN SUTCLIFF JONATHAN CRAVEN.


AN ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE OF JOHN RICHARDSON, Introduced With a brief Relation
concerning his Father WILLIAM RICHARDSON.
IT has been repeatedly revived in my Mind, to leave the following Account
concerning my dear Father WILLIAM RICHARDSON, having also seen something of his
own in Manuscript, concerning his Convincement, with Remarks on some other
Things; but I being young when he died, did not then much heed it, and when I
would gladly have seen it for my own Satisfaction, I could not, nor as yet can
meet with it; therefore,

Inasmuch as my Father was early convinced of the Truth, a Sufferer for it, and
bore a public Testimony to it, I found it my Duty, as near as I could remember
the Contents thereof, to leave this short Account concerning him, viz.

He was born at North Cave, in the East Part of Yorkshire, in the Year 1624, of
honest Parents, and of good Repute, and was educated in the Episcopal Way,
being soberly inclined from his Childhood and upward, a Lover and Seeker after
Purity and Virtue: And I have heard him say, gave his Mind much to Retirement,
reading the holy Scriptures, breathing and seeking after the Lord, especially
in the Fie^^s, being by Calling a Shepherd; and it pleated the Lord to open his
Understanding so clearly, that he saw and longed for a more excellent
Dispensation to come; and also saw that the Priests were wrong, and generally
proud and covetous, so that he was weary with following them, and much weaned
from them and all Company, except two or three Men who did meet with him, and
spoke one unto another concerning their inward Conditions, and what they had
experienced of the Lord's Dealings with them. This was before they had heard of
the Name Quaker, as it was in a short Time after given to a People which the
Lord raised up to give Testimony of the notable and ancient, yet newly revived
and blessed Dispensation of Christ's Coming, and Manifestation by the holy
Spirit, inwardly in the Hearts and Minds of the Children of Men, in order to
enlighten, quicken, sanctify, and save them from Darkness, Death, Ignorance and
Sin, that they might be made capable of obeying, worshipping and glorifying the
great God and Sanctifier of them.

And as my Father was thus waiting and looking for a more general breaking
forth of this glorious, powerful and Gospel-day, which had in a good degree
sprung up in his Heart, he had not, as yet, seen that worthy and good Man
GEORGE FOX, although he passed through those Parts about that Time; but soon
after came WILLIAM DEWSBERRY, and at the Sound of his Voice, I have heard my
Father say, he was exceeding glad, in hearing him declare the Way to find the
lost Piece of Silver, the Pearl of great Price within, a Savior near, that had
been held forth by Men to be at a distance. But having left the dark Watchmen,
of whom they used to enquire, they now met with their Beloved at home, in their
own. Bosoms; renowned be the great Name of the Lord, now and for ever.

Thus the hearing and, receiving the ever blessed Truth, was as the Seed, or
Word of the Kingdom, sown in the good Ground, or honest Hearts of Men, which
took Root downward and sprang upward, and brought forth Fruit in some thirty,
in some sixty, and in others an hundred Fold, to the Praise of the great and
good Husbandman.

My said Father was early raised up to bear a public Testimony, which was
living and acceptable to Friends, but was so much attended with Weakness of
Body for many Years, that he went little abroad in the Work of the Ministry. He
suffered patiently the Spoiling of his Goods, and Imprisonment of his weakly
Body, in the great and more general Imprisonment; he not only believed in Jesus
Christ, but suffered for him; he was a good Neighbor, a loving Husband, and a
tender Father over all that was good, but severe to all that which was wrong,
and was for Judgment, without Respect of Persons, and spared it not even to his
own Children; and especially he was much concerned for me, for, as he said, I
was the wildest of them; and as he lived well, and believed in Jesus Christ, I
doubt not but he has finished his Course in the Love and Favor of God, is
entered into a Mansion of Glory, and is at Rest with all the Faithful who loved
not their Lives unto Death, but rather hated them in comparison of that
endeared and unfeigned Love they bore to God the Father, and to Jesus Christ
his dear and well-beloved Son, who died for them, and also for the whole World.

He departed this Life in 1679, aged about fifty-five Years, and was decently
buried in Friends burying Place in Hotham, near Cave, where he was born.

NOW having given this short Account concerning my Father, it remains with me
to leave to Posterity some Remarks on my Convincement, with an Account of
sundry Transactions, Travels, Healings, and Deliverances I met with, in and
from my Youth to this Day, with some Advice and Openings in the Spirit of Truth.
I was young when my Father died, not above thirteen Years of Age, yet the Lord
was at work by his Light, Grace and holy Spirit in my Heart, but I knew not
then what it was which inwardly disquieted my Mind, when any Thing which was
evil did prevail over the Good in me, which it oftentimes did, for want of
taking heed to that of God in my Heart; I desired Ease and Peace some other
Way, without taking up the Cross of Christ to my own corrupt Will, and strove
for some Time (as no doubt many do) to make merry over the just Witness, until
for a Season the converting and true Witness of God seemed to be slain, or
disappeared, and then I took Liberty, but not in gross Evils which many ran
into, being preserved religiously inclined, seeking after Professors, and
enquiring of them, for my Information and Satisfaction, to find (if I could)
any Thing that was safe to rest in, or any true and solid Comfort to my poor
disconsolate and bewildered Soul, but I was afraid I should be deceived, or
take up a false Rest in any Thing that was wrong or unsafe; which was the great
Love and Mercy of God to me. But after many Searchings and Enquirings among
those who were but in the Letter without, and in the outward Court, where the
Veil is over the Understanding, and the Eye of the Mind is not truly opened to
see into Things that are invisible, and hid from all carnal-minded Men; even so
was my State and Afflictions hid from them, and all the deceitful Workings of
Satan, and the strong Temptations which I met with, these blind Guides could
not see, nor their veiled Understandings know how to direct me to the true
Shepherd of Israel, the Lawgiver coming out of Sion, that turns away
Ungodliness from Jacob, and Transgression from Israel; not having truly
experienced Deliverance wrought in them out of this cloudy, bewildered and
tempted State which I was in. Oh! that People would come to him that has the
Eye-serve, with which if the Eye be truly anointed, it will see clearly Things
as they are, and not darkly, ^^^taking Trees for Men, and Things terrestrial
for Things coeles^ial; and that they would buy Gold, tried by the Fire of him
that is called the tried Stone, elect and precious, laid in Sion for a
Foundation: This is Christ whom the true Church believes in, and builds upon,
and they are enriched with his Love, Power and Virtue, which is better than
Gold outwardly; this is the Anointing, and the Unction, which the true Church
has, and does receive from Christ the holy One; and such as do truly put on
his Righteousness, Purity, and Holiness, their Clothing is better than that of
fine Linen outwardly. Oh! that all the Inhabitants of the Earth might be thus
anointed, enriched and truly clothed, that no more inward Blindness or Poverty
may be found in the Children of Men, nor the Shame of their Nakedness be any
more seen, now or hereafter.

Receive and learn these Things, you that can, of him that is the Faithful and
true Witness, that always witnesses against the Evil in Man, but always gives
Witness to the Father, for the Good in Men which they do say and think. This is
the Spirit of him that was dead, and is alive, no more to be known after the
Flesh, as the Apostle gave Testimony, and is to be known inwardly and
spiritually by the Children of Men, to open the blind Eye, and unstop the deaf
Ear, and pierces into the Soul that has been clouded and captivated,
imprisoned and misguided, and even in a Wilderness, and sees not a Way for
Deliverance; like Israel in the Land of Egypt, when the Lord Jehovah sent
Moses, a lively Type of Christ, and employed him in that great World of
pleading with, and plaguing Pharaoh and the Egyptians; yet for a Time their
Burdens and Afflictions were increased, and their Exercises more embittered
unto them, until that great and mavelous Work was in a good degree
accomplished, which was their Deliverance out of Egypt, the great and mighty
Work for which Moses was chiefly sent; which Deliverance was not wrought until
the Firstborn of Man, and of Beast, was slain throughout all the Land of Egypt.

Now the clear Opening I had in the Light, of what is to be understood, and
gathered from hence, is not the staying of the outward Man, but a putting off,
or slaying the Body of the Sins of the Flesh, crucifying, or putting off the
old Man with his Deeds; and as to the beast, all Cruelty, Lust, Pushing,
Tearing, Devouring, and Savageness, is to be slain or put away; and the corrupt
or strong Will of Man, as well as what is beastial, must be slain before Man
can come from under the Power of him who is called the Prince of the Power of
the Air, who rules in the Hearts of the Children of Disobedience. These Things
must be experienced, before the Children of Men can go forth rightly qualified
to glorify God, and follow his dear Son, whom he has appointed to be a Leader,
and a Commander of his People: This is he, as Moses declares, who is to be
heard in all Things, under the Penalty of being cut off from the People; or of
having their Names blotted out of the Book of Life; or being deprived of the
Comforts of the Lord's holy Presence. Read this, you who have heard and
understood what the Spirit says unto the Churches. -- These Things I saw,
after the true Witness arose or revived, and the Light did shine which had
disappeared, or had been clouded. I have been led into these Openings, which
have caused a little Digression from my Wilderness State I mentioned before,
which I now return to.

After much Searching without, amongst those who proved to me Physicians of no
Value, and miserable Comforters, I betook myself to a lonesome and retired
Life, breathing after, and seeking the Lord in the Fields, and private Places,
beseeching him, that he would bring me to the saving Knowledge of his Truth;
and blessed be the Name of the Lord now and for ^^er, I had not sought him long
with all my Heart, before I met with his inward Appearance to me, in and by his
holy Spirit, Light and Grace; but when the true Light did begin to shine more
clearly, and the living Witness did arise in my inward Man, Oh then my undone,
bewildered and miserable condition began to appear, and then great and
unutterable were my Conflicts, and the Distress I was in; I thought no Man's
Condition upon the Face of the whole Earth was like mine; I thought I was not
sit to die, neither did I know how to live; I thought in the Evening, Oh! that
it was Morning; and in the Morning, that it was Evening. I had many solitary
Walks in the Fields, and other Places, in which I many Times poured out my
Complaints and Cries before the Lord, with fervent Supplications to him, that
he would look upon my Afflictions, and the strong Temptations I was then under,
and that he would rebuke the Adversary of my Soul, and deliver it, for I even
thought it was as in the Jaws of a devouring Lion, and amongst the fiery
Spirits, and, as it were, under the Weight of the Mountains. Read and
understand the Afflictions of thy Brother, thou that have come through great
Tribulations, and have washed and made thy Garments white in the Blood of the
Lamb; this is the Beginning of that Baptism which does save, and of that
Washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost, which the Lord sheds
upon the Believers in abundance; this is the Blood which sprinkleth the Heart
from an evil Conscience, that the Children of Men, thus changed, may serve the
living and true God; this is the Life which converts the World, even as many as
are converted; this is the Virtue, Life and Blood, which makes clean the
Saints Garments, and inwardly washes them from all Filthiness, both of Flesh
and Spirit. I found this was and is he of whom it is said, by him were all
Things made, and he is Lord of all; a Man ought to be Servant to him, and all
Things in Man subservient to him, who commands and comprehends all Things, in
whom all the Types and Shadows also do end, or are fulfilled. Read this thou
Virgin Daughter, or clean Church of Christ, the Rock of thy Strength, whose
Name to thee is as precious Ointment poured forth, and because of the Savor
thereof, the Virgins love him, and are under great Obligations to obey and
follow him the Lamb of God, wheresoever he leads.

Although I had seen many Things, and had diverse Openings, yet great were my
Trials, and many were the Temptations I met with in those Days, for I lived at
a Distance from Friends, and Meetings, which made my Exercise the harder, as
will more fully hereafter appear, in the Course of my Travels and Pilgrimage in
this Vale of Tears and Troubles, and some of them not very common; but the Lord
helped me through them all, blessed be his Name for ever.

I now came to witness that Scripture to be fulfilled, which faith, that when
the Lord's Judgments are in the Earth, or earthly Hearts of Men, the
Inhabitants learn Righteousness: And notwithstanding there was an Aversion in
my wild Nature to the People in scorn called Quakers, as also to the Name
itself, yet when the afflicting Hand of the Lord was upon me for my
Disobedience, and when, like Ephraim and Judah, I saw in the Light my Hurt and
my Wound, I bemoaned myself, and mourned over that just Principle of Light and
Grace in me, which I had pierced with my Sins and Disobedience; and although
that Ministration of Condemnation was glorious in its Time, yet great were my
Troubles, which humbled my Mind, and made me willing to deny myself of every
Thing which the Light made known in me to be evil, I being in great Distress,
and wanting Peace and Assurance of the Love of God to my Soul; the Weight of
which so humbled my Mind, that I knew not of any Calling, People, Practice, or
Principle, that was lawful and right, which I could not embrace, or fall in
with. This was surely like the Day of Jacob's Troubles, and David's Fears; I
saw that the Filth of Sion was to be purged away by the Spirit of Judgment and
of Burning; this is the Way of the Deliverance and Recovery of poor Men out of
the Fall, and the Time of the Restoration of the Kingdom to God's true Israel.
Read ye that can, and understand. This was the Day of my Baptism into the Love
of God, and true Faith in his beloved Son, as also into a Feeling of, or
Sympathy with him in his Sufferings, which were unutterable, and I found that
Ministration changed; that which had been unto Death, was now unto Life; and
the Ministration which was of Condemnation unto the first Birth, when that was
slain, and in a good degree nailed or fastened to the Cross of Christ the Power
of God, then the Good prevailed over the Evil, and working out the Evil in the
Mind, and also in the Members, made all good or holy. The Lord's living Power,
and consuming burning Word, when it works and prevails, it brings into
Subjection, and makes the very Heart or Ground holy in Men.

Whereas there had been an Aversion in me to the People called in scorn
Quakers, and also to their strict living and Demeanor, Plainness of Habit, and
Language, none of which I learned from them; for when the Lord changed my
Heart, he also changed my Thoughts, Words and Ways, and there became an
Aversion in me to Vice, Sin and Vanity, as there had been to the Ways of
Virtue, but having tasted of the Terrors and Judgments of God because of Sin, I
was warned to flee from such Things as occasioned Christ's Coming, not to bring
Peace upon the Earth, but a Sword; a Sword indeed, yea, his Heart-penetrating,
searching Word, which is sharper than any two-edged Sword, that pierces to the
cutting or dividing ^^^nder between Flesh and Spirit, Joints and Marrow. And as
thus I came to see and abhor the Evil in myself, when such who had been my
Companions in Vanity reviled me, or came in my Way, I was often moved to warn
and reprove them, having as before hinted, tasted of the Terrors of the Lord
for Sin, I could not well forbear to warn others to flee such Things as I had
been judged for. Now I came clearly to be convinced about the Hathonour, bowing
the Knee, the corrupt Language, as well as finery in Habit; all which for
Conscience Sake, and the Peace thereof, I came to deny, and take up the Cross
to, and had great Peace in so doing.

Although the blessed Truth thus prevailed in me, yet notwithstanding, I was
not without great Conflicts of Spirit, Temptations and Trials of diverse kinds;
nevertheless, my Mind was resigned to the Lord, and my fervent Prayers were to
him, and he kept me, and opened my Understanding, for I was afraid of being
misled in any Thing, especially relating to my Salvation: I came to be weaned
from all my Companions and Lovers which I had taken Delight and Pleasure in,
and all Things in this World were little to me, my Mind being much redeemed out
of the World, and not only the corrupt and evil Part thereof, but even from the
lawful Part; so that my Heart and Mind became much inclined and given up to
seek the Lord, waiting upon him to feel his Presence, and Peace, and to know
his Will, and receive Power to do the same.

As thus my Mind came to be brought into a depending and waiting Frame upon the
Lord, and to be stayed in the Light, and experimentally and feelingly to
partake of his Love and Grace, which ^elped me against my Infirmities, (blessed
be his Name) I found it sufficient for me, as I kept to it, in all Trials and
Temptations: Then I came to see, that all the outward Performances in Matters
of Religion did not avail nor render Man acceptable to God, but as the Heart
came to be truly given up to him, that he might not only purge it from
Defilement, but keep it clean through the Indwelling of his holy Spirit: And,
as near as I remember, I saw clearly through these Things before the sixteenth
Year of my Age; although, between the Death of my Father and this Time, I took
Liberty to go among what People I would, my Mother giving us great Liberty,
although she was a Woman well accounted of among all People who knew her, and
not undeservedly, for her Industry and fair Dealing concerning the Things of
this World.

After this Time I attended the Meetings of the Lord's People called Quakers,
as diligently as my Circumstances would well admit: My Mother being left with
five Children, I had only one Sister who was elder than myself and three
Brothers younger, the youngest about three Years old when my Father died, he
leaving but little of this World to bring us up with; yet my Parents always had
as much as kept them above Contempt, and no body lost by them; but I found
myself under a Necessity to work hard for my own Support, the Help of my
Mother, and Education of my Brothers, more especially as my Sister died soon
after.

We being lest in a Farm of Grazing, and part Husbandry or Tillage, did well as
to the Things of this World, yet I cannot well omit mentioning one Thing which
became a great Exercise to me, which was thus; my Mother married one that was
zealous for the Presbytery, and I being much against it, showed my Dislike to
the Marriage, and told my Mother, I was afraid that she had too much an Eye to
what he had, for he was counted rich as to this World; but if she thought to
augment our Portions in so marrying, the Hand of the Lord would be against her,
and a Blasting or Mildew would come upon even that which we had got through
Industry and hard Labor, and what the Lord had intended to have blessed to us,
if we kept faithful to the Truth, and contented ourselves with our present
Conditions. Then my Mother confessed, that as to the worldly Enjoyments, it had
not been better with her than now. I must write with great Caution; she was my
Mother, and a tender Mother over me, and was loath to offend me, and had
promised, as far as she well durst, not to marry with any one with whom I was
not satisfied. But as to their Procedure in Courtship, and Marriage, from this
Time I was entirely ignorant, until it was accomplished. But when my poor
Mother was married, her Cry was, My Son, how shall I ever be able to look him
in the Face any more, it will be such a Trouble to him; he that has not at any
Time disobliged me, but if I bid him go, he ran; and if I bid him do any Thing,
he did it with all his Might; or to that Effect, as several told me who heard
her. But she being married, what we had was mixed with my Father-in-Law's
Goods, and my Mother died first, and our Father married again, made his Will,
and dying, left me Five Shillings for all my Part, which was of Right to
descend from my own Parents upon me; I gave his Executors a Receipt in full,
and there was an End of all, except some small Matter given to my youngest
Brother, for the rest of my Brothers and Sister were dead. As near as I
remember, this Marriage was in the eighteenth Year of my Age, so that what I
foresaw about the Blast and Mildew, came to pass.

Now to return to my further Account concerning the Troubles and Trials that
attended me in the Time while I was in my Father-in-Law and Mother's House,
after Marriage; we, and what we had, being removed to his House, except Part of
the Stock which was left in the Ground. Now I foresaw that I was like to come
to a great Trial, and I was brought very low, what with the Trouble about the
Marriage, and the Exercise of my Mind concerning my own Condition, having had
many great Conflicts of Spirit, so that I was almost in Despair, ^^d not the
Lord, in whom I believed, risen in his Power, and rebuked the Adversary of my
Soul, I had been overthrown, and swallowed up in the Floods of the Temptations
that were cast out of the Mouth of the red fiery-like Dragon after me, in this
the Day of my great and strong Trouble and Travail; but the God of Love and
Pity saw me, and helped me in my Distress, and in a Day and Time acceptable; he
that heard poor Ishmael when he cried from under the Shrub, and sent or gave
Relief to him and his Mother, who with him was gone from Abraham's House, saw
me in this great Strait. Also, when I came to my Father's House, he being a Man
much given to Family Duties, of saying Grace, etc. before and after Meat, none
of which I could comply with, except I felt evidently the Spirit of Truth to
attend therein, and open the Heart and Mouth into such Duties. The first Day I
came to the House, being called to the Table with all or most of our Family, I
thought, Is it now come to this? I must either displease my heavenly or earthly
Father: But oh! the Awfulness, or deep Exercise which was upon my Spirit, and
strong Cries that ascended unto the Lord for my Help and Preservation that I
might not offend him. My Father-in-Law sat with his Hat partly on, and partly
off, with his Eyes fixed on me, as likewise mine were on him in much Fear; so
we continued as long or longer than he used to be in saying Grace, as they call
it, but said nothing that we heard; so at length he put on his hat again, to
the Wonder of the Family: Neither did he then, or ever after, ask me why I did
not put off my Hat; neither did he perform that Ceremony all the Time I stayed
with him, which was above one Year: Thus the Lord helped me, renowned be his
great Name now and for ever. My Father might seem for Age, Spirit and
Understanding, to have been much more than a Match for me a poor Shrub, but the
Lord (who caused the Pillar of the Cloud to be bright and give Light to Israel,
and brought Darkness upon the Egyptians, and fought against them, and for
Israel) I believe touched and smote my poor Father, that he could not rise up
against that Power the Lord helped me with. For it was not mine but the Lord's
doing, to him be given the Attributes of Praise, Salvation and Strength, now
and for ever. I saw clearly, that there could not be any true and acceptable
Worship performed to God, but what was in the Spirit, and in the Truth, neither
could any pray aright, but as the Spirit helped them, which teaches how to
pray, and what to pray for, and rightly prepares the Mind, and guides it in the
Performance of every Service which the Lord calls for from his Children.

I found my Father-in-Law was much displeased with my going to Meetings, yet I
could not see what Way to appease his Displeasure, except in being very
diligent (which I was) in his Business, rather beyond my Ability, working very
hard; it is almost incredible what my poor little weak Body went through in
those Days, but all would not gain his Love, for the longer I stayed with him,
the more his Love declined from me; although I told him, he need not be uneasy
about my Wages, for I would leave that to himself: I could not see what he
could have against me, except my going to Meetings, however that was all he
alleged. Now when his former Stratagems would not do, he offered me a Horse to
ride on, if I would go with him to his Place of Worship. I met with many a Snib
and sour Countenance from him, in my return on Foot from Meetings, although as
seasonably as my Body was capable of performing; for my Father commonly sent me
on the Firstday Mornings into the Fields a Mile or two, and as far upon a
Common to look at Beasts, Horses, and Sheep (all this on Foot) I thought with a
Design to weary and make me incapable of going to Meetings; all which I bore
patiently, neither, that I remember, ever said, this is hard Usage; after all
this, to the great Grief of my poor Mother, I had to go two, three, four, five,
and sometimes six Miles, to Friends Meetings. After I had walked fast, and ran
sometimes with my Shoes under my Arms for want of Time, I have seen many
Friends weep, and could not forbear when they saw me come into the Meeting very
hot and in a great Sweat, they being in part sensible of the hard Task I had to
undergo.

There is one Thing somewhat remarkable, which was thus; one First Day Morning
when I was about going to the Meeting, my Father said, is I would ride upon
such a young Mare, as he mentioned, I might; which was one of the greatest of
ten or twelve Horses which he kept, about four Years old, and not before rid at
all: I thought his Design was more to hinder me of the Meeting than any Good to
me, or any Expectation of getting his Mare rightly broke, but I accepted his
Offer, only asking how I might catch her? Having got Help to answer that, she
being abroad, I put on the Bridle and mounted the topping Beast, and upon her
first Resistance, down she came; for that was my way: And if the first or
second Fall did not, the third mostly cured them from striving to throw the
Rider; I commonly fell upon my Feet, and endeavored so to free my Legs that
she might not fall upon them, and then sprang up on her Back while down, and
made her rise with me; so away we went, and came in due Time to the Meeting.
This was partly the beginning of this way of managing Horses by me; so I rid to
the Meetings two or three Times, and then my Father asked me, if the Mare did
not carry me soberly? I replied, she did; then I must have her no more, he
would make her his Saddle-Mare; so I betook myself to my Feet again, except
some other such like Turn came. The Lord's mighty Power bore me up, and he gave
me as it were Hind's Feet, and enabled me to go through these Exercises, and to
bear the Burden in the Heat of the Day of my Trials, inwardly and outwardly,
which were many and various.

Now the last Stratagem my Father used to hinder my going to Meetings was thus;
he took me in his Arms in great show of Kindness, saying, if I would be as a
Son to him, I should s^^d he would be a Father to me, expressing something
about his having no near Kindred, (and much more to the same Effect he said to
my Brother Daniel, who was an innocent, wise, and clean-spirited Lad) I replied
to him, if in thus making me thy Son, thou intends to hinder me from going to
Meetings, or to oblige me to go with thee to the Presbyterian Meetings, or any
Thing that is against my Conscience, I cannot upon this Bottom be thy Son; and,
for the same Reasons, I refused to be his hired Servant, although he offered to
hire me, and give me Wages. Now when he saw that neither Frowns, Threatenings,
Hardships, nor great Promises of Kindness could prevail with me, he told me
bluntly and roughly, I should stay no longer in his House: I innocently
answered, I could not help it if it must be so, as all I could do would not
give him Content, without hurting my Conscience, and the Peace of my Mind,
which I valued above all mutoble Things of this World. My poor Mother heard my
pleading with him, and how I offered to do the best for him I was capable of by
Night or Day, (as I always had done) if he would be easy, and let me have his
Countenance; but this was the Sentence, No, I should not stay in the House: And
indeed that troubled my poor Mother so, that I was sorced to leave my Father,
and go to endeavor to mitigate her great Trouble by telling her, that if I was
but faithful, the Lord, I believed, would take Care of me that I should not
want; and the more fully to discharge myself, I reminded her, that as she had
entered into Marriage Covenants with her Husband, she should endeavor to
perform them, and in every Thing faithfully to discharge herself as a Wife
ought to do to a Husband, and leave me and all, and cleave to him, and to make
her Life as easy as she could: I also told her, never to send me any Thing that
my Father knew not of, for I was not free to receive it; although what we had
was in his Hand, and all sunk there, as I mentioned before.

I write this partly, that all who do marry, may take special heed that it be
done with great Caution, and under due Consideration, and the Lord sought to in
it, that it may be done in his Counsel, and not only nominally, but truly in
his Fear, and then no doubt but it will be well with both Husband and Wife; and
being equally yoked, such will not only be meet and true Helpers in all Things
belonging to this Life, but more especially in Things appertaining to the World
that is to come, and the Good of the immortal Soul, which to the faithful
People of the Lord is of great Value. Oh, how happily and peaceably do such
live together in the Lord, as they keep to that which thus joined them! There
is more in it, both as to the Parents and their Posterity, than it is to be
feared many consider or think of, as is but too apparent in the many forward
and unequal Marriages which I have made Observation of.

One remarkable Passage occurs to my Thoughts, which happened thus; my Father
having been at the Presbyterian Meeting and come home, he, as his manner was,
put me or my Brother upon reading the Priest's Text, which had been that Day in
Daniel, concerning his being cast into the Den of Lions for his not regarding
the King's Decree, but on the contrary prayed to the God of Heaven with his
Windows open toward Jerusalem, after his wonted manner. My Father made his
Observations as my Brother read, and very much magnified Daniel, and said, the
Spirit of God was in him, but that there were none such as bun in these our
Days. I owned that he was indeed an extraordinary Man, but that there were none
endowed with a Measure of the same Spirit in any Degree, in that I dissented
from him, and gave my Father a brief Account of the many Sufferings of our
Friends, some of which were past, and some then under Sufferings for the Word
of God, and the Testimony of Jesus, which they bore for him, and especially the
great Sufferings of our dear Friends in New England, viz. hard Imprisonments,
cruel Whippings, cutting off Ears, Banishment if they returned into New England
any more; and I showed him likewise, how they put to Death Marmaduke
Stephenjon, William Robinson, William Leddra, and Mary Dyer, for no other Cause
but laboring to turn People from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of
Satan to the living Power of God, to his Light, Grace and holy Spirit in their
Hearts, and laboring to bring the People from Persecution, Pride, and every
evil Work and Way, to live a self-denying, humble Life, a Life agreeable to the
Christianity they professed; this was the Purport or Substance of the Service
they were called to, and so deeply suffered for: From whence I inferred, there
was somewhat of the Spirit of God in Man in these Days as there was in Daniel,
and many more formerly, which helped and bore them up in their great
Sufferings. Now my Father confessed, it was true some suffer^d for Good, and
some for Evil; and withal said, he had now lived to the Age of about sixty five
Years, and although he heard us telling of a Principle, or Light within, yet he
knew not what it was. I replied very meekly, If he would hear me, I would tell
him what it was; which I did in the Words following: When at any Time thou have
been under a Temptation to put forth thy Hand to steal, or to lie for
Advantage, or by Provocation to swear, or any evil Work or Word, have not thou
found something in thee, that has showed thee thou ought not to have said
or done so, which if thou had taken heed to, and not said or done wrong, have
thou not found great Peace and inward Comfort in thy Mind? But if thou have
said or done wrong, have not thou found great Disquietness and Trouble of Mind?
This is the inward Principle, Light, or Grace, that God has placed in Man to
help and direct him, which we the People of God called Quakers, do hold
agreeable to the Holy Scriptures. My Father smote his Hands together, and
confessed it was true.

But that I was not willing to break in upon this Story, but keep it entire,
there was one Thing worthy of Notice, which I now come to, wishing it may be
duly considered by all who read or hear it: When I mentioned Marmaduke
Stephenson, that good Man and great Sufferer in the Cause of Christ, as before,
my Mother said, it was true; for she lived a Servant with Edward Wilberfoss, an
honest Quaker in Skipton, where Marmaduke Stephenson was a Day-labourer, about
the Time he had his Call to go to New England. See the Account of New England
judged, not by Man as Man, but by the Spirit of the living God, written by
George Bishop. If I remember right, she said, He was such a Man as she never
knew, for his very Countenance was a Terror to them, and he had a great Check
upon all the Family; if at any Time any of the Servants had been wild, or any
way out of the Truth, if they did but see him, or hear him coming, they were
struck with Fear, and were all quiet and still: And if but one of the Children
came into the House where he labored, and he would not have it to come, these
were his Words, Go thy way, or go Home, lest I whip thee; and they were subject
and quiet. This ample and excellent Account, I thought had some Reach upon my
Father, however, it much affected my Mind. Oh! that we the Professors of the
same holy Truth, may so live in it, as to reign over every wrong Thing in
ourselves, and also in others, but especially in our Children.

Some little Time before the Marriage of my Mother, I was brought into the
public Work of the Ministry, concerning which I had many Reasonings, being
young, scarce eighteen Years old, and naturally of a stammering Tongue, which I
could not overcome, although I had used what Endeavors lay in my Power as a
Man, considering my Years and Education, all would not do until the Truth
helped me: But after many Conflicts, great Troubles and Temptations, the worst
I ever met with, and the most piercing Sorrow I ever had yet been in since I
came to the Knowledge of the blessed Truth was, when through Reasonings,
Disobedience, and Unwillingness to comply with, and answer the Lord's
Requirings, he in Displeasure took away from me the Comfort of his holy
Presence for several Months together. Oh! the Tribulations and penetrating
Troubles I met withal in this Condition, no Tongue is able to express, no nor
the Heart of any finite Creature is able to conceive the Depth of the Anxiety
of the Heart-piercing and wounding Sorrows I was in; I thought my ^tate was as
bad as Jonoh's, for surely if there be a Hell upon Earth, I was in it: What
greater Hell can be here to a quickened Soul, and an enlightened Understanding,
who has tasted of the Goodness of God, and of the Powers, in a degree, of the
World to come, than to be deprived thereof, and think they are fallen away from
this State? I could scarcely believe I should ever have Repentance granted to
me, or be restored again into the Love and Favor of God, when I found that
River of Life dried up, as to me, which did before, not only make me, but even
all the whole City of God, truly glad: But being left under an Apprehension of
the Lord's Displeasure, and in part a Partaker of the Terrors of his Wrath; Oh!
I thought, surely the very Mountains, and even the Hills, were not sufficient
(if they could have been put into the Scales or Balance) to have weighed
against my Troubles and Afflictions they were so great; but as the Lord had by
his Judgments brought me in a good degree from the Vice and Vanity of this
World, now by his Judgments he made me willing to give up to answer his
Requirings in part, and in my Obedience to him I began to feel some Comfort of
Love and Fellowship of the Spirit of the Lord in myself, and in his People, who
were brought to be Partakers of the like Fellowship.

Now I return to the Matter about my b^^ng turned out of my Father's House,
which I mentioned before, but was willing to keep this solemn Account entire,
with Desires it may be a Caution to all, in whom the Lord is at work in the
same manner, not to reason or gainsay so much as I did, but to give up freely
and cheerfully to the Will of God. When I saw I must turn out, I thought it
expedient to acquaint some worthy Friends with it, lest any undue Reflections
should be cast upon the Truth, or Friends, or myself, that if so, these Friends
might be able to contradict them; so I acquainted Sebastian Ellethorp, and that
worthy Man and Minister of the Gospel Benjamin Padley, two of the chief Friends
in Ellington Monthly Meeting, and they came to my Father's House, and when they
came, they began to enquire about the Reasons why I went away? and, if my
Father had any Thing against me concerning the Business he employed me in? And,
whether I was not faithful and diligent in all his Affairs he sent me about? He
confessed, I was; and thought none could exceed me. They said, Well then, what
is the Reason of that Misunderstanding which is betwixt thee and thy
Son-in-Law? Is it about his going to Meetings? When they understood his
Reasons, which were not hard to do, they expressed a Pity toward me that I
could have no more Liberty; and they thought, as I was so diligent in his
Business, if he would give me a little more Liberty to go to Meetings, it would
be more Encouragement to me. At which he took Offense, and gave the good Men
rough Language, and asked, What they had to do with him and his Son? and bid
them go Home and mind their own Business; which they were much troubled at,
especially for my Sake, and much pitied me, and wondered how I had lived with
him so long; for he said in short, that there was no Abiding for me there. But
Sebastian Ellethorp told me, which was mightily to my Comfort, that my Father
had nothing against me, save that concerning the Law of my God. This is the
Sense, if not the Words, of these wise and good Men, which passed betwixt them
and my Father, as they expressed them to me; for I was not there when they were
together.

Notwithstanding I pleaded with my Father to let me stay until I could hear of
a Place, he would not, though I was scarce fit for Service, being almost like
an Anatomy (as the Saying is) so that most who knew me, said, I would pine away
in a Co^^^mption; but turn out I must, and did, though I was weak, poor and low
in Body, Mind, Pocket and Clothes; for I think I had but Twelve-pence in my
Pocket, and very ordinary Cl^aths upon my Back. Thus I took my solemn Leave of
the Family, with my Heart full, but I kept inward to the Lord, and under
Truth's Government; many Tears were shed in the Family, especially by my poor
Mother, when I left them; my Father said little, but appeared like one struck
with Wonder, to see so much Love manifested toward me by the Family, and so
much wishing that I might not go away: But out I came upon the great Common
aforementioned, where I had had many solitary Walks, but none like this, for
this Reason, that I knew not where to go. I then thought of Abraham who was
called out of Ur in the Land of the Chaldeans, as it is briefly mentioned by
Stephen; but this was the Difference betwixt us, he was called, I was forced
out. But as I was walking upon the Common, the Sense of my weak Condition, not
knowing whither to go, nor where to lay my Head, although I had many Friends,
yet I could not be free to go to them, unless I had known they had Business for
me, being not of a forward, but rather backward and shy Disposition. I say, the
Sense and Weight or my Condition came over me to that degree, that it appeared
to me as though my Way was hedged up on every side, inwardly and outwardly; I
even thought myself like a Pelican in the Wilderness, or as an Owl in the
Desert, there appearing ^o me scarce a Man in all the Earth in my Condition,
every way considered; and in the Sense and deep Consideration of my present
Wilderness State, I felt myself under a great Oppression of Spirit, and my
Heart seemed full, like a Bottle that wanted Vent: I looked round about me to
see that none were near to see my Tears nor hear my Cries, and in the very
Anguish and Bitterness of my ^oul I poured forth my Complaints, Cries and Tears
to the Judge of all the Earth, who spoke to me and comforted me in this my
deplorable State, which was worse than Jacob's when he lay upon the Ground, and
had a Stone for his Pillow; he had his near Kindred to go to, whom he might
expect would receive him gladly, but I had none to go to but such as rather
revised me, and gave me hard Language; but the Lord said unto me, as if a Man
had spoke, First seek the Kingdom of Heaven and the Righteousness thereof, and
all these Things that thou stand in Need of shall be given unto thee. I then
desired he would please to show me the Place I should go to; and the Lord
opened my Way, and showed me the House I should go to, and abide in for a Time.
I said, Good is the Word of the Lord: I believed, and it was a great Means to
stay my Mind, and settle it in the Truth, with full purpose of Heart to follow
the Lord, and obey his Requirings, according to the Knowledge and Ability given
me; yet Reasonings attended me; two Things especially stood much in my Way,
yea, three Things were a Let to me, for soon after I came to the Friend's
House in South-Cliff, viz. William Allon by Name, I bound myself to him to
learn his Trade of a Weaver, and after I was bound, I found this good Man loved
me, and I loved him to the Day of his Death; and he often said, he was b^ssed
for my Sake, and all that appertained unto him; for when I went to him he was
very poor, but he increased very considerably after I went to live with him.

I come now to the Particulars which stood in my Way of answering the Lord's
Commands so fully as sometimes I should have done; First, a violent Humor fell
into one of my Legs soon after I was bound Apprentice, which I with others
thought was much occasioned by hard Usage, Heats and Colds, and many Surfeits,
even from my Infancy; which Lameness held me about two Years, and I suffered
much by the said Leg, and it much discouraged and disabled me. The second
Hinderance was, my low Circumstances in the World, which very few knew of,
because the common Fame was (and not without some Truth) that I had rich
Parents. I have given an Account already how they were circumstanced, and (...)
them at present and proceed, (...) the Straits I ^net withal; yet (...) truly
religious Master, if he understood any Thing was upon my Mind to go to visit
any Meeting, or Meetings, he would say, take my Mare and go thy way, and be not
une^sy, neither about the Mare nor Business, nor do not hasten thyself. These
Kindnesses made me often thoughtful how I might return suitable
Acknowledgments, and be duly grateful for the same: I was diligent in my
Master's Business, not serving him with Eye-service, but faithfully; believing
it good and acceptable in the Sight of God, and I had great Peace in it; my
Master never found Fault with me for doing too little, but often for doing too
much, and would sometimes say, I think thou will cleave to the Beam; come off
and let us walk into the Fields and see how Things are there. Now as to the
third Hinderance, the Account of which I was not willing to have interwoven
with Matters of less Moment, although the healing of my very sore Leg I
attribute to the great and good Providence of God; for in a short Time after I
gave up freely and cheerfully to answer the Lord's Requirings, the Lord healed
me of my Lameness; and when I cried unto him, that he would also heal my Tongue
of it Stammering, believing that the Lord was as able to take away the
Impediment of my Tongue, as he was to stop the Violence of that Humor which
had attended my Body, and had a Recourse to my Leg, and made it sore from above
the Ancle to the Knee: And notwithstanding several Men had given their Advice,
and had showed their Skill, it all proved ineffectual, until I came to believe
in Jesus Christ, and to press through all to him, and to touch the Skirt, or
lowest Appearance of his blessed Truth and Power, in which I found true healing
Virtue to my Soul, and also to my Body, and to my Tongue, even to my
Admiration; so that I did not only speak plain in the Testimony the Lord gave
me to bear, but also spoke plain in my common Intercourse with Men.

I was likewise in these Days under the Dispensations of Openings and Visions,
and thought myself as it were upon Mount-Pisgah, and saw into the holy Land,
and into Things relating to God and his heavenly Kingdom, and into his Work and
Way of bringing Man out of the Fall and Alienation to himself again, and into a
heavenly State in Christ, as Man yields true O edience unto the Leadings and
^^eration of his blessed Grace and holy Spirit in the Heart. But under such
Dispensations it is requisite, yea, of absolute Necessity, that Man be brought
into true Self-denial, as also into a depending Frame of Mind, and true
Resignation of Will to the Will of God, and a daily sitting as in the Du^^, as
to the Motions and Workings of the Creature as such; for all that is of Man's
working, or Work, does but let or hinder the spiritual Work of God in the
Heart; and we must come tru^ to know all fleshly Motions, and the Workings in
Man's own Will and Spirit, to be silenced, to hear the Voice of God, which is a
f^ll small Voice, and not to be heard in the Noise and Hurries of the World;
neither when the Mind is busied with Things agreeable to our own corrupt Wills
and depraved Nature.

But although at times I had clear Sights into many heavenly Things, and also
had at times comfortable Enjoyments of the living Presence of God, yet I wanted
to be more established in the unchangeable Truth, which I had at times some
comfortable feeling of; and in crying to the Lord, I found he inclined unto me,
and, as David said, he heard my Cries, and plucked my Feet out of the Mire and
Clay, and set them upon a Rock, that was higher than I, and in part established
my Goings, and put a new Song into my Mouth, even high Praises unto the Lord
for all his tender Mercies to me in these trying Times; and now being more
crucified to the World, and the Spirit of it, I witnessed a more constant
Indwelling of the heavenly Power and living Presence, Light and Grace; I came
to be brought into Stilness, and it became most agreeable to my Condition to
keep much in Silence, and wait upon the Lord for the Renewing of Strength, that
thereby I might surmount all Temptations and Trials that might fall in my way,
or which I might be tried with, which were not a few.

Now these Things, before recited, are worthy of Commemoration, and proved
great Confirmations to me in the Truth, in these Davs of my Tribulations and
great Trials: Read and believe thou that can, for they are faithful and true
Sayings. After the Lord had healed me, he sent me forth in the Work of the
Ministry, and the first Journey I took Southward was into Lincolnshire,
Nottinghamshire, and through Coventry, and so to Warwick to see William
Dewsberry. One Thing is remarkable upon William's Enquiry what Way I came? In
my Account of the particular Towns and places I had passed through, I mentioned
Coventry, which was the last and the worst; for some of the rude People slung
Stones at me, as I was speaking in the Meeting, with great Violence, so that
had the Lord suffered them to have hit me, they must have spoiled me: but my
Faith in the Lord, and the Strength of the Truth, bore up my Mind above Fear of
the outward Man, or what wicked Men could do to me. After William had heard my
Account, he fixed his Eyes on me and said, Thou must go back again to Coventry.
I appeared unwilling, for two Reasons; first, because I thought I had cleared
myself of that People. Secondly, I thought it not safe to run myself into
Danger of Suffering, unless I was satisfied the Lord required it of me. But
William was positive, and said I must go, for there was a Service for me to do
there. Upon a deliberate Consideration of the Matter, and a seeking to the Lord
to know his Will in it, I found my way clear to go, and I had some Service and
good Satisfaction, and left Friends nearer to one another than when I first met
with them; for there had been a Misunderstanding amongst some Friends in that
City: So I came from thence to Tamworth, where there was a Difference,
especially betwixt two Friends; both of them had been such as had made some
considerable Figure among Friends: I felt it upon me to go to the Man, to warn
him of the Spirit of Prejudice and Envy, for if he gave Way to it, it would eat
out his Love to Friends and Truth, and he would decline Meetings, and come to
naught, and turn his Back on the Truth; which came to be fulfilled, as I
afterward heard; for he became a loose Man, and listed himself to be a
Soldier. I was zealous for the Name of the Lord, and had a great Concern upon
my Mind for the Promulgation of the Truth, and where I met with loose
Professors of the Truth, it was a great Exercise to me.

When I returned home from this, and indeed from all my Journeys, I took Care
what I well could, so far as my weak Body was capable, to fall into Business,
and not to loiter away my Time, neither abroad nor at home. My weak
Constitution would not well bear the Weaving-trade, therefore I left it much
against my Will; but I wrought upon Clock and Watch-work, and many other
Things, which supplied my Necessities, the Lord allowing me as much Time at
^ome as put me in a Condition reasonably fi^ for Travel, and then I was
inclined to go to visit Friends. Many Things I omit, because I am not willing
to swell my Account too much. I traveled through most Parts of England four
Times, and twice through most Parts of Wales, between the twentieth and
twenty-eighth Year of my Age.

After the Lord had opened my Heart, and I came in part to understand the holy
Scriptures, and to have a Feeling of that holy Spirit in which the holy Penman
wrote them, and a Sympathy with the Spirits and Exercises of the Righteous
therein mentioned, I took great Delight in reading them, and having a good
Memory, could thereby the better deal with Priests, and with Professors. I had
many Disputes and Reasonings with Priests and Professors, of several
Denominations, both in Yorkshire and other Parts in my Travels, so that through
these Disputes, and much Reading, my Mind was rather too much in the Letter,
and not altogether so much in Spirit, and in Power, as it should have been; for
which I met with a gentle Caution from the Lord, which was thus: I heard a
Voice (from the Lord) as plain as if one had spoke to my outward Ear, The Fowls
of the Air lodge in the Branches. This being repeated to me, I besought the
Lord to show me what was the Meaning of that Voice which I heard; and the Lord,
the mighty God, showed me in his condescending Love, that the Scriptures, even
all of them which were written as the holy Men were moved of the holy Ghost,
sprung from the living Root; yet those who rested only in the Letter, and came
not to be acquainted with, and live in, and minister from the same holy Spirit,
are outward, dead, dry, airy and foolish. This gentle Check was of great
Service to me; not so as to make me decline reading the Scriptures, but that I
should not have overmuch Dependency on them; and to caution me against the
Neglect of waiting for the Help of the holy Spirit, the Root and pure Spring of
the right and living Ministry which reaches the Heart, and carries the true
Evidence with it to the Believers, that it is of God; which that of the Letter
cannot do of itself. I tenderly desire that all concerned in this great Work of
the Ministry, may not be Ministers of the Letter only, but of the Spirit also,
and may speak in the Demonstration of the Spirit and of Power. And let him that
speaks, speak as the Oracle of God, and he that ministers, do it as of the
Ability that God gives. This is the last and lasting Ministry, which is after
the Order of M^lchisedeck, and not after the Order of Aaron, but in Jesus
Christ the High Priest, the one Offering, which makes perfect for ever all who
come to him through the Drawings of the Farther; he is the one Lord, and there
is but one true Faith in him, and but one true and saving Baptism into him, or
into the Likeness of his Death; so as Christ died for Sin, we may truly die to
Sin; and as he was raised by the Glory of the Father, so we may walk in Newness
of Life; the heavenly High Priest, holy, harmless, separate from Sinners; and
such a High Priest who was tempted, and knows how to succor such as are
tempted; he is the Advocate with the Father, the Propitiation for the Sins of
all, the true Guide and Comforter, the Leader of them into all Truth who obey
and follow him; although to the World a Reprover and a swift Witness against
all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men.

My writing thus, from this gentle Check, concerning the Fowls and the
Branches, etc. is not with the least Intention either to lessen the holy
Scriptures, or discourage any from reading them; for I would have all true
Christians encouraged to be more conversant in them; yet with this Advice, kind
Reader, from thy Well-wisher and true Friend, to breath to, and truly seek
after the Lord for a Measure of his holy and blessed Spirit, the only Key and
best Expositor to open and truly expound them to thee, as by the same holy
Spirit thy Mind and Understanding comes to be fitted and enlightened; and
indeed the whole Vessel must be brought into a Preparation to hold the heavenly
Treasure, and not to mix the pure with the corrupt and impure: For without this
enlightening, preparing, opening, and sanctifying Gift of God's holy Grace and
Spirit, Man can neither know the heavenly Power of God, nor yet the holy
Scriptures aright, as he ought to know them; and for this reason it has seemed
good to God to hide these Things from the Learned, Wise and Prudent of this
World, that they should not pry into, nor find out the Mysteries contained
therein, unless they a^e sanctified, and called of God thereto; and as no Man
knows the Things of a Man, save the Spirit of a Man that is in him; likewise
the Things of God are not perceivable by Man, without the Help of the holy
Spirit of God in Man.

Thus the Lord opened to me the true Meaning of the Parable of the Mustard Seed
in this the Time of my Infancy as to the Ministry, with which he sent me forth
into the World, that my Faith might stand in the Lord alone, the Author and
Finisher, as well as Giver of the true and saving Faith, even that Faith which
works by Love, and gives Victory over the World; it was by and through the
Power, Virtue and Efficacy of true Faith, which is the Gist of God, that the
Elders in former Ages obtained, and now do obtain a good Report; it was in and
through this Gift, that worthy Abel with his Offering was accepted of God,
although he was envied of his earthly and evil Minded Brother Cain, and also by
him slain. The ever memorable Enoch, through the Virtue of this holy Gift,
walked with God, as himself gave witness that Enoch pleased him; he walked so
in Faith and Obedience even to the End, that he died not as Men in common do,
but was translated, or changed in a peculiar manner. Come, read thou that
can, and understand thou that art redeemed out of (and have overcome) the
Flesh, and the Powers of the first Nature, the World and the Devil, in a great
measure, for thou know that it is by the Operation of this Gift that the
Dead in old Adam are raised to a new Life, and Way of living in the new Man;
and through this heavenly Adam, that is known to these to be a quickening
Spirit, agreeable to holy Writ. Through Faith the Violence of Fire was
quenched, the Mouths of Lions have been stopped, the Sword turned backward, the
Armies put to flight, even such as were Aliens or Strangers who outwardly
fought against the Lord's People; which sets before us, as in a Glass, how and
what we are to overcome in this Gospel-day, in which we are not to fight with
Men, but with our Lusts, and overcome Sin and Satan; which is as great a
Victory as he obtained that overcame the rampant Lions, who had Dominion over
the Wicked, as Sin and Satan have Power and Dominion over the Wicked and
Ungodly to this Day. Consider now in Time thou that read these Lines,
whether Christ or Antichrist does most predominate in thee? Whether Grace or
Sin most abound in thy mortal Body? Whether the Spirit of Truth, that leads
into all Truth, or the Spirit of Error, that leads into all Error and Untruth,
is the most prevalent, and has the greatest Place in thy Heart? For to him
whom thou art the most subject, and yields thy Members Servants to, his Servant
thou art, and to him thou give way and subjects thyself, and his Servant thou will altogether come to be in time, and the Wages due to his Servants thou
shall have given to thee at the End of thy Work: Therefore consider in due
time, while the Day of thy Visitation is continued unto thee, and the Lord is
following and calling by his secret and inward Checks and Reproof, by which he
disquiets thy Mind, that although thou may take some Pleasure in Vanity and
wrong Ways, when thou can get over the just Witness of God in thy own Soul,
yet while it strives with thee to convert and gather thee up out of earthly and
fading Pleasures, to have thy Mind set upon heavenly Things, and take Pleasure
in them, thou will have no solid Comfort in all thy lower Enjoyments, but
Condemnation and Anguish of Soul will attend thee, until thou either gets over
the Witness, or leaves the Evil, is the Experience of the Lord's People, who
have been acquainted with the true and inward Warfare, and also with the Saints
Victory. Read, and learn to follow Christ by the Footsteps of the Flocks of his
Companions; although it be through great Tribulations, yet it is the way to have
thy Garments washed and made white in the mystical Blood of the immaculate Lamb
of God: This is he, as John the Baptist said, that takes away the Sins of the
World. Happy is every one that truly puts on his Lamb-like Nature, his
Humility, Righteousness and Purity, and is covered with his holy Spirit, and
lives and walks in and under the Influence and Conduct thereof to the End of
Time here, until we enter into Immutability.

Now to return from this Digression to the historical Part. When I had
traveled much of the Time between my going forth, which was from about the
nineteenth Year of my Age unto about the twenty seventh, then finding some
little Respite from the Weight of that Service, I inclined to settle a little
closer to Business, but had little to begin any Calling with, being
necessitated to leave my Trade of Weaving, through Lameness, as before
mentioned; and I had been a Sojourner some time at Whitby, Scarborough, and
Bridlington; but upon seeking unto the Lord to know what Place I might now
settle in, though my great Inclination was for Whitby, yet it sounded as in my
Ear, Bridlington, Bridlington is the Place to settle in; and in the Cross I
repaired thither, and settled for some time, keeping a little Shop, and mended
Clocks and Watches, as I had done for several Years past at times; it was of
good Service my settling there, for the Lord began to work mightily, especially
amongst the young Friends, so that in a few Years many had their Mouths opened
in Testimony for the Lord, and a fine Spring of heavenly Ministry was in that
Monthly Meeting, the like I have not known in the like Bounds, (for it is but a
small Monthlymeeting) and has been so ever since I knew it. For Truth did so
mightily prosper, and Friends grew so in the Ministry, that it became a
Proverb, that BRIDLINGTON was become a School of Prophets. This mighty Work of
the Lord in these Days, is worthy to be chronicled and remembered among his
many worthy and noble Acts; we had many heavenly and good Meetings, praised and
renowned be the worthy Name of the Lord, now and for ever.

We had but little Discipline when I first settled in that Place, but
afterward many Friends Hearts were stirred up in a holy Zeal for the Lord, not
only to promote Meetings for Worship, but also for good Discipline in the
Church, and they began to see a Necessity of coming up more in the Practice of
this very needful Work; although there were some that said, they could see no
Need of such close Order and Discipline: Yet I found it to be my Way in the
Truth to bear with such, if they were not irregular in their Conversations; but
if they were disorderly, we dealt with them as the Lord opened our Way in the
Wisdom of Truth; and thus bearing with the Easiness of some on the one hand,
and encouraging the faithful and zealous on the other, until way was made,
beyond my Expectation, for the spreading of the Truth, its Testimony, and the
Discipline thereof in those Parts.

I had now traveled and labored much in the Lord's Work at home and abroad
for about ten Years, but had not in all that Time found my way clear to marry,
although not without some likely Opportunity, and with such as were a great
deal richer than she was whom I did marry; but I was afraid in this weighty
Affair to miss my Way, knowing the great Difference there is between them who
only profess, and they who possess the Truth, and them that are only in the
first Nature and unregenerated State, (and strictly speaking, but the Sons and
Daughters of Men) and such who are born again, not of Flesh and Blood, nor
indeed of any thing that is corruptible, but of that incorruptible Seed and
living Word of God which leads into a lively Hope, and brings forth a new and
heavenly Birth in Man, that takes delight to please and obey the Lord in all
Things, and so become Sons, or Children of God, in a more spiritual and nearer
Relation than that of Creation only; it is in and through this great Work of
Renovation, and being born again: And, as such as live up to that holy Seed and
regenerating Principle, and as the same does predominate and rule in Man, in
this State Man cannot sin, as the Apostle said, with this Reason annexed,
because his Seed (to wit, the Seed of God) remains in him: Thus walking in
the Light, and living in the Seed, Grace and holy Spirit, although the Terms of
it differ, the Virtue and Nature of it are undividable; such who come to be
gathered to walk with, and truly love Christ the Bridegroom of the Soul, are
brought into a greater Nearness, truer Sympathy and Unity of Spirit than the
World knows of. Read this, you that are born again, and duly consider it in its
proper Time and Place. I believe, and therefore truly speak it, the Lord gave
me such a Wife as really feared him, loved Truth and Righteousness, and all
such as she thought loved, and especially such as lived in the Truth; her Name
was Priscilla Cannaby, Daughter of James Cannaby; she was descended of an
honest Family in the East Part of Yorkshire, the only Child her Parents left,
they were Bakers by Trade, and gave her a commendable Education, though they
did not leave her any great Portion; she was under the Care of her Uncle
Charles Cannaby of Bridlington, an honest Friend, who left something behind him
in Manuscript concerning his Convincement of the Truth, and Sufferings for the
same; he was convinced early, lived to a great Age, and was a Man of great
Service in those Parts where we lived.

I was in the twenty eighth Year of my Age when I married my Wife, who was a
Woman of an excellent Temper, very affectionate, sober and prudent, loved
Retirement much, and waiting upon the Lord, and the Enjoyment of his internal
and living Presence, and especially with the Lord's People, that they might
also be made Partakers with her of the like special Favors: this was as her
Crown and Kingdom while in this World, even from her Childhood; and to see
Friends prosper in the Truth was Matter of great Rejoicing to her. When we had
been married scarce three Years, the Lord raised her up to bear a public
Testimony amongst Friends in their Meetings, which was very comfortable and
acceptable to them; and also she had the Spirit of Grace and Supplication,
measurably poured upon her, so that many with me did believe she had Access to
the Throne of God, and to that River which makes truly glad the City of God:
She always freely gave me up to answer the Service I believed the Lord called
for of me. She was taken from me when we had been married but about five Years,
in the twenty eighth Year of her Age, and died in a sweet Frame of Mind, and
was sensible to the last, and her last Words were, He is come, he is come, whom
my Soul loves, and my Soul rejoices in God my Savior, and my Spirit magnifies
him; and so passed away like a Lamb, I believe into a Mansion of Glory, where
her innocent Soul will for ever sing Hallelujah to the Lord God and the Lamb,
who is worthy of Glory, Honor, Salvation and Strength, now and for ever.

I might enlarge much upon the Virtue and Worthiness of faithful Priscilla, but
in this, as in other Matters, it is my Desire to avoid Prolixity, yet would
take Notice of the most remarkable Occurrences that have happened to me in the
Course of this my earthly Pilgrimage; also, I have been much pressed by some,
and not of the least of my faithful Brethren; likewise, I believed it to be my
Duty, to leave some Remains to Posterity for their Encouragement and Comfort in
the Way and Work of the Lord. One Thing is worthy here to be inserted, which
had a strange and astonishing Effect upon my Mind, which was thus:

As I was walking in a plain Field in the fore Part of the Day, not far from
the Sea, betwixt Bridlington and Broynton, my Soul was in a deep Concern, and
at that Time exercised in Meditation on the Things of God, and also in fervent
Prayers to him for Preservation from every hurtful Thing; and a heavenly Frame
my Mind was then brought into, for then I neither saw Cloud over my Mind, nor
yet any in the Firmament, for it appeared to me a Morning without Clouds; though
I had passed under many Clouds. Soon after my Mind was brought into this
heavenly Frame, and as it were swallowed up in the heavenly and internal
Presence of the Lord, I thought a bright Cloud came down and covered me, or
caught me up into in; so whether I was standing, walking, or set upon the
Ground, or carried up into the Cloud in the Body, or out of the Body, I know
not to this Day; yet Fear and Reverence, with bowing of Soul, did possess me
before the great Majesty; at the Glory of whose Countenance, as I had it in a
preceding Vision, Men and Angels fled and gave way, and could not steadfastly
behold the Brightness and Glory of the Countenance of the Son of the Highest,
with the mighty God and Father, which are one in Power, Greatness, Goodness,
and Glory, who was before all Things, made all Things, and uphold and fill all
Things that are good, with that which is truly good, or at least is for a good
End. Read this Mystery thou that can, and learn to fear him that has Power
over both Soul and Body, to kill and to cast into Hell, for one Time or another
he will make thee fear him, when he brings thy Sins to Judgment, whether it be
now or hereafter: The Time has been, is, or will be, in which the Lord, the
Judge of both Quick and Dead, has, does, or will plead with thee, and all
Flesh, as in the Valley of Jehosaphat; therefore beware lest thou make him
wroth, as he was upon Mount Perizim, but be thou subject to the Lord, as
faithful Moses was upon Mount Horeb, or the Mount of God, when he obeyed his
Voice, and put off his Shoes; do thou obey, if it be to the putting away of the
Glory and Wisdom of Egypt, or Learning, or what else is required of thee: Oh
then thou art in the way to further Service, and wilt be enabled, as thou
continues faithful, to go through all to God's Glory, and thy unspeakable Peace
in the End.

Now as to the last Part of the Rapture or Vision, when I was swallowed up in
the luminous Presence of him that is first and last, the Alpha and Omega, I
heard a Voice, very intelligible to that Sensation I had then given me, saying,
Do thou see how Pride and Wickedness abound in the Nation? I answered in much
Fear, Lord, I do see it: The next Words which I heard in the Voice and in the
Cloud were, The People are too many, I will thin them, I will thin them, I will
thin them. I desired of the Lord to show me, whether it was his Mind I should
publish this in any Part of the Nation? The South was set before me, with this
Caution, Where this is opened to thee in my Power, there speak of it, and not
otherwise. I gave up to answer the heavenly Vision, and visited most Parts of
the southern Counties, as also the northern Parts, and Scotland; and where the
Lord opened my Mouth to speak of what I had heard, as before, by way of
Prophecy, I gave up, but did not so much insist upon that Matter, as to suffer
it to be a means to mislead me from that Work of the Ministry I was chiefly
concerned in. I would that all, who are concerned in the like manner, may be
cautious in this great Affair, and look well to the Rise and Original from
whence they receive this Gift, and how; and also what Frame of Mind they are
in, and that nothing of the Warmth of their own Spirits be set to work or
stirred up, either by Sight of the Eye, or hearing, or reading outwardly, but
that the Mind may be redeemed from all Workings, from these and the like
Grounds, and purely purged, and truly adapted or fitted to receive this Gift or
Spirit of Prophecy; and also be sure to be very careful to be guidable in the
Gift, or otherwise thou may miss, as to Time and Place, etc. I intend not to
dwell long upon it, as there are other Services included in this of Prophecy,
as Edification and Comfort, etc. but what I have been upon, relates to
foretelling something that is to come; and, as once a worthy Elder said to me
when I was young in the Ministry, It is a great Thing to know what, where and
when; and I have ever found it true to this Day. Learn of him that is (as he
always was) meek and low of Heart, and be not discouraged, but perfevere in
Faith and Si^^^rity, and look not overmuch at the Diffi^^^^ ^^out look over all
to him who has called ^^^e, and in some measure revealed his Son through the
Spirit in thee: Although I know from some Experience, what it is to be
exercised in the matter of Prophecy, for in the Journey touched of before, I
was concerned to tell Friends at Kilmouck in Scotland especially, that the Lord
would take many of them away; which in a short time came to pass, for many died
before that time Twelvemonth, it being a time of scarcity of Corn; and it was
thought many died for want of Bread, the Year ensuing my being there: I had
good Service for the Lord, and great Satisfaction in these my long Travels, as
I had in the like before, in diverse of which there were some convinced of Truth.

At Cromer in Norfolk, one Elizabeth Horry, when my Mouth was opened, despised
my Youth, as she confessed afterward; but what I had to say so reached her
Condition, that she shed many Tears upon her fine Silks, and confessed, before
the Meeting broke up, that all might hear, in these Words, All that ever I have
done has been told me this Day, and this is the everlasting Truth. And as I
passed along from that Meeting, not far from Cromer, with some other Friends,
it rose in my Heart to say aloud, that a Man who was watering his Horse might
hear, looking, and pointing my Hand toward him, That Man will be a Friend
before he dies; and, as he owned after, he was so struck with it, that he had
no Rest till he came among Friends, though he was then afar off, but he came to
be a serviceable Man among us, and his Wife was also convinced of the Truth,
and was a serviceable Woman. Samuel Hunt of Nottingham, was first reached at
Leicester by the Testimony I had given me to bear in that Meeting at that Time,
as he acknowledged afterward; but I always gave God the Glory, and laid the
Creature as in the Dust, that Man, as Man, might not be too much accounted of.

After my being caught up, and hearing the Voice (as before mentioned) I had
many deep and heavenly Openings, some of which it may not be amiss to mention
here, inasmuch as I had now a more clear Sight into a translated State than
ever I had before; I came, through a divine Sense and Participation, to have
great Sympathy and dear Unity, not only with the ever memorable Enoch, whose
walking was such as the Lord gave Testimony or Witness to, that he pleased him;
the Ground of which Witness was from hence, he lived near and loved God, and
walked in the Ways of Virtue, and abhorred Vice: But also with the Apostle,
having this Seal, that God knows who are his; and with some other of the
Servants of Christ in former Ages who could say, as some now can say, (from
true Experience) that the Spirit of the Lord bears Witness with our Spirits,
that we are his, to wit, the Lord's Children, so long as we do well; which last
Words are of large Extent, to do well, think well, speak well, and believe
well; for he that has no Faith, or that believes ill, cannot do well; he that
eats, drinks, or wears that which he knows he ought not, does not well; but
what is done well, is done in a pure Mind and clean Conscience, for so is true
Faith held, and all acceptable Work to God performed. I had great Openings into
the Removal of Moses, and taking up of Elijah, that great and worthy Prophet,
from the Earth into Heaven, and I have seen Things not fit to be uttered,
neither can the World yet believe them; and I saw far into the Mystery of the
Transfiguration of Christ, and Appearance of Moses and Elias with him upon the
Mount; and the Voice which was heard from the excellent Glory, This is my
beloved Son, hear him; not Moses nor Elias in Comparison of him, for the Law
pointed to him, and was as a Schoolmaster to bring to him. The holy Prophets
foresaw, and prophesied of his Coming, and John the Baptist saw Christ, and
baptized him, and bore Witness of him as the Light, and said, Behold the Lamb
of God, that takes away the Sin of the World; he also said, He is the
Bridegroom that has the Bride (the Church;) he spoke of his own Decrease, and
Unworthiness in comparison of Christ, though called by Christ himself, as great
a Prophet as was ever born of a Woman, and he was also called Elias, which much
first come, and is already come in respect of Power, Knowledge, Boldness and
Faithfulness; he was as Elias, yet the least in the Kingdom of Christ was
greater than he, because the Power and glorious Kingdom and Gospel Dispensation
was not fully brought in (and restored to Israel, or those who should believe
in him) until his Ascension; but now these great Agents in these foregoing
Dispensations all passed away, with their figurative, prophetical and
elementary Dispensations, and gave place to the Son and Heir of all Things, the
Messiah, the great Prophet, Bishop, Shepherd, King and Lawgiver.

Now read these Things, and learn truly to understand how Moses past away, and
Elias past away, and Christ is left, who is able alone to perfect the Work of
Man's Redemption, who trod the Wine Press alone, and amongst all the Sons of
Men, none were with him or helped him; he came who was the Antitype of all
Types gone before: He, Christ, is come to remove the Covenant made before,
because of the Weakness and Imperfection thereof, which Covenant made not the
Comers thereto perfect, but the better Hope brought in by Christ, did; so this
Covenant is abundantly more excellent which was brought in by Christ, and
settled and established upon better Promises than that was or could be, by the
Blood of Bulls, Goats, and the Ashes of an Heiser, which reached the outside
only; but in the second or new Covenant there is the Blood which sprinkleth the
Heart from an evil Conscience, so that such may be fitted and qualified to
serve the living God, not in the Works of the old Covenant, but in the Newness
of the holy Spirit: This is he that, as to his Divinity and Eternity, was
before the Hills were settled, and the Seos and Fountains were made, that took
delight to dwell with the Sons of Men, or in the habitable Parts of the Earth;
as he was a Spirit or Word uncreated, he dwelt measurably in Abel, Seth, Enoch,
and Noah before the Flood; for by his Spirit God strove with the old World to
reclaim them from their Wickedness, when it was great; it was by this Spirit
Noah was made a Preacher of Righteousness, and instructed how to build the Ark;
this is he who was with Shem and Japheth, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Joseph,
and all the faithful Fathers after the Flood, the Foundation of all the
Righteous, Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs, such as loved and believed in him,
and suffered for his Name's sake, and the Testimony which they held. This is he
that despised the Glory of this World, and is lifted up a Standard to the
People, and an Ensign to the Nations; unto him shall the Gentiles seek, and his
Rest shall be glorious; he has lifted up a greater Rod than that of Moses,
sometimes called the Rod of Iron, by which he has, and I believe will break to
pieces many People as a Potter's Vessel, when the Sin and Iniquity of the
People is come to the height; it was he that turned the Waters of Egypt into
Blood; it was he that slew the Firstborn throughout all the Land of Egypt, he
overthrew the Egyptians, and brought forth Israel by a strong Hand, and an Arm
outstretched. After he had marked the Dwellings of his People, and spared them
in the time of this great Slaughter, which was executed both upon Man and
Beast, to wit, the Firstborn in Egypt, then he became Israel's Passover. Read
these Things (that were typically done, and in an outward way) inwardly, and in
thine own Experience, that thou may say, and that truly, Christ is my
Passover, after he has mitigated thy sore Bondage, and in degree has given
thee Faith in his great Name, and has caused thee to love him, and made thee
willing to follow him, although it be through the Sea of Troubles and sometimes
as through the Wilderness. F^^^e is an eating of the heavenly Passover, or
Pas^^al Lamb, under the Influence of the pure Love of God, that is spread or
displayed over the Soul like a Canopy, or Banner: Here is the heavenly Manna,
the true Body to feed on, that yields true Nourishment and solid Comfort to thy
Soul, in this thy Travel toward the heavenly Country: Here is the Substance of
the Escape Goat known, that bears away the Sins of the People, for he bore our
Iniquities, and through his Stripes were we healed; on his Part there wants
nothing, but on Man's, Faith in, and Obedience to Christ: He is the Substance
or Antitype of the brazen Serpent, which was listed up in the Wilderness to
cure the Peoples Ailments, occasioned by the Serpents; he is the Advocate with
the Father, as John said, to encourage little Children in that time, which I
think may very well be applied to all in that State until time here shall be no
more. Happy is every one that hears, obeys, and reverenceth the Son and
Heir of all Things in his spiritual Appearance in the Heart, where he speaks to
the Conditions of the Children of Men, as never Man spoke, and to much better
Purpose than ever Man could do: This is he that spoke to the Fathers by the
Prophets, who in these Times does speak to us in or by his Son; so take heed to
his spiritual Appearance in the Heart, for there must the Work of our Salvation
be perfected, after Sin is purged out, and the Guilt thereof taken away; to
such Death is easy, where Sin, the Sting of Death, is taken away, having a Part
in Christ, the Firstborn of many Brethren, and Resurrection from the Dead; I
say, having a Part in him that is the Resurrection indeed, and the Life; over
such the second Death (which is a perpetual Separation from the heavenly
Presence of God, and Company of holy Angels) shall have no Power. I now leave,
I think, this not unprofitable Digression, and return to the more historical
Part, where one Thing, I think, is worthy of inserting here, viz.

In my young Years I was very much afflicted in my Travels, upon taking Cold,
with a sore Throat, that I could scarce speak so as to be heard, and had much
Trouble at times to swallo^ any Thing which Nature did require; and in one
Journey northward, in Truth's Service, coming to Hawkshead, and sitting in the
Meeting under no small Exercise with the Trouble aforesaid, not without some
Reasonings and Conflicts of Spirit, having left all, as I believed, to do what
the Lord required of me, and yet I apprehended myself, by Means of this
Affliction, not likely to be of any Service; and after some Reasonings, and a
fervent seeking to the Lord to know the Cause of this great Trouble, and withal
to bring my Mind to a true Resignation to the Will of God in this, and in all
the Trials the Lord might see good in his Wisdom to exercise me in; I had not
been long brought into this devoted and resigned State to be and do what the
Lord would have me do, but oh! I felt of the Virtue of Christ as a sweet and
living ^pring, by which I was healed: I was, and am to this Day (when I
remember the Lord's kind Dealings with me) very thankful to him.

It has been frequently observable, that the Lord leads his Servants through
many States, that they, having the Experience thereof, may be the more capable
of helping others in the like Straits; it is an excellent Thing to love and
truly believe in Jesus Christ, and keep Self down as in the Dust for ever.

An ACCOUNT of my first VISIT to FRIENDS in AMERICA.
NOW the Time came on for my going into America, having had a Sight of it about
ten Years before; I also acquainted my Wife therewith about a Year before she
died, and I found it was likely to be a very near trial to her; she was a
virtuous, good Woman, but was taken away, and left me three small Children, the
eldest not above four Years old, the youngest not much above one Month old, and
I having but little of this World, reasoned much about going, thinking my
Circumstances at present might excuse me; my Intentions were good in it, that I
might not leave Things any way to the Dishonor of the Truth: My innocent young
Child was taken away when about a Year old; and soon after, where ever I went,
while I was awake, it founded in my Ears several Days and Nights, Now is the
time, Now is the time. My other two Children, Providence so ordered it, that
they were placed to mine and Friends Sati^^^ction: I went through many Provings
that no Man knew of, but I believe, when I am gathered to my Place, I shall
leave many Brethren behind me yet in mutability, that will read my Lines in
their own Experience. I would not have any to misunderstand me, for as to my
outward Circumstances, I left no Debt, neither was I in a way of going backward
in the World; for ever after I received the Knowledge of the Truth, I could not
see what Pretense I could have to Religion, if any should lose by me: I have
often said, and been hearty in my Intentions, that rather than Truth should
suffer on that score, I would live upon Bread and Water, and wear very mean
Clothes, and work very hard if I were able, and upon any mean, if but lawful
Calling. It has been matter of wonder to me, how any that appear to carry any
Pretensions to Religion, dare run such great Ventures, sometimes beyond their
own Bottoms or Abilities; which to me has always appeared an unwarrantable
Risque; and, as I apprehend, Pride and Ostentation is much the Occasion of it,
which are much against Truth, and Men are no better for their greatness, for
the more plain, and the more humble we are, the more we resemble humble Jesus
and his Religion, which he labored to inculcate. If any are lifted up, or
aspire above their place, let them consider well the foregoing Paragraph.

Now I must leave my little Children, and my very near Friends, and my native
Country, and all for Christ and the Gospel's sake, without any sinister End or
View; and then I appealed to the Lord, in the simplicity of my Heart, that he
knew I was willing to be at his Disposal, and what he had favored me with, I
could leave to him; yet whether what I had was sufficient to defray mine and my
two little ones necessary Charges, was somewhat in my way; and to satisfy me in
this Doubt, the Lord's Voice sounded exceeding clear to that Sensation I was
then endued with, saying, Go and be faithful, and I will bless thee every way.
Oh my Heart seemed to me to melt, and my Spirit to dissolve within me, and I
said, Good is the Word of the Lord, thou have not failed me in any of my great
Straits and Trials to this Day; I have great Cause to trust in thee: Renowned
be thy most excellent Name, now and for ever.

I parted with my Friends with much brokenness of Heart, and set forwards on my
Journey toward London, in order to take shipping there, the 11th of the Eighth
Month 1700; and when I, with my Companions Thomas Thompson, Josiah Langdale,
and John Eslaugh, with some other Friends, went on board a Ship in the River
Thames, we had not been long there, and having considered our freedom about
going in the Ship, it opened clearly in my Mind, in the Light, that I must not
go in that Vessel; and I said to the Friends, I could not go in her, for I saw
nothing but Death and Darkness there. The Account of what afterward happened
to the Ship I had from two particular Friends, in two several Letters from
London into America, wherein they expressed a Thankfulness for our Deliverance,
and magnified that Hand which wrought it, and preserved us from going in that
Ship, which was lost near the Islands of either Jersey or Guernsey, and, as it
was said, about seventy People were drowned.

Peradventure I may mention some Things that may appear to be of but little
moment, but I have seen a divine Providence attend terrene Affairs, although
they may appear of little consequence to some; such as do not duly consider
these Things, may make a wrong Application, and as the course of my Travels
has afforded variety of Trials and Transactions which are in some Things very
particular, from whence arises variety of Accounts, so there has been a
Willingness in my Mind to favor some who have been desirous of having me to
leave a Journal of my Life, which I have complied with, as far as I can see my
way clear in the Truth.

Then we went on board of another Ship called the ARUNDEL, Splenden Rand
Master, in which we embarked the 17th of the Ninth Month 1700, and after many
Storms, and much Sea-sickness, not without some Conflicts of Spirit, more than
I am free to express, and a long Passage, being near sixteen Weeks upon the
Sea, we arrived in the River Patuxent in Maryland, as near as I remember, the
5th or 6th of the First Month 1701, and my Heart was glad, and filled with
Acknowledgments and Praises to the Lord, for bringing us safe over the mighty
Waters.

Now we left the Ship and Master, who was but a churlish, ill-natured Man. I
was very weak and low when I landed, both in Body and Mind, but the Lord helped
me, and made my Journey and Labors comfortable to many, as well as to my own
Soul. After the first or second Meeting we were at, John Estaugh being now my
Companion, as we came near a great House in Maryland, I espied a little white
Horse, the Sight of which put me in mind of a Dream I had on board the Ship
before I landed, in which I thought I got a little white Horse which carried me
well, and many Miles; I said to the Friends with me, let us call here at this
House, which we did, and upon Enquiry about a Horse the Man said, he had none
but a little white young Galloway, as he called it, which he was willing to
sell, and withal told us, it carried him one Day forty Miles, and asked 8 l.
sterling for it, and I bad him 5 l. sterling; the Man's Wife coming up the
Passage, heard what I had offered, and she said to her Husband, it is enough;
so I had him, and a good Horse he proved, and carried me, by a moderate
Computation, 4000 Miles. I took this, according to the nature of it, to be a
singular Favor from that great Hand which led me forth, and hitherto has
preserved me in the Land of the Living, to praise his ever worthy Name.

Now we set forward toward Virginia and North Carolina, and found great
Openness in these two Provinces amongst the People, and a tenderhearted
Remnant of Friends scattered abroad in these wilderness Countries. Although, as
I said before, I was brought very low, yet the Lord, in whom I did, and yet do
believe and put my Trust, raised me, and filled many times my Heart with his
Word and Testimony, so that sometimes it went forth as a Flame of Fire amongst
the loose Libertines, who were proud and unfaithful, yet professors of the
Truth, and we had many large and good Meetings. One Thing is Worthy of Notice;
as I was speaking in a Meeting in Virginia, a sudden stop came upon me, and
occasioned me to say, I cannot go forward, whatsoever the matter may be, I know
not: But giving over immediately, a Friend, whose Name was Edward Thomas, began
to preach, who was but young in the Ministry, although and elderly Man, and apt
to be attended with Reasonings; but as he said after the Meeting, he had sought
to the Lord with Prayers, that he wound condescend so far to his Request, as to
give me a Sense of him, and in so doing he would take that as a great Strength,
and Confirmation to his Minisity, in this the Day of his many Exercises and
great Fears, or much to the same effect; thus we see the Lord in his great
Mercy condescends to the low, weak, and as it were, infant States of his
Children, like a tender Father, and being our heavenly Highpriest, is touched
with the Feeling of the Infirmities of his People; Thanksgiving and Honor be
given to his most excellent Name, now and for ever.

During our Stay in Virginia, one remarkable Passage occurred, which it may not
be amiss to insert here, and the case was thus; I being at a Friend's House, an
ancient Widow, in order to go to the Meeting, observed as I sat in the House,
several Persons of not come into the Yard (a Storehouse being near) to make,
as appeared afterward, a Seizure for Rates for the Government and Priest, they
not being distinctly charged, but a mixed Rate, occasions Friends in those
Parts to be straightened about the Payment of them: I observing the Priest to be
there, and appear very busy, asked, What he was come about? The Friend replied,
They were come to make Distress for the 40lb. per Poll, as they phrase it,
which is 40 Pounds of Tobacco, payable for every taxable Head, ( i.e. all above
sixteen Years old.) There were along with the Priest the Sheriff and Constable
for the Government, and diverse Merchants of note as Spectators: I understanding
the reason of their coming, stepped out to the Priest, who seemed a topping brisk
Man, his Temper in this case not unsuitable to his Name, which was Sharp; and
being come to him, I desired him to be careful how he devoured Widows Houses;
he briskly replied, he did not; to which I as closely returned, that I found he
did. He denied my Assertion, and said, The Government gave him what he demanded
and took; to which I gave the following Answer; Inasmuch as he did not any
thing for the Widow, for which he reasonably might require a Reward, I believed
the Government would not infist upon it for him, if he would be willing to drop
it, which in common Equity I thought he should. The Priest, displeased with
this modest Reply, tartly answered, You are no Christians. I told him, The
Charge was high, and false, and he might more easily affirm than prove it;
wherefore I put the Question, and asked him, Why we were so charged by him? To
which he returned this insignificant Answer, That we denied part of the
Divinity of Christ. I told him, he was a Novice, and receded in his Opinion
from most of his Brethren, seeing it was a general Reflection cast on us by
most of his Fraternity, That we owned the Divinity of Christ, but denied his
Manhood, which was false also; therefore I demanded of him, to prove what Part
of the Divinity of Christ we denied; in which if he failed, I should look upon
him as a false Accuser, and those present would, I hoped, be my Witnesses: But
he shustled, and declined answering, though I urged him as much as possible;
and to cut the matter off, he asked, Whence I came? The Sheriff bid him give me
a Verse in Greek; I told them, I mattered not meddling in that, for as the
English Tongue was best understood by those present, therefore I thought it
would be best to keep it. I told him, I was of Old England; but still reminded
him of his proving his Assertion, which I looked for from him; but instead of
that, he asked what part of Old England I came from? I told him Yorkshire; and
bid him produce his Proofs, as before urged, but he still evading the matter,
desired to know from what Place? I told him I was born at North Cave; and, said
he, I was born at South Cave, and my Father was Minister there many Years, his
Name was Sharp, and there is but a Mile difference betwixt those Places: I
said, it was a long one. No sooner was this over, but the Priest, transported
with my being his Countryman, began hugging me to such a degree, that I was
quite ashamed of him: When I had, not without some Difficulty, got clear of his
Embraces, I asked him, if he esteemed himself a Minister of Christ? He
answered, Yea, and lawfully called thereto; I told him, if he was a
Gospel-Minister, as the Gospel was free, so should his Ministry be free; and
turning to the People there present, I told them, I would not have them
deceived, for they might understand he only possessed his Place by virtue of a
Law in that Case provided, and his Call and Ordination was only such as had
been transferred upon him for a Fee, which made him require Pay for what he
did, and indeed where he did nothing, which was highly unfair; wherefore they
might upon Consideration find he was but a Minister of the Letter, which was
dead, and not a Minister of the Spirit and divine Power: From which he offered
not to clear himself, though I urged him thereto. Then I asked him, which of
those odious Characteristicks the false Ministers were branded with, and
deciphered by in the New Testament, he could clear himself of? which I then
enumerated to him. The Sheriff said, it was so; and withal said, Mr. Sharp,
answer the Man, for the Question is very rational, and you ought to answer him,
and for Honor sake clear yourself of those Odiums if you can: But he would not
offer to meddle with it; wherefore I told him, to mind for the future, not to
charge any Man or People with more than he could be sure to prove; for it was
highly scandalous. It being now Meetingtime, I asked him to go thither; but he
refusing, said, he durst not; so we parted.

Having visited Friends here, we returned back for Maryland, and Pennsylvania,
and a great many we found who loved to hear the Testimony and Doctrines of
Truth, but too few there were, who took up the Cross daily, and followed Christ
in the way of Self-denial, and knew the thorough Work of Regeneration, so as to
have their Garments washed and made white in the mystical Blood of the Lamb:
These are not polluted with the Sins and Iniquities of the World, who have
experienced this Blood to sprinkle the Heart from an evil Conscience. These are
capable of serving the living God; and coming from the Laver or Pool that truly
washes, there is none unfruitful, but every one bearing twain, and they are
inwardly clean and fruitful to God, and walk with him, whose bright and shining
Lives are also fruitful to the World that will receive them. Read this thou
that have known something of the Work of Conversion, and consider the great
Difference there is between the bright Lives of the Virtuous, and the dull and
cloudy Lives of the Vicious, and besure thou look well, which of these thou
most resemblest in thine.

Now when we came into Pennsylvania, my Companion before mentioned, whom I
loved well, told me he must go back to Virginia; it became an Exercise to us
both, for I could not see my Way clear to go back, having been twice through
that Province. When no other Way appeared, but we must part, (for my Way
appeared clear for the Jerseys, Long Island, Rhode Island, and New England) I
held it needful that we should, as we did, call the Friends and Elders of
Philadelphia and thereabouts together, to let them know how we parted, for we
parted in much Love and Tender-heartedness; yet notwithstanding, lest any undue
Reflections should be cast upon the Friends there concerning us, because of our
parting, I thought these Friends would be capable of setting those Things in
their proper Light, being Witnesses thereto; so taking our Leave of our dear
Friends in these Parts, I traveled without any Companion outwardly, or
constantly; but I sometimes fell into company with Elizabeth Webb and Sarah
Clement, who were virtuous Women, and lived near the Kingdom, and were of good
Service in their Travels, and grew in Truth, which while with them I was
sensible of: We traveled under great Care and Circumspection, both for our own
good, and avoiding Offense, as became our Places, and holy Profession, that in
all Things we might adorn the Gospel of the Kingdom, a Dispensation of which
was committed to us to preach unto others. Good Service I had for the Lord, and
great Satisfaction in my own Mind in these Parts, the Lord helping me by his
mighty Power through all my Trials, as my Heart and Mind was devoted and
resigned to answer his Requirings.

I had great Openings in several Places in New England, and it appeared clear
to me, and sometimes I spoke openly of it, that the Lord would gather a great
People to the saving Knowledge of the Truth in his Time, notwithstanding what
many of our Friends had suffered for the Name of the Lord, and Testimony which
they held in these Parts, from the Predecessors of the present Inhabitants: The
View of the State of these Things, especially the great Sufferings of many of
our faithful Friends, put me in mind of that Saying, that The Blood of the
Martyrs is the Seed of the Church; and in this case, I believe it will be
fulfilled in its Season.

One Passage happened, which I think not fit to pass over in silence: There
came into one Meeting, eastward in New England, a Man, who was Brother to a
Presbyterian Priest, to oppose Friends, (who, as Friends said, had been often
very troublesome in that Meeting) in the Beginning of the Meeting he desired to
have Liberty to ask some Questions. I being a Stranger, and not having so much
as heard of the Man, nor any making Reply to him, I felt Liberty in the Truth
to return the following Answer in behalf of the Meeting, That I did apprehend
it was the Desire of Friends, inasmuch as the Meeting was appointed for the
Worship of God, and not for asking of Questions, or Controversies, that the
chief Part should first be answered; and I also thought the Meeting would be
willing, in the Conclusion, to give him Liberty to ask the Questions, if his
Intent therein was for Information or Satisfaction, and not for Contention.
Friends were silent, and the Man submitted to what was proposed, and a good
Meeting we had, the Lord's heavenly Power and living Presence being with us,
and the Substance was felt among us, and exalted over all the Shadows and
Types; and Christ the true Bread and living Water, Light and Life of the World,
was exalted that Day; and the mighty God and Father, with his beloved Son,
through the Help of the holy Spirit, was glorified, who is worthy for ever.
Near the Conclusion of the Meeting, the Man began to speak well of what he had
heard, particularly touching that of Water-Baptum, which, he said, he had
nothing to object against; but as to the Sacrament, as he called it, because
little or nothing had been said about it, therefore he concluded, we either
denied or disused it; or Words to the same purport. Then I stood up and said, I
did not remember that the Word Sacrament was in all the Bible; but, I said, I
supposed he meant the Bread and Wine; he answered, he did; I asked him, whether
he was of the same Mind the Episcopal Church was of? If not of the same Mind he
might say so; for they say, the Bread and Wine is an outward and visible Sign
of an inward and spiritual Grace, etc. what said he to it? He was some Time
silent; then I asked him, How long he thought that Sign was to continue? He
replied, To the End of the World. I answered, He did not read in all the Bible,
that the Lord had appointed any Figure or Sign but what was to end in the
Substance, which is to be witnessed and enjoyed in this World, and not put off
only to the End or Conclusion thereof, as his Argument seemed to declare, by
his urging, that the Sign of that divine Substance must remain till the End of
this World. I asked him, What he could answer to that? He turned off with only
saying, I was too great a Scholar for him, and so he would not meddle with me.
He then was silent, and there being many People, I had a fine Opportunity to
open to the tenderhearted, and Friends present, how that was at best but a
Sign, which the People eat and drank outwardly, in Remembrance of Christ's
Death until he came, but that I could now prove plenteously from the New
Testament, that the Substance, the Grace was come, and urged many Proofs out of
the Scriptures to the same purpose: And when I had done, what I had said, so
reached a good-like old Man, a Presbyterian, that he confessed with Tears, he
had heard much said upon that Subject, but had never heard it so opened before;
and said, he believed I was in the right. The Meeting broke up in a good Frame,
and Friends much rejoiced that Truth came over all, and the contentious Man was
silenced: And when the Meeting was over, the goodly old Man took me to the
Door, and asked me, what a Man should do in case of a solemn League and
Covenant, he being entered into it? I told him, I needed not to direct him, for
he had that in himself which would show him what he should do; for if one
should make an Agreement or Covenant with Hell and Death, in the time of
Ignorance and Darkness, and now the true Light discovered it to be so; the same
Light which discovered and manifested it to be wrong, as he was faithful to the
same, would show him how and when to break it, and every other wrong thing; to
which Light I recommended him, and bid him take heed to it; which, he said, he
hoped he should; and so I left him with Tears on his Cheeks, and passed on.

I omitted one thing which happened in that Part of New England near New York
and LongIsland, although I was twice backward and forward, yet to be brief in
my Travels through those Countries, intended to make one Account serve, viz. As
I was speaking in a Meeting, there came a great Damp over my Spirit, and in
that Time came into the Meeting several Men, occasioned by a topping and great
Man in the World, who had given them an Expectation that they should hear how
he would oppose the Quakers; but in a short time Truth rose, and Friends
generally heard a Man say to this Disputant, why do you not speak? he hushed
him with saying, the Man is upon the Subject which I intend to oppose them
with. After some time the Man was put upon again to speak to me, with a why do
not you speak? we heard him say, the Man has opened the Thing so as I never
heard it before, and I have nothing to say: And to his own, and the Wonder of
his Neighbors, he sat down upon a Seat near the Door and wept tenderly; so it
was a good time to him, and many more, for the Lord's mighty Power was amongst
us. And in my Return from my Journey in the East Parts of New England, the same
great Man desired me to condescend to have a Meeting at his House; and after
due Consideration and Approbation of Friends, who desired it might be so, when
they knew it was his Request, a Meeting was appointed, and I heard there were
likely to be at it a great many of the higher sort of Presbyterians of his
Neighborhood.

I went to the Meeting under no small Concern of Mind, but when I was come into
the great House, I was very much affected with the wise Conduct of the Man, to
see in what excellent order he had placed every thing, so that I could not find
wherein any thing could be amended; and a heavenly Meeting it was, without any
Opposition; and at the breaking up of the Meeting, this tender Man, whose Heart
was broken and opened by the Power of Truth, said audibly, His Heart and House
were open to receive me, and such as me, let all say what they would to the
contrary. But what the subject matter was at the first Meeting when he came in,
I forgot; it was enough that we remembered we had a good and heavenly Meeting,
and were truly thankful for the same to him who was the Author thereof.

I and some other Friends being in our Passage by Water in a Vessel bound for
Rhode Island, and meeting with high and contrary Winds, we put into a Creek
some Miles distant from RhodeIsland, and desired the People to procure us some
Horses to ride on, and we would pay them any thing that was reasonable, but
hoped they would not make a Prey of us, for we were Strangers, and they ought
to do to us as they would be done by, if they were in a strange Land, as we
were; and there came up to us a goodly old Man, and asked us, what People we
were? if we were not Quakers? I told him, we were in Scorn so called, but we
did not much mind Names, for there was but little in them. He was a brisk
talking Man, and said, there was a Man here lately that said he was a Quaker,
and borrowed a Horse, and when he was gone some Miles from this Place, he
offered to sell t^^ Horse: I know not, said the Man, but you are such. I
returned this Answer to the Reflection; That was a great Proof that we were an
honest and reputable People where we were known, he might assure himself of
that; for when a Man is so wicked, as to become a notorious Cheat, he will
cover himself under the best Name he can think of, otherwise he might have said
he was a Baptist, or a Presbyterian, or an Episcopalian, and desired you to
lend him an Horse; but you mind not these Names, neither does the wicked Man
think he can pass so well under any of these last, but under the first; and the
reason of it I leave thee to judge. The old Man asked no more Questions, but
used his Endeavors to get us Horses, and a Man and Horse to go with us, to
have the Horses back again, and we were well mounted; but before we set
forward, the old Man took me to his House and was very courteous to me, for
though we had spoke for some Victuals in as short a time as well might be, he
invited me to drink, and brought of his Apples and Beer, which he would have my
Friends to partake of, for, he said, (and we found it true) it was but a poor
Inn; I think there was no Liquor at it but Brandy or Rum, and Water. The old
Man and I parted very lovingly, and I gave him a piece of Money to show my
Gratitude for his Civility and good Service to us. The People looked upon us as
some great Wonder, for I heard one say, Are these Quakers? well, said he, they
look like other People. How we had been represented, and by whom, its not hard
to gather, for it is very apparent, the same Spirit and the same Enmity yet
does continue in some of the Inhabitants of that Country, which some of our
Friends formerly felt the severe Effects of; but they are since somewhat
moderated by the Government there, which is of a more mild and Christian
Disposition; although I am well assured, that many of the more conscientious
and thinking People in those Parts of the World begin to see, and many will see
and understand in time, that hanging and taking away Lives, for the sake of
Religion, is opposite to Christ, and the Nature of the true Religion which is
wrought in Man by the Operation, Quickenings, and Indwellings of the holy
Spirit, which, as it is regarded and followed, leavens and brings the Soul of
Man in some degree to put on the Purity, heavenly Image, and Nature of Christ,
which is Love, praying for Enemies, and is not for destroying, but saving
Lives; but how far the Reverse will agree with that Religion taught by Christ,
and practiced by him and the Apostles, I would have all seriously consider of
in time.

While we were in Boston, when one of the aforementioned worthy Women was
declaring excellently, with both good Utterance and Voice, as also good Matter,
as the manner of the Inhabitants of Boston had been for many Years to
encourage, or at least suffer a rude Mob to bawl and make a Noise, so they did
now, that it was hard to hear so as to understand distinctly what the Friend
said, although she spoke plain and intelligibly: It did very much grieve me to
to see the Ignorance and Darkness of those high Professors of Religion, so that
when the Friend had done, observing there appeared Men of some note in the
World, I requested them to hush the Rabble, for I had something to say, which I
desired them to make known to the Governor and chief Men of the Town; so they
soon quelled the Noise. Then I told them, That in case we were as erroneous as
some might insinuate we were, that was not the Way to convince us of our
Errors, neither to bring us out of them, but rather to establish us in them;
and that was not the Way for them to gain Proselytes, but the Way to lose many
from them, and increase Dissenters; for what Convincement could there be by
Noise and Clamor, and Hooting, as if they would split their own Lungs? I had
come a great Way to see them, and what Character could I give of them? I never
thought to have seen so much Folly amongst a wise and religious People as now I
saw: Tell the Governor and chief of the Town, what the old Englishman says;
for I am ashamed of such Doings. It had a good Effect, for when I came after,
we had quiet Meetings; and I understood by a Letter from Daniel Zachary, of
Boston, to Old England, that the Governor said, I was in the right, and ordered
that Peace should be kept in Friends Meetings there; and I never heard to the
contrary but it is well yet as to that. We have great reason to be truly
thankful to the Lord for those, and all other his Mercies, that he the Fountain
of all Good is pleased to favor us with: And as an Instance of the Lord's
Mercy to many poor Sufferers, and to show the implacable Envy of these People
to Friends, the Case of Thomas Maulham of Salem may suffice, in some measure,
to set forth both, who was a great Sufferer in the Time of hot Persecution,
when the Persecutors had stripped him of almost all he had; their insatiable
Minds not content with that, they came with Axes and hewed down all the Apple
Trees in his Orchard, it being a large one, and left the Stumps about the
height of a Man's Knee, and, as Thomas Maulham said, they took the Way as they
thought to ruin him; but the Lord turned it into a Blessing, for the Trees grew
to Admiration, and came to bear Fruit abundantly, and a finer Orchard I have
not seen in all my Travels, for the Bigness of it; let the Lord be sanctified
by all his People, and admired by all them that believe.

I with several other Friends went from Salem Yearly Meeting (which was a large
and good Meeting) toward Dover, and coming to a River, I staying a little
behind, a Friend took my Horse with two more into the Boat, and by that time I
came to the Riverside the Boat was sinking, and the Ferryman made a lamentable
Cry, saying, The Boat is sunk and we shall be all drowned; although it was so
ordered, that there was but one Friend in the Boat with the Boatman, and I do
not remember that ever before now my Horse was in any Boat, and I not there;
which I looked on as the Mercy of a kind Providence to me, and to several other
Friends in Company. I hearing the Noise, as before, (and also the flowndering
of the Horses when tumbling into the Water) called to the Men, to be sure to
take care to free themselves of all the Tackling of the Horses, (as Bridles,
Stirrups, etc.) and catch hold on my Horse's Tail, and he would bring them both
ashore; but if they trusted to the other (as before mentioned) when the Horses
swam they would fail them, unless very strong; and to have them hold by the
Bridle was the way to drown both Horse and Man: This Advice was given while
they had the Horses in their Hands; the Boatman, being a lively Youth, took my
Advice, caught hold of my Horse's Tail, it being long, (which I ever approved
of among Rivers) and I calling to my Horse, he came quickly with the Man
ashore, but left the honest old Friend Ezekiel Waring (to whose House we
intended to go that Night) in the River floating to the Neck, a hundred Yards
from the Shore by Computation, yet watchful Providence did so attend, that his
Life was preserved to a Wonder; for it was so ordered, although he missed taking
my Advice, and caught hold of his Stirrup, and the Girth broke, as they are apt
to do if they be tight when the Horse begins to swim, which brought off the
Saddle and Pillion, and the Oar of the Boat, and his Hat, which with the
Pillion-seat being in his Arms, just bore up his Head above Water for some
time; his poor Wife seeing the Danger to which her Husband was exposed, fell
into a fainting Fit; (there being neither House, Man, or Boat, to be seen on
this Side of the River, but ourselves, the Boatman, and the Stem and Stern of
the sunk Boat full of Water.) A House there was on the other Side of the River,
which was half a Mile over. The Ferryman did his best to get a Boat or Cannoe,
and although it began to be dark, yet he found a Cannoe, (which is made of a fine
piece of Timber hollowed in the form of a Boat, and generally will carry but
two or three or four Men;) he coming near, asked if Ezekiel was alive? I told
him he was, but very weak, for I had often heard him blubber in the Water; I
encouraged him, that he might not faint in his Mind, for I told him, I yet
believed his Life would be preserved; he would very faintly say, Unless Help
came, he could not hold it long. I went on by the Waterside, and laid me down
often on the Land, not much regarding Wet or Dirt, sometimes tumbling over Logs
of Wood and Limbs of Trees, for so it is in these uncultivated Places: I
directed the Man with his Cannoe where the poor Friend was, as near as I could
tell by my last Observation, and withal desired he would turn the Stern of his
Cannoe to him, as he could not lift him into the Cannoe; neither to let him lay
his Hand upon the broad Side of it, but upon the Stern, lest he should overset
it, and you be both drowned: So he did, and brought him gently ashore, to the
great Joy of his loving Wife and us all. The Boatman, as he owned, had found my
Counsel good, and therefore would have me tell him what he might do now; I bid
him fetch the Boat to shore by the Fowler or Rope, and then go and carry
Ezekiel in the Cannoe to the Inn on the other Side of the Water, that he might
dry, warm, and refresh himself until we came; in the mean time we cleared the
Boat of Water, which when done, we put two Horses into it, and I towed my Horse
at the Boat's Stern to make room for several, especially the good Women before
mentioned, who were at this time in my Company, not without their Exercise any
more than myself: We got well over, and then the Ferryman and Friend on the
other Side brought the Horses that were left, being three, which were enough
for the Boat, and proved too many the first Time. We found the good old Friend
sinely and well recruited, and got to his House about Midnight, where we were
glad, and our Hearts were full of Praises to the Lord for this great and
eminent Deliverance and Preservation.

In this first Visit while in Rhode Island, I met with something worthy of thy
Notice, if thou art such a Reader as I wish thou may, which was thus: Being
in Rhode Island, several Friends came to me in some of the Intervals of the
Yearly Meeting, (for it held several Days, both for Worship and Discipline) to
enquire whether it was usual to let the Young, and such as had but appeared
little in Testimony in our Parts of the World, come into Meetings of public
Friends? I said, Yes, if they were of clean Lives, and what they had to say,
approved; and it was very like such might want Advice as much as those who were
come to more Experience in the Work of the Ministry, if not more: This was some
means of enlarging the said Meetings of Ministers now coming on. When I came
into the Meeting, several of the Elders desired me to go into the Gallery,
which I refused, the Concern upon my Mind being so great, I thought it was
enough that I could but get into the House, and sit down among the lowest Rank.

This Meeting was one not to be forgotten, because of the eminent Visitation
from the Lord that was upon us in it; I have not often seen the like; I
question if there were any dry Cheeks for some time in it; and the manner of
the working of the heavenly Power was remarkable, in order to the sanctifying
and preparing Vessels for the Lord's Use; and he broke us down by his Judgments
from following flattering Flesh, and the pleasing Vanities of the World, and
the subtle Baits of Satan, by the Tenders of his Love, and engaged us to follow
his heavenly and inward Calls, Knocks, and Reproofs of his holy Spirit, and to
obey the Dictates of the same. When the Lord prepares in a good degree for this
Work of the Ministry, many have been unwilling to give up and obey, until they
have tasted of the Lord's Displeasure, and in part of his Judgments, which have
brought them into a Submission; after which they went out with their Lives
sometimes in their Hands, and became a Wonder to men, bearing their Reproach,
and sometimes appeared in great Congregations, sometimes in Noises and Tumults,
and sometimes were in Watchings and Fastings, in Weariness, Hunger and in Cold,
with much more, for the Name of the Lord and his Testimony, and for the
Enjoyment of Peace, and the internal Presence of him that has separated us to
this Work by the holy Ghost; and it is in and by our abiding faithful to the
same, that we are preserved in a Capacity of Perseverance through all to the
End, to the mutual Help and Comfort one of another, and Renown of the Name of
the Lord, who is worthy now and for ever.

We also had a very large Meeting on this Island in an Orchard, where I had
good Service for the Lord; and I remember I was much concerned about the two
Ministrations, viz. John's Baptism with Water, and CHRIST's with the holy
Ghost, it being clear from John's Words, that he saw to the End of his own
Dispensation when he declared, he must decrease, but CHRIST must increase:
which is generally understood to respect their differing Dispensations; for the
first Baptism was to baptize unto Repentance, the other to the purging of the
Floor, and burning up of that which was combustible, viz. the Chaff and
Stubble, which the Lord's Baptism burns up inwardly, and which no elementary
thing can do; for if all the Eatings, Washings, Observations, and Ceremonies
under the Law, although to Israel commanded and enjoined by the Lord, could not
make the Comers thereunto perfect, how should these or any of them now, when
not commanded, as they never were to us, perfect they Gentile World? So what I
had upon my Mind, as I received I went through with, and showed the Beginning,
Use and End of the watery Dispensation and the Use and Continuance of CHRIST's.
spiritual Baptism to the End of the World. The Meeting broke up, and Friends
went into an upper Room in an Inn; but I felt such an Exercise upon my Spirit
that I could not eat, but desired Friends to be easy, and I would eat as soon
as I could; and while I was walking over the large Chamber alone, there came up
three Men whom I knew not, or what they were, but it sprang livingly in my
Heart to set my Eyes on them in the Lord's Dread, and so I did; they passed
away, and I was told afterward, that they were three Baptist Preachers who had
been at the Meeting, and came once more to see me, with a Design to have a
Dispute with me; but, they said, I looked so sharply they durst not meddle with
me: Thus the Lord in a good degree wrought for me, blessed be his worthy Name
for ever.

Now I leave the Account of my Travels in those Parts, and enter upon my
second, with my honest Companion James Bates, who was born in Virginia, and
traveled much with me through many Provinces, and some Islands; we had good
Service together, and it was much with me, when on Rhode Island, to visit
Nantucket, where there were but very sew Friends; Peleg Slecum, an honest
public Friend nea^ Rhode Island, intending to carry us in his Sloop to the said
Island that Night; and Peleg thought we had been close in with our desired
landing Place, but we fell short, and Night coming on, and having but one small
Cannoe to help us ashore, which would carry but three People at once, we went
ashore at twice, and left the Sloop at an Anchor; and it being grown dark, we
thought we were going up into the Island among the Inhabitants, but soon found
that we were upon a Beach of Sand and Rubbish, where was neither Grass nor
Tree, neither could we find the Sloop that Night, though we sought it
carefully, and hollowed one to another till we were weary, so that we were
forced to settle upon our little Island, from the Center of which, one might
cast a Stone into the Sea on every Side; here we staid that Night, not knowing
but the Sea, when at the Height, would have swept us all away, but it did not;
there I walked, and sometimes sat, until Morning, but slept none; at last the
Morning came, and the Mist went away, and we got on Board again, and reached
the Island about the ninth or tenth Hour.

The Master was willing, at our Request, to land three of us, (i. e.) me, my
Companion and Susanna Freborn, a public Friend, who had a Concern upon her Mind
for some Time, (as she signified to Friends in Rhode Island where she lived) to
visit the few Friends in Nantucket, and Friends thought this a proper Season to
pay that Visit. She was a Woman well beloved, and in good Unity with Friends.

We landed safe, and as we went up an Ascent, we saw a great many People
looking toward the Sea, for great Fear had possessed them, that our Sloop was
a French Sloop loaded with Men and Arms, who were coming to invade the Island:
I held out my Arms and told them, I knew not of any worse Arms than these on
board. They said, they were glad it was no worse, for they had intended to have
alarmed the Island, it being a time of War: I told the good like People, for so
they appeared to me, that Peleg Slocum, near Rhode Island, was Master of the
Sloop, and that we came to visit them in the Love of God, if they would be
willing to let us have some Meetings amongst them. They behaved themselves very
courteously toward us, and said, they thought we might.

We then enquired for Nathaniel Starbuck, who we understood was in some degree
convinced of the Truth, and having Directions to his House, we went thither,
and I told him, We made bold to come to his House, and if he was free to
receive us, we would stay a little with him, but if not, we would go elsewhere;
for we heard he was a seeking religious Man, and such chiefly we were come to
visit: He said, we were very welcome. And by this time came in his Mother Mary
Starbuck, who the Islanders esteemed as a Judge among them, for little of
Moment was done there without her, as I understood.

At the first Sight of her it sprang in my Heart, To this Woman is the
everlasting Love of God. I looked upon her as a Woman that bore some Sway in
the Island, and so I said, and that truly, we are come in the Love of God to
visit you, if you are willing to let us have some Meetings among you: She said,
she thought we might; and withal said, there was a Nonconformist Minister who
was to have a Meeting, and they were going to it, and she thought it would be
the best way for us to go with them to the Meeting. I showed my Dislike to that
for these Reasons; first, we did not want to hear what that Minister had to
say, because some of us had tried them before we came there, (meaning the
Non-conformists of several sorts) and if we should go, and could not be clear
without speaking something in the Meeting, he might take it ill; but as we
understand there is another Meeting appointed at the second Hour for the same
Man, therefore, as the present Constitution of Things are, we look upon
ourselves to stand upon an equal Ground in a religious Capacity with other
Dissenters; and if we should appoint our Meeting at the same Hour, then the
People will be left to their Choice to which Meeting they will go. The great
Woman approved of the Proposal, and said, indeed that was the best Way. The
next Consideration was, where shall the Meeting be? She paused a while, and
then said, I think at our House. I from thence gathered she had an Husband, for
I thought the Word our carried in it some Power besides her own, and I
presently found he was with us; I then made my Observation on him, and he
appeared not a Man of mean Parts, but she so far exceeded him in soundness of
Judgment, clearness of Understanding, and an elegant way of expressing herself,
and that not in an affected Strain, but very natural to her, that it tended to
lessen the Qualifications of her Husband.

The Meeting being agreed on, and Care taken as to the Appointment of it, we
parted, and I lay down to try if I could get any Sleep, for I have showed
before what sort of a Night the last was with us; but Sleep vanished away from
me, and I got up and walked to and fro in the Woods until the Meeting was
mostly gathered. I was under a very great Load in my Spirit, but the Occasion
of it was hid from me, but I saw it my place to go to Meeting, the Order of
which was such, in all the Parts thereof, I had not seen the like before; the
large and bright rubbed Room was set with suitable Seats or Chairs, the Glass
Windows taken out of the Frames, and many Chairs placed without very
conveniently, so that I did not see any thing awanting, according to the Place,
but something to stand on, for I was not free to set my Feet upon the fine Cane
Chair, lest I should break it.

I am the more particular in this exact and exemplary Order than in some other
Things, for the Seats both within and without Doors were so placed, that the
Faces of the People were toward the Seats where the public Friends sat, and
when so set, they did not look or gaze in our Faces, as some I think are too
apt to do, which in my Thoughts bespeaks an unconcerned Mind: The Meeting being
thus gathered and set down in this orderly and ample manner, (although there
were but very few bearing our Name in it) it was not long before the mighty
Power of the Lord began to work, and in it my Comp nion especially did appear
in Testimony in the fore Part thereof; and while he was speaking, a Priest (not
him before touched on, but another) flung out some Reflections upon him, and
the People for his sake, which I did not see the least Occasion for; after
which he went away, (but more of this in the Sequel.)

I sat a considerable Time in the Meeting before I could see my Way clear to
say any thing, until the Lord's heavenly Power raised me, and set me upon my
Feet as if one had lifted me up, and what I had first in commission to speak,
was in the Words of Christ to Nicodemus, viz. Except a Man be born again, he
cannot see the Kingdom of God; with these Words, Nay, the natural and
unregenerate Man cannot so much as see the heavenly and spiritual Kingdom of
Christ, which stands not only in Power, but also in Righteousness, Joy and
Peace in the holy Spirit; and to be born again, was not to be done
unperceivably, no more than the natural Birth could be brought forth without
Trouble; and to pretend to be in Christ and not to be new Creatures, is
preposterous; and to pretend to be new Creatures, and yet not able to render
any Account how it was performed, was unreasonable; for it could not be, as I
urged before, without our Knowledge; for to be born again, signified to be
quickened and raised into a spiritual and new Life, by which the Body of the
Sins of the Flesh is mortified, and we come to live a self-denying Life: Those
who are crucified with Christ, they are crucified to their Sins, that as he
died for Sin, we might die to Sin: In this State we live not after the Flesh,
although we live (as the Apostle said) in the Flesh; but the Life which these
live, is through Faith in the Son of God: And to have all this, and much more
wrought in us, and we know nothing of it, is unaccountable.

As I was thus opened, and delivering these Things, with much more than I can
remember, the great Woman I felt, for most of an Hour together, fought and
strove against the Testimony, sometimes looking up in my Face with a pale, and
then with a more ruddy Complexion; but the Strength of the Truth increased, and
the Lord's mighty Power began to shake the People within and without Doors; but
she who was looked upon as a Deborah by these People, was loath to lose her
outside Religion, or the Appearance thereof: When she could no longer contain,
she submitted to the Power of Truth, and the Doctrines thereof, and lifted up
her Voice and wept: Oh! then the universal Cry and Brokenness of Heart and
Tears was wonderful! From this Time I do not remember one Word that I spoke in
Testimony, it was enough that I could keep upon the true Bottom, and not be
carried away with the Stream above my Measure.

I might add much more concerning this Day's Work, but I intend not to say any
thing to the Praise of the Creature, but to the Renown of the mighty Name of
the Lord of Hosts, and let all Flesh lie as in the Dust for ever; for while I
continued speaking in this State, as beforementioned, and thus swallowed up in
the internal Presence of Christ, where there was no want of Power, Wisdom nor
Utterance, I spoke but a Sentence and stopped, and so on for some Time: I have
since thought of John's being in the Spirit on the Lord's Day. If it had been a
State to have been continued in, I am of the mind, I should not have been
sensible of Weariness, neither of Hunger or Pain. This is a Mystery to many,
yet these are faithful and true Sayings, thou may read that can; but there
are none who can know the white Stone and new Name, but they who have it; there
are none who stand upon Mount Sion with Harps of God in their Hands, but only
such as have come through great Tribulations, and have washed their Garments
and made them white in the Blood of the Lamb; to these are the Seals of the
Book of the Mysteries of the glorious Kingdom opened; these are called out of
Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People; these are redeemed out of the fallen and
earthly State of old Adam, into the living, heavenly and spiritual State in
Christ the second Adam; these cry holy; the other Part of the Children of Men
cry unholy, because they are not willing to cast down their Crowns at the Feet
or Appearance of Christ in their own Souls; although such, with the four Beasts
may cry, come and see, yet are they not properly qualified to (...) ship the
Lord God and the Lamb before his Throne, as the four and twenty Elders did, and
as all do, and will do, who worship God in his holy Temple in Spirit and in
Truth, according to his own Appointment; who are not tied up to the Canons,
Creeds, Systems and Dictates of Men, much of which is beaten out of the Wisdom,
Parts, and natural Comprehension of earthly fallen Man.

I return from this, which may seem a mysterious Digression, to the other Part
of what did happen concerning the Meeting, and come now to the breaking up
thereof; and as extreme Heats often end in extreme Cold, and as great Heights
frequently center (as to Man in this Capacity) in great Depths, and great
Plenty in great Poverty, which I have often seen to be good in order to keep
the Creature low, in Fear, and in a Dependence upon the Lord, I soon fell into
such a Condition that I was like to die away; and when it was so, I with my
Companion made a Motion to break up the Meeting, but could not for some time,
for they sat weeping universally; then I told the Meeting, especially such as
were near me, that if I should faint away, I would not have them to be
surprised at it; for I was much concerned lest that should hurt these tender
People; my Life was not dear to me in comparison of the Worth of the Souls of
the Children of Men; but all this did not break up the Meeting: But after some
time Mary Starbuck stood up, and held out her Hand, and spoke tremblingly and
said, All that ever we have been building, and all that ever we have done, is
all pulled down this Day, and this is the everlasting Truth; or very near these
Words. Then she arose, and I observed that she, and as many as could well be
seen, were wet with Tears from their Faces to the fore sk^rts of their
Garments, and the Floor was as though there had been a Shower of Rain upon it;
but Mary, that worthy Woman, said to me, when a little come to consider the
poor State that I was in, Dear Child, what shall I do for you? I said, a little
would do for me; if thou can get me something to drink that is not strong but
rather warm, it may do well: So she did, and I went unto her Son's, where my
Clothes were, that I might shift me, for I felt Sweat in my Shoes as I walked.

I mention this partly for the sakes of such of my Brethren, who may be at any
time in the like Case, to take care to keep out of the Cold, and beware of
drinking that which is cold, neither is Brandy good, for it feeds too much upon
the weakened Vitals; but in all Things endeavor to possess your Vessels in
Sanctification and Honor: And as it is not in Man's Power to make the Vessel
clean nor prepare it, therefore if the Lord does (with thy Obedience through
the Work of his Grace and holy Spirit) fit thy Vessel for his Work and Service,
take this Caution; see that thou neither destroy, defile, nor hurt the same.
But it may be, some or other have done all these, some one way and some another.

I remember Peleg Slocum (before mentioned) said after this Meeting, that the
like he was never at; for he thought the Inhabitants of the Island were shaken,
and most of the People convinced of the Truth: However, a great Convincement
there was that Day, Mary Starbuck was one of the Number, and in a short time
after received a public Testimony, as did also her Son Nathaniel.

After I was somewhat revived, my Companion having a Mind to speak to the
Priest, to know why he did so reflect on him, desired me to go with him, which
I did with several more, and coming to his Door where he was set upon a Bench,
James Bates asked him, why he did so reflect? He replied, he was in a Passion,
and had nothing against him; then James forgave him, and they fell into some
Debate concerning Faith; my Friend urged the Apostle James's Words, which are
these, As the Body is dead without the Spirit, so is Faith without Works. The
Priest said, Dead Faith was nothing, and that it had no Being in the World. I
thought he appeared to be in the Craft; and after they had tugged at it a
while, I said, I found something in my Mind to interpose, if they would hear
me; they both showed a Willingness to hear what I had to say, and then I asked,
what Belief or Faith that was the Devils had? for I did not understand, but
that although they believed there was a God, they remained Devils still;
therefore the Word dead is a proper Word, and properly adapted to that which
any may call Faith and is not operative, but ^^^^^tion that may be received by
Education, by hearing or reading, and not that Faith which works by Love, and
overcomes the World; and because of its not working, being inactive and
useless, is fitly called dead: What do thou say to that? He said, I was too
great a Scholar for him. I replied, there was no great Scholarship in that. He
then invited me to stay all Night, and said I should be as welcome as his own
Children, and he and I would dispute about that between ourselves. I declined
it and showed these Reasons for so doing; If he declined the Debate publicly, I
would not debate it privately, for then these Neighbors of his would want the
Benefit of it; and so we parted, with my saying, as it immediately sprang up in
my Heart, Thou have been a Man in thy young Years that the Lord has been near,
and favored with many Openings, and if thou had been faithful to the Gift of
God, thou might have been serviceable, but thou have been unfaithful, and a
Cloud is come over thee, and thou art laid aside as useless.

I was altogether a Stranger to the State of the Priest, nor had I heard any
thing of him, nor indeed of the State of the Inhabitants of the Island, but
what I heard after mostly from Mary Starbuck; for as we walked from the
Priest's House toward our Quarters, she said, Every thing she now met with,
did confirm her in the Truth; for she knew this was the State of the Priest, as
I had said, she being acquainted with him in his best State, and then he had
fine Openings, and a living Ministry among them, but of late a Cloud was come
over him, and, as I said, he was laid by and useless. She also put me in mind
of something I had said in the Meeting about Election, which as near as I can
remember was thus: I had endeavored to make one in the Election, and one born
again, much the same; for I had laid waste all claim to Election without being
born again; for as Christ was the Chosen or Elect of God, who never fell, could
such who were in the Fall be the Branches of Christ, the pure heavenly Vine? Or
such who were found in the impure State, and in the Degeneracy, by reason of
Sin and wicked Works? Or would Christ be married to a People, and become as
their Husband, who were in an unconverted State? Could this be the true Church
of Christ? Could this be the Lamb's Bride, who had departed from this Spirit,
and was in the Pollutions of the World through Lust, and running after the
Pleasures and Fineries of the World, depending upon Ceremonies, and outside
Things and Elements, which appear not to be essential to our Salvation, neither
do we find Life in them, nor Conversion through them? I was of the Apostle's
Mind, that neither Circumcision nor Uncircumcision avails any thing, but a
new Creature: And what Man in the World can say, that Water (although he may
have been baptized or dipped into the same) has converted him, or changed his
State from a natural to a spiritual, or from a dead to a living State in
Christ? Or, who that have gone through the most celebrated Ceremonies (as some
may account them) had thereby got Dominion over Sin and Satan?

Having thus treated of Things, or to this purpose, among them, I said to Mary,
that she warred and strove against the Testimony for a time: And as near as I
remember, she said their Principle was, That such who believed once in Christ,
were always in him, without Possibility of falling away; and whom he had once
loved, he loved to the End: And it was a Distinction they had given to their
Church, to be called Electarians; and as I said, or near it, she had no mind to
be pulled out of her strong Hold. But when she saw the Glory of Christ, and the
true Church, as the Queen of the South saw Solomon's and the Glory of his
House; and as she had her Questions and Doubts answered, she had no more Spirit
in her, or Doubts or Questions, but openly owned, This is the Truth, this is
the Glory I have heard so much of: That Spirit of doubting and questioning was
swallowed up now, by her hearing and beholding for herself this greater than
Solomon, his Wisdom and Glory, and the great House that he had built (the
Servants, the Attendance, and excellent Order, with the Ascent unto the House
of God, which were all wonderful in Solomon's House, carried in them a lively
Resemblance of Christ, his Power, Glory and Wisdom) as also that Order and Mean
which is seen among his faithful Servants, his Church and People, even such as
our spiritual Solomon rules in and over by his Spirit and Power. Here is
Solomon, or Man of Peace, elsewhere called the Prince of Peace; and as Solomon
ruled in Jerusalem, formerly called Salem, or City of Peace, and indeed over
all Judch, and over all his Tribes, so does Christ in his Kingdom every where
upon the Face of the whole Earth. Learn this, see and know in and for thyself,
that thou art truly translated out of the Kingdom of Death and Darkness into
the Kingdom of Christ, which is a Kingdom of Power, Life, Light, Peace and Joy
in the holy Ghost. I was much bowed down in my Spirit, and in Weakness,
Fasting, and in much Fear; for the more that Truth appears, the more it brings
the Creature into Self-abasement.

A Passage is here revived to my Mind, which was thus: After a large
Yearly Meeting, where were many able Ministers, one of whom was worthy WILLIAM
PENN, who taking me aside after the Meeting, said, The main Part of the Service
of this Day's Work went on thy side, and we saw it, and were willing and easy
to give way to the Truth, though it was through thee, who appears but like a
Shrub; and it is but reasonable the Lord should make use of whom he pleases:
Now, methinks, thou may be cheerful. From which I gathered, that he thought I
was too much inclinable to be cast down; therefore I gave him this true Answer,
I endeavor to keep in a Medium, out of all Extreems, as believing it to be
most agreeable to my Station; with this Remark, the worst of my Times rather
imbittered the best to me: WILLIAM shook his Head, and said with much Respect,
There are many who steer in this Course besides thee, and it is the safest Path
for us to walk in; with several other Expressions which bespoke Affection.

This worthy Man, and Minister of the Gospel, notwithstanding his great
Endowments and excellent Qualifications, yet thought it his place to stoop to
and give way to the Truth, and let the holy Testimony go through whom it might
please the Lord to empower and employ in his Work, although it might be through
contemptible Instruments. I sincerely desire this may prove profitable to those
whom it may concern, and into whose Hands it may come, that the Lord's Work may
be truly minded, and given way unto, when it is opened; for seeing no Man can
open it, let not any strive on the Man's Part to shut the same. I have at times
seen something of this Nature, which has not been altogether to my
Satisfaction; a Word to the Wise may serve, I would hope, and may be sufficient
for a Caution, for what I have written is in the Love of God, and under a
Concern that has been upon my Mind at times, for some Years, to leave behind
me a gentle Caution to my tender Friends of both Sexes, to have an especial
Care in all Things to recommend not only their Gifts, but their Demeanor in
them, as also their Conversations after them, to every Man's Conscience in the
Sight of God, to that you may build up the Lord's House (like the wife Woman)
and always have a great Care, that nothing you say or do may any way tend to
the Hindrance of the Lord's Work, or discourage the Weakest in the Flock of
Christ, but labor to fasten every Stake, and strengthen every Cord of Sion,
and as much as you are capable, build up the Tabernacle in Jerusalem; for as
God is a Spirit, and the Soul of Man is a spiritual Existence, and as the Soul
and Body of Man become sanctified and prepared, as a Temple for the Lord by his
holy Spirit to tabernacle in, the Lord is to such as a Sanctuary to fly to, and
rest in, from Heats and from Storms: Here is the true Church's Rock, and Place
of Defense (to wit) the Name and Power of the mighty God. Oh! that all the
Inhabitants of the Earth were acquainted with this Name, and Rock of Defense,
they would not then be so much overcome, as they are, with the Power of the
Enemy of the Soul, but would live above his Region, which is in the Earth, or
rather, in the earthly Hearts of Men. All you who have escaped the Pollutions
of the World, keep in your Tents, until the Lord moves and leads forward, and
opens the Way, sometimes as in a Wilderness.

Read and understand from whence these Things have their Rise and Original, for
there is the Church's Safety, and its Comeliness too, in abiding in the Truth;
this is your Place of Safety where the Enemy has no Power, where the Wiles of
Satan and Inventions of Man cannot reach, no Enchantment has Power over these,
renowned be the great Name of the Lord now and for ever.

How comfortable, how easy and pleasant are even all the Books, and
Testimonies, and Exhortations, that are given forth in the Spirit, Love and
Life of Christ! yea, the very Company and Conversation of such who are
preserved in the Life, becomes a sweet Savor of divine Life to the Living;
there is Edification, Comfort and Consolation, a strengthening and building up
one of another in the most holy and precious Faith, so that I find the truly
quickened Soul takes great Delight to resort to, and as much as may be,
converse with the awakened and truly quickened Souls who take up the Cross of
Christ daily, and follow him in the Way of Self-denial, although it be a Way
that is much spoken against, by such who know not the Nature and Discipline of
the holy Cross, and despise such who are true Followers of Christ. To feel this
essential Virtue, Seed or Leaven of the Kingdom, or Salt of the Covenant
(Christ) to work so effectually to the restoring of the Powers and Faculties of
the Soul, into the first Rectitude and Purity, that all the Malignity may be
thoroughly purged out, with all the Dross or Tin, which defiles the Man, and
makes him unfit for the Kingdom and for the Service of God, is a great Work.
Neither is the Vessel preserved clean, (when it is in degree cleansed) but
through great Care. Watchfulness and Diligence in attending upon the Lord with
great Devotedness, and Resignation to his Mind and Will in all Things:
Experience has taught us, as well as what we read in the holy Scriptures, that
there are many Combats to go through for such as are engaged in this Warfare,
before the abovesaid State, viz. Deliverance from Sin and Satan, and a
Sabbatical or peaceful Rest in Christ can be obtained to the Soul.

Come thou that love the Light, and bring thy Deeds to the Light, and
believe in the Light, and have thy Body full of Light, by keeping thy Eye
single to God, and in and to all things that may tend to his Glory and thy
Duty; thou will become a Child of the Light, and receive the whole Armor of
Light; this is that which will arm thee on the right Hand and on the left: Put
off thy own Righteousness, which it may be thy Breast has been too much
possessed with, and put on Christ's Righteousness as a Breast Plate, for it
much imboldens in imminent Dangers, and also at approaching Death; wait upon
him that has Power, that thy Feet may be shod with the Preparation of the
Gospel of Peace; so that as the Gospel-Power, and Gospel Ministry, all tend to
gather into the Ways of the Gospel and of Virtue, thou may not fail to be a
Preacher of Righteousness in thy Walking, and in thy whole Conversation; for
this is one of the good Ends for which the Gospel-Power has reached and
visited thy Soul, viz. to purge it and make it clean; and take care to have
upon thy Head the Helmet of Salvation, which will be a Strength and as a Crown
to thee, not only in thy many Encounters, but more especially in thy last
Encounter with Death; and that thou may have Faith as a Shield to put on,
that thou may overcome the World and have Victory; and above all things, take
to thyself the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, that through this
excellent Armor of Proof, thou may be able to quench all the fiery Darts and
Temptations of the Devil.

If thou art a Soldier of Christ, this is thy Armor; these are thy
Accoutrements which fit thee for thy Vocation, as a Follower of the Lamb
through many Encounters with thy Enemies, which Armor will give thee the
Victory, and bring thee through many Tribulations, which is the Way to the
Kingdom of Heaven.

Now leaving the Eastern Parts of New England, and these fine tender People on
Nantucket Island, with fervent Supplications and Prayers to the Lord of Heaven
and Earth, (...) he would prosper his blessed Work of Conversion which he had
begun amongst them, and in all such upon the Face of the whole Earth, in the
next Place I came to Lynn, to Samuel Collings, where I had not been long before
I met with an unusual Exercise, which I had expected for some Time would fall
upon me, viz.

Having heard of George Keith's Intention of being at Lynn Monthly Meeting the
next Day, (this Lynn, as near as I remember, lies between Salem in the East
Part and Boston) the Evening coming on, as I was writing to some Friends in old
England, one came in haste to desire me to come down, for George Keith was come
to the Door, and a great Number of People and a Priest with him, and was
railing against Friends exceedingly. I said, Inasmuch as I understand this Lynn
Meeting is, although large, mostly a newly convinced People, I advise you to be
swift to hear, but slow to speak, for George Keith has a Life in Argument; and
let us as a People seek unto, and cry mightily to the Lord, to look down upon
us, and help us for his Name's sake, for our Preservation, that none may be
hurt.

The Country was much alarmed; for, as Friends said, George Keith had given
Notice two Weeks beforehand, that he intended to be at this Monthly Meeting,
and the People were in great Expectation to hear the Quakers run down, for
George Keith had boasted much of what he would prove against Friends. So after
some Pause, Retirement and fervent seeking to the Lord for Direction and
Counsel in this important Affair, I went to the Rails, and leaned my Arms on
them near George Keith's Horse's Head, as he sat on his Back, and many People
were with him; but the few Friends who were come stood with me in the Yard. My
fervent Prayers were to the Lord, that if he gave me any thing to speak to
George, it might go forth in that Power and Wisdom which was able to wound that
wicked Spirit in which he appeared, and boas^ed over Friends after the
following manner, crying, Is here a Man that is a Scholar? Is here a Man that
understands the Languages amongst you? Is so, I will dispute with him. I told
him, It was probable that the English Tongue was most generally understood and
used amongst that People, and therefore I thought it was the best to keep to
it. He went on and said, that he was come in the Queen's Name to gather the
Quakers from Quakerism, to the Mother Church, the good old Church of England,
and that he intended to exhibit in our Meeting on the Morrow these Charges
following against us, which, he said, he could prove we were guilty of, out of
our Friends Books, viz. Errors, Heresies, damnable Doctrines and Blasphemies:
Look, said he, to answer for yourselves, for if you do not, the Auditory will
conclude, that what I exhibit against you is true.

I was roused up in my Spirit in a holy Zeal against his wicked Insults and
great Threatenings, and said to him, That it was the Fruit of Malice and Envy,
and that he was to us but as an heathen Man and a Publican;; (but more of this
anon.) Then he began to cast what Slurs and Odiums he could upon Friends, with
such bitter Invectives as his Malice could invent. I stood with an attentive
Ear and a watchful Mind; for as I stood leaning upon the Rails, with no small
Concern upon my Mind, I felt the Lord's Power arise, and by it my Strength was
renewed in the inner Man, and Faith, Wisdom and Courage with it, so that the
Fear of Man, with all his Parts and Learning, was taken from me; and in this
State George Keith appeared to me but as a little Child, or as nothing:
Renowned be the most excellent Name of the Lord, now and for ever. But this
great Champion ( Goliath like, at least in his Mind) I supposed feared not any
there; he overlooked us all, and in the Pride of his Heart disdained us; but
the Lord of Heaven and Earth looked down upon us in a very acceptable Time, and
helped us for his Name's sake, and covered our Heads in the Day of Battle:
Glorisied be his great Name for ever.

I have sometimes thought to omit some Part of this Account concerning George
Keith, but I remember it opened very clearly in my Mind then, and I said to
him, That the Hand of the Lord was against him, and that he would pour forth
Contempt upon him, for his Disobedience and Wickedness.

But to return to his Reflections; he said, the Quakers pretend to be against
all Ceremonies, but he could prove that they used many Ceremonies, as taking
one another by the Hand, and Men saluting one another, and Women doing so to
one another, and, he said, that Women did salute Men; yea, they had done it to
him; as it was generally understood by those who heard him, which I thought not
worthy my Notice, (but more of this anon.) He went on and said, the Quakers
pretended to be against all Persecution, but they were not clear, for the
Quakers in Pennsylvania and the Jerseys had persecuted him, and would have
hanged him, but that there was some Alteration in the Government.

Then came out one of my Arrows which cut and wounded him deep: I said, George
that is not true. Upon that the Priest drew near and appeared very brisk, and
said, I had as good as charged Mr. Keith (as he called him) with a Lie. I
replied, Give me Time, and I will prove that which George said, was not true,
and then thou and he may take your Advantage to rescue him from that Epithet of
a Liar if you can. The Priest said, I knew not Mr. Keith: I replied, If he knew
him as well as I did, he would be ashamed to be there as an Abettor of him. The
Priest got away, and troubled me no more in all the Engagements that George and
I had afterward (although the said Priest was with him.) Then I demanded of
George, What Way our Friends proceeded against him, and what Measures they
took, as he would insinuate, to bring him to the Gallows? But I perceived Fear
began to surprise the Hypocrite, and he thinking by my Boldness I was an
Inhabitant of ^^ose Parts, and knew his Abuse to Friends in these Provinces,
and their peaceable Behavior toward him, was willing to let the matter drop,
and demanded my Name, which was told him. I then asked, How he could have a
Face to urge such a notorious Untruth in the View of that People who were much
Strangers to, and ignorant of the Troubles and Differences, chiefly created by
him, among Friends in those Parts?

This Meeting (as before mentioned) being generally newly convinced of the
Truth, therefore I urged to have him to come to the Particulars of Friends
Proceedings against him, that even for very Shame, among those Strangers he
would set forth as far as he could in Truth, the steps Friends had taken in
persecuting him, as he pretended; but he would not meddle in the least with it.
Then I showed him, and the People, the Falsity of his Charge, and the
Wickedness of his Spirit, and the Peaceableness of Friends Behavior toward
him, and what great Affronts and Provocations they had put up with at his hand,
as I had it from those who were Eye and Ear Witnesses of it: For, as I showed
George Keith, I had searched into the Bottom of these Matters, and heard that
when he stood before Governors and Assembly Men in their Courts of Judicature,
when they were met about the Affairs of the three Provinces, he has tore open
his Buttons and told them, His Back tickled for a Whipping, and could they not
cut him into Collops, and fry, and eat them with Salt; and that he scorned they
should wipe his Shoes: All which, with much more, I told him I could prove
against him. And when he saw he could not provoke Friends to give him some
condign Punishment, which I thought, as I said to him, none but Friends would
have spared, especially, when his Back tickled so much for a Whipping; but they
like Men of Peace and Religion overlooked it all, and he like a Man full of
Malice, rather than want something to slur and blacken Friends with, writ a
Letter I know not where, but dated it from Bridlington Prison in West-Jersey.
It must have been dated on the outside of the Prison, the Doors being locked,
so that he could not get into it; yet this went current far off, that George
Keith was in Prison; consequently by Friends Procurement, they being chief at
the Helm of Government in those three Provinces.

I asked, What he had to say to all this, for it was all provable? He did not
object one Word against what I had said, but vainly hoping for better Success
relating to his Undertaking in Old England, finding me (as he might suppose) so
well versed in the American Affairs, hoped (no doubt) that I had been more
ignorant of the Affairs in Britain: But poor Man, he sped as ill there also;
for he boastingly said, Since it pleased God to open his Eyes to see into the
worst of the Quakers Errors; although, he said, Charity did oblige him to
construe every thing at the best whilst in Fellowship with them, but since they
were so opened, as he said, he had been instrumental to bring from Quakerism,
to the good old Mother Church in Old England five hundred People. I replied,
that is not true: If he rightly considered what he had done in Old England, he
had little cause to boast; for, I said, I thought about as many Persons as he
spoke of Hundreds, would make up the Number there; and if there was occasion, I
could name all or most of them: And withal told him, that some of those few,
whilst among us, were grown to be neither honorable nor comfortable to us. I
urged George, if he could, to name or make appear more in Number than I had
mentioned, that he had so gathered, as he had falsely said. This was a very
great Stroke upon him, and put him to a stand.

He then began to ask of my Country, and from whence I came? With the Account
of which I humoured him; yet withal put him in mind of his great Brag, and
importuned him to make something appear toward that great matter he had done
in Old England, even for very shame; for I was ashamed for him, that a Man of
his Learning, Parts and Pretensions, should so expose himself; but he went no
farther about it. Then I showed to the People what sort of a Man he was, (as
they themselves could not but see, who were impartial) and that he was not
worthy of our Notice; for he cared not what he said, so that he could but
calumniate and abuse us.

By this Time he appeared somewhat glutted with the sharp Sword and keen Arrow
the Lord gave me, which cut and wounded deep, so that from this Time I did not
find in our after Encounters, he appeared at any time so bold and desperately
hardy, but rather expressed himself, although very wickedly, yet in a softer
Tone. He was now for being gone, threatening us with what he would do on the
Morrow; but I reminded him, that he was to us as an heathen Man or a Publican,
and that what he exhibited against us, being but the Fruits of Wrath and Envy,
as such we slighted and trod it under our Feet as Dirt, and rather desired his
Absence than his Company: So away he went, only telling us, he would be with us
in the Morning. we understood by it, that he intended to be with us at the
Friends house, the Meeting House being about a Quarter of a Mile from our
Lodgings.

The Evening coming on, the neighboring Presbyterian Women fell hard upon our
Women Friends about their saluting Man, which George Keith had charged upon
them, as was generally understood in the Plural, and this appeared as a
Confirmation, as they alleged, because when charged, I made no Reply to it, as
I had done to all or most other Charges, and had overthrown Mr. Keith, as they
said, so that he was not able to stand before me. They ought to have said
before the Lord in the first place: But how the Women might clear themselves of
that Reflection was the present Business. I said, I thought it would be the
best, at a suitable Time in the Morning when George Keith was come, that by
handsomely bringing the matter over him, they might learn what Women they were
who saluted him, and so clear themselves from the Reflection cast upon them;
for, I said, perhaps he will limit it to some of his near Kindred (as Wife,
Mother, Sister, Daughter) which may serve for a Salvo in this present Case; for
I did not know of any such general Practice in any Place where I had been, and
I had visited most of the meetings in England, Scotland, and Wales. So in the
Morning when George, with two Priests, and many People were come, with some
Friends, who filled the House, a Woman Friend stood up and brought the Matter
discreetly over George Keith. But when she put the Question in the Plural,
(Women) he shifted the Term and said, he did not say Women. I desired the
Friend to call to her Neighbors who heard what George Keith had said the last
Evening, and were now present, how they understood the Word? One like a wise
and just Man said, He would do Justice to every Man; and he understood that
Geoge said Women; and many said to the same purpose, but none to the contrary.
The Friends asked me, How I understood the Word? As being a North Countryman, I
might know better the North or Scotch Dielact than they. I replied, They had a
broad way of expressing the Word Woman, rather sounding it like the plural, but
I understood it Women as the above mentioned discreet Man had said.

The next Question she put to him was, What Woman? he answered, A good old
motherly Woman that was gone to Heaven many Years ago. Then she asked, What
Country Woman? He replied, A Scotch Woman. The Friend said, It was very well
that he had cleared all the World of that Fault (if it might be so termed) but
Scotland, and the Woman dead many Years ago. The Women Friends were greatly
satisfied, and glad they were so finely discharged of that which some counted a
foul Reflection, and especially before their zealous Neighbors the
Presbyterians, who (as the Friends said) probably might have twitted them with
it, whether the Matter was true or False, if it had not been cleared up; but,
as I said to George, it was a Reflection for Reflection's sake: For I was
willing to set every thing that was wrong (as far as I was capable) in its
proper Light, that Friends and others, of all Persuasions and Qualities who
were present, might see Things as they really were, and not be deceived; and I
had much Satisfaction in so doing. And inasmuch as I was engaged in the Defense
of the Truth, it appeared the most clear to me, to load him with his own Lies,
Mistakes and Wickedness, and to do what we did, as much as in us lay, in the
Lord's mighty Power; for he appeared to me, like to the Angels who kept not
their first State.

Matters being thus far gone through, and the Meeting-time drawing on, I was in
some Concern of Mind, lest any should be hurt by either hearing or answering
George Keith, he having a great Propensity to jangling; it therefore opened in
my Mind to ask him a Question, withal reminding him, that he was but to us as
an heathen Man or a Publican, yet he might, if he pleased, answer me the
Question, which was, Whether he was always sound in the fundamental Doctrines
of Christianity, yea or nay? Upon which he sat a considerable Time in Silence,
of which I was truly glad, my Spirit being much bowed under the Apprehension I
had, of the weighty Exercise that was likely to attend the approaching Meeting.
But before we parted, George stood up, and taking his Staff in his Hand by the
Middle, said, While he was a Quaker, he thought, as Paul thought, that he had
the Spirit of God, and when he had the Spirit of God, then he wrote sound
Things, but when he had it not, then he wrote unsound Things. I asked, Whether
these unsound Things he wrote were in Fundamentals, yea, or nay? If not in
Fundamentals, then my Question remained firm and untouched. He would have gone
from the matter, but I reminded him of it again, as I supposed he foresaw that
he could not answer it, but by bringing a Stroke upon himself, for if he had
owned his being unsound, I had it under his own Hand, in a Book written after
he left Friends, that he was always sound, etc. And if he had said, he was
always sound in the Fundamentals, as before, then I intended to have asked, why
he left us? For he advocated the same orthodox Principles which we believed and
taught; but we ended quietly, and prepared to go to the great Meeting, for by
this time many Friends and People were come, and coming from every Quarter, to
see and hear how Matters would go between the poor Quakers, and this great
Champion in his Heart George Keith, for I thought he most resembled the great
Goliath of Gath, who defied the Armies of the living God, of any I had ever yet
seen in all my Travels, in a religious respect.

Now to the Meeting we went; George Keith, with two Priests, and a great many
People gathered together of several Professions and Qualities into one Body,
and Friends and some friendly People into another Body; and as we came near to
the Meeting House, I sto^d still, and took a View of the People, and it
appcared to me as if two Armies were going to engage in Battle: There appeared
with George Keith Men of considerable Estates, Parts, and Learning, and we
appeared like poor Shrubs; and, under a Sense of our present State, I had like
to have been dismayed, and my Faith had even like to have failed me; but I
cried mightily to the God and Fountain of all our tender Mercies, that he would
look down upon us, and help us in this Time of great Exercise, which was not
hid from him; but his penetrating Eye saw, and his watchful Providence attended
us, blessed be his Name for ever. I continued my fervent Prayers and
Intercessions to the Lord of Hosts, that he would arise for his great Name's
sake, and work for us that Day, that the Enemies of Truth might not triumph or
vaunt over us, and that none of these tender Plants, which he had brought to
the saving Knowledge of the Truth, might be hurt.

I had no sooner thus heartily sought to the Lord, but I felt renewed Strength
come upon me, and the Fear of Man was taken away from me, and I saw evidently
that Truth would have the Victory that Day, and my Faith and Confidence was
greatly strengthened in the Lord. These breathings forth of my Spirit to the
Lord were in secret, without Words to be heard by Men, but the Lord hears and
knows the Distress and Language of the Spirit.

Being thus encouraged in myself, it arose in my Heart to speak to Friends
before we went into the Meeting House, and I advised them to be swift to hear
and slow to speak, and that what was spoken might be in the Lord's Power, for
that wounds George the most, and slays that wicked and ranting Spirit in him,
more than all the Wisdom of Words without it; and let us maintain our Testimony
of Denial against him, and endeavor to get together into one Body, that we may
be an Help and Strength one to another; and let every one who knows the Lord,
cry mightily unto him, that his living Power and Presence may be amongst us,
and I believed the Lord would not suffer any to be hurt. So the Meeting
gathered, and immediately after, George stood up to tell us (as before) that he
was come in the Queen's Name to gather Quakers from Quakerism, to the good old
Mother Church, the Church of England (as he called it) and that he could prove
out of our own Books, that we held Errors, Heresies, damnable Doctrines and
Blasphemies; with a Threat to look to ourselves to answer, or else the Auditory
would conclude, that what he exhibited against us was true. I expected some of
the elder Friends would say something to him, but none did; and I having a deep
Concern upon my Mind, lest Truth, or the Friends of Truth, should suffer through
our Mismanagement, and such as waited for Occasion, might have an Occasion
administered by us against ourselves; I say, under this Concern of Mind I stood
up, and signified to the People what manner of Man George Keith was;
notwithstanding he had walked many Years amongst us, yet toward the latter end
of his so walking with us, he grew very troublesome, by reason of a contentious
Spirit which did possess him: and after much Labor and exercising of Patience,
and extending of Love toward him; in order to recover and reclaim him, all
that Labor of Love and much Forbearance would not avail, but he still
persisted in the Work of Contention and Disturbance. Then he was publicly
disowned, and testified against by us, as a Person with whom we had no Unity or
Fellowship: And being thus cast out, he became to us (agreeable to the Sayings
of Jesus Christ) as an Heathen Man or a Publican; and being thus disjointed, to
expose us, what lay in his Power, to all sorts of People, he chose printing
against us; wherein he has much abused us, in leaving out many times the
explanatory Parts of Sentences, and coining Words to make the Meaning appear
different from what was designed, and indeed, from what was most fair and
genuine: Therefore, some of our Friends found themselves concerned to follow
him in Print, for the clearing us from what he, through Envy, would have
willingly fastened upon us, and to return his Selfcontradictions,
Misinterpretations, and Misapplications of our Writings upon himself, and to
clear our own Innocence, and manifest the Perverseness and Wickedness of his
Spirit: Neither do we, as a People, hold ourselves to be under any Obligation
to follow him into foreign Parts of the World, to answer his Arraignments and
Charges, not being conscious to ourselves that we hold any thing contrary to
sound and orthodox Doctrine; and also knowing that what he exhibits against us,
is the Fruit of Envy and Malice, as such we reject it and trample it under our
Feet; and were it not for your sakes, who are Strangers to these Things, we
should take no further Notice of George Keith than to slight and reject him as
a Man that cares not what he says, nor is he worthy of our Notice.

Then pausing a little, George being quiet, a Friend stood up with a short, but
living Testimony, and then my Companion; all this in much Weight and with good
Demonstration. After them it pleased the Lord to open my Mouth, I think in as
much Strength, Clearness and Demonstration as ever, beginning with the
following Words, In that Way you call Heresy do we worship the God of our
Fathers, believing all Things that are written concerning Jesus Christ, both as
to his Godhead and Manhood; giving a summary Account of his Birth, working of
Miracles, some of his Doctrine, Sufferings and Death, Ascension and
Glorification, the Coming of the Spirit of Truth, or Comforter, to lead all
those who receive, believe, and obey it, into all Truth: Having great Openings
concerning the Law and Prophets, and the Beginning, Service and End of the
Ministration of John the Baptist. The People appeared very much down and
attentive, for the Lord's heavenly baptizing Power was amongst us that Day: It
was thought, many were there who had not been at any of our Meetings of Worship
before, and the Presence of the Priests there, opened a Door for all the rest.

I being clear, left them unto the Grace of God, and unto their free Teacher
Christ, whose heavenly Power in the Appearance of his Spirit, the last and
lasting Dispensation, was exalted that Day above all the shadowy and typical
Things that ever had been in the World: A good Meeting it was, and Friends were
mutually comforted and edified in the internal Presence of the Lord.

The Priest of this Place, whose Name was Sheppard, before my Mouth was opened
in Testimony, made Preparation to write, and when I began to speak, he had his
Hat upon his Knee, and his Paper upon its Crown, and Pen and Ink in his Hands,
and made many Motions to write, but wrote nothing; as he began so he ended,
without writing at all. And as Friends entered the Meeting House in the Lord's
Power, even that Power which cut Rahab, and wounded the Dragon, which had been
at work, kept down in a good degree the wrong Spirit in George, for he appeared
much down; but this busy Priest called to him several Times to make his Reply
to what I had spoke. After some Time I said to the Priest, in Behalf of the
Meeting, that he might have Liberty to make Reply. He proposed to have another
Day appointed for a Dispute; to which I said, if he did make a voluntary
Challenge, which he should not say we put him upon, we or some of us (meaning
Friends) if a Day and Place were agreed upon, should find it our Concern to
answer him as well as we could. He said, he would have Mr. Keith to be with
him: I told him, if he should, and meddled in the Dispute, if I was there, I
should reject him for Reasons before assigned. When the Priest had said this
and somewhat more, an Elder of the Presbyterian Congregation clapped him on the
Shoulder, and bid him sit down; so he was quiet, and then stood up George
Keith, and owned he had been refreshed amongst us that Day, and had heard a
great many sound Truths, with some Errors, but that it was not the common
Doctrine which the Quakers preached.

I then stood up and said, I had something to say to obviate what George Keith
would insinuate; for his Drift was to infuse an Opinion into them, that the
Quakers did not commonly preach up Faith in the Manhood of Christ, as I had
done that Day; I appealed to the Auditory, whether they thought there was a
Necessity frequently to press a Matter so universally received amongst
Christians, as Faith in the Manhood of Christ was? Yet we, as a People, had so
often and clearly demonstrated our Faith in the Manhood of Christ, both in our
Testimonies and Writings, as might satisfy any unbiassed Person, or such who
were not prejudiced against us; and we know not of any People who believe more
scripturally in the Manhood of Christ than we do: But inasmuch as the Grace,
Light and holy Spirit, is highly concerned in the Work of Man's Salvation, as
well as what Christ did for us without us, and this being yet much a Mystery to
many called Christians, it pleases God to open, in the Course of our Ministry,
into the Meaning and Mystery thereof, and to press the latter more than the
former. To which George made no Reply, but began to exhibit his Charges against
us (as mentioned before) and said, he could prove them out of our Friends
Books, naming George Fox and Edward Borough, etc. He had in a Paper a great
many Quotations out of Friends Books, and a young Man with him had many Books
in a Bag, out of which, he said, he would prove the Charges he was about to
exhibit against us.

He was now crowded up into the Gallery between me and the Rail, with a Paper
in his Hand; and I standing over him, and being taller, could see his
Quotations and his Paraphrases upon them, on which I told him loudly, that all
the Meeting might hear, That he offered Violence to that Sense and
Understanding which God had given him, and he knew in his Conscience, we were
not that People, neither were our Friends Writings either damnable or
blasphemous, as he through Envy endeavored to make the World believe; and that
he would not have Peace in so doing, but Trouble from the Lord in his
Conscience. I spoke in the Lord's dreadful Power, and George trembled so much
as I seldom ever saw any Man do: I pitied him in my Heart, yet, as Moses said
once concerning Israel, I felt the Wrath of the Lord go forth against him:
George said, Do not judge me; I replied, the Lord judges, and all who are truly
one in Spirit with the Lord, cannot but judge thee. So he gave over, and it
appearing a suitable time to break up the Meeting, Friends parted in great
Love, Tenderness and Brokenness of Heart; for the Lord's mighty Power had been
in and over the Meeting from the beginning to the end thereof, glorified and
renowned be his most excellent Name, now and for ever, for his Mercies are many
to those that love and fear him who is the Fullness of all Good.

This Meeting was not only for Worship, but also for Business, as I said to the
People at our parting; it was Friends Monthly Meeting, in which their Poor,
Fatherless, and Widows, were taken Care of, and such other Things as concern
them as a People. Two Friends were desired to stay, to hear what George had to
say to them who remained, which said two Friends gave an Account to us
afterward, that George said to the People after we were gone, that the Quakers
had left none to dispute with him but an Ass and a Fool; when I heard it, I
said, could you not have replied, An Ass was once made sufficient to reprove
the Madness of the Prophet.

George called to see me the next Day, and said, You had the Advantage over me
Yesterday, for you persuaded me to be quiet until you had done, and then you
would not stay to hear me; neither indeed were we under any Obligation so to
do: I told him, I hoped that Truth would always have the Advantage over those
who opposed it; and so we parted, but met again upon Rhode Island; the Governor
of which Place, who was a friendly Man, having heard of my. Intention of coming
thither, ordered the Deputy Governor, when I came, to have me to him, which he
did; and when he saw me at the Door, and after Enquiry heard my Name, he took
me by the Hand and led me like a Brother, or rather more like a tender Father,
into a Room, setting me down by him, and then began to say, I have heard much
of you, and desired to see you long, and am glad you are here. I finding him
near me in Spirit, was very open in my Mind to him, and answered him with much
Clearness and Satisfaction. I remember he asked, Whether I thought the Sourness
in the Minds of the Presbyterians against us, was not rather abated? I told
him, I did believe it was; and if our Friends did but observe to walk wisely,
and live up to what they professed, they would overcome it all. He said, that
was the way, and there was not another comparable to it; and, as he said, and I
believe it was so, he had no other view in sending for me, but to manifest his
Respecls to me, and to do me any Service that lay in his Power: I told him, I
was sensible of his Love, and wished I could be capable of retaliating that
which in Gratitude his Kindness to me called for: He said, he desired no more
than when I came that way I would visit him, if he was living. I told him, I
intended so to do, if ever it was my Lot to come there again. I then desired he
would be at the Meeting next Day, George Keith proposing to be there, in all
likelihood it would be very large; which he promised he would, and accordingly
came.

George made little Disturbance in the beginning of the Meeting, but commanded
the Governor to quiet the Quakers: A Priest said, Mr. Keith, you ought not to
command the Governor, but entreat him; well then, he entreated the Governor to
quiet the Quakers that he might be heard; whereupon the Governor, like a Man of
Justice and Wisdom, stood up and said, It was not in his Power to quiet the
Quakers; inasmuch as the House is theirs, and they have appointed the Meeting,
it is but reasonable they should have their Liberty, and if they be willing,
when they have done, you have your Liberty to say what you have to say to those
who will stay to hear you: So the Governor being next me, leaned his Hand upon
me, and went away in a sober Manner. George was quiet, and we had a good
Meeting, and so parted.

After most of the Friends were gone, a Friend and I went to the Meeting House
Door, to hear what George said; he held his Bible in his Hand, and said it was
promised, that the Gospel should be preached unto every Creature under Heaven;
but if it was truly translated, it would be in every Creature, ( not in every
Creature as Horse, Cow, etc. but in every rational Creature of Mankind:) And
then their Meeting broke up in Confusion.

My next Remove was to Long Island, where I met with Thomas Story and John
Rodman; John desired Thomas and me to be assistant to him in preparing a
Writing against George Keith, when he came to Flushing Meeting upon the
asoresaid Island, which Writing was to this Effect, viz.

Whereas Colonel West, an Inhabitant in these Parts, who died and made Miles
Forster a Trustee, gave by Will a considerable Sum of Money to poor Friends of
London, which Money was ordered by the Testator to be put into the Hands of
some faithful Friends of the aforesaid City of London, to distribute as above.
A true Copy of which Will we obtained, and at the Meeting made it fairly appear
to George Keith's Face, that he had wronged the Poor in receiving Fifty Pounds
of the aforesaid Money of Miles Forster, as appeared under Miles's own Hand;
which George did not deny when he was charged with it in the Meeting, as
knowingly to have robbed the Poor; it being made fairly appear, that George
Keith had no Right to meddle with the Money, neither as a faithful Friend, nor
yet as a poor Friend of London, because he was tae^ in America; and what made
him more incapable of claiming any part of it, was his being got into the
Spirit of Strife and Enmity against Friends, and therefore, before they could
hear his Charges, he ought to have first laid down the Money, or given such
Security as Friends approved of; neither of which he was capable of doing: So
he was ^lighted by all or most of the People, as well as by Friends, and this
blocked up his Way so much that we had little or no Trouble with him in that
Part of the World: But the Lord wrought for his Name's Sake, and the
Preservation of his tender People, Praises and Honor to be given to his great
Name, now and for ever. Thus ended this Engagement betwixt a poor Servant of
Christ, and a grand Apostate, who appeared to fight against Reason, Sense and
Conscience. Think not, my Friends, the Account too long, for it has seemed to
me, for some time, a Debt due to my Brethren, and a piece of Justice to the
Memory of George Keith, for his Wickedness, Revolting, and sad Apostasy. Few
there are who can believe how great the Power of Darkness and Wickedness of
that Mind and Spirit was, which possessed and breathed through him; so great it
was, that even the considerate and sober People said, they did not think that
George Keith had been so wicked a Man as they now found he was upon Trial.
Courteous Friend and Reader, hold fast that which thou have received, that none
may take thy Crown, for it is laid up in Store for the Righteous only, and such
who hold out to the End, in the same pure Righteousness which is of Christ
wrought and continued in Man, by the Operation and Indwelling of his holy
Spirit, as Man abides in Subjection and Obedience to the Leadings and Dictates
thereof.

I told George, that I was much ashamed of his complimenting great People; for
I observed he sometimes said thee and thou, and sometimes you, and Sir;
sometimes put his Hat off, and sometimes kept it on: I told him, before I would
be so unhandy, if I intended to be ceremonious, I would have gone to School a
while, before I would shame myself as he had done. If I have not wrote the very
Words, in all my Accounts in the preceding Pages, I have the Substance: And
for a Conclusion, I had to say to George Keith, The Hand of the Lord was
against him, and would follow him, unless he repented.

This Account carries in it an Admonition to us, and to Friends in future Ages,
into whose Hands it may come, to beware of letting in the Spirit of Envy,
Prejudice, and Pride of Heart, which I clearly saw was that which, with too
much leaning to his natural Abilities and Learning, was his Overthrow, he not
keeping to the Lord's holy Spirit, the Life and Strength of his faithful
People, and the Key of true Knowledge, the good Remembrancer, and Leader into
all Truth, which the Lord sees meet in his wisdom to open and lead us into;
without the Help of which Anointing and holy Spirit, we are apt to be cold and
forgetful in our Duties toward God, and also in our Love and Duties one to
another: but as the Measure of this Spirit is faithfully kept to, and improved,
we grow more and more fruitful in every good Work and Word, to the Glory of God
and Comfort of our Souls, and, as the Salt of the Earth, help to season those
who are not seasoned.

When I was in the Yearly Meeting upon Rhode Island, there was a Query
concerning what Friends might do, in case there should be a Lay or Tax laid
upon the Inhabitants for building some Fortifications, and to provide Men and
Arms for the Security of the Island? Such a thing being then in Agitation, he,
who was one of the chief Friends concerned in Church Affairs, would have me
give an Account what we did in the like Case in England; for, he said, they in
that Country looked upon themselves but as the Daughter, and Friends here in
Old England as their Mother, and they were willing to act consistent with us as
far as they could, and would know how we did there in that Matter, whether we
could pay to that Tax which was for carrying on a vigorous War against France?
I was unwilling to meddle with it, as I said; but the Meeting waited a
considerable time for my Answer (as one told me) and was not willing to go
forward without it; at last, when I could not well do otherwise, I signified to
that large Meeting, That I had heard the Matter debated both in superior and
inferior Meetings, and privately, and the most general Result was this; Friends
did not see an effectual Door opened to avoid the Thing, that Tax being mixed
with the other Taxes; although many Friends are not so easy as they could
desire: Neither have we any further Sway in the Government, than only giving
our Voices for such as are concerned therein; therefore, as Things appear to
me, there is a great Disparity between our Circumstances and yours here; for
you have a great Interest here, and a great Share in the Government, and
perhaps may put such a Thing by in voting, considering the Body of Friends, and
such as are friendly, whom you have an Interest in; therefore look not for Help
from the Mother, wherein she is not capable of helping herself, and thereby
neglect your own Business; but mind your own Way in the Truth, and look not
out. Friends appeared well satisfied with these Distinctions, and it gave me
some Ease, in that I had not hurt any.

During my stay in one of the Jerseys, a great Weight, more than usual, seized
upon my Spirit, as I sat in a Meeting, and under a Sense of the same my Cries
ascended unto the Lord, the Fountain of all tender Mercies, that he would
please to show me what was the Cause of that great Power of Darkness which did
so oppress my Spirit; and it pleased the Lord to show me, that a Man there had
been guilty of some gross Wickedness; and when it appeared clear to me, to be
required of me to express it publicly, it became a very great Exercise to me,
and some Reasonings I had, before I gave up to make it public to that large
Meeting, of Friends and other People: I labored under it till toward the
Conclusion of the Meeting, but finding my Peace concerned very nearly in the
Matter, I stood up in the Gallery and said, Under a Sense of some gross
Wickedness committed by some Person not far from me, has my Spirit been borne
down; which Wickedness will in a short Time break forth to the Dishonor of
Truth, and Grief of Friends. A great Man who sat in the Gallery by me, started
up and seated himself upon the Rail of the Gallery, with his Eyes fixed on me,
and I fastened, in the Lord's Dread, my Eyes on him, and said, We have a common
Maxim in Old England, Touch a galled Horse's Back, and he will kick, and I am
of the Opinion he that kicks is not clear. He got down as fast as he could out
of my way, for he not only prevented me from the View of the Meeting by setting
there, but his Uncleanness stood much in the way of my Service.

After the Meeting was over, several worthy Friends expressed to me the great
Concern they were under, lest he should cither by Money, or by Subtility,
conceal the Sin and Wickedness, if such was committed; for I found there was a
great Fear and Jealousy in the Minds of Friends, that something was wrong with
the Man, but I was 'till then altogether a Stranger to their Thoughts, and to
the State of the Man; yet I advised that Friends should have a watchful Eye
over him and his Family, for I told Friends, my Spirit was easy in what I had
delivered, and I believed the Evil would not be concealed. So in my Return, his
Housekeeper had brought forth a Child, and charged him with being the Father
of it, which he denied not: Friends then asked me, what they should do in the
Case? I said, Let the Judgment of Truth go forth against all manifest
Wickedness, without respect of Persons, that the ever blessed Truth, and such
as live in it, may be kept clear and in good Esteem before all Men as much as
may be.

Something of the like Exercise I met with in a Meeting in Pennsylvania,
repeating several times what Oppression my Spirit was under, because of some
yet hidden Wickedness, which in a short Time would be brought to light, to the
Blemish of the Truth, and great Trouble to Friends. That very Evening, after
the Meeting, a Women little thought on by Friends to be guilty of such a Crime,
went to a worthy Friend and told him, She was the Woman that had done that
great Wickedness I had so much complained of, and had borne such a great Load
because thereof; and, as the honest Friend said, she wept bitterly, even in the
very Anguish of her Soul. He came twelve Miles the next Day to Philadelphia to
acquaint me with the Matter, and ask my Advice, which I gave to this Effect; If
Friends find upon Enquiry, in the proper Season, that the Woman continues
heartily sorry, and truly penitent for what she has done, for Godly Sorrow
works Repentance, and if from such a hearty and penitent Sense (which is to
be felt beyond Words) she gave forth a Paper against her wicked Doings, not so
much to ingratiate herself into Favor, as for the clearing of Truth and
Friends, and for the Ease and Peace of her own Mind, and took the Blame and
Shame to herself, then Friends may pass it by; if not, Friends must set the
Judgment of Truth over manifest Wickedness, as before mentioned.

I went to visit a Meeting in that Part called North Wales, which had not been
long planted in that Place, where there was a fine tender People, but few
understanding English, Rowland Ellis was my Interpreter; a good Meeting it was,
and Truth was over all: Some, by the Interpreter, expressed their great
Satisfaction in our Visit to that Meeting, which heretofore had not been
counted as Friends, but since that have been taken Notice of, and grown into
good Esteem with the Body of Friends.

I found it much my Work to be concerned in the Discipline of the Church, which
was very low in many Places, yet I found there was a Willingness in many
Friends Minds to be helped in that needful Affair, for surely it is a good
Fence, or a Help to keep the Righteous in, and hurtful and wicked Things and
Doings out, if the same be rightly handled, and extended as it ought to be, in
the Love and Wisdom of God.

There was one Thing I had like to have omitted, which happened when I was in
Rhode Island, viz. one Rogers came thither to offer (as he said) his Gift in
the Yearly Meeting amongst Friends; but they appearing in a great Strait about
him, although he had writ in Behalf of Truth's Principles, and suffered
Imprisonment, and the taking away his Wife from him, and was not so much as
suffered to come to converse with his own Son, but under a Guard or Watch which
was set over him, to hear what passed betwixt them, as he told me and some
other Friends, which Friends said was true; yet, under the Consideration of the
Matter, and Clearness of the Man's Conversation, Friends remained in a Strait
what to do; and desired that I would take the Matter upon me, and reason the
Case with him, and try if I could persuade him to be easy, and not insist upon
any such Thing, as to promise to receive his Gift; for otherwise, he said, he
would go where it would be received. I showed him, that it was a Thing
impracticable among us, and in itself unreasonable, that we should be by any
Pre-engagement obliged to receive that which he might call a Gift, before we
heard it, if he believed he had a Gift, he might speak, and, as the Apostle
said, we might judge: For it was not impossible but he, who was a Scholar and a
wise Man, and had a strong Memory, might have gathered certain Passages out of
the Bible or other Books, with what other Interpretations he might have stored
up, and speak of, and call a Gift, which we could not receive as a real Gift of
the Ministry, which stands in the Spirit and in the Power and if it be such, it
will make way for itself; if not, we cannot receive it. So he went away, and
troubled Friends no more that I heard of.

When I was at William Penn's Country House, called Pennsbury in Pennsylvania,
where I staid two or three Days, on one of which I was at a Meeting and a
Marriage, and much of the other Part of the Time I spent in seeing (to my
Satisfaction) William Penn and many of the Indians, (not the least of them) in
Council and Consultation concerning their former Covenants now again revived
upon William Penn's going away for England; all which was done in much Calmness
of Temper and in an amicable way. To pass by several particulars, I may mention
the following; one was, they never first broke Covenant with any People; for,
as one of them said, and sinote his Hand upon his Head three times, that they
did not make them there in their Heads, but smiting his Hand three times on his
Breast, said, they made them (i. e. their Covenants) there in their Hearts. And
again, when William Penn and they had ended the most weighty Parts for which
they held their Council, William Penn gave them Match-Coats, and some other
Things, with some Brandy or Rum, or both; which was advised by the Speaker for
the Indians, to be put in the Hand of one of their Cassacks or Kings, for he
knew the best how to order them; which being done, the said King used no
Compliments, neither did the People, nor the rest of their Kings; but as the
aforesaid King poured out his Drams, he only made a Motion with his Finger, or
sometimes with his Eye, to the Person which he intended to give the Dram to; so
they came quietly and in a solid manner, and took their Drams, and passed away
without either Nod or Bow, any further than Necessity required them to stoop,
who were on their Feet, to him who sat on the Ground o^ Floor, as their Choice
and Manner is: And withal I observed (and also heard the like by others) that
they did not, nor I suppose never do speak, two at a time, nor interfere in the
least one with another that way in all their Councils, as has been observed.
Their Eating and Drinking was in much Stillness and Quietness.

I much desire that all Christians (whether they may be such in Reality or
Profession only) may endeavor to imitate these People in those Things which
are so commendable, which may be a Means to prevent Loss of Time and expedite
Business; as much as may be endeavoring to prevent above one speaking at a
time in Meetings of Conference and of Business.

When much of the Matters were gone through, I put William Penn in mind to
enquire of the Interpreter, if he could find some Terms or Words that might be
intelligible to them, in a religious Sense, by which he might reach the
Understandings of the Natives, and inculcate into their Minds a Sense of the
Principles of Truth, such as Christ's manifesting himself to the inward Senses
of the Soul, by his Light, Grace or holy Spirit, with the Manner of the
Operations and working thereof in the Hearts of the Children of Men, and how it
did reprove for Evil, and minister Peace and Comfort to the Soul in its
Obedience and Well-doing; or, as near as he could, come to the Substance of
this in their own Language. William Penn much pressed the Matter upon the
Interpreter to do his best, in any Terms, that might reach their Capacities,
and answer the End intended: But the Interpreter would not, either by reason,
as he alleged, of Want of Terms, or his Unwillingness to meddle in religious
Matters, which I know not, but I rather think the latter was the main Reason
which obstructed him; therefore we found nothing was like to be done according
to our Desires in this Matter, as the Interpreter was but a dark Man, and, as
William Penn said, a wrong Man for our present Purpose.

William Penn said, he understood they owned a superior Power, and asked the
Interpreter, What their Notion was of God in their own Way? The Interpreter
showed, by making several Circles on the Ground with his Staff, till he reduced
the last into a small Circumference, and placed, as he said, by way of
Representation, the great Man (as they termed him) in the middle Circle, so
that he could see over all the other Circles, which included all the Earth. And
we querying, What they owned as to Eternity, or a future State? The Interpreter
said, They believed when such died as were guilty of Theft, Swearing, Lying,
Whoring, Murder, etc. they went into a very cold Country, where they had
neither good fat Venison, nor Match Coats, which is what they use instead of
Clothes to cover them withal, being of one piece in the form of a Blanket or
Bed-covering: But those who died clear of the aforesaid Sins, go into a fine
warm Country, where they had good fat Venison and good Match-Coats, Things much
valued by these Natives. I thought, inasmuch as these poor Creatures had not
the Knowledge of God by the Scriptures, as we have who are called, Christians,
but what Knowledge they had of the supreme Being must be by an inward
Sensation, or by contemplating upon the Works of God in the Creation, or
probably from some Tradition handed down from Father to Son, by which it
appears, they acknowledge a future State of Rewards and Punishments; the former
of which they express by Warmth, good Clothing and Food, and the latter by
Nakedness, pining Hunger and piercing Cold.

I have often thought and said, when I was amongst them, that generally my
Spirit was very easy, and I did not feel that Power of Darkness to oppress me,
as I had done in many Places among the People called Christians.

After William Penn and they had expressed their Satisfaction, both for
themselves and their People, in keeping all their former Articles unviolated,
and agreed that if any particular Differences did happen amongst any of their
People, they should not be an Occasion of fomenting or creating any War between
William Penn's People and the Indians, but Justice should be done in all such
Cases, that all Animosities might be prevented on all Sides for ever; they went
out of the House into an open Place not far from it, to perform their Cantico
or Worship, which was done thus; First, the made a small Fire, and the Men
without the Women sat down about it in a Ring, and whatsoever Object. they
severally fixed their Eyes on, I did not see them move them in all that part of
their Worship, while they sang a very melodious Hymn, which affected and
tendered the Hearts of many who were Spectators: When they had thus done, they
began (as I suppose is their usual manner) to beat upon the Ground with little
Sticks, or make some Motion with something in their Hands, and pause a little,
till one of the elder Sort sets forth his Hymn; and that being followed by the
Company for a few Minutes, and then a Pause; and then the like was done by
another, and so by a third, and followed by the Company, as at the first; which
seemed exceedingly to affect them and others. Having done, they rose up and
danced a little about the Fire, and parted with some Shouting like a Triumph or
Rejoicing.

I leave Pennsbury, but intend, before I leave the Indians, to say something
more concerning that People, which I met with near Caleb Pusy's House in
Pennsylvania, viz. I being walking in the Wood, espied several Wigwams or
Houses of the Indians, and drew toward them, but could not converse with them;
but looking over them in the Love of God, I found it to be my Way, as I
apprehended, to look for an Interpreter and go to them again, which I did; and
when I came to them, and signified that I was come from a far Country, with a
Message from the great Man above (as they call God) and my Message was to
endeavou^ to persuade them, that they should not be Drunkards, nor steal, nor
kill one another, nor fight, nor commit Adultery, nor put away their Wives,
especially for small Faults, which (as I understood) is usual with them to do;
for if they did those Things, the great and good Man above would be angry with
them, and would not prosper them, but bring Trouble on them; but if they were
careful to refrain these Evils (before mentioned) then would God love them, and
prosper them, and speak Peace to them; or very near these Words. And when the
Interpreter expressed these Things to them in their own Language, they wept,
and Tears ran down their naked Bodies, and they smote their Hands upon their
Breasts and I perceived said something to the Interpreter: I asked what they
said? He told me they said, all that I had delivered to them was good, and
except the great Man had sent me, I could not have told them those Things. I
desired the Interpreter to ask them, how the knew what I had said to them was
good? they replied, and smote their Hands on their Breasts, the good Man here
(meaning in their Hearts) told them what I had said was all good. They
manifested much Love to me in their Way, and I believe the Love of God is to
them, and all People in the Day of their Visitation.

Having left them, I came to a Friend's House in the lower part of
Pennsylvania, w^o was in the Office of a Justice of Peace, and had been
convinced not long before by Tho^^^ Story: When I came into the House, the
M^^^s Wife was very uneasy and called me a De^^^er, and wrung her Hands and
said, Woe is me, I am undone, my Husband is deceived; and what more Deceivers
come? Oh how she lamented. I was somewhat struck with the Passion the poor
Woman was in, however, I said little but sat down, and after some time it rose
in my Mind to ask her, In what her Husband was deceived; was he, since he came
among us, any worse Husband to her? if he was, it was a bad Sign; or, was he a
worse Father to his Children? or, any worse Neighbor? or, in any particular
thing which she could name, changed from better to worse, since he was
convinced of the Truth? if not, she had no great Reason to complain: If he had
turned Drunkard, Whoremonger, Railer, Fighter, or become a vicious Man, she
would have had Reason to complain; but she honestly owned, she had nothing to
charge him with. He sat by me and heard all our discourse, but said nothing. I
told her, she had made a lamentable Outcry about her Husband's being deceived,
but had not convinced me of any Cause that she had received from her Husband
for her sore Complaint.

Being weary, having rid a great way that Day, I with my Companion Richard Orm
took leave of her Husband and went to our Rest, and saw him no more till the
next Day in the Evening, and when he came, I asked him, For what Reason he left
us so long, as he knew how uneasy his Wife was about us, and that we had a
great want of him? He said, he had been giving Notice of the Meeting twenty
Miles one way, and two Men had given Notice as far, each Man his way; that was
Six-score Miles in and out.

Our Landlady, against we rose in the Morning, had got another Woman, a
Justice's Wife, to help her to dispute with us, and overthrow us, as she hoped,
but in vain, for Truth proved too hard for them; although the other Woman
charged high in the Morning, and said, we were no Christians. I said, it was
easier to charge than to prove; how do you prove it? Because, said they, you
deny the precious Ordinance of Jesus Christ. I asked, if they could prove it to
be such? they said, they did not question but they could. I said, they should
do it from plain Texts of Scripture, verbatim as it lies, without any
Inferences, Consequences, or Comments upon the Places they insisted upon; and
they agreed to it. But, in Case, I told them, they should fail and not prove
(as they thought they could) that Ordinance to be so appointed by Christ, I
hoped then they would allow us to be Christians, not withstanding what they had
charged to the contrary; and they said, they would.

I then repeated all the Preliminaries, and asked them, if they would agree to
each particular? they said, they would. I desired Richard O^^m to m^^^ them and
imprint them as much as might be in his Memory, for it was like enough we
should have Occasion to call them in Question before we had done, which came to
pass not long after we began; they urged the 28th of Matthew in defense of
Water Bapt^^in, where Christ said to his Disciples, Go ye therefore and teach
all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe all Things whatsoever I have commanded
you: And lo^ I am with you always, even unto the End of the World. Water not
being mentioned, the Disputants were at a stand, and said it must be implied: I
showed them, that by their Agreement to the Preliminaries, there were to be no
Inferences, but plain Scripture. I told them, it was an unreasonable Thing to
undertake to unchristian a great Body of religious People by a few Inferences,
which might be true, or not true. Now when they had tugged at it, and searched
the New Testament a great while, they could not find what they desired,
although they urged what Peter said in a certain case, Who can forbid Water,
that these should not be baptized, who have received the Holy Ghost as well as
we? I showed them, that there was a great Disparity between a Servant's
Question, and a Master's Command. When they were even weary with searching, and
could not find a positive Ordination by Christ for Water Baptism, they gave it
over, and I asked them, If they had not fallen short of the Proof of what they
had so boldly charged upon us in the Morning? My Landlady confessed, they had
fallen short of their Expectation; but the other was in the Mind, as she said,
that it might be proved: I told her, she could not prove it from any plain Text
of Scripture.

My passionate Landlady became more meek and friendly, and received the Truth
in the Love of it: We had a good Meeting the next Day, and she said, If I would
stay that Night, I should be as welcome as her own Children; but if not, she
blessed the Lord for my Company, and the Good she had already received by me, and
parted with me in much Brokenness of Heart; and I heard she lived and died in
good Unity with Friends. But oh, how glad was her Husband to see that great and
sudden Change wrought in her! it was the Lord's Doings; to him be the Praise
now and for ever, for he alone is worthy.

I had many comfortable Meetings in my Travels through these Provinces, and
good Service. We were at a Yearly Meeting at Third-haven in Maryland upon the
Eastern Shore, to which Meeting for Worship came with William Penn, Lord
Baltimore and his Lady with their Retinue, but it was late when they came, and
the Strength and Glory of the heavenly Power of the Lord was going off from the
Meeting; so the Lady was much disappointed, as I understood by William Penn,
for she told him, She did not want to hear him, and such as he, for he was a
Scholar and a wise Man, and she did not question but he could preach; but she
wanted to hear some of our Mechanics preach, as Husbandmen, Shoe-makers, and
such like Rusticks; for she thought they could not preach to any purpose.
William Penn told her, some of these were rather the best Preachers we had
amongst us; or near these Words. I was a little in their Company, and I thought
the Lady to be a notable, wise, and withal a courteously carriaged Woman. I was
also in Company with the Governor of Virginia, at our Friend Richard John's
House upon the West Cliffs in Maryland, for we both lodged there one Night, and
I heard that he had been studious in a Book against Friends, called the Snake,
and Friends greatly desired he might have the Answer called the Switch, but
knew not how to be so free with him as to offer it to him; I told Friends I
would endeavor to make way for it. Although he had seemed to be a Man of few
Words, yet at a suitable Interval I said to him, I had heard that he had seen a
Book called the Snake in the Grass; he confessed he had. I desired he would
accept of the Answer, and be as studious in it as he had been in the Snake;
which he promised he would, and took the Book.

There happened a Passage worthy of note, either in this or the preceding
Governor's Time in Virginia, as I was credibly informed, which was thus; The
Governor wanted a Cooper to mend his Wine, Cider, and Ale Casks, and some told
him there was a Workman near, but he was a Quaker; he said, if he was a
Workman, he made no matter what he professed; so the Quaker, such as he was,
was sent for, and came with his Hat under his Arm: The Governor was somewhat at
a stand to see the Man come in after that Manner, and asked, If he was the
Cooper he had sent for? He said, Yes. Well, said the Governor, are not you a
Quaker? Yes, replied the Man, I am so called, but I have not been faithful. He
then asked, How long have you been called a Quaker? The poor Man said, About
twenty Years. Alas for you, poor Man! said the Governor, I am sorry for you.

By this we may clearly see, that such who walk most up to what they profess,
are in most Esteem among the more thinking and religious People; and the
unfaithful and loose libertine Professors of the Truth are slighted, and I
believe will be more and more cast out as the unsavory Salt, which is good for
naught in Religion, and is indeed trodden under the Feet of Men; for a great
Part of the Men in the World have such an Understanding as to know what we
profess, and also what we should do and be in many Things; let us therefore
walk wifely before all, and not be an Occasion of stumbling, nor give Offense
either to Jew or Gentile, nor to the Church of God, that so we may indeed be as
a City set upon a Hill, which cannot be hid; nay, that may not desire to be
hid, but rather that the Inhabitants of the Earth might see our good Works, and
have an Occasion from thence administered, to glorify the Father which is in
Heaven.

I having it on my Mind to visit a Meeting up the River called Perquimus on the
West Side of the great River Choptank, and I being on the East Side, Henry
Hosier and some more Friends set forward with me in a small Boat, not in good
Condition but crazy, with only one small Sail: We set out, as we thought, in
good time to reach our desired Port, but when we were upon the great River (as
I remember it is ten Miles over the shortest way, but the manner of our crossing
it made it more) the wind veered much against us, being then within about four
Points of our Course, and it rained hard, and was very dark, so that we could
scarce see one another, and the Water broke so into the Boat, that it was most
of one Man's Work to heave it out, and all our Company were discouraged, and
most of them very Sea-sick: Henry Hosier, of whom I had the most Hopes for
Help, said, that he could not steer the Boat any longer. What by the extreme
Darkness, the Roughness of the Waves, Boisterousness of the Wind, and hard
Rain, I, unwell as I was, was obliged to undertake the steering of the Boat,
and not without some Conflicts of Mind, not having any Certainty, from any
outward Rule, what Way we went; having no Fire, and the Boat being open, we
could not have any Light to see our Compass, but my Faith was in the Lord; that
he would bring us to shore; and I kept the Boat as near the wind as she would
sail, and told my poor sick and helpless Company, I believed that we should not
perish, although we might miss of our Port: But the like imminent Danger, I
think, I was never in before upon any Water; but renowned over all be the great
Name of the Lord for ever, we put into the Mouth of our desired River Perquimus
as though we had seen it in the Day, or steered by a Compass, neither of which we
had the Benefit of for several Hours.

Here we went ashore and made a great Fire under the River's Cliff, and about
Midnight the Moon rose, and it cleared up and froze, and was very cold: My
Companions falling asleep, I turned them over, and pulled them from the Fire as
it increased, and put them nearer as it failed, but could not keep them awake;
I sought Logs of Wood, and carried them to and minded the Fire, which was work
enough for the remaining part of the Night; but Morning being come, we got into
our cold icy Boat and sailed away toward the Meeting. When we were come among
Friends, Notice was given of a Stranger being there, and a heavenly and sweet
Meeting it was, so that we thought we had a good Reward for all our Trouble,
blessed be the Name of the Lord now and for ever, for he is worthy: Although he
may see good to try us, sometimes one way and sometimes another, how should we
know that we have any Faith, if it be not tried? How shall we know that we have
any true Love to God, if it never be proved? The Trial of the true Believers
Faith is more precious than Gold. The excellent Sayings of Job came into my
Mind, Behold, I go forward, but he is not there; and backward, but I cannot
perceive him: On the left Hand, where he does work, but I cannot behold him: He
hides himself on the right Hand, that I cannot see him, Job xxiii. 8, 9. And
then in Verse the 10th, he, like a Man in the true Faith, says, The Lord
knows the Way that I take; and when he has tried me, I shall come forth as
Gold: And the more vehement that the Fire is, the more it destroys the Dross,
and the more pure and weighty the Gold is, which has past through the most
severe Fires. Read thou, and understand this that can.

I had a Meeting when in Virginia, at a Friend's House whose Name was Matthew
Jordan, and something which I said in the Meeting, somewhat offended a young
Woman a Presbyterian, and not having, as she said, a suitable Opportunity while
I was there, to discourse with me, being busy in her Master's Affairs, (for she
was the Friend's Housekeeper) she desired Liberty of her Master to go to the
next Meeting, that there she might ease her Mind to me about the Offense I had
given her in the first Meeting; (it was something about Election, and they told
me what it was, but not writing it down, it went from me) and accordingly she
came to the Meeting, where the Lord's mighty Power broke in upon us, to the
tendering of many Hearts, to Friends mutal Satisfaction, and it proved a good
Day to the aforesaid young Woman; her heart was as if it had melted within her,
and she shed many Tears, and I am satisfied went from the Meeting in Fear and
in great Joy; in Fear, how to walk as not to offend Christ the Elect, which
before she could talk of, but now she had met with, and he had opened her State
to her: And Joy, that she had met with the Messiah, the Elect of the Father,
his choice and beloved Son; so that she could now say, Where are the Wise?
Where is the Scribe? Where is the Disputer of this World? All her brisk
talkative Qualities were swallowed up in the feeling of the internal,
enlightening Presence of Christ.

When she returned to her Master's (before mentioned) he asked her, If she had
got Satisfaction? meaning, had she had any discourse with me and was satisfied?
She replied, She was satisfied. Some Time after I met with her in Philadelphia,
plain and Truth-like, but knew not who she was at first. The Manner of the
Working of the Truth is to humble the Creature, and bring it into Contrition,
Tenderness, and Fear, with true Self-denial.

I come now to mention someting that happened in my going over James's River,
toward a Yearly Meeting in Virginia: Alighting at an Inn by the Riverside
where we refreshed ourselves, there was a poor little Child cried so
exceedingly, that I was uneasy to hear it, and asked the Mother what was the
matter? She said, it had cried most of the Time since it was born, and they
were almost off their Feet with it, or to that effect. I told her, I believed I
could give the Child something which would do good, and she readily agreed to
it, and I gave it a little of something then, and ordered her to give it twice
more in four or five Days time: But when I returned, the Child was better, and
oh! how glad the poor Woman was to see me, and spoke more in my Commendations
than was to my Satisfaction, and was kind to Friends afterward for my sake.

Now we came to ferry over the River, being, as I remember, five Horses and
nine People; there was Jane Pleasant a public Friend, and her Manservant who
rid before her upon a great Horse, and high in Flesh, and about the Midst of
the River, it being two Miles over, he rose upon his hind Feet, and flung
himself upon the Edge or Gunnel of the Boat, half into the River; the Fall of
the Horse, and the Motion of the other Horses thereupon, caused the Boat to
make such Sallies that it took in Water, and was very likely to sink: But
before he could have Time to rise again, or to make any more Springs, I took
several young Men by the Shoulders, and flung them upon his Neck to keep him
down, and told them, as fast as I could, why I did so. Now I had to deal with
the Ferry-man, who was about to strip for swimming, and said we should all be
drowned; but for his Part he could swim; and was about to leap into the River,
for, he said, the Boat would either break or sink. I told him, It was soon
enough for him to swim, when he saw the Boat either break or sink, and if he
would not row, then I would: With much Entreaty he took the Oar again and rowed
us to the Shore. But in our imminent Danger I looked over my tender Friends,
(for so they appeared to me) and thought in my Heart what a Pity it would be,
if all these were drowned! yet the Thought of my own drowning never entered my
Mind, until I was got over the River, which was a Mercy to me, and a great
Means to keep out Disorder and Confusion, which commonly attend sudden
Surprises and Frights, or else they make People dead-hearted and almost
senseless.

As I had now an Occasion to observe, as well as in some imminent Dangers I had
seen before, where I happened to be, I find it an excellent thing to be, as
much as we can, always ready, and by being frequently thinking upon Death, it
is not so surprising when it does come: This is a great Point of true Wisdom,
to number our Days so, as to remember our latter End. The want of thus
contemplating and truly thinking on what Preparation we are in to look Death in
the Face, and to appear before the great Judge of both Quick and Dead, was the
Cause of the Complaint, Oh! that my People were wise, that they understood
this, that they would consider their latter End. The great Remisness of such
Considerations among People, bespeaks Folly and great Insensibility, and that
the Heart is hardened through an Habit of sinning; oh! that I might prevail
with the Children of Men to awake. Arise, you that sleep in Sin, and are at
ease therein, that you may come to hear inwardly the Call of the Son of God,
that your Souls may not only live here to serve God, but also may live
eternally in Bliss with him, is the Desire of my Soul for the whole Bulk of
Mankind; for my Life has often appeared not dear to me, in Comparison of the
saving of the Souls of the Children of Men.

I have often thought of Moses, how far he went for saving of Israel, and how
far Paul went for the saving of his Kinsfolk after the Flesh; it was a great
Demonstration, that these great and good Men had great Faith and Interest in
the Lord, and also a very great Love to his People; and such whose Eyes are
truly opened, cannot but see it is the Love of God, and Love to the Souls of
Men, that constrains us thus to take our Lives as in our Hands, and labor
under many weary Steps, and many Perils by Sea and by Land, and in the
Wilderness, Cold and sometimes in Tumults and Noises, sometimes in Watchings
and Fastings, that we have been sometimes Spectacles to Men; but the Lord has
given us Faith and Patience to bear and overcome all, as we have singly stood
in his heavenly Counsel, and been truly devoted to his Will in all Things.

It may not be amiss to mention a particular thing which happened to me before
I left Long Island, viz. Knowing that my Landlady, Samuel Bowne's Wife, had a
very sore Breast, by which she had much Trouble, and had no less than five
Tents in it, and she being a sensible and a serviceable Woman, something came
with a Concern upon my Mind to administer unto her Breast, with a Belief, it
would heal her: I reasoned about it until I had got one Foot into the Stirrup
for mounting my Horse, but I grew uneasy for being dilatory in doing that which
came into my Mind; so I went in again and said, Mary, I am come back to advise
thee what thou should do, by which, I believe thou will be healed, although I
cannot stay to see it done. I believe, said she, and intend to follow thy
Advice; but asked, what would become of all those Tents? I told her, the
Poultice would draw them all out and give her Ease; and accordingly I heard it
did, for she slept twelve Hours immediately after the Time of the Application,
and when she awoke the Tents were all drawn out, and she had little further
Trouble with it: So it is good to mind Truth and the Workings of it in all
Things. I met with the great Doctor (as he was esteemed) who had it under hand,
and he said I was a bold Fellow: I said, it proved well. He answered, it was
well for me it did.

Something more which I have before omitted occurs to my Memory: When I was in
that Part of Virginia toward North Carolina, to visit Friends, a very great
Mist arose, and we went wrong, until the Guides were so far lost, that they
confessed, they knew not East from West, nor on which Hand we had left the Road,
although it was in the fore Part of the Day, but neither Wind or Sun to be felt
or seen; then I told them, I would try what I could do, if they did but know
what Quarter we should go to: They said, we should go toward the South; then I
brought out my little Compass which I had made before I left England, and took
it in my Hand and steered by it, till we all came into the Road; for that
inward Sense I had did persuade me, that we were to the Westward of the Road,
so leaning a little to the Eastward of the South Point, we came right as
before, and when so, the Guides much rejoiced, and said, I was fitter to be
Guide in a Wilderness Country than they. My Compass was not so big as a
Tailor's Thimble, which had often been of Use to me, and others with me.

Now the Time came on for my leaving all my near and dear Friends in those
Parts, and I embarked for the Islands the Sixth of the Ninth Month, 1702, with
my Companion James Bates, on board of a Sloop, Samuel Salter Master, for
Barbados, and we put into Bermudas in our way: Soon after we landed, being on
the 21st of the same Month, we were sent for by Governor Bennett to come before
him, and being near his Door, a Man came and clapped me on the Shoulder, as we
were walking on our way, and said roughly to us, You must go before the
Governor, and seemed to hasten us: I replied meekly, I am willing to go as fast
as I can, but I have been very Sea-sick, and can go but weakly: The Man fell
from his Roughness, and bid us take Time, and carried himself very civilly to
us, and put us by a Man who was keeping Centry at the Governor's Door with his
Musket on his Arm, and when we were come into a large Room the Man left us, and
we staying a while, I began to reason in myself, What if the Governor should be
a rigid Man and be severe to us, and either confine or punish us? But I said in
my Heart, Lord, thou that know all Things, know that I have not only
offered up my Liberty, but Life also, for thy Name and Gospel's sake! and
immediately all the Fear and Reasonings about human Power was taken away from
me.

I being not well, and weary with walking from the Ship, sat down to rest
myself unbidden, when there came a friendly well carriaged young Woman, who I
supposed to be a Servant, and spoke kindly to us; I desired her to do as much
for us as to give us something that was small to drink, for we were very
thirsty and had been much out of Health, and were not well recovered since we
came from the Sea, having had rough Weather: She brought us Wine and Water, and
a Thing to mix them in; so taking most of a Glass of Water, and a very little
Wine poured into it, I drank and was very well refreshed. By this Time the
Governor called us into an upper Room, and as I came near to the Top of the
Stairs, going but faintly, for Reasons before given, the Governor put forth his
Hand and reached to take hold of mine, and like a tender Father drew me up, and
led me along toward a great Window, and stood and looked on me and said, He
believed he knew what I was, and my Business too. I replied, it might be so,
and asked, if he was the Governor of that Place? He said he was, and bowed his
Head. I then spoke to him in the Love of God and said, Thy Countenance bespeaks
Moderation, and the Apostle said, Let your Moderation appear to all Men, for
the Lord is at hand; and it was with me to say to him, The Lord of Heaven and
Earth bless thee and all thine. He bade us sit down, and gave us each a Glass
of Wine, and enquired from whence we came? I told him my Home was in Old
England, but it was long since I was there; my Companion's was in Virginia. He
wanting to know the Affairs in Europe, I told him, There was a Merchant
belonging to the same Ship that we did, who was lately come from Europe, and I
thought was a Man of Parts and Memory, and well versed in the Affairs of those
Parts of the World, and when we came into this Place he was with us: The
Governor then sent for him, and when he came, he answered his Expectation in
resolving all or most of his Questions, for the Knowledge of the News appeared
to me to be the young Man's Talent. Having done with and dismissed him, he
said, he must now have some Discourse with us: Then rose up all the great Men
who were with the Governor, to make way that I might come near him. I said, If
it was the Governor's Mind, I had rather sit where I was, for I sat well in
the Air, and that suited well with my present Weakness: So he bade them all sit
down, and they did so.

Now, said he, I want to know the Reasons why you, as a People, where you live,
do not assist the King and Country with Men and Arms, for their and your own
Defense and Safety, against all that may attempt or endeavor your Hurt? I
replied, The most convincing Reasons I have to offer to the Governor are, We
have neither Precept nor Example from Christ, or his Apostle, to use the Sword
to hurt one another withal. No, said he, what then means that Saying of our
Savior, when he bade him that had not a Sword, fell his Cloak or Coat and buy
one? I replied, One of his Disciples answered and said, Lord, here are two;
Christ said It is enough. Now how two Swords can be enough to answer for a
genenal Precept, I leave the Governor and all these Men to judge. So after a
little Pause he said, In case you was assaulted by Robbers that would break
your House, and take what they could get from you; or upon the Highway, and
would take your Purse or Horse, what would you do in that Case? I replied, I
could not directly answer what I should do in such a Case, because through the
Lord's Mercy I was never yet so assaulted; but it appears most likely, that I
should endeavor to keep my House from being broken up, and yet withal be
tender of Men's Lives: And as to the ^^her Assault, inasmuch as it is well
known I do (...) provide any outward Weapon for my Defense, neither Sword,
Pistol, nor any other such like Weapon, therefore I must rely upon the Lord for
Protection and Help, who is able to rescue me out of the Hands of all such
ungodly Men; or if he does not, I must endeavor to bear what the Lord suffers
such to do unto me. The Governor said, You say well; for inasmuch as you have
not provided any thing for your Defense, you have nothing to fly to but the
Lord; you say very well; and said, he hoped what he had offered had not given
any Offense. I replied, It was so far from that, we were glad he was so free
with us; yet if he pleased to dismiss us, we should be willing to be going, for
Night came on. He said, There were some of our Friends would be glad to see us:
I replied, I understood there were some further on the Island that did own us,
but how much they were of us I could not tell, for I had not seen any of them.
He asked, whether we had a mind to go by Water or by Land, for he had a Boat,
and a couple of Hands should carry us where we would; or if we had a Desire to
ride, he had two Horses, we might take them and keep them as long as we staid
upon the Island. I endeavored to persuade him to let us go without troubling
himself any further, for I was sensible of his good Will and Love to us, and
having his Countenance, was more than we expected, and as much as we desired.
He still urging to know after what manner we would choose to go? I told him, I
was very sensible of his Generosity to us who were Strangers, and if he would
be easy and let us pass, we had whe^^w^^al to defray our necessary Charges
either by Water or Land, as would answer best with (...) Convenience. He
pressed upon us to accept ^f his Offer, for he said, he did not do it in
Compliment to us: Then seeing no way but to accept of his generous Offer, I
said, Riding at present would be much more acceptable to me, considering how I
had been lately fatigued at Sea, of which I was not yet well. He immediately
gave Orders for the Horses to be brought to the Door, which being done, and we
having Notice thereof, I rose up and made an Offer to go, and the Governor
likewise rose up and came and took me by the Hand, and so we went down the
large Stairs into the great Room where we first entered in the Lord's Dread and
holy Fear. Read this thou that can, and withal learn to understand, here I
had re^g^ed my Life and all to the Lord who gave it, and my Life at that time,
as at many other times, was not dear to me for Christ's sake; and being thus
resigned, I felt the Love of God, and a Measure of that Life was manifest, in
which I had Dominion over Men, Bonds, and over Death and the Powers of
Darkness, blessed be the Lord for ever.

Now coming to take Horse, I looked out at the Door and saw two Horses, and a
Man holding them beyond the Pavement, and the Centry as before in the Street,
and the Horse next the Door, which I supposed I was to ride on, had a Saddle on
the Back of it set about with three Rows of shining Silver Lace, I thought
about two Inches broad each: The Governor holding me by the Hand and looking in
my Face, its not unlikely but he might think, as I used to say, I looked very
sheepishly at it. He said to me, I am apt to think you are not used to ride
upon such a Saddle as this; I told him, if he could let me have one more like
myself (plain) without much Trouble, I should like it the better, but if not, I
could ride on it, I thought without much Straitness, in case of Necessity. He
answered, he could not, for Horses and Saddles too were scarce on that Island,
for the one was that which he rid on, and the other was for his Man; but he
said, he would tell me how to prevent all this: If, said he, you get over the
Inlet of Water, though he questioned it, because the Wind blew very strong in
the Mouth or Inlet of the River; but, he said, he spoke not this to hinder our
taking his Horses, but if we got over, he said we should come to Richard
Stafford's, an old Judge of Life and Death, and might ask there for the Cover
for his Saddle, which ties on with little Straps at each Corner and hides all
this, and then it will be like yourself; but if the Ferryman says he cannot
carry the Horses over, what Man soever you meet, white or black, if capable,
tell him he must bring me my Horses, he dares do no other but bring them; and
be sure you take no further Thought for them: And if we met with any thing in
his Liberty that might trouble us, let him but know and he would help it, if it
lay in his Power, and so with his Blessing on us, we took leave of him and came
to the Waterside, but could not get the Horses over, therefore sent them back
again, and intended to have staid at the Ferry-house all Night, but the Boat
was about going over as we lighted; and Notice being got some way or other to
the Judge's Ear, that there were two Strangers on the other Side of the Water,
he had sent a Boat and a couple of Men for us, who said we must go, for the
Judge said, he could not sleep until we came; whatsoever the matter is, we know
not, said they: So we went, after asking if they at the Ferry-house had been at
any Cost or Trouble on our Account in providing Supper, for as yet we had not
eaten any thing since we landed; the People said no, they had not done any
thing which we should pay for: It grew dark and very stormy, and the Sea broke
over the Boat, so that some of us were forced to hold our Coat Laps one to
touch another on the Weather Side, to keep out the Breakers of the Waves, that
they might not fill the Boat, and we came safe over to the Judge's House, and
no sooner got into the Passage but his friendly Wife met us, and asked us, If
we were the Strangers her Husband had sent for? I said, We are Strangers. She
bid us follow her to the Judge, and we did so. When we came to him he rose up,
and took the Candle in his Hand and said, Are you the Strangers that I have
sent for? I said, Who thou may expect I know not, but we are Strangers. When
he had looked well in my Face, he set down the Candle and said, What a Mercy is
this, that the Lord should send Men from I know not where, in his Love to visit
me! and took me in his Arms and kissed me; and I said to him, The Lord of
Heaven and Earth bless thee; and we shed many Tears and wept together.

As I entered the House, I felt the Love of God, and his Glory, I thought, shone
in and filled every Room as I passed through them, and I said, Peace be to this
Place, and I felt it was so. He enquired of our Travels, and from whence we
came, of which we gave him a brief Account; he also asked if I knew any thing
of the Family of Staffords at Lahorn near Haverfordwest in South Wales? I told
him all I knew about them, both of the Dead and of the Living; with which he
was pleased, and said, He had not heard of them many Years, and that Family
were his near Kindred.

Now as the Judge was somewhat troubled with the Gout, I found his usual
Bedtime drew near, and I made an Offer to go away lest I should discommode
him, yet he appeared unwilling to part with us; but considering his own
Ailments and our early Rising in the Morning, he at length consented: But
before we parted, his Wife asked leave of him to go with us on the Morrow to
the Meeting, to which he readily assented, if he was not worse of his
Distemper, and then ordered how we should ride, and which Negro should go, not
only to help his Wife but us also, and take our Horses when there was occasion,
and do any thing he could for us; and indeed so he did, and appeared to me to
run on his Feet without much Trouble, being a lively young Man.

I omitted before, that the Judge asked, If we had seen the Governor, and if he
was kind to us? I told him he was very friendly to us, and said, If we met with
any Trouble in his Liberty that he could help us in, only let him know and he
would right us. The Judge said, It was very well, and he was glad of it. I
perceived the Judge was rather a Moderator of the Governor, he being an ancient
wise Man, and had lived long as a Judge upon the Island, and understood (it is
like) more fully the State of Things there than the Governor could be capable
of, he being but a young Man, although he appeared to be a wise Man, and, as
William Penn said, came of an ancient and honorable Family in England, which
he knew very well, whose Name was Bennett. Afterward I told William Penn how
it had fared with us on that Island, and especially the Kindness of the two
chief Men in Power there, and William Penn wept, and said, He had not heard any
Account of this Nature, that he had been so much affected with, as he
remembered these many Years.

Now we left the Judge until the Morning, and got some small Refreshment, it
being late, and I had been faint for several Hours for want of eating, but the
Lord's heavenly Power bore me up over all, so that at Times I felt no want of
any thing: Oh! Renowned over all be the Name of the Mighty God, now and for
ever. We went to Bed, and when Morning came, I with my Companion were stirring
early, having eight Miles to the Meeting, and it being in the latter End of the
Ninth Month, we were willing to be in such Time, that we might give some Notice
to the People. I was walking in our Lodging Room early, and the Judge's Wife
came to the Door and asked, if she might speak with us? I said she might; then
she came in and said, She had a Message from her Husband to us; I queried, what
it was, She said, He desired we would come and pray for him before we went
away. I desired she would favor us so much as to lay before her Husband
something which I had to say, and she promised she would: Well then, tell the
Judge, that if he will suffer us to come into his Room, and sit down and wait
upon the Lord, as our Manner is in such a Case as this, if it please the Lord
to move us by his Holy Spirit to pray, we may; but if not, let not the Judge
take it amiss, for we are willing to be at the Lord's disposing in all Things.
She went, and I believe, as she said, laid the Matter before him as I had
delivered it to her; for she was a Woman of a good Understanding, and came back
again to us in a very little Time: I asked, what the Judge said? She replied,
he said, Let the Men take their own Way, and whether they pray for me or not, I
believe they are Men of God: So after some little respite, we being brought to
the Judge's Bedside, sat down and waited upon the Lord, who was pleased in his
Love and by his mighty Power to break in upon us, and also opened my Mouth in
his Gift of Grace and of Supplication, in which Gift, ardent and fervent Cries
went up to the Lord of Heaven and Earth, that he would send Health and
Salvation to the Judge, and also to all his Family, and to all People far and
near, that all every where might repent, and come to the Knowledge of the Truth
and be saved. The Judge wept aloud; and a mighty Visitation it was to his
Family, and especially to himself and his tender Wife. We left the Judge in a
fine Frame of Spirit, and no doubt near the Kingdom, having his Blessing and
earnest Request, that when we could reach his House we would not fail to come
to it, for we were very welcome; and I found and felt it so, and it was mostly
our Lodgings: His Wife and Foot-Page went with us to all the Meetings, except
one, while we were on the Island, which was about two Weeks, in which Time we
had many good Opportunities among a sober behaved and well carriaged People,
amongst whom we met with no Opposition, but had large quiet Meetings.

When we were clear, as we thought, of the Island, we went to take our solid
Leaves of the Governor, acknowledging his Civility and Generosity to us
Strangers, and I told him and the Judge, That they would not want their Reward
for what they had done to us, and such who should take their Lives as in their
Hands, and come in the Love of God to visit these remote Parts of the World,
which we durst not have undertaken if we had not believed it required of us by
the Almighty, and our Peace concerned in it, as also the Glory of God, and the
Good of the Children of Men; these are the Motives to those our great
Undertakings: or Words to that Purpose. So we parted in much Love with these
great Men, especially the Judge, with Tears on his Face, as also his tender and
friendly Wife, who had been very serviceable to us in ordering Meetings and
making Way for us, and none like her in all the Island, that we met withal, she
being given up to that Service, for the encouraging Truth and Friends in what
she was capable of.

Being invited to a Friend's House to dine one Day, when we were sat down at
the Table, the Woman of the House desired that one of us would say Grace; from
which I took an Occasion to show her, and several more in the Company, who
appeared not much more grown in the Truth than she, that since we had been a
People, we had both believed (and accordingly practiced) that true Prayer was
not performed without the Help of the holy Spirit of God, and no man could pray
aright and acceptably without it; nor was it in Man's Power to have it when he
pleased; therefore it is Man's place to wait upon the Lord for the pouring
forth of this Gift upon him, and also to know whether it be required of him to
pray, so as to be heard by Man, or only to pray secretly, so as to be heard of
God, as did Hannah and many more have done; which, as they do aright, no doubt,
but as Christ said to his Disciples, their Father will hear them in secret, and
reward them openly; or to this Effect: With which they all appeared satisfied.

We then went on board our Vessel, and set sail with a fair Wind for the East
End of the Island in order for Barbados; but soon after we got out to the
Mouth of that Inlet where we arrived first, the Wind came full against us, and
we put in there again; and the Master, although not called one of us, said in a
friendly manner, What is the matter now? this is along of you, Mr. Richardson
(as he was pleased to call me, although I often showed my Dislike to it) you have
something to do yet on the Island. I said, I knew not of any thing; but he
seemed positive, and withal said, if the Wind came fair at Midnight he would
call if I was willing; if not, he would stay as long as I pleased. I said, I
knew not of any thing to hinder, but he might call as soon as the Wind came
fair. So we parted, only giving him an Account, that we intended to go for the
Judge's House. It was late in the Evening when we got there, and the Judge was
gone to Bed; but his Wife was up, who lifted up her Hands with more than
ordinary Surprise, and much Joy, and said, She was always glad to see me, but
never more than now: I said, Why so? She then began to tell, how that since I
went away, there had been a Man with the Judge, who had incensed him against me
all that ever he could, and said, He knew me in England, and that I was broke,
and came into those Parts to preach for a Living. I asked, what her Husband
said to all that? She said, his Answer was to the Man, that he believed I was
no such Person, but an honest Man; yet the Accuser seemed very positive. I
said, It would be well if this Man could be brought with me to the Judge's
Face, that he might he convinced, not only of the Man's Ignorance of us as a
People, but of me in particular, and his Envy against me be made known; upon
which I opened to her the case of such Journeys and Services, how we proceeded,
and how the Meetings were constituted in which we did so proceed, and from
whence we had Certificates, from Monthly, Quarterly, or Meetings of Ministers
to which we belonged, and from Friends in the several Provinces and Islands
where we traveled, if we desired them, many of which I could show the Judge if
Time would admit; but she said, lest we should be called away in haste, she
craved to see some of those Certificates: I showed her them, beginning at the
first, wherein Friends of Kelk, now Bridlington Monthly Meeting in Yorkshire,
to Friends in America, showed not only their full Unity with this my present
Journey, but also with my Service for the Truth, and Conversation to the same,
where I had lived and traveled; and that I had settled my outward Affairs to
Friends Satisfaction, under many Hands variously writ.

When this great and wise Woman saw this, she said, it was enough; but I showed
her other Certificates from diverse Places, wherein Friends had signified
sufficiently their Unity and Satisfaction with me. I likewise informed her,
that in case any Man, not approved by us as a Minister, did take upon him to
impose his Preaching upon any who were Strangers to him, such as knew him took
care to acquaint the Churches therewith, if his Intentions could be known, that
no Impostor might do any hurt: All which she admired, and said she had never
heard so much before, neither did she think there had been such excellent
Orders in the World amongst any People.

Having thus acquainted her with our Order and Discipline, and afterward
informed her of the Cause of our unexpected Return, I renewed my Proposal of
having my Accuser before the Judge; she told me, she had good place with her
Husband, and would endeavor to obtain it: And accordingly, after talking with
him, she let me know, that the Judge expressed his Readiness to do me any
Service which lay in his Power, and was of Opinion, my Accuser durst not face
either him or me in that Affair; but that if the Wind continued against us, he
would try to find him out and bring him, which might be of Service; but if the
Wind favored, she thought I might be easy to go; as indeed I was, and the more
so, considering that our Captain Salter, who lived near the Judge on the same
Island, had showed a great deal of Patience and good Disposition to usward for
about two Weeks, yet would gladly be gone; so about Midnight we were called to
go on board the Ship, for the Wind was fair, if we were ready; I replied, we
come quickly, and so we did, and took leave of all we saw of the Family, and
remembered our dear Love, with grateful Acknowledgments to the Judge, for all
his Civility and Kindnesses he had done to us, with Reasons why we could not
see him, for he had been afflicted for some time with the Gout, and was now
fallen into some Rest, and we going very early away, were not at our own
Disposal.

I admired the Lord's good Providence in all this, and there was something of a
Reach from the same watchful Providence, to order that to be put into my
Certificate which did so fully remove that Slur this Enemy would have fastened
upon me, (i. e.) that I broke in England, and could not pay my Debts, and
therefore was come into these remote Parts of the World, where I was unknown,
to preach for a Livelihood; but the contrary fully appeared, that I was known
and well beloved too, and had Effects to discharge any just Demand upon me,
blessed be the worthy Name of the Lord now and for ever.

Now I may say something of our Affairs upon the Sea in this Voyage: When
Captain Salter had taken us in Passengers at Philadelphia for Barbados, it
being a time of War, and People somewhat afraid of shipping Goods, he said he
was to have two honest Quakers Passengers, and he did not fear being taken by
Privateers nor Pirates. I was troubled at his Confidence in us, and told him
so, and that it was much if the Lord did not suffer us to be taken, that he
might see Men were not to be depended upon, but that we ought to depend upon
the Lord alone for Protection and Deliverance: However, in much less time than
was expected, Goods came, and we were loaded and gone. We had rough Weather
before we came to Barbados, (I have given an Account of Bermudas) especially
about the Tropic of Cancer we had very high Winds, and I was extremely
Sea-sick, and so was my Companion, and I could eat little, but was treated with
remarkable Civilities by the Captain; for in and about that Latitude there are
Fish not unlike Herrings, which fly from Wave to Wave, and by dipping their
Fins or Wings in the Water, they will fly a great Way, especially when they are
chased by Fishes of Prey, and almost every Morning there were of those Fishes
found on the Ship's Deck; and the Captain often said, as his manner was, Mr.
Richardson, these are sent for you, or for your Breakfast, and seeing it is so,
I will dress them myself, for I know, said he, my Cook is so greasy you can
hardly eat of his Cookery, which was very true; and therefore he would wash his
Hands, and lay a clean Napkin on his Arm, and tell me he would dress me my
Breakfast on the best Fashion he could. I asked him, why he would put himself
to so much Trouble? He said, he never waited on a Man in all his Life with so
much Pleasure, and if I were going into any Country where he was going, I
should not pay any thing for my Passage; so much Respect he showed to me.

Now it happened in the Course of this Voyage, when we were within a few
Leagues of Barbados, one Morning early as soon as Day appeared, he that was
aloft (upon the Watch to look out, as the manner of Mariners is, especially in
the Times of Wars and Danger) espied a Ship which he and the rest of our most
knowing Men supposed to be a Turkish Frigate, of considerable Strength;
however, it was a great Vessel, and appeared to have a great many Guns: When we
first saw her, she appeared to be within Gunshot. But Oh what a Surprise and
Fright our Ship's Crew were in! I had not often seen the like. Our Vessel being
deep loaded, although a good Sailer, was less than that which chased us, and to
run for it appeared the only way for us to escape, hauling as close to the Wind
as we could to keep the Sails full; and the Vessel being stiff with its great
Burden, endured Sail well, and indeed they crowded so much Sail, that I told
them I feared they would bring the Rigging by the board; so thus we labored
until Noon, and then our Captain had lost all his Confidence in the Quakers,
and said we shall be taken, for the Ship has gained upon us for several Hours,
and we have done what we can, and are all spent: I walked upon the Main-deck
under no small Concern of Mind, and Truth rose, and I found it open in the
Truth, that we should not be taken: The Captain said, binding it with some
Asseverations, we shall certainly be taken. I said, No, we shall not, unless by
our Mismanagement. Alas! said he, you are such a Man as I never met withal; do
not you see the Frigate or Sallee-man, for that he called her, is just going to
fire a Broadside at us, opening the Gun Ports, and laying the Ship broad Side
upon us, and levelling at her as well as they can? And indeed our Captain,
although he was a stout Man, yet appeared very ghastly and dead-hearted, and said
(in a Tone which bespoke both Affliction and Trouble) to me, Go into my Cabin,
or some where under the Deck, for they will fire immediately; and that where I
walked I could hardly escape either the Shot or the Rigging falling upon me. I
said, they will not sire; and desired him to be easy, for we should come to no
Damage by that Ship. Well then, he asked what they should do, for the Enemy was
just upon us? I said, I would fetch them a Bottle or two, or more of my best
Brandy, and they should take as much as might do them good; but have a Care of
more, and ply away a while, and you will see they will fall back, and we shall
leave them. The Captain said, although there was no human Probability of
escaping, yet for my Sake they would try, and to work they went. I think I
never saw Men on board of any Ship work like them for some Hours, and we soon
perceived we outsailed them, and by the time it began to be dark we had left
them considerably.

Now all Fire and Light was forbidden, except what could not be avoided, and
all Noise, and a Council was held, to consult what Way to steer, whether the
nearest or most common way for the Island, or about; for it was reasonable to
conclude the Adversary would way-lay us, if he could, before we came to the
Island; and the Captain said, what I said in the Case should be done: After
some Deliberation I told him, I was most easy in steering the nearest Course,
which we did, and saw our Adversary no more.

We came to the Island next Day in much Joy, that we had escaped so imminent a
Danger, but I was very ill in a Fever when I landed, which had been growing
upon me for several Days, (this being the Sixth-day of the Week, and 18th of
the Tenth Month) I was so poorly, that several thought I must die; but I stood
resigned in the Will of God, whether to die or live. The First Day being come,
I went to the Meeting, though with great Difficulty, being very weak, where I
sat under more than usual Exercise, Reasonings, and Conflict of Spirit for some
time, about my present Condition, which was weak and low, and in my own
Apprehension, unlikely to be of any Service, notwithstanding all the Troubles
and Hazards of the Sea and Robbers, and other Jeopardies in coming here, I was
now thus disabled and laid by as useless. These Things were an Occasion to me
to consider, whether I had not mist my Way in something or other? Many
particulars were brought to my Mind, whether I had discharged myseif faithfully
where I had been? and when I looked back and took a View of my past Travels and
Services in the Work of the Ministry, and Discipline of the Church, my Conduct
and whole Conversation, I saw nothing but I was clear of the Blood of all Men;
as also clear and well satisfied both as to the Time of my coming, as well as
to the Coming itself unto this Island. There appeared yet two Things in my way;
First, if this Place should be my Grave, such as might not watch over me with
the best Eye may say, If he had gone at the Lord's Command, no doubt but he
would have brought him back again; and Secondly, as I had two little Children
in England, if I finished my Course here, they would be left Fatherless and
Motherless, And I said before the Lord, Let not my End bring Dishonor to thy
great Name, nor any Blemish to the Truth which I have loved, and labored for
the Promotion of from my Childhood.

When I had thus, or to this Purpose appealed to the Lord, I felt great
Quietness and Resignation of Mind; and as I thus sat, a Friend, well thought on
by several, began to speak in the Meeting, and it opened in my Mind, that he
was not wholly redeemed from having some Thoughts, that elementary Water had
not yet ended its Service; I mean in Point of Dipping: I would have shut it
out, for the Man appeared a wise, zealous Man; and I being altogether a
Stranger, could not remember I had heard of his Name, yet the Matter continued,
and I thought, for my own Satisfaction I might ask him the Question: If he was
a right spirited Friend, he would not be hurt; if he was not, he stood in Need
of Help, or at least it was high time for Friends to have a more perfect
Knowledge of him. So I leave this a while, and return to the other Part of the
Meeting, which was very remarkable.

During my sitting, as before, under much Weakness of Body, yet quiet in Mind,
the living Virtue or heavenly Power of Christ sprang up in my inward Man, like
healing and suppling Oil, which so effectually helped me every way, that I
could say feelingly and experimentally, Miracles are not ceased; for I was
raised beyond my own Expectation, and all others who knew my weak State, to
give Testimony to the glorious Coming and Manifestation of Christ in Power,
Spirit, Life, Light, and Grace, for the Help, Health, and Salvation of all the
Children of Men who receive, believe in, and obey his spiritual Knocks,
Reproofs, and heavenly Calls in the Soul, without any Lessening to his
Humanity: Great Cause have I, with all the Living, to love, value, honor and
reverence the great and mighty Name of him who has helped and healed, by
sending his eternal Word of living Power into our Hearts.

Returning with other Friends to my Quarters from this good Meeting (not to be
forgotten by me) came the beforementioned Friend to see me; and I having, as I
told him, a Desire to speak privately with him, he replied, there were none
there but his good Friends, and I might speak my Mind. I told him, what I had
to say related chiefly to himself, and in such a matter as he might not be
willing to have it exposed; but he would not hear, and said, I might speak it
there. I desired he would not take an Offense at what I had to say, for I did
suppose it to be a Secret to all there but himself; and then I said, the matter
is, When thou wast speaking in the Meeting, it sounded in the Ear of my Soul as
if one had said, This Man (meaning thee) is not wholly redeemed out of a Belief
in John's Ministration of Water, as not having done its Work. Now the Matter is
before thee, thou know whether what I received be true or false: In the
first place I enquire for my own Satisfaction. His Answer, if it may be called
one, was as follows; he said, The Disciples of Christ, when they baptized
with Water, knew that it was the Mind of their great Master that they should so
baptize: I said, I know not that any of the Apostles did ever say so much as
thou would insinuate; for both by what Peter and Paul say, it appears very
natural to be the Mind of Christ, only to condescend to so much as was done by
the Apostles in that of Water, because of the Peoples Weakness; and no Question
but the Jews were very much settled in the Belief of John the Baptist's
Dispensation of Water to Repentance, and also of the Circumcision and
Purifying, and many other Things used amongst that People: Now Peter, when the
Converts were grown stronger in the Faith and in the Grace of God, told them,
It is not the putting away the Filth of the Flesh, but the Answer of a good
Conscience toward God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ; and Paul, although
he did once in Condescension circumcise Timothy, yet told the People at another
Time, that Neither Circumcision nor Uncircumcision avails any thing, but a
new Creature; and if they were circumcised, Christ would prosit them nothing;
and he also thanks God, he baptized no more than Crispus and Gaius, and the
Household of Stephanus; besides these, he knew not that he had baptized any
other, for Christ sent him not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel: And I am,
as I said to the Friend, of the Prophet's Mind when he said, The Elements
should melt as with servent Heat: If the Gospel Power be not this fervent Heat,
I know not what is, nor what is able to melt away the Elements. But I further
said, if he was a Baptist, he should deal plainly and honestly with Friends,
and tell them what he was, and not preach one thing, and keep such Reserves to
himself.

Friends admired, and said, they had not the least Thought of any such Thing by
him; so he said, he would not fall out with me. I told him, I was as much for
Peace as he was, but at the same Time I would have us to mind that we were
sound in the Faith, and Preachers of the Gospel, and not go back again into the
beggarly Elements, for what is all in comparison of the Love of God in Christ
Jesus.

I had good Service and great Satisfaction upon this Island, although I found
Truth so low, that it might then be truly said as formerly, By whom shall
Jacob, or the true Seed, arise, which is in our Apprehensions but small, and
much pressed down with the many Things that are hurtful, especially by the Love
of Money, Pride, and Forgetfulness of God?

I was invited on board a great transport Ship, whereof one Reed was Master,
who remembered me when I was but young, and was traveling to or near
Scarborough; he was loving to me, and several Friends who were with me, and I
had good Service on board. There was also on board a French Protestant, now a
Captain of the English transport Soldiers bound for Jamaica; he lodged at John
Groves's and was a very civil Man, and said, if I would go with Captain Reed
(who offered, if I was going, to carry me to Jamaica free) he would wait on me
if I was sick or ailed any thing; and would gladly have had my Company: I
acknowledged both their Generosity and Civility to me, and so I took leave of
them, and of the noble Captain Salter, who I have had occasion both to mention
and to love, who took his solid leave of me, and wept like a Child, and said
openly in the hearing of many, that he never loved a Man so well before, and
though he did not want Business, yet for my sake he would serve my Friends what
lay in his Power; or near those Words.

I find as we live and walk in the Truth, there is an inward Witness which God
has placed in the Hearts of Men that is reachable, except in such who are
arrived to a great Degree of Hardness and Insensibility, and so have little
Sense or Perceivance of Good, either in themselves or in others, which is a
deplorable State and much to be lamented. Oh what Grief of Heart and Spirit it
has been to me, to hear and see the Wickedness of some! if such Wickedness was
as great a Trouble to them who acted it, as it was to me, I have thought they
would soon grow weary of it.

Now I left the Island, and embarked on board a Ship, John Grissith Master,
bound for Bristol in Old England, and went to Sea with some East India Ships
that had put in at Barbados, having a Ship of War or two for their Convoy.
After we were got to Sea, they had so much drinking and carousing that we grew
weary of staying with them, and after some Consideration, the Captain, who was
a Friend, left them and came safe to England.

In our Passage we had some rough Weather near the Tropic which I mentioned
before, and the Men and Captain being much disordered with watching and hard
Labor, as I remember, for eight and forty Hours Night and Day, a Calm ensuing,
the Captain desired me to take his Place for his Watch, and mind the Helmsman,
and see that he made straight Steerage; but alas! he was so sleepy, it was next
to impossible to keep him awake. I walked on the Deck, and had overmuch Work to
mind the Compass, and the Helmsman too, for a fine Breeze of Wind came on, and
all of a sudden a very unusual Fear fell on me, and I looked into the Sea, and
beheld it appeared to turn blue, and as far as I could discern to Windward, I
saw white Caps or the Water-freckle; on seeing which, through Fear, more than
any great Skill, I stamped with my Foot as though I would have broke the Deck.
Out came the Captain, but what with Fear and Sleep he could scarce hit the Door
out of the Cabin; but when he was got upon the Deck, he stamped, and called out
all his Hands, and bid them lower and furl the Sails with Speed, or else we
were all dead Men, for here is a Hurricane just upon us: And no sooner was all
made snug as well could be (as the Seamen phrase it) but the Wind blew so, that
we thought it would have turned the Bottom of the Ship upward: The like I never
saw; and, as the Captain said, we had not one Minute to spare of being cast
away, according to all human Probability; and, as the Seamen term it, it was
such Hurry durry thick Weather, that we could scarce see any thing a hundred
Yards, which violent Weather held for about an Hour, in which time we drove by
a Vessel, and were so near her, that I thought I could have flung a Stone
aboard: Our Ship's Crew were sore afraid, and looked upon her to be a Robber;
her Rudder was lashed or tied up, and the Men were all gone off the Deck, but
our Mariners were so affrighted, that they thought they would set some sail and
follow us; for no sooner were we past this Ship but the Weather grew better,
and away we ran in hazard of bringing the Masts by the board, but through the
divine Providence of him that is Lord over all, both Sea and Land, we escaped
and came safe into Cork in Ireland, where the Master lived, and rode there for
some time, and then weighed for Bristol, intending for the Yearly Meeting there.

We had rough Weather in crossing the Channel, before we came into the Severn,
where our Sailors, being afraid of being pressed, launched the Boat, and ran away
into Cornwall, leaving but four on board to bring the Ship up the River. We saw
a Pinnace, having in it a Lieutenant with a Crew of pressed Men, to press more
if they could find them, and our Master called on me, and desired I would put
on my best Clothes and come to him, and so I did, and he sat me on his right
Hand: By this time up comes the Lieutenant and asked for my Men, taking me to
be the Master; I told him, they had launched the Longboat and were gone, and
we could not hinder them, they being the strongest Party; at which he appeared
very much enraged, and seemed as though he would have struck at me. I told him
calmly, he had more need pity than be angry with us, for if there should be a
Gale of Wind, we were in great Danger of all perishing for want of Hands, for I
showed him what Force we had, viz. James Bates, whom I did not then call my
Companion, nor John Grissith Captain, the Cabin Boy and myself were all the
Men on board. But he asked, what for a Man that was who sat beside me? I told
him, he was a Man sufficiently secured against the Press: Then the rough Man
fell, and said, I looked like an honest Man, and he would take my Word and not
search for Men: So I ordered a Bottle of the best Liquor on board to be
brought, and then the Lieutenant and I parted very friendly.

I write not this as a Thing I approved, but disliked; but being taken at
unawares, had not time to shun it (as before mentioned) unless I had exposed my
Friend the Master of the Ship; although I neither said nor did, that I know of,
any thing worse than what thou see here written; I told the Captain I thought
he was a great Coward, and had exposed me to Danger to save himself.

Wind and Weather favoring us, we came in due time to Bristol Yearly Meeting,
where I met with William Edmundson, and was truly glad to see him with many
more at that Place; but my Companion falling sick, I was made willing to leave
him, and traveled to London with John Watson of Ireland, and a sweet spirited
Man he was; we got to London Yearly Meeting, where I discharged myself of what
I had upon my Mind, and came away in Peace, and in the feeling of the Love of
God.

John Haydock and I came from London together, and had Meetings in our way to
York Yearly Meeting, where I was glad to see my Home-Friends, and to enjoy the
Love of God once more with them; for this is our principal Crown and Kingdom in
this World, to enjoy the favorable Countenance of the Lord, and one another in
his living and internal Presence; and when I looked back upon all the Mercies
and Deliverances I had received from the Mighty God of Heaven and Earth, Seas,
and Rivers of Water, whose Hand made all, and whose Eye and watchful Providence
attends all, and is over all, my Soul was filled with Thanks and Praises to the
great and most excellent Name of him who lives for ever, and has helped my
Soul to overcome many strong Temptations, and has borne up my Head under many
deep Afflictions and Tribulations, renowned for ever be his holy Name.

I came home the 18th of the Fourth Month 1703, and found my Children well; and
now I was under a Thoughtfulness how to walk and demean myself so, as that I
might be preserved near the Lord, and in due Reverence and true Fear before
him; that inasmuch as I found there was something of Holiness unto the Lord
imprinted or engraven upon the fleshly Table of my Heart, that now in this
Time, when I was not so particularly and immediately concerned in the like
daily Travel on Truth's Account, I might not lose the Savor, Relish and
Sensation of heavenly Things. Some will read me here, in this short Survey I
have been taking of my present State and Thoughtfulness, that if I could not
make it better, I might not make it worse, either in doing, or not doing any
thing that might prove a hurt to me; for a Vessel had better be laid by, if it
can be spared, than used to its hurt. Now in this careful and watchful Frame of
Mind, I have found Preservation from time to time to this Day, by retaining the
Salt of the Kingdom in the Soul of the inward Man, which is of a preserving
Quality, with which the Vessel is, and can only be kept fit for the Master's
Use: If we lose this, the Creature soon grows out of Order and unfit for the
Master's Use. Read and consider these Things in Time, while thou have the Prize
in thy Hand, and Time to do, and receive Good at the Hand of him who is truly
full of Good, and is all Good; to him be the Offerings of Praise and Renown,
now and for ever.

Whilst I remained at Home, as my usual Manner was, I attended First Day, and
Weekday, and Monthly-meetings, as also Quarterly and other Meetings for the
Service of Truth, and visited many Meetings up and down in the Country, and had
good Service and much Satisfaction in being given up to the Service of Truth;
but did not see it convenient (as my Children were well placed) to settle to
keep a Family, until my Way appeared clear to marry, which did now draw on, and
after I had been near seven Years a Widower I married Anne Robinson, who
descended of a substantial Family at Hutton in the Hole, in the Parish of
Leslingham, not far from Kirby-moorside in Yorkshire.

We had not been married much above two Years, before my Wife began to appear
in the public Work of the Ministry, and indeed very comfortably and acceptably
to Friends, and she grew in Understanding both of the Discipline of the Church
of Christ, and also in further Knowledge in the Work of the living Ministry,
etc. And about that time it came upon me to visit Friends in most of the
Northern Counties in England; and some small time after my Return, I had a
Concern to visit Friends in several Parts of the Southern Counties, Thomas
Beedal being my Companion, who grew in the Truth, and also in the Ministry: We
had many good Meetings in that Journey, good Service and great Satisfaction,
and I returned Home in Peace.

Now I may say with Sorrow of Heart, the Time drew on apace when my virtuous
Wife and I must part, and be no longer Meet-helps to one another, which we
truly were, and never had either evil Word or evil Thought against each other,
I am fully satisfied; but lived in Peace and true Love one with another, and
were glad when we could either one or both serve Truth and Friends: Therefore I
find it on my Mind, in this Place, to insert the following Relation concerning
her, viz.

A short ACCOUNT of the Life, Convincement, Qualification, and dying Sayings of
that faithful Handmaid of the Lord, ANNE RICHARDSON, who departed this Life the
18th of the Twelfth Month, 1711, aged about Thirty three Years.
"SHE was descended of an honest and considerable Family of the Robinsons, at
Hutton in the Hole in Yorkshire, and was convinced in her young Years, and
received the Truth in the Love of it, and it became valuable and precious to
her above all Things in this World; and through the blessed Work and Operation
of the Grace and holy Spirit of Truth, she was weaned from the World's
Pleasures, Vanities and Recreations, from taking any Delight in them; and
through the virtuous and most precious Blood of Christ, she came to witness her
heart sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and in a good degree made able to
serve the living God, and bore a faithful Testimony against the needless and
superfluous Dresses and Fashions of the World, as also against the corrupt
Language thereof; and came to be a great Lover of Virtue and Purity, and had
great Satisfaction in being in good Friends Company, and at Friends Meetings,
and in much Retirement and waiting upon the Lord, who in great Mercy and
Condescension to the Desire of his Handmaid, gave her a large Shar^, not only
of the Enjoyment of his living Power and internal Presence, but also a
Knowledge and clear Sight into those Things that appertained to Life and
Salvation: And after Truth thus prevailed over her, and brought every Thought
into the Obedience of Christ, and subjected her Will to the Will of God, which
is a great Work, yet requisite to the new Birth, without which there is no
Regeneration; and without Regeneration and being born again, there is no
entering into the Kingdom of Heaven.

"After this great Change was wrought in her, it was evident through the
remaining Part of her Time, that she was much preserved under the Power,
Influence, and Guidance of the peaceable, meek and quiet Spirit of Jesus
Christ, and grew daily more and more in the Favor and love of God, and was
much beloved of God's People, and indeed of her Relations, Neighbors and
Acquaintance, who were not of her Persuasion, and walked so wisely and
prudently in all her Ways, that she sought not her own Honor and Interest, but
the Honor of the Lord, and inward Peace with him, which she had a Regard unto
in all her Undertakings; so that even such who sought for an Occasion against
Truth and the Professors of it, had nothing to say against her, not even from
her Childhood to the Day of her Death, for she was generally beloved and spoken
well of by all who knew her, and many were deeply and sorrowfully affected to
part with her, both Friends and others; the like has not often been seen in
those Parts, and not without some Cause, for she was a Woman of an upright
Life, and exemplary Conversation before all, and gave no Offense to Jew or
Gentile, nor to the Church of Christ; charitable to the Poor, a true
Sympathizer with such as were in Affliction and Distress, whether in Body or in
Mind, which was manifested in her frequent Visits to such, and by other Means
clearly demonstrated: She was a Woman endued with great Patience, and with a
quiet and serene Mind, well qualified and fitted to her Husband's
Circumstances, (whose Lot it was often to be abroad in the Service of the
Truth) an honorable and a faithful Wife, willing to give up her all for Christ
and the Gospel's sake, counting nothing in this World too near and dear to part
with, for the Glory of God, and Advancement of the ever blessed Truth, Peace
and Salvation of her own Soul, and the Good of others.

"One Thing is remarkable and worthy of Commemoration, which I insert as
follows, that others in the like Case may not barely and outwardly imitate
her, but feelingly come up in her heavenly Practice and Experience, under the
Influence, Light and Help of God's holy and blessed Spirit, viz. When that
worthy Servant of Jesus Christ, John Bowstead, returned from London
Yearly Meeting through several Counties to York, and so Home with me, not long
before my Wife was taken away: and having some Discourse with her, he asked
about several Things of Moment, especially about her Husband being so much from
Home, she gave him this Answer; That inasmuch as she gave up her Husband
cheerfully and freely to serve the Lord, and to be serviceable to the Church of
Christ, she did not only sympathize and feel with him in his most adverse and
low State, but partook with him in his best Enjoyments, when the Power of Truth
prevailed over all its Enemies; although I am then far from him, yet I partake of
the Spoil, or the shedding abroad of the good Things of God among his People,
as my Heart goes along with the Work of the Lord, and such as are engaged in
it; and in all my Husband's Afflictions I am afflicted with him: And one of my
main Concerns is, that neither I, nor any Thing in this World, may detain my
Husband from doing what the Lord calls for at his Hand; for if any Thing hurt
him as to the Truth, what Good can I expect of him? This John much admired,
with the deep and weighty Reasons she gave about the Christian Discipline of
the Church, and concerning the Ministry, the like, he said, he had not met with
in all his Travels before; yet she was a Woman of few Words, and expressed much
in a little Compass: And when she was taken away, oh! the Loss and Sorrow he
expressed to me in a Letter concerning her Death.

"She was very clear in her Understanding, had a penetrating and discerning
Eye, a great and inward Sense of the State of a Meeting, as also of their
several particular States. I cannot at present describe to the full all the
hidden Virtues of this Handmaid of the Lord, but there were many visible Fruits
of her virtuous Mind, that did appear to the Children of Men, some of which
were these, viz. She was an affectionate and tender Mother to her Children, yet
did correct them when Occasion required, without Passion, or the least
Appearance of Disorder of Mind, and still had them in great Subjection; at
which I often admired, and thought, surely she is come, by the Workings of the
holy Spirit, to a greater Dominion over her own Spirit than many who appeared
to be her Equals. She was a true Christian, a loving and dutiful Child to her
Parents, a good Neighbor, a faithful Wife, a loving and tenderhearted Dame
over her Servants, and overcame them with Love, and was much beloved by them,
and also feared; they loved her, and were very unwilling to disoblige or offend
her.

"She appeared and behaved herself as became a sanctified Vessel, that was in a
good degree fitted and prepared for the great Master's Use, and often appeared
as one that had been secretly in some Intercourse with Jesus Christ in Spirit,
where his Glory had more particularly shone in and over her Soul, not only
because of the Gravity and Solidity of her Countenance, but also the
Tenderness, Humility and Sweetness of her Mind and Spirit, Weightiness of her
Conversation, Edification of her Advice, Soundness of her Judgment, and
Clearness of her Understanding, all which made her Company very acceptable
while among the Living. Her Heart was often filled with the Love of God, and
early raised and enabled to speak a Word in Season unto many States and
Conditions, whether at home or abroad, in her own Family, amongst her
Neighbors, or in the Church of Christ, in Testimony to Matters relating to the
Worship of God, or in Matters relating to Discipline, especially in the
Meetings of her own Sex, where she had a great Service, and will be greatly
wanted. She had great Care upon her for the good Education of our Youth in
Plainness of Habit and Language, that they might be preserved out of the
Corruptions of the World in all the Parts thereof; in all which Services she
will be much missed: Yet we being sensible, that her Removal is her great Gain,
it helps to alleviate our Sorrow and Loss, which is great, and will not soon be
forgotten by many who had the Benefit and Comfort of her good Services. Also
her watchful and solid sitting in our Meetings for Worship was remarkable, with
very little Motion that was perceivable; yet when the least Stirrings of Life
in her Mind were perceived, in order to bring her forth in Testimony, the
Meeting was truly glad, and the Living amongst us rejoiced at it, for her
Appearance was with the Wise, and in the Language of the Holy Spirit; which was
a clear Demonstration that the Work was the Lord's and by and through his
Spirit and Power; all which gave her a great Place in the Minds of faithful
Friends and Brethren. But she is gone in the Prime and Flower of her Age! which
sets before and is a Memento unto us, to show us the Uncertainty of our Time
here, and to prepare for one certain to come, that Death may not overtake us at
unawares before we are prepared for it.

"I come now to the Time of her long Weakness, in which she was preserved in
great Patience, Steadiness and Resignation of Mind to the Will of God, even
unto the End; and she enjoyed much heavenly Comfort and Consolation in the
living Presence of the Lord to her immortal Soul, so that when she was asked,
Whether she thought she might recover or not? She mildly replied, She was
afraid to desire to live; because, said she, I believe if it please the Lord to
take me away now, it will be well with me, for I find nothing that lies as a
Burden upon my Spirit. At another Time she said, As to that little Testimony I
have been concerned in, this is my Comfort and Satisfaction, that I can truly
say I did not kindle any strange Fire, and therefore could not warm myself at
the Sparks thereof; but what I did in that Matter was, in the Constrainings of
the Love of God; and when my Cup was full, I a little emptied myself among the
Lord's People, yet very sensible of my own Weakness and Poverty, and often
thought myself unworthy of the least of the Lord's Mercies.

"Many savoury Expressions she spoke that were not written then, and therefore
could not be remembered; we having some Hopes of her Recovery, it rather caused
an Omission as to such a due Observance of what she said as otherwise it is
like would have been; although she was heard to say not long before she fell
weak, She thought her Time would not be long in this World. I never heard an
unbecoming or unsavory Word come from her, let the Provocation thereto be what
it would, no, not in the Time of her Health; and in her Weakness, she was much
swallowed up in the luminous and internal Presence of her Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, and often sang Praises unto his worthy Name, and appeared as one
wholly redeemed from this World, whose Heart was set upon, and Mind intent, and
earnestly engaged in the Pursuit after Heaven and heavenly Things. Blessed be
the Lord, she had witnessed a Part in the first Resurrection, and over such the
second Death has no Power; and no doubt but she lived and believed in Jesus
Christ, even unto the End of her Time here, and passed away without any
Appearance of Struggling or Sorrow, I believe into a Mansion of Glory, where
her Soul shall sing Hallelujah to the Lord God and the Lamb for ever, with all
those who have overcome the World, the Beast, and false Prophet, and every
Thing the Lord's Controversy is with, and who have not loved their Lives unto
Death, but given up that Life they had in any wrong Thing whatsoever."

When I had drawn up the foregoing Account, and showed it to some dis^roe^
F^^^^ds, they said, it was not beyond her Wo^th; yet when I looked it over
again, with an Intent to insert it here, I thought it looked too large; but
upon more mature Deliberation, I could not find what part to omit, but it would
hurt the whole Matter, therefore as I found it contained Encouragement to all
tender and well-minded People, to persevere in Faithfulness to the End; Caution
again. Pride, Passion, and indulging or sparing any wrong Thing in Church or
Family; and something of Advice to several Conditions and Growths in the Church
of Christ; it appeared most easy to me, not to lose any of those good Fragments
which had any thing of a heavenly Savor in them, and if I have not missed it,
there is something that has a living Relish, for without that I should soon be
weary of either writing or speaking.

Not long after the Departure of my Wife, it came upon me to visit the southern
Parts of England, and some part of Wales, and I had good Service and great
Satisfaction; and I was also at London, John Adam being my Companion, who was
an innocent, clean spirited Man.

Again, I found it required of me to visit the South West Parts of England, in
the Year 1717, and I traveled through the West Part of Yorkshire, into
Westmoreland, Lancashire, Ch^shire, and so on to Bristol, and as far as
Cornwall, and had many good Meetings; although I traveled alone, yet the Lord,
in whom I put my Trust and depended upon, helped me, and bore up my Head
through and over all, renowned be his most honorable Name, now and for ever.

An ACCOUNT of my Visit to FRIENDS in IRELAND.
IN the Year 1722 it was renewed upon me to go into Ireland; the Thoughts of it
had been long upon my Mind, but now the Time seemed to be fully come, to pay
that long thought of Visit; and Joseph Bunting of Cumberland being my
Companion, we went from Kendal Yearly Meeting which was a large and good
Meeting, and passed along to Whitehaven, and took shipping for Dublin, and
staid their Half-Years Meeting, which was large, and in which the living Power
and Presence of the Lord was felt amongst us; exalted over all be the mighty
Name of the Lord, for those and all his Mercies.

I had there many good Meetings, and also met with some hard ones (as is the
Lot of such who are called to this Vocation) and the best way I have found,
when I met with such, is first to regard our Call, then to mind our daily Steps
we take in that Vocation into which we are called, and take special Care to
have along with us the Company and Counsel of him that has so called us; this
is the way fully and truly to discharge ourselves of that Trust the Lord has
reposed in us, to the mutual Comsort and Edification of the Churches of Christ,
and also to the Peace and Consolation of our own Souls.

It is now with me to write the following Remarks of Ireland, which will not be
remote to the State of Friends in many other Places, where there is a right,
sound, living Ministry preserved, and good Discipline exercised, which mostly
go together: There Truth and Friends are kept generally in good Esteem, and
also thriving; but where these fail, especially the Discipline, oh! how undue
Liberty, and the Fashions of the World, with many corrupting Things, creep in
amongst the Professors of Truth, even unto the Reproach thereof, and Scandal of
those who are so prevailed upon; and hearty Sorrow of such as know and feel the
Hurt of these Things: Oh! what a Hinderance this is to the Progress of the ever
blessed Truth in the Earth; and indeed it has been in my Mind, that the main
Work in this our Day is to search into the Churches, and endeavor to bring
them into such a Condition, that it may once more be said, Follow Christ as you
have us for Examples; not only here and there one, but the Believers in
general; so it will be, when we as a People all speak the same Thing, or that
which is agreeable, as well in our Practice (so often recommended) as in Faith
and Doctrine; for I have ever understood Examples to be more prevalent than
Precept: but if any amongst Friends be grown so hardy, and so unsensible, as to
prefer some foolish Fashions, which to me appear to be shameful and undecent,
it is an evident Demonstration they are departed too much from the Principles
and Practices of our worthy Elders in the Truth; which I fear is the case of
too many, both in that Nation and in England.

Let not any say, that I smite in the Dark, and do not tell what I mean; for
some few particulars I intend to mention for the Ease of my Mind: I have seen
several Changes of Fashions in forty Years Time; our first Friends and
Promoters of Truth came out in the Lord's Work and heavenly Power, plain, and
generally continued so for their Time; but alas! how soon there appeared an
Alteration, in some Men especially, when the Weight of Sufferings was over; it
then began to appear, and has from time to time continued to increase ever
since, among some professing Truth with us, not only in extravagant Wigs, with
much Powder in them, but also in Cross-pockets, needless Capes, and diverse Cuts
and Shapes in their Clothing, in Conformity to the prevailing Fashions of the
Times, as well as in setting up their Hats; all which appear to be more likely
to lead those, who follow them, into Egypt, or the World again, than into the
heavenly Country or Canaan, which we profess to be pressing after, and hope to
obtain in the End.

Now, not to let the Females pass without my Observation on them: I well
remember in my younger Years, especially in great Towns and Cities, I have met
with those that professed Truth with us, who have had but very little Coverings
on their Heads, and others that have had more set up at a considerable Distance
above their Foreheads, and both these Sorts perhaps bare necked. When I have
met with such I have said, What a fair or beautiful Daughter of Zion would
thou be if thou would put on Truth and Christ's Righteousness, and put away
all these foolish Fashions? And in Families, when I have asked some
Particulars, what they could say for these Dresses, and being so naked, both
Neck and Shoulders, I received this Answer, or someting like it, That it was
good for their Health, to keep their Temples cool, and to learn to be hardy, by
exposing themselves thus to the Air in their Youth: But if that was the true
Reason, I added this Caution to th^^^; to consider duly, if Religion did not,
yet the Modesty of their Sex should, reclaim them from it. Sometimes, with the
Dislike I showed to these Things, I advised them, that they would cover their
naked Skin, and no more expose themselves to the Lust and vain Speculation of
the worst, and great Trouble of their best Friends; and worst of all, to the
great Hurt of themselves, and in a manner destroying all reasonable Claim to
Christ: For how can our Love to, and Faith in him be true and sound, when our
Practice is so remote unto the Practice and Example of Christ and his Apostles,
which they gave and endeavored to inculcate? Be not conformed to this World,
but be ye transformed by the renewing of your Mind, that ye may prove what is
that good and acceptable, and perfect Will of God, Romans xii. 2. Whose adorning,
let it not be that outward Adorning of plaiting the Hair, and of wearing Gold,
or of putting on of Apparel: But let it be the hidden Man of the Heart, in that
which is not corruptible, even the Ornament of a meck and quiet Spirit, which
is in the Sight of God of great Price: For after this manner in the old Time,
the holy Women also who trusted in God adorned themselves, being in Subjection
unto their own Husbands, 1 Pet. iii. 3, 4, 5. Alas! woe is me, for the Hurt of
the Daughter of Zion, when I consider with Regret from whence such are fallen,
if ever restored out of the Fall.

If we as a People should follow such Examples as I have touched upon,
certainly we shall become an Hissing and a Bye-word to all Nations round about,
who may have heard of us, and what great Things the Lord of Hosts has done for
us since we became a People, as may and has been seen and heard in Examples,
Words and Writings from our faithful Friends and Brethren (the chief
Promulgators of Truth and Righteousness) in their unwearied Labors, Faith and
Sufferings for the Cause and Testimony of Jesus Christ; and what also was not
less remarkable, by their exemplary Lives of Plainness, Humility, Sincerity,
and Self-denial, with Works of Charity.

Now, thou that read this, beware that thou do not let in any wrong Mind,
and in that begin to judge me instead of judging thyself; for as far as I know,
I have but done my Duty: See first, that thou do thine before thou begins to
judge me. Bear this Caution from thy Friend, thou that God has endued with his
Spirit, and wait till this holy Spirit of Truth is upon thee a Spirit of
Judgment; as thou abidest under these Qualifications, thou art fit to sit in
Judgment, and judge wrong Things in thyself first, next in thy Family, and then
in the Church of Christ; and be unwearied in thy Labors to preserve, as well
as to restore, what thou art capable of doing in the Church of Christ, from all
wrong Ways and Things; for if Corruption and Slackness come in, and prevail
over the Leader, as well as over those whom God has raised thee up to be a
Help unto, then will the Lord deal with both thee and them some other Way; for
I am satisfied the Lord will turn his Hand upon his People in these Days, as he
did upon Israel formerly, saying, by his Prophet, He would purge away her
Dross, and take away all her Tin; not only all gross Evils, but also that which
in Appearance may be like Truth, but is not Truth: This was, and will be the
Way to restore Judges as at the First, and Counselors as at the Beginning: Oh!
then shall the Gentiles see thy Righteousness, and all Kings thy Glory, said
the Prophet.

Although there is great Occasion for an Amendment in many, yet there is a
bright and heavenly-minded Remnant in England, Ireland, and many other Parts in
the World, against whom I find not any thing to press upon my Mind to complain
of; but a Word of Encouragement springs in the Life, in the Love and good Will
of God, to press and persuade you to a steady Perseverance in the true Faith,
and in an exemplary and pious Life, (I never saw more need of this than now,
according to my View of the State of Things) that when the Lord the righteous
Judge, who will bring every Work into Judgment, with every secret Thing, these,
as beforementioned, may be found clear of the Blood of all Men, seeing that
they have warned them, and given Notice when they have seen any Danger, or an
Enemy approach nigh to them.

Here is Work for such as God has set up as Watchmen over his People, to see
that those do not go on in Bye-ways, who profess Truth, and leave the Way of
Truth unoccupied by them; here is Work for the true Judges, who have the Spirit
of Judgment upon them: And notwithstanding some, here and there, who may be
found in the faithful Discharge of that Trust the Lord has reposed in them,
may meet with some Opposition from such as are unfaithful, and not willing to
be bounded and girded by the Truth, no not so much as to an outward Consormity
to the Plainness and Decency, so much and frequently recommended by the
Writings, by public Testimonies, and also in our Meetings for Discipline; for
it is a considerable Branch of our Meetings for Discipline, to inspect into,
and take care to se^ that Friends walk orderly as becomes our holy Profession;
and where wrong Steps are made, and wrong Ways are gone into, and Liberty taken
by any who do profess Truth with us, that such may be dealt with, and the Evil,
as also the bad Consequence thereof, laid before them, and they be labored
with, and not left; for although it may be but a small Appearance or Beginning
of a Leprosy, which is naturally apt to spread, unless proper Applications, and
in due Time too, be made in the Wisdom and Love of God; yet if any there be who
prefer their own Wills, and so far love that Life they have in those Things,
that are not only evil in themselves, but also of evil Consequence by their bad
Example, more than they love Truth and the Unity of the Brethren, such had
better for Truth's sake, and for the Reputation of the Testimony thereof, be
dealt with, for Ease of the Minds of the Faithful, who suffer under the Sense
they frequently labor of a Cloud of Darkness and Oppression, wrong Ways and
wrong Things.

It may not be amiss to give a Hint here, at what Door many have gone out into
diverse Evils; first, by being brought by Custom to be in love with
Strong-drink, and keeping loose Company; for even such have been so far a Means
to corrupt, and in time to draw away the Mind from that Simplicity and Purity
the Lord's People ought to live in, until a Cloud has come over the
Understanding, and the Sense of the Virtue and heavenly Savor of the precious
Truth is lost; and then the old Inhabitants of the Land (comparitively
speaking) crowd in again, as Pride, Passion, Lust, Envy, loose Conversation,
open Drunkenness; nay some worse Spirits than ever had possessed them before,
have now entered their Minds with the former, that were once measureably
overcome and cast out; it is therefore certain, that the End of these will be
miserable, except the Lord grants them a Place of Repentance while here.

Now my tender and well beloved Friends, watch against and strive to keep out
the Enemy that he enter not; for what way soever he enters and gets Footing, he
defiles God's Temple; and before thou witnesses the Lord to destroy him and
cast him out again, thou must have many a sore Combat, and some Warfare
(perhaps more that thou art aware of) before thou gainest all the Ground thou
have lost, by giving way to the Adversary of thy Soul; therefore keep upon thy
Watchtower, watch unto the End, watch and pray continually, that ye enter not
into Temptation, said our great Lord unto his Followers: For I have found by
Experience, that it is harder to gain what we have lost, than to keep it while
we had it; and to improve our Talents, is not only the way to have them
continued, but also to have them more abundantly added unto us; but such as do
not improve what is given unto them, even that which they have been entrusted
with shall be taken from them: Oh! how desolate and miserable such will be in
the Day of Account, when Christ, like a great Shepherd, divides the Sheep from
the Goats, and between the Slothful and the Faithful Servants, between the wise
and the foolish Virgins, and between all those who adhered to, obeyed, and
followed him according to the Measure of Light and Knowledge received, and
those who have rejected and disobeyed the Strivings and Convictions of God's
holy Light, and blessed Spirit, placed in the Hearts of the Children of Men to
enlighten, instruct, reprove, comfort, and guide, according to the State of
every individual Mind, as it is conformable or disobedient to inward
Convictions. So is this holy Gift a Witness for, or against, to accuse, or
excuse in thy Conscience, according as thy good or evil Doings are and do
prevail in thy Heart and Soul. But this is somewhat a Digression from the
historical Part of my Travels; for as I have mentioned before my going into
Ireland, I shall now say something more particularly thereof.

We journeyed from Dublin toward Cork, and had several Meetings in our Way, as
at Ballicane, Culladine, Wexford, Lambstown, Waterford, Clonmel, Cashel,
Youghall, Cork, and staid their Province Meeting for Munsler, which was a good
and large Meeting. I was much out of Order here, by reason of a Fever and Ague
which held me several Days, and I was much obliged to my Friends, John Dobbs,
Joseph IIoare and his Family, for the great Care they took of me in this my
weak State; I was not without some Reasonings for a Time, as to my being out of
my native Country, but the Lord who is mighty in Power, helped me and raised me
again, and gave me Ability to discharge myself of that Service I was called to,
honored for ever be the great Name of the Lord for this and all his Mercies.

Next we came to Charleville, Limerick, Ross, and from thence to John Ashton's,
Birr, James Hutchinson's, Montrath, Mountmeleck, Henry Ridgway's, and from
Balinakil to Montrath again, and was at their Six-weeks Meeting, which was a
heavenly and good Meeting, there being a living Remnant there: Then we came to
Kilconner, Carlow, Ballitouer, John Stephenson's, Timahoe, Edenderry, and went
to see my good Friend Thomas Wilson, who was sore troubled with the Gravel; I
was much afflicted, and truly sympathized with him in my Spirit, and john
Barcroft, that true Man, and I did what we could for our afflicted Brother, and
so left him and his Family in the Love of God; and went to Lismoiny, the Moat,
Waterstown, Ballimurry, Athlone, and had another Meeting at the Moat;
Oldcaslle, Ballihays, Coothill, Castleshean, Ballihagan, Charlemount,
Dumclaudy, Colrain, James Moor's, the Grange, Antrim, Lisburn, Hillsborough,
and was at their Province Meeting, which was held at Ballenderry, and was also
at some Meetings twice; Monallen, Turmery, Lurgan, Rasser-Island, Newry, and
from thence to Drogheda, and so to Dublin, being the 29th of the Fifth Month,
1722, and stayed there some Meetings; and a living Remnant there is in that
City, but it is a rich Place; the mighty God of Heaven and Earth keep his
People low, and truly humble in that great City and every where else, is the
earnest Desire of my Soul to the Lord; for I know there is a considerable
Remant, whose Labor and daily Travail is to have the Church kept clean from
all manner of Defilements both of Flesh and Spirit, so that she may be
presented unto God the Father without Spot or Wrinkle, or any such Thing, in
the Day when she must appear before the great Judge of all the Earth, who will
do Right unto every one, according as their Works are found to be Good or Evil.

Being clear of Dublin and the whole Nation, I took shipping for Whitehaven,
and had a short Passage but a very roug^ one, and had some Meetings in my way
H^^^e, to which I got on the 21st of the Sixth Month, 1722, and found my
Children recovered from the Fever and Ague in which I left them when I took my
Journey, which Distemper had so far prevailed over them, that they were
sometimes scarcely sensible; it had been upon them for a considerable Time, and
it proved a Trial to me to leave them in that very weak State, but one Day as I
sought the Lord in the Fervency of my Heart, to know whether I should leave
these my two poor weak Children or not, as also my Housekeeper much in the
same Case (who were all my constant Family) it sprang in my Heart livingly, as
though it had been spoke with a Man's Voice, Leave them, and I will take care
of them: I said, Thou the Lord have never failed me, I will leave them to thee,
do what seems good in thy Eye with them. I looked then no more behind me,
neither at them nor any thing else I had left, but became as if I had not any
thing in the World. For thus it behooves all the Servants of Christ to do, even
the Married as if they were not married; and those that buy any Thing, as if
they did not possess it: This is a Liberty which many are Strangers unto, it is
wrought by the Finger of God, it is the Work of God's heavenly Power to loosen
Man thus from the Things of this World, and at the same Time we are most bound
unto Christ, yet enjoy a comfortable and heavenly Freedom in our Spirits in
Christ, by our Faith and Obedience unto him, in and through all Trials,
Provings and Adversities: And dear Friends, the greater the Cross, the greater
is the Crown and Reward which all those possess, who do all Things they do with
a single Mind, and an upright Heart unto the Lord in all Things, and at all
Times.

Thus the Children of the Bridegroom are or ought to be espoused or married to
Christ, and truly devoted to him, that so they may stand, as much as may be,
disintangled from all mutable Things, and cleave to and follow him when and
wheresoever he calls and leads, and be in Subjection to him, as a virtuous Wife
is not only bound, but willingly is subject, to her virtuous and preferable
Husband: Thus we may know and experience Christ to become our holy Head; and
that we may hold unto him, and that we may so walk and live, that he may take
Delight in his Church, (the Body) to rule in and over it, as we have the State
of the true Church and Christ represented in the most excellent and ^^cred
Writings of the Holy Scriptures. Oh! that we may likewise know the Marriage of
the Lamb to be come, and that as of old, we may make ourselves ready, put off
the Sins and Corruptions of the World that are through Lust, and put on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and his pure Righteousness: This is the fine Linen, the
Righteousness of the Saints; this is the Wedding Garment; without which
Preparations, and true Bride's Attire, I cannot see how any can expect an
Admittance into the Bridegroom's Chamber: Therefore I entreat all such as do
not find themselves in Preparation, and have not their Peace assured to them,
and want the Seal or Evidence of the Spirit of the Lord that they are his, not
to slumber away their precious Time until the Midnight, least unexpectedly the
Cry be heard to sound with Terror in thy Ears, Arise, trim thy Lamp, for behold
the Bridegroom comes, who has in Times past exercised Mercy and
Loving Kindness toward thee, and has sought diverse Ways to win thee to love
him; he has at Times reproved thee for thy evil Ways, and at other Times he
has set before thee the Comforts and Happiness thou should possess, if thou
would obey and follow him; nay, he has wooed thee as a young Man does a
Virgin, and if thou had devoted thyself to him, he would have gathered and
saved thee, and rejoiced over thee as a Bridegroom does over his Bride. But if
thou turnest thy Back upon all his Reproofs, Entreaties, and Endearments (as in
the Parable of the five foolish Virgins) in the Time when he (the Bridegroom)
calls to an account, he will not know thee otherwise than to shut thee out of
his Presence and Favor, notwithstanding whatever thou may have heard,
received or done, if thou continues to work Wickedness, and art not reclaimed
therefrom.

These Things sprang in my Mind as a Warning for all, to flee from every
destructive Thing, before the Lord overtakes them, when they cannot escape his
Hand of Justice; and also, that the Faithful may be encouraged in well-doing,
and to a faithful Perseverance to the End, Amen.

Some Things which have been omitted, I think proper to insert here, as worthy
of Observation. As I was traveling toward Lincoln, and passing through Brig,
Friends gave me Notice that there were two great Disputants, a Nonconformist
Minister, and a Doctor of Physic, who were like to go all or most of the Way
with me, as the Assizes were coming on, and would be at me with Arguments about
Religion, which I soon found true; for we were no sooner got into a suitable
Way but they began with me, which I endeavored to prevent by telling them, I
did not look upon myself to be qualified for Disputes; and withal I observed,
that sometimes Disputants ended in a worse Understanding one of another than
when they began, except they minded well to keep good Government; and now as we
appeared free and friendly, how we might be when we had ended our Dispute, was
a Question, therefore I had rather they would forbear: But they turned the deaf
Ear to all that I said, and nothing would do with them, but a Dispute we must
have. I then asked them what they would say? They queried, Whether all Men were
placed in a Station capable of Salvation, yea or nay? I replied, If I should
give my positive Thoughts to your Question, we shall have Occasion to go back
to treat of the Nature, not only of the upright State Man was in before he
fell, but also how he fell and also in the Fall, how he stands as in Relation
to his Restoration, which brings us to the Question. Although this be not the
usual Way of Disputants, yet if you will submit to it, it will either answer
your Question, or set it in a clearer Light for an Answer. They asked, How
could that be? I replied, if it did not, they might say so. They then so far
condescended as to hear me, and I said, first, we all agree in this, that Man
was made upright; secondly, that he fell from that Uprightness; the Question
then is, How? Answ. By the Offense or Disobedience of the first Man Adam Sin
entered, and Condemnation came upon all who had sinned. I then queried of the
Disputants, whether they believed that Adam's Fall did affect all those who did
not hear of it, as well as those who did? For, I said, there were some of
Opinion, that those who had not the explicit or outward Knowledge of the
promised Seed or Coming of Christ, had not the Benefit of his Coming; and
except they would first allow, that all were affected or hurt by Adam's Fall,
then such as were not, remained in Paradise to this Day, except they would make
the Remedy less than the Disease, the Plaster less than the Sore, and Christ's
Coming less extensive than Adam's Fall. I argued, that upon the foot of Reason,
as well as what we had in plain Scripture, Christ's Coming was as extensive as
the Fall of Adam; for, by the Obedience of Christ, the Gift of God came upon
all unto Justification.

Now I think, said I, your Question is set in a clear Light for an Answer, or
else answered; so take it at what End you will (laying aside all Quibbling) I
intend to join Issue with you, and prove that all Men are placed in a Station
capable of Salvation; or otherwise you must leave a great Part of the World in
Paradise, or make the Coming of Christ less extensive than the Fall of Adam. I
then queried, what they said to all this? They answered, they never heard the
like before, and they would not meddle with me, I was too great a Scholar for
them. I said, there was little of Scholarship in it; I offered, I thought,
nothing but plain Scripture and sound Reason; and I told them, I had now as
good as answered their Question, and had given several Reasons to back my
Answer, and as they appeared wise, well read Men, and as far as I had gathered,
had been principled against universal Salvation, and universal Grace, for them
now to drop the Matter so slenderly, before me who appeared but like a Child to
them, was very surprising: But they replied, they would not meddle with me.

I then commended them for their good Temper, and the Civility they showed to
me, for they were civil to me beyond what I could expect; and they invited me
to the Burial of one of their deceased Friends, but I could not go, for I was
in haste to get to Lincoln, having some Business there that hastened me. Now at
parting with them, my Soul magnified the Lord, under a Sense of his Goodness to
me, in that he had opened my Way, and helped me through this Difficulty, with
many other Trials and Afflictions I had met with.

I had at another Time some Reasonings with a Papist who was my Neighbor,
about the Visibility of their Church, and Transubstantiation, with several
other Things. As to the first, I showed him, that the true Church fled into the
Wilderness, where she was for Times, Time, and half a Time; in this State we do
not read she had any outward Character as a visible Church; and that if they
derived their Descent, it was from some false Church, and not through the true
one. And as to the other, they took too much upon them, more than they could
justify from Scripture, or clearly demonstrate from Christ or his Apostles; for
Christ never gave any of them such a Commission, as to convert Bread and Wine
into real Flesh and Blood, and then to call it Christ. You, said I, by these
Notions, deceive yourselves and your Adherents; for Christ spoke unto such as
you by Parables, because they were carnal, and did not understand the Meaning
of his Sayings in this Case, no more than the Jews understood what Christ
meant, when he spoke of destroying this Temple (meaning his Body) which they
understood was of that Temple at Jerusalem, which they made a great Wonder at,
and said, How can this be that he can destroy this Temple, and raise it up
again in three Days, when it was Forty eight Years in building? Thus they
reasoned carnally, as Nicodemus (though a Ruler of the Jews) did concerning
Regeneration or the new Birth; and as the Woman of Samaria did, from whence
Christ should have that living Water, which he spoke of, that should be in Man
as a Well of living Water, springing up unto everlasting Life; and as the Jews
did, when Christ said, Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his
Blood, ye have no Life in you; they said, How can this be, that he can give us
his Flesh to eat, and his Blood to drink? But this is a spiritual Eating and
Drinking; even as Christ said, Out of the Belly of him that believes, shall
flow Rivers of living Waters; which he spoke of the Spirit: In like manner it
is said in the Revelation, Behold I stand at the Door and knock, is any Man
hear my Voice, and open unto me, I will come in, and sup with him, and he with
me. Here is an Union of Spirits between Christ and his faithful Children, and
here is an inward Eating and Drinking of the heavenly, spiritual and mystical
Flesh and Blood of Christ, which carnal Men cannot eat of, neither can the
carnal Eye discern Christ's spiritual Body, which he feeds his living and
spiritual Church withal. When I had reasoned with the Man to this Effect, he
went away seemingly not pleased, but would not from that Time ever meddle with
me any more.

I need not say much here about Christ's being come; having showed, in a
Conference in New England, how he is come to answer his Eating and Drinking the
Passover and last Supper with his Disciples, saying, He would drink no more of
the Fruit of the Vine, until he drank it new with them in his Father's Kingdom.
Now he that has experienced what this Eating and Drinking is, is come beyond
the outward Eating and Drinking, into the Kingdom which is within, which comes
not with outward Observations, Eatings, Drinkings, nor carnal Ordinances, but
the Kingdom of Heaven consists in Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the Holy
Ghost.

Now, read this thou that can, and learn to understand between the Thing that
points, and the Thing which is pointed at, and between the Thing signifying,
and the Thing signified, and mistake not the Shadow for the Substance any
longer; for it is possible a Man may do all the outward Parts, and yet be
ignorant of the Cross of Christ, and of the heavenly Substance: But if he is
come to the End of these outside Things, to the Holy of Holies, such will know
what it is to minister before the Lord in his Temple, and to serve and wait at
the holy Altar, and live, and have that pure spiritual Life preserved: For we
read not of any Tithes that appertain to this spiritual Priesthood, or Gospel
Ministry; and what their outward Maintenance was to be, is showed by Christ,
beyond Contradiction, who sent them forth. Where they were received (mark that
well) they might eat such Things as were set before them, but were not to take
any Thing from them by Force, for that is out of the Doctrine and Practice of
Christ and his Apostles.

Why do People call the Scripture their Rule of Faith and Manners, when at the
same Time they believe and act contrary thereto? for when I had some Years
before a Debate with the Priest of our Parish, we meeting at Sponton, I being
there upon some Occasion, and several People met together, the Priest demanded
my Reasons, why I did not pay him his Tithe? I used some persuasive Arguments
to put him off, not being willing at that Time to enter into any Debate with
him; but the more I showed my Unwillingness to it, the more urgent he was upon
me: So when I could not see how to avoid entering into some close Debate with
him, I desired he would not be angry, and he said he would not; I then showed
in several Particulars, why I could not pay him any Tithe, because I believed,
if he was a Minister of Jesus Christ, he ought not to claim any; for, as there
was a Change of the Priesthood, there also must be of Necessity a Change of the
Law, as we see in Heb. vii. 12. and to pretense to draw any Command or Example
from Christ or his Apostles, out of the New Testament, for that Purpose,
appears to me weak and inconsistent.

We had some farther Discourse upon the Ground of his Right and Title to
Tithes, whether Jure divino, as they used to be formerly claimed, or Jure
humano; that is, by human Laws, as most of the modern Priests seem to choose to
fix their Title; I bid him fix his Right for Tithes on which Claim he pleased,
and I would endeavor to answer him as well as I could, but he seemed not to
fix upon either; whereupon I told him, That there was no scriptural Settlement
of Tithes upon Gospel Ministers, and also offered to prove, that he was neither
in the Practice of the Levites, to whom Tithes were directed to be paid, nor
yet in the Practice of those Ministers whom Christ qualified, ordained and sent
forth: First, not in the Practice of the Levites; because the Tithes due to
them, were for their Service and punctual Performance of their Part of the
ceremonial Law, Numb. xviii. 21. which if any now claimed, it seemed to me,
that he subjected himself to the Practice of burnt Offerings and Sacrifices,
Circumcision, Jewish Habits, Washings, etc. (besides which, the Law which
appointed the Tithe to the Levites, expressly forbids them to have any Share or
Inheritance in the Land, as appears from Numb. xviii. 20, 23, 24, and Deuteronomy.
xviii. 1, 2.) which the modern Claimers of Tithe would be loath to be compelled
to the Practice of; not to insist on the Law of the third Year's Tithe, of
which the Widow, the Fatherless and the Stranger within their Gates, were to
receive a considerable Part as their allotted Portion, Deuteronomy. xiv. 28, 29.
Secondly, not in the Practice of those Ministers Christ qualified and sent
forth; for these went out by an especial Command from him, without Gold, Silver
or Brass in their Purses, without two Coats; and so intent were they to be in
the Execution of their great Duty of preaching the Gospel, that they were to
salute no Man by the way, but to go forward on the great Errand they had
received in Commission: And when they returned to their Lord he asked them, If
they lacked any Thing? And they said, Nothing; yet not because they had forced
a Maintenance from any, but that the Effect of their Ministry among their
Hearers had been so prevalent, that those who had been convinced by their
Doctrine, and turned to the effectual Power of Christ in themselves, had from
thence known their Hearts so opened, as to administer to all their immediate
Necessities; and these, thus sent, had only eat such Things as were set before
them, as they were appointed; and where they had sown Spirituals, had only
reaped of the Temporals of their Converts for their immediate Subsistence: But
though thou sowest not to me of thy Spirituals, nor do I believe thee to be one
who have any thing spiritual, which can be of any Benefit to my spiritual Part;
and though thou esteemest me as an Heathen Man and a Publican, and I am
excommunicated and cut off from any Church Fellowship with thee, (not for any
Evil, but as far as I can understand, for not coming to what thou call the
Church) yet thou expectest to reap of my Temporals, because the Law of the Land
has given thee that Power; which Disposition to reap where thou have not sown,
and to gather where thou have not strown, is far from manifesting a Christian
Spirit.

The Priest farther urged some Passages out of the New Testament, in
Vindication of the Payment of Tithes, alluding to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor.
ix. 7. about sowing of spiritual Things unto us; that it was but a small Thing
if such received of our carnal Things; and that of feeding a Flock, and
partaking of the Milk of the Flock; and of planting a Vineyard, and eating the
Fruit thereof: All which I endeavored to obviate, by showing, that he did not
sow his Spirituals to us, so as that he might be entitled to our carnal
Things; neither were we of that Flock which he should partake of the Milk of;
neither were a Vineyard which he had planted, that he might eat of the Fruit
thereof. Furthermore I said, as I am a Stranger, and an excommunicated Person,
and not of thy Children, the Apostles, if they wanted or were in any Straits
for Necessaries, did not apply to Strangers for Help, but to such of their
Children as they had been instrumental in the Hand of God to plant the true
Faith, and sow the Seed of the Kingdom in: Now these who are thus convinced,
and by the Work of God's Power converted, these were such who knew spiritual
Things sown in them, who I believed were very free to distribute (where true
Need was) of their temporal Things, especially to such who had been
instrumental in the Lord's Hand to their coming to the saving Knowledge of
Jesus Christ. But I showed the Priest, that all this carried no Analogy to what
was between him and me, for I, being excommunicated, was but to him as an
heathen Man and a Publican, and as we never came to hear him, we could not owe
him any Acknowledgement, nor could he expect any Thing as a freewill-offering
on that Account.

This Priest Wykes (for that was his Name) was a strong spirited Man, of
considerable Parts and Learning; and a neighboring Justice of the Peace told
me, he was fearful would be very severe with me; yet to his Commendation be it
spoken, he was ever after this Conference very loving, and never gave me any
Trouble for those (...) called his Dues.

I may add one Observation or two not mentioned in our Debate, which were, that
if the Maintenance of the Priests was to be wholly withdrawn, or left to the
Freedom and Generosity of the People, many of them would want and come to
Poverty, and be forced to labor with their Hands, which would distract or at
least impede their Studies. I answered, that with such Ministers as they were,
this might be the Case: But if all would come truly and rightly to wait on the
great Teacher, the Anointing in themselves, it would greatly tend to the
Advantage of Christendom; for the Almighty, who by his good Spirit is alone
able to raise up and qualify Gospel Ministers, as he knows the Wants of his
People, and their Faith and Trust in him, would no doubt raise up from among
them faithful Ministers; such, who being humble, meek and low in Heart, like
him of whom they had learned, would be content to live in Moderation on a
little, and to labor in their respective Callings, like the Apostle Paul, that
great Minister of the Gentiles, working with their Hands that their Ministry
might not be chargeable, such as Fishermen, Collectors of Customs, etc. whose
Ministry being not their own, but received immediately from the great Shepherd
of the Sheep, would not require much Time and Study to pen down, but coming
from the Spirit of Truth immediately moving upon the Minister's Heart, would be
more effectual to reach the Witness of Truth in the Hearts of their Hearers
than all the labored Discourses of the most subtle Pr^est, though the Produce
of much Pains and Sr^^^y. Neither have I found in all my Travels (...) any
Observation I have made, that ever the ^^^^^ful Ministers of Christ became any
gre^^^ ^^^^en or Charge to the Churches; for I have seen the Divine Providence
attend the Lord's faithful Servants, who thereby have been enabled to order
their Affairs with Discretion, so as to want little.

An ACCOUNT of my second Visit to FRIENDS in AMERICA.
I Having had Drawings in my Mind, for some considerable Time, once more to
visit Friends in several Parts of America, and inasmuch as I believed it was my
Duty, and what the Lord required of me to give up to, I was resigned, after
some Reasonings about my Age, and Doclension as to Ability of outward Strength,
concerning which I met with some inward Conflicts and Combatings which brought
me very low for a Time; but the Lord helped me through these Difficulties, and
caused his Truth to spring comfortably in my Heart, and his heavenly Presence I
witnessed at Times to refresh my Soul in these Exercises unknown to many; and
the Time being come for my preparing for the Journey, on the 15th of the Third
Month 1731, I set forward from Hutton in the Hole to Scarborough, where I took
shipping with George Widget for London, and came thither the first Day of the
Yearly Meeting, with which I was very well satisfied, and on the 25th Day of
the Fourth Month went on board of a Vessel bound for Philadelphia in America,
John Wilcox Master, who was very civil and kind to me.

On the 27th of the said Month we set sail, and had a good Passage in the main,
excepting that we had one very great Storm, in which we were in Danger of being
lost; our Bolt-sprit was broke, and the Masts were in Danger of coming down,
yet we were preserved, and in about eleven Weeks, being the 12th of the Seventh
Month, I landed near Philadelphia, to the great Satisfaction of Friends as well
as my self, renowned be the great Name of the Lord for ever.

I have many Times considered, that although it was my Place to leave my very
near and dear Friends, Children and Relations, who in a tender Frame of Spirit
were much concerned for me, and I for them, yet I met with many tenderhearted
Friends in my Travels, who were very near me in the ever blessed Truth; which
fails not those who trust in the Lord, and are faithful, according to the
Ability and Understanding which the Lord, has given to the Children of Men,
and are devoted to answer the Leadings and Guidance of his Holy Spirit, and
willing to bear the Cross, Burden, or Yoke, which he sees good to lay upon his
Servants and Handmaids: And I entreat all such who are called unto the Lord's
great Work, to give up cheerfully and not grudgingly, and not to look back at
what is behind, so as to hasten or hinder themselves in that Work they are
called to, lest they fall short of that Penny, or Crown, which the Faithful
will receive in the End of all their Labor.

The Yearly Meeting at Philadelphia was nigh when we landed, which was large,
and a good Meeting, many Friends from several Parts being at it. Here I met
with Henry Frankland, and we were truly glad to see each other, and went in
Company together southward toward Maryland, Virginia, and North Carolina, and
returned to Pennsylvania; and in a short time after we parted: He came for
England, and I traveled for New England through the Jerseys, Long Island,
Rhode Island and Nantucket, having Richard Waln of Pennsylvania for my
Companion, an innocent good Man; we passed through all, or most part of the
aforesaid Provinces and Islands, and had very large Meetings, and great
Attention there was in many to hear the Testimony of Truth, and an open Door
both of Utterance, and in many Places of Entrance, for what was delivered; yet
not without Opposition in some Places.

I had some Discourse with a Baptist, a Justice of Peace, in one of the
Jerseys, (a Man whom I truly loved) and he told me that some of his Children
went to our Meetings, and he did not hinder them; he appeared a tender spirited
Man, and was of good Repute in these Parts where he lived, and very serviceable
in his P^st: What we had most in debate, was touch^^^ Water-B^ptism: I
endeavored to show him (...) Use and End of all the shadowy Things, all ^uch
were ended in Christ the Substance, or Antitype; and that such outward
Materials or Elements appertained not unto his Kingdom, or inward and spiritual
Administration; nor could they take away the Root or Cause of Sin, which is
only effected by the Holy Ghost and Fire, or the Holy Ghost that works as
does Fire, to the cleansing and purifying the Hearts of the Children of Men, as
is the Nature of material Fire to cleanse what it is properly applied unto.

I met with the same Justice afterward at Burlington in West-Jersey, he was
glad to see me, and so was I to see him, for he was very loving and friendly. I
likewise met with a Man who was a Schoolmaster upon Long Island, that appeared
somewhat offended at something I had said in a Meeting where h^ had been, and
he followed me to a Friend's House, and appeared so full of Scriptures in
Vindication (as he thought) of Water Baptism, that what with his reading many
Passages in the Scriptures, and paraphrasing upon them, he would not hear me
for some Time; but when he was quiet I said to him, Thou have not treated me
like a fair Disputant, to run on so long, and not to give me Time to make my
Objections; if thou had pitched upon any particular Scripture, and given me
Liberty to have answered, it would have been civil and reasonable. He owned, he
d^d not done fairly by me; but I desired to know, what Church he pretended to
belong to? He answered, To the Episcopal Church. I then requested he would
answer me one Question before we entered into any farther Debate, and he
promised he would if he understood it. I told him, I heard he was a Scholar,
and no doubt but he understood how to answer it, if he did but consider the
Matter; the Query was this, Whether the sprinkling a little Water in a Child's
Face, would bear the Name Baptism, yea or nay? He said, it would not. I
answered, Thou have made a great Pother and Noise about little or nothing; for
by thy own Confession thy Church has no Baptism at all, for I know not of any
other Way they use but Sprinkling. He would not enter into any farther
Discourse about it, but made use of the Words of Gamaliel, in favor of the
Work the Apostles were concerned in, saying, If this Work be of God it could
not be overthrown, but if it was of Man it would come to naught. I told him, I
was of his Mind; and the Lord has supported me in this and the like Work, now
between forty and fifty Years, and if I continued faithful, I had no Doubt at
all in my Mind, but he would support and stand by me to the End. And when we
parted he said, The Lord of Heaven and Earth bless you, for I believe you are
an honest Man.

By this we may see, that Truth sometimes comes over Men, and the Witness which
God has placed in Men is reached, and Truth prevails many Times beyond our
Expectation, or what is by us foreseen; therefore it is good to keep to the
Guidance or Leading of the Spirit of Truth, for it is a blessed Remembrancer,
Instructor and true Comforter to all such as truly depend upon him, who sent
the Spirit of Truth into the Hearts of the Children of Men, to guide them into
all the necessary Truths which we are to know and practice, and consequently
out of all Untruth.

When we had gone through this Island, and visited Friends there, and in
Rhode Island, and had some Meetings in our Way, we went to Nantucket, where we
met with many innocent plain Friends; also on Rhode Island, and in many Places
in these Parts of the Country, we found great Openness; in Boston beyond
Expectation, and there was some Convincement in that Town. We traveled up to
Dover, and visited Friends thereabout (which are the most remote Parts where
Friends inhabit in that Quarter of New England) where I met with a Presbyterian
Priest: What his Design chiefly was in coming to the Friend's House I know not,
but thought it was to see, or rather speak with me, for he soon began to ask me
some Questions; first, Whether I was not brought up a Scholar, and had been in
some of the Colleges where I had my Education? And also, Whether I had not put
on the canonical Gown, and preached according to the Manner of the Church of
Enland? I replied, I had not received my Education in any College, neither ever
put on the canonical Gown, nor preached after the Manner of the Church of
England. He told me, I had been so represented to him; and said, he supposed I
had been at some Schools: I told him, I had been at several to learn when I was
young; and said, I did not know that I had given Occasion at any Time, by what
I had said, whereby any Man might judge me to be a Scholar. He understood I
came from Old England, and began to ask several Questions, as Whether our
Friends increased or decreased? I answered I could not positively tell; I
thought there was no great Alteration in my Time as to Number, for their
Decrease in one Part of the Nation, I thought might be made up in their
Increase in another Part. He also asked me, How the episcopal Ministers dealt
with us about their Tithes? My Answer was thus; As to that Part called the
Praedial Tithes, they commonly either gather them themselves or Family, or set
them to Tenants who take care to fetch them away before us, knowing that we
cannot be free to leave them on the Ground, as Hay and Corn, etc. and as to
small Tithes, there is an The 7th and 8th of William the third, Chap. 6. is the
Act for Recovery of small Tithes or Offerings, etc. not amounting to above the
Yearly Value of forty Shillings, which is common for all People, the Cost not
exceeding ten Shillings, before two or more Justices of the Peace, not to go
back above two Years. The 7th and 8th of William the third, Chap. 34, which is
our Affirmation Act, is the Act for the Recovery of Tithes and Church-rates for
any Sum not exceeding ten Pounds from Quakers only, before two Justices of the
Peace, without any Limitation of Time. And by the statute of the first of
George the first, Chap. 6. Sect. 2. limited to ten Shillings Cost. See the
Statutes at large.


Act of Parliament, called An Act for the more easy Recovery of small Tithes,
for any Sum not exceeding forty Shillings, and ten Shillings Cost; which is by
Justice's Warrants. This is mostly thought to be intended to prevent their
Procedure by Exchequer Process, through which great Havoc and Spoil has been
made of Friends Goods, and sometimes their Bodies cast into Prison, where some
have lain a long Time. He asked, How our Friends did in Scotland, if they
increased there? I told him, I heard that they did not increase, but some of
the Presbyterians in Scotland were kind to our Friends, and would come to our
Meetings, especially if Strangers were at them: And I also told him, that
Persecution in our Part of the World was become hateful amongst most sober
People. He said, It was very well; and likewise mentioned, that we were
refined, and not the People we had been. I asked him, wherein he thought we
were refined? He answered, in our Principles. I desired him to name one; and he
said, George Fox denied the Resurrection of the Dead. I told him, George Fox
did own a Resurrection according to Scripture, as we do; but because he and our
Friends thought it not safe to recede from plain Scripture, nor to comply with
the Way many People have of expressing it, which we think to be too gross and
carnal, viz. that the same Body shall rise, therefore they have asserted we
deny the Resurrection: The Apostle says, that which thou sowest, thou sowest
not that Body that shall be, for it is sown in Corruption, raised in
Incorruption, sown a natural, raised a spiritual Body; with much more that
might be added: And how much such a Change makes a Difference between the
present and the future in the Resurrection, between natural and spiritual,
Corruption and Incorruption, I know not of any finite Creature that is able
truly to determine; and therefore I think it is not consistent with Charity,
nor true Wisdom, to differ about such Things which exceed our Comprehension. He
allowed it to be better to let them alone.

We parted very friendly, and Friends were glad of the Opportunity, he having
the Character of being a great Scholar and a wise Man; but from all that
passed, they believed he gained no Advantage: However he behaved well; and
before we parted, I told him, I thought the greatest Reason why some think us
refined was this, That formerly People were so prejudiced, that whatever was
printed or said against us, our Principles, Practice and Doctrines, was
generally received and believed, though never so much disguised or covered with
such Dresses as might render us most odious, and were by many taken for the
Standard of our Belief and Practice; but of late the Light has more appeared,
and many are grown better disposed toward us, and like wise Men, not willing
to be imposed upon any longer, have searched for themselves into the State of
the Controversy between us and our Opposers; and our Writings upon perusal,
appearing so clear and different from what the Books of those who opposed us
charged upon us, caused many who read them with a good Design, and were willing
to be set right, to say we were reformed, and not the People that we had been.
The Priest said, he thought there might be much owing to that: I told him it
was undeniable, that there must be a great Difference between our Principles,
Doctrines and Conversations, truly stated and set forth in their proper Light,
and when they were misrepresented, sometimes with all the Art and implacable
Malice that Men were capable of: And this has been the Way our Adversaries have
treated us, almost in every thing we have believed, said or writ, although it
was very agreeable to the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament.

We returned back by Salem, Lynn and Boston, and visited Friends in our Way,
and at Rhode Island, Long Island and New York; and we had many good Meetings
and some large in the Jerseys, where I had some Discourse with a Justice of the
Peace about Water Baptism, but he did not hold it long before he gave up; and I
had another at Allens Town with a Presbyterian, which held for some Hours,
about Water Baptism, and concerning Election and Reprobation, and he also soon
gave up as to the first; but when he began about Election and Reprobation, I
said, I thought it was the most pernicious Doctrine that ever was broached in
the World, it did so oppose the very Nature of God, and his Design of creating
of Man, which, with all his other Works, he pronounced good and blessed; and
that Man, as the Crown and Glory of all his Works which he had created, should
be designed for the most miserable End, was unaccountable; I urged many
Scriptures against that Doctrine, as also the Confusion they were in about it,
as that of their Westminster Confession of Faith, wherein they say, That the
Decree is so certain and definite, that one cannot be added to the Number of
the Elect, or diminished from the Number of the Reprobate; and yet you tell us,
that God has ordained the Means to effect his Ends: I then said, this
Supposition of a Decree for the Means, as well as the End, seems intended to
make the Priests and their Service necessary; but yet if they cannot alter the
Decree, what Benefit or Advantage can there be to Men by their Services or
Performance? I hope none will think that a Service to Mankind, to strengthen or
confirm that Decree if it were in their Power to do it, which I am satisfied it
is not; because no such Decree was made or is in being; the opposite appearing
by plain Scripture (which he owned when I urged it) to wit, that the Fall of
Adam did affect all; and upon the Parity of Reason, the Coming of Christ did
reach as far; because, as in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be made
alive; he tasted Death for every Man, was a Propitiation for the Sins of all;
and where then will thou find a People that is not included? But if thou can
find in, and prove by plain Scripture, that there is such a People not included
in these general Assertions, that Christ came to save, show me who they are.
These and much more I urged against that Doctrine, and he with many othe^s
appeared much satisfied, and we parted friendly. He came next Day several Miles
to a Meeting which I had appointed; the Man was counted a wise and sober Man,
and was under some Convincement, and behaved well.

From thence we went to Pennsylvania, and had many good Meetings in that Part,
and being clear and willing to return, I took leave of Friends in a loving and
tender Frame of Spirit, and embarked on board a Ship, whereof Samuel Flower was
Master, the 1st of the Third Month 1733 at Philadelphia, and arrived at Bristol
the 18th of the Fourth Month following, and was glad we got safe to England,
having been seven Weeks in our Passage; I got Home on the 6th of the Sixth
Month, and was truly thankful to the Lord, who had preserved me in these long
Travels and Labors of Love, through many Difficulties; but the Lord's Power is
sufficient to bear up and carry through all, Renowned be his worthy Name over
all, now and for ever, Amen.

A remarkable DELIVERANCE which happened to me, being omitted in its proper
Place, I think fit to insert here, which was as follows:

In the Year 1718 and the Twelfth Month, when John Dodgson was visiting Friends
in our Parts, he lodged with me, and I went with him and his Brother in Law
Peter Buck, to (...) their Guide to Whitby, and staid their First day's
Meeting, and Second-day's Preparative Meeting; and on the Third-day I went on
with Friends toward Scarborough, to have the better Road Home, there having
fallen a great deal of Snow while we were at Whitby, so that it was looked upon
impracticable for me to return the same Way home that I came, it being a
moorish, bad Way: But in our Way back, within a Mile or little more from
Scarborough, we came to a Brook, which by reason of the excessive Rain and Snow
was higher than ever I had seen it, so that when we came to ride through it,
Henry Levins, our Guide, first adventured in, being mounted upon a very strong
large Horse, and got over with some Difficulty, and I followed him; but when I
came about the middle of the fording Place, it took my Mare off her Feet, and
something being in the way, it turned her upon her Broadside, so that I was
dismounted and carried away by the Rapidity of the Stream; but there being a
Foot-bridge a little below, about Knee deep under Water, and no Rail either to
be a Guide, or to lay a Hand on, and the Water being reduced to a narrow
Compass, hurried me violently along, and drove me with my Breast against the
Bridge with such Force, that it very near knocked the Breath out of me; but
before I touched the Bridge I happened to hold up my Hand, and John Dodgson
seeing the Danger I was in, jumped off his Horse, and ran at a venture (seeing
the Water ripple) to hit the Bridge, and just caught hold of my Fingers, and
held my Head above Water, until Henry Levins, who was got over, came to his
Assistance.

But by the Strength of the Water in my Boot-tops, they being large, and by a
Nail (in the Timber under the Bridge) catching hold of my great Coat, which
held me fast, it was impossible for one Man to free me, and not without some
Difficulty for them both to get me out, the Nail holding so fast that it tore
out a great Piece of my Coat, Lining and all; but upon Henry's dismounting, his
Horse ran away to Scarborough, (and mine swam back to the Company) and when
they had got me out, Henry ran on foot to get his Horse, and found him at the
Stable Door where he used to stand, and in the mean Time John Dodgson kept me
in Motion by dragging me along, having very little or sometimes no Hopes of my
Recovery. When the Horse returned, they got me back to Scarborough, but I was
not sensible how, and they had me to Dorothy Jaques's House, and when there,
they could perceive my Lips move, but could not hear what I said, until one
laid an Ear close to my Mouth, and so understood that I said, If they gave me
any Thing that was strong, it would carry me off; which made them very
cautious: However, they stripped me and changed my Shirt, and put me into a
warmed Bed, and applied warm Flannel to my Feet for three Hours together, which
I knew nothing of, being then altogether senseless.

Isaac Skeleton, who had been a Companion of mine, in the Service of the Truth,
through several Counties, hearing of this Accident, came immediately and got
into Bed to me, and kept me close in his Bosom, which many thought was a great
Means to preserve my Life. John Dodgson, though he intended for the
Monthly Meeting, expressed so great a Concern for me, that he said, He would
either see me in a Way of Recovery, or die, before he left me; yet it pleased
the Lord, of his infinite Mercy so wonderfully to raise me up again, as to
enable me to be at the Meeting next Day, and also to bear some Testimony, which
was very acceptable and comfortable to Friends, as it was also to see me there
beyond their Expectation; but yet I was much troubled with Pain, the fleshy
Part of my Shoulder being rent by the violent hauling me out of the Water.

In Gratitude, my Soul can do no less than praise and magnify the Lord for this
great Deliverance, and all his other Mercies, who alone is worthy. And I cannot
but take Notice of Friends Kindness and Goodwill to me, in doing whatsoever
they could for me, but more especially my worthy Friend John Dodgson, who
hazarded his Life to save mine.

FINIS
The following BOOKS are printed and to be sold by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, in
Market-street, between Second and Thirdstreets, Philadelphia.
The original and present State of Man, briefly considered; wherein is shown,
The Nature of his Fall, and the Necessity, Means, and Manner of his
Restoration, through the Sacrifice of Christ, and the sensible Operation of
that divine Principle of Grace and Truth, held forth to the World by the People
called Quakers, by Joseph Phipps. Some Account of the Life and Gospel Labors
of William Reckitt, late of Lincolnshire in Great Britain. Also, Memoirs of the
Life, Religious Experiences and Gospel Labors of James Gough, late of Dublin,
deceased. Bound together. Works of that faithful Minister of Jesus Christ, John
Woolman, late of Mount-Holly in New Jersey, containing his Journal and other
Writings. Fruits of Retirement: or Miscellaneous Poems, moral and divine; being
Contemplations, Letters, etc. by Mary Mollineux. The Plain Path to Christian
Perfection, showing that we are to seek for Reconciliation and Union with God,
solely by renouncing ourselves, denying the World, and following our blessed
Savior in the Regeneration. Translated from the French. The History of the
Life of Thomas Ellwood: Or an Account of his Birth, Education, etc. with diverse
Observations on his Life and Manners when a Youth; and how he came to be
convinced of the Truth; with his many Sufferings and Services for the same.
Primitive Christianity revived, in the Faith and Practice of the People called
Quakers. Written in Testimony to the present Dispensation of God through them,
to the World; that Prejudices may be removed, the Simple informed, the
Well-inclined encouraged, and the TRUTH, and its innocent FRIENDS rightly
represented, by William Penn. Memoirs of the Life of John Roberts, alias
Hayward. Seven Discourses and three Prayers, with an Epistle to Friends in
Tortola, by Samuel Fothergill. Grounds of a Holy Life, by Hugh Turford. Fruits
of a Father's Love; being William Penn's Advice to his Children, relating to
their Civil and Religious Conduct.
He has also for Sale:

Writing Paper of different Sizes and Qualities, in large of small Quantities;
Parchment; Quills; Ink-Powder; Sealing-Wax; Wafers. Blank Account Books;
Bibles; Testaments; Dilworth's, Benezet's and Pierce's Spelling-Books; Primers;
Buchanan's regular English Syntax; Bachmair's Grammar for learning German;
Schoolmaster's Assistant, and Sundry other Books and Stationary.


