SOME REMARKS, On a PAMPHLET entitled, ALL MEN will not be saved for ever:
Wrote by SAMUEL MATHER, Pastor of a Church in AMERICAN BOSTON: In answer to
one, entitled, Salvation for ALL MEN: In which there is an endeavor to clear
several passages of scripture, which appear very much darkened by the writer,
and the several authors referred to in that performance: By comparing scripture
with scripture, or attending to the scripture as its own interpreter. Addressed
to Mr. MATHER: TOGETHER, With some remarks on the insidious pamphlet, (so
called, by him) TO WHICH IS ANNEXED, FOUR INFERRENCES from the above REMARKS.

By SHIPPIE TOWNSEND, of said Boston.

To the law and to the testimony, if they speak not according to this word, it
is because there is no morning in them.

Prophet Isaiah. For I determine to know nothing among you, save Jesus Christ
and him crucified; for though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the
flesh, for the weapons of our warfare are not carnal but mighty through God, to
the pulling down of strong holds, casting down imaginations, and every high
thing that exalts itself against the knowledge of God, and bringing into
captivity every thought to the ob^^^ence of Jesus Christ, which things also we
speak, not in the word, that man's wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost
teaches, comparing spiritual things with spiritual.

Paul to the Corinthians. COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS, BOSTON, N. E PRINTED
AND SOLD BY N. WILLIS, COURT STREET. M,DCC,LXXXIII.

REMARKS, etc.
To Mr. Mather.
SIR,
AS the subject before us is the common salvation, I take liberty to lay aside
your addition, as that which no way belongs to the point in controversy, and
consider myself as on a perfect level with you, (your superiority in years
excepted, to which I mean ever to have a due regard) that I may write with that
freedom and plainess, that becomes one, contending for a truth, which I judge,
of equal importance to all the descendants from apostate Adam. I remember to
have heard this observation, that while we are attempting to pull down our
neighbor's one idol, we are in danger of setting up two of our own; but I hope
I am not so ignorant of the pride of the human heart, and the devices of the
grand adversary, as to think myself not equally liable with others engaged in
controversial writings, to contend for victory and triumph, rather than truth;
and of being influenced by the vanity of my carnal mind, rather than the
meekness and gentleness of Christ. To him who is able to keep me from falling
into the condemnation of the devil, I now commit myself, and proceed to the
remarks proposed; may they be made with that meekness that becomes the man who
fears God, loves his truth, does not despise, but love his neighbor.

NOTWITHSTANDING the many objections I have against your performance, I must
acknowledge there are some things in it that justly demands one's attention, in
the premonition to the reader; your bringing up to view, Matthew 7, 13, 14, the
exhortation to enter into the straight gate -- and to beware of false prophets;
was very agreeable as you present it to view -- "as coming from the great light
of the world, the only and true way to God and happiness;" and it sixed my
tho'ts the more, as it is a passage of scripture that has many years engaged me
in the inquiring what is the true import of it, as not knowing but that I might
profit by your interpretations thereof, which indeed did not appear
satisfactory to my mind, more than any thing that I had been before acquainted
with; therefore I set my self to inquire into the meaning of those words of the
Lord and Savior, with other parts of the divine word, by compairing scripture
with scripture, as i^ is undoubtedly the best, and is its own interpreter. --
When I consider Jesus Christ, as made under the law, and speaking as under the
law to those that were also under it, and that it was his d^sign to manifest
himself as the true Messiah* the antitype of what took place under that
dispensation, I apprehend in this exhortation he has the same thing in view,
and speaks of himself as the antitype of what was said of the gate in the old
testament scriptures; perhaps in Ezekiel chap 43, 4 and^. 4.2.3. and 4^, 19,
which passages were they well understood, perhaps would illustrate this matter;
but I shall only take notice of what is said in psalm 11^.19, 20, where the
Messiah is brought in, saying, open to me the gates of righteousness; I will go
in to them and praise the Lord; this gate of the Lord, into which the righteous
shall enter. -- Here we have the mediator in virtue of his own righteousness,
calling for the opening the gates of righteousness, which may be illustrated by
John 10 2. he that enter^th by the door is the shepherd of the sheep, and he
enters the gate of righteousness as head of his body. -- By his own
righteousness, his perfect obedience to the law and his full satisfaction to
divine justice, in which the father is well pleased: So entering by him, is
entering into the straight gate, into the narrow way, the only way leading to
life; Jesus Christ admitts no competitor, no rival with him; nothing to be made
mention of, but his righteousness and his only; not merely for the entrance
into the gate; but all along the narrow way, and so jealous is he of his honor,
that he allows of no subjection to any other lord; -- this appears to me, the
most likely meaning of the straight gate and narrow way, which it is manifest
there be but few that find; as it is natural for us all in some way or other
besides him, to go about to establish our own righteousness and seek to enter
in thereby which though many seek thus to enter, they never shall be able; (for
eminently he is the way, the truth and the life) whilst the body of the Jewish
nation were seeking righteousness by the works of the law, the Lord lets them
know the master of the house was about to rise up and that the door of that
dispensation; and when he shall have so done their knocking and pleading, what
they had been done and the many advantages they had enjoyed, would not avail
them while they rejected the straight gate and narrow way and they with their
pleas utterly rejected; while he should say to them I know you not, while
others* i. e. the Gentiles, should come from the east and west, north and
south, and sit down with the patriarchs; and thus it would appear that the
great savior according to the good pleasure of his will, was found of them
that sought him not; thus Israel that followed after the law of righteousness
has not attained to the law of righteousness; wherefore, because they sought
it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the law: if the two passages
that speak of the straight gate be considered and compared. I think these
thoughts must appear agreeable to the scope of them. Matthew 7.13. and Luke
13.13, 24 -- and it must be acknowledged that it was not more the error of the
people under the old dispensation by many deceitful ways, to be endeavoring to
establish their own righteousness, than it is for those who call themselves
christians, and the uncertainty and perplexity which arises from that painful
question. What lack I yet, will forever torment them, till the straight gate
and narrow way i^ wide opened to them; wherefore woe to them who pretend to
another gate or way beside Jesus Christ the true way; he warns against false
prophets that come in sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves
and says* by their fruits ye shall know them; do men gather grapes of thorns,
or figs of thistles; the fruits by which Mr. Mather judges of them "is their
own irregular worldly and ^en^ual lives and conversations;" and the same fruits
of their doctrine, but as this is not a satisfactory discovery because men of
such lives and doctrines don't come in sheeps clothing, but appear outwardly
and inwardly alike, and there does not seem much danger of their deceiving. It
may then be inquired, who are the false prophets? I answer, our Lord who has
warned us against them, has not left us without their distinguishing marks, by
which to know them; therefore looking for the meaning of Jesus Christ, let us
compare the passage with the apostle Peter, 2d. epist. 2 chap beginning who
says, th^re were false prophets among the people, even as there shall be false
teachers among you, who privily shall bring in d^mnable errors, even denying
the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction, etc.
Denying the Lord that bought them; as in the straight gate and narrow way; the
gospel admits of no competitor, no rival with Jesus Christ, nothing to be made
mention of but his righteousness, no subjection to any foreign lord; so the
false teachers are those that privily bring in something besides, and cannot
trust the finished work of Christ alone, as the exclusive ground of hope
toward God, without something wrought in us or done by us to recommend us to
the divine favor; and though these teachers will with much plausible language
speak honorable of Jesus Christ; yet will warn of the danger of holding his
character and finished work as witnessed in his resurrection, as the sole
foundation of hoping for divine mercy to eternal life; is not this privily
denying the Lord that bought them. -- Again when the scriptures assert, that he
gave himself a ransom for all; -- that he tasted death for every man; -- --
that he is the propiciation for the whole world; -- that he will have all men
to be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth: (or even as some read,
coming to the knowledge of the truth and being saved) the love of Christ
constrained the apostle thus to judge; that if one died for all, then were a^l
dead, and that he died for all, that they which live should not hence forth
live to themselves, but unto him that died for them and rose again; that as sin
reigned to death, even so might grace reign through righteousness to eternal
life, by Jesus Christ our Lord -- Is it not denying the Lord that bought them,
to assert this cannot be scripture doctrine because it leads to licentiousness;
when the apostle truly says, he died for all, that those that live should not
henceforth live to themselves, but to him that died for them and rose again; --
and another apostle tell us; we love him because he first loved us; and this is
the love of God that we keep his commandments; -- let God be true and every man
a liar. The doctrine of Christ leads to himself as the true vine, the cause of
fruitfulness; the root of the righteous that yields fruit agreeable to* Hosea
14, 8. from me is thy fruit found; -- -- and to John 15. beginning; as the
branch cannot bear fruit except it abide in the vine, no more can ye, except ye
abide in me; -- I am the vine, yea are the branches, he that abides in me and
I in him, the same brings forth much fruit, for without me ye can do nothing.
-- Now when obedience is urged from other motives and to other ends by false
teachers, we may as well gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles --! must
here make a pause, that I may acknowledge the great satisfaction you gave me in
your remarks upon Mr. White; the full testimony you have given to the doctrine
of the great God our Savior. -- I mean to credit you for the whole of what you
have written from page twelve, line eleven, from the bottom -- "but there is
one thing that follows, that is quite inexcusable;" -- "mark says he, who is
this savior, i.e. of all men; it is God, not Christ." -- "Let us look into
1st. of Timothy, 2.3. and we shall see who is God our savior, and we shall see
that in the Greek it runs, in the sight of the savior our God, and servants
are enjoined to show all good fidelity that they may adorn the doctrine of God
our savior in all things, in Titus 2.10. but it is in the Greek, that they may
adorn the doctrine of the savior our God in all things -- and how contrary is
this to the interpretation of Mr. White, as well as other Arians. However, it
is the truth as it is in Jesus the savior our God and worthy of all
acceptance." And in page 14. line 8 from the top, you say, "if the words be
justly translated the sense will be, there is one God and one mediator of God
and man, the man Christ Jesus, and so it signifies that the mediator is both
God and man; -- but we note, that the learned Bitterfield, has proposed this
translation of the words, which it must be owned answers word for word to the
Greek; -- the one God, the one who is also mediator of God and man, is the man
Christ Jesus; so then the man Christ Jesus, who is the mediator, is God as well
as man, so that he is God and man united." The above quotation is what strikes
my mind with satisfaction, as the truth as it is in Jesus the savior our God;
and were I capacitated to recommend them to every ones consideration I would do
it -- though I cannot, I dare not, for any other paragraph in your whole
performance; -- and what follows immediately hereupon, is as shocking as that
quotation was pleasing; to which you add, "but although this mediator has given
himself a ransom for all; for it must be granted that he has given a sufficient
ransom and propitiation for all; and he will not cast abroad any, who
penitently come to him as he requires, to gain and enjoy the benefit of it; yet
it is no where said, that they who will not come to him for life and happiness
shall enjoy the benefit of his ransom and propitiation;" -- the sum of which
is, that though our savior be God and has given himself a ransom, a sufficient
ransom and propitiation for all, yet it depends upon the will of man, whether
any shall enjoy the benefits of it; -- I would ask you sir? Did you ever read
Jeremiah 31, 31, 34. and chap. 32.38, 40, and chap. 33, 8. with the Hebrews 8,
from 8. to the end, and Hebrews 10, 16, 17, 18. -- you seem indeed sir, as if
you thought the new covenant might be broken as the old one was; but it must be
from your inattention to the scriptures. -- I will be their God and they shall
be my people, I will cleanse them from all their iniquities whereby they have
sinned, against me, and I will pardon all their iniiquities whereby they have
sinned and whereby they have transgressed aginast me; the ground of which is
the sufficiency of the ransom and propitiation -- I will forgive their
iniquitie^ and remember their sins no more; alluding to the sacrifice of
Christ, where the remition of them was Hebrews 10, 17.18 and the apostle says,
having therefore brethren boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of
Jesus, -- their boldness did not arise from their own repentance, their own
good dispositions; but came in by the blood of Jesus. -- Would it have been
possible for you to expressed yourself as you have done if you had attended to
Isaiah 45.22 3.4. Look unto me and be ye saved all the ends of the earth, for I
God and none else; I have sworn by myself, the word is gone out of my mouth in
righteousness and shall not return, that unto me every knee shall bow and every
tongue shall swear surely shall say in the Lord have I righteousness and
strength to him shall come and all that are insensed against him shall be
ashamed: in the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified and shall glory.

SIR, it you could accept advice from one, but a few years younger than
yourself, it would be to lay aside your numerous train of commentators and
ancient fathers (about five and twenty of which have been called in to your aid
in your little piece) and leave the scripture to speak for themselves; for
instance, suppose we should say aside Mess'rs. White, Austin, Beza and
Grotious, upon 1 of Timothy. 2, 3, 4 and betake ourselves to the scriptures for
to find the meaning. I exhort therefore that first of all, supplication,
prayer, intercession and giving of thanks, be made for all men for kings and
even all in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in al^
godliness and honesty; and the ground and reason upon which the apostle founds
his exhortation is as follows; for this is good and acceptable in the sight of
God our savior, who will have all men to be saved and come to the knowledge of
the truth; for the one God, the one who is also mediator of God and man, (as
you say it is in the Greek) gave himself a ransom for all. Here we see the
paryer of faith in the public assembly was to be ma^e for a^l, acc^rding to the
will of God, and to which the people of God could heartily say, AMEN -- for
there is ground of faith in prayer for all men.

FOR kings, is it not said; Psalm 72.10, 11. the kings of Tarshish and the
^s^es shall bring presents; the kings of Sh^ba and S^ba* shall offe^ gifts; yea
all kings shall fall down before him: all nations shall serve him. Psalm
102.15. So the heathen shall fear the name of the Lord, and all the ki^gs of
the earth thy glory. Psalm 138 4 All the kings of the earth shall praise thee,
when they shall hear the words of thy mouth (or come to the knowledge of the
truth) but dot^ not the kings of the earth set themselves* and their rulers
take council to^ether, against the Lord and against his anointed? and have not
many of them been the basest of men? yes, verily: How then shall it be
accomplished? because he has said it in his word, and he has given hi^ self a
ransom for them; it is he that gives salvation to king; -- hence there is
ground to pray for kings, ground of faith in prayer for them because it is good
and acceptable in the sight in God our savior who will have them to be saved;
-- and is there not the same ground of faith in prayer for ^ll men? was there
not original blessing pronounced upon them all in their Head their first
parents in the day they were created? when God blessed them; Genesis ^.2. And
though the blessing was forfeited, it was not revoked or recalled, for the
gifts and callings of God are without repentance; if he gives commandment to
bless it cannot be reversed. Numb 23.19. God is not a man that he should lie,
neither the son of man that he should repent; has he said it, and shall he not
do; or has he spoken and shall he not make it good? behold! I have received to
bless, and he has blessed, and I cannot reverse it; -- Therefore on the fall
of our first parents the serpent was cursed, and the way in which the
pronounced blessing should take place, is revealed in the promised seed of the
woman, and afterward to Abraham -- In thy seed shall all the nat^^^s of the
earth be blessed; and afterward in the priesthood, sacrifices types and
shadows of the Jewish di^pensation -- ^n the ^rophets and in the Psalms;
concerning him who is mighty to save, God over all blessed forever: When I
consider that for the accomplishment of this great and comprehensive truth full
of blessing -- God was manifest in the flesh, the on^ God the medi^to^ of God
and man, the man Christ Jesus; the brightsness of the divine glory and the
express image of his person, in whom the fu^^ess of the godhead dwelt: I
inquire, did not the fullne^s of the Human as well as the divi^e nature, dwell
in him als^? Is he not the head of the whole human nature as extensively as
Ad^m was? I think it is impossible to conceive the apostles m^^ning ^n Romans 5
from 14. to the end, in any other ^ight: Indeed, (...) I a^ at a loss for what
purpose you bring this passage into in ^^^e 15. and filling a paragraph with
it, and then say^ng noth^ng about it; let it be attended to with sobriety; and
it with prove that Christ is the head of every man, in which Adam was a figure
of him; and that as head of every man he gave himself a ransom for all,
therefore to pray for all men, is good and acceptable in the sight of God our
savior, who will have all men to be saved and come to the knowledge of the
truth; -- but you say, page 13, "May they expect to be brought to this saving
knowledge in a land of darkness and misery; we have no warrant for thinking any
such thing from the word of God." How shocking is this, where God has said by
his messenger, he will hate all men to come to the knowledge of the truth; --
it savors of the same impious infidelity that the people of ancient Israel were
chargeable with; Psalm 78.19. yea they spoke against God; they said, can God
prepare a table in the wilderness? verse 2^, Can he give bread also; can he
provide flesh for his people; has he said and shall he not do it; has he
spoken, and shall he not bring it to pass? The Lord gave the word and great was
the company of those that published it, for with God all things are possible.

Now as Christ was the head of every man, when he was lift up, he drew all men
unto him; and so when one died for all, then were all dead. -- Please sir to
look into the text in 1st. of Corinthians 5.14. in your Greek testament, and
see if it is not there, if one died for all, then all died.

Is not Paul to be thus understood, when he says, I was crucified with Christ?
Was it his privilege It was Paul's privilege indeed to be acquainted with this
grace, to enjoy the comfort of it, and to be influenced to fruitfulness by it;
while it was not the divine good pleasure to manifest himself to the world; but
John 17.21, 22, 23. informs us, there is a time coming, when the world shall
know and believe that Jesus Christ is the sent of God; know and believe the
same truth that the disciples knew and believed. verse 8. Which then,
distinguished them from the world, and this is what Jesus had in view in
praying for his immediate disciples, and those that should believe through
their word.
only, or did Christ by the grace of God taste death for every man? Agreeing
with 1st. of John, 2.2. And he is the propitiation for our sins; and not for
ours only, but for the whole world; which is agreeable to his giving himself a
ransom for all; and therefore, will have all men to be saved and come to the
knowledge of the truth; -- therefore, there is ground of faith in prayer for
all men.

There is another text mentioned, (which though my mind has been much
exercised, and it may be, have not yet, that understanding of, as I could wish)
your illustration thereof, not being satisfactory upon it by any means. Let us
look for the meaning of it by comparing it with other scriptures; -- but first
I would take leave to lay aside Mess'rs. Joseph Nicol Scot, Samuel Clark and
Lebnitz, with the other learned men mentioned. -- 2d. I would read both verses,
the text is Isaiah 66.23.24. And it shall come to pass from one new moon to
another and from one sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship before
me says the Lord, and they shall go forth and look on the carcasses of the men
that have transgressed against me, for their worm shall not die, neither shall
their fire be quenched, and they shall be an abhorring to all flesh. You
mention Isaiah 66.24. and say, "Allowing the words of our Lord in Mark. ix, to
be taken from them, this interpreter does not appear to have observed, that
just before this passage, it is written of the eight worshippers of God our
savior, and they shall go forth and look on the carcasses of the men that have
transgresse^ against me." I suppose the eight worshippers to be an error of the
press, putting eight for right; but if so, then the right worshipers, are all
flesh, for all flesh shall worship -- but as this was not your design, here is
an evident error, that when you appear to endeavor to correct another with the
scripture, you do not cite the text as it stands.

3dly. Having read the text would proceed to look for the meaning of it by
comparing it with other scriptures; here we shall agree that all flesh have
transgressed; and the text says all flesh shall worship; and the carcasses of
the transgressors shall be an abhoring to all flesh. Now the inquiry is, what
is meant by the carcasses of the men that have transgressed; if we compare some
other scripture prophesies, particularly Jeremiah 16.18. And first I will
recompense their iniquity and their sin double because they have defiled my
land and filled mine inheritance with the carcasses of their detestable, and
abominable things. Ezekiel 43 7 8, 9 And he said unto me, son of man, the place
of my throne and the place of the soles of my feet where I will dwell in the
midst of the children of Israel forever, and my holy name shall the hou^e of
Israel no more defile; they nor their kings by their whoredoms* nor by the
carcasses of their kings in their high places in their setting their threshold
by my threshold and their post by my post; -- they have even defiled my holy
name by their abominations, wherefore I consumed them in mine anger; now let
them put away their whoredom and the carcasses of their kings far from me, and
I will dwell in the midst of them forever. -- What is here called carcasses is
their whoredom, their going aside from the straight and narrow way he had
prescribed, and worshipping in ways of their own or others devising which is
spiritual whoredom and abomination to him, and which these abominations so
prev^^led as t^ be established by the kings as the form of worship ^ndered to
be observed as the re^igion of the kingdom, they are called the carcasses of
their kings, and as this profane worship was paid in high places; it was called
the carcasses of their kings in their high places, and as it took the place of
the worship of the true God, it is called their threshold by my threshold. and
their po^t by my post, by which they profane his holy nam^ -- Now as this is
very evident if we lo^k over the history of the kingdoms of Judah and Israel so
a little attention would show that this is applicable to all flesh who have
corrupted their way* all ag^e^ing in going astray; though every one turns to his
own way every one's own way in this view, is the carcass of his abomination,
and when ever any are turned from idols to the living God the^r way of going
astray from him becomes to them an abhorrence because it is an abomination to
the Lord, against which our God who is a consuming fi^e a jealous God has
declared, and will eternally m^nifest his displeasure. When al^ flesh shall to
^orship before the Lord the carcasses of t^^ men that have transgressed ^ill b^
abhorrent to them.

I offer these my thoughts freely, if any one upon comparing the ^ scriptures,
shall give a more probable meaning of them than I have advanced I hope it will
be heartily received; if I was to inquire into the meaning of what God our
savior says, when referring to this passage in the 9th of Mark, I should take
notice of the occasion of his writing these words in order to understand them
and if I mistake not, they a^e address^d to his immediate disciples who had
been disputing which should be greatest; from the 33d to the end of the 37th
verse* then in verse 3^, John answered him (as not yet cared of this fondness
for pre-hemin^^ce) saying, ma^^er we saw ^^e casting out devils in thy name and
we forbad him because he followed not us -- Now the whole from the 39th verse
to the end, appears addressed to the disciples upon the very subject in answer
to John, who spoke in behalf of himse^f and his fe^low disciples, ma^^er we saw
o^e, ^c. Omitting what might be observed in the preceding ve^ses, I shall take
notice of the 43d verse* If thy hand thy foot thine eye ^ffend thee, if you
find a disposition to d^spise one of these little ones and to prefer yourselves
above them, because your eyes have discovered truth and duty beyond them, o^
because your feet have carried your further in your master's cause than they
are able to go, or because your hands have labored therein, or have dealt out
to the poor and necessitous beyond what they ever were, or are ever l^ke to be
able: this pride of heart is aside from the narrow way, it is taking a step
into the broad way, it leads to destruction; in the narrow way, Christ is all,
his wisdom guides, his power supplies* his feet was ever employed in going
about doing good; were it not better you had no foot, nor hand, nor eye to
enter into life halt ^r ma^^ed being wholly hopeless, helpless and destitute in
yourself, nothing to hope for but mere mercy as manifest in Christ Jesus; than
^aring two ^e^t, hands and eyes to abuse these gilts to the purposes of your
own pride and so to fall under the divine displeasure, who scorneth the
scorner, resists the proud, and knows them afar off, for what can strike
the mind of any person with more darkness, perplexity and distress, than to
have the apprehension that our God who is a consuming fire, a jealous God, is
displeased with him.

When pride of heart and dispising little ones takes place, the savor of the
knowledge of Jesus Christ, the salt of the covenant of God, is l^^king; for
every one shall be salted with fire; -- may not this receive illustration from
Matthew 3.11. He shall baptize with the Holy Ghost and with f^re -- Is it not
the fire of love, love to him and to the least of these little ones for his
sake -- and every sacrifice shall be salted with salt that you now offer;
looking for pre-heminence one above another has no savor in it; it does not
savor of the knowledge of myself, and therefore it is not accepted; every
sacrifi^e shall be salted with salt -- have salt in yourselves and p^ace one
with another. I am satisfied that those thoughts are agreeable to the scope of
the passage; though being but an inquirer, am not able to comprehend the full
meaning of them or to speak of every sentence in them; but this s^em evident
that those things that Jesus Christ meant for the instruction and warning of
his disciples, are now made use of as though they were only intended for the
profane and openly vicious among mankind.

In taking notice of the title page, you say, "Even the title page is not
without its errors; it is this salvation for all men illustrated and vindicated
as a scripture doctrine; had the writer intended, and said, salvation for all
men revealed and offered in the gospel; this would have passed well enough for
a scripture doctrine; but that all men shall actually obtain salvation sooner
or later* which is the intent and meaning of this writer, this cannot be fairly
illustrated from the sacred writings, nor can it be fairly and honestly
vindicated as a scripture doctrine." Let us look of this a little: "Salvation
for all men revealed a scripture dictrine," -- then it is a truth, a revealed
truth it could not be, if it were not an original, eternal truth. I think I
need say no more on this. "Salvation for all men revealed and offered in the
gospel"; -- that Jesus Christ or his salvation are offered in the gospel, is
without any foundation in the scriptures, and conveys an idea very
dishonorable to him and very exalting to human pride; -- if any thing be
offered to me I am at once in some respects upon a level with the offerer, and
may receive or not as I please; the gospel reveals Jesus Christ and his
salvation, and where the evidence of the truth strikes the conscience, the
light discovers that however incensed against him, I have been, I (...) be
entirely beholden to him for salvation, and must be subject to his authority,
or fall under his displeasure, I cannot quit his dominions -- Acts 4 11, 12.
The various passages, where the call and invitation of the gospel are spoken
of, such as, look to me and be ye saved all the ends of the earth, come unto me
all ye that labor and are heavy laden and I will give you rest, calls the
attention of the lost bewildered children of men that are grouping in the dark
after salvation and rest, to the object where salvation and rest is to be
found; for as Moses lift up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the son of
man be lifted up, that whosoever believes on him should not perish but have
everlasting life; he is brought to view, that whosoever believes the truth
concerning him that has his mind satisfied on divine evidence of the truth,
testified of Christ and his salvation, should not perish but have eternal life,
the faith of the gospel is the belief of the truth, not the accepting of an
offer: But were it that salvation was offered to all, it could not be sincere
if it was not for all; but God sent not his son into the world to condemn the
world, but that the world through him might be saved.

SIR, one thing more I would take notice of, is this, that as the title of your
piece is, "All men will not be saved" the design of your piece is to prove the
title; and the reason is given in page 25, line 7 from the top -- "on the other
hand, it is plain and evident to all sound and considerate minds, that the
broaching of it (viz. the doctrine of universal salvation) has a very dangerous
tendency; and hence it should not be admitted for a scripture truth," when at
the same time you say, page 24, line 9 from the bottom, "nor is there the least
reason to believe, that their sufferings will make them the willing people of
God, as the sufferings of punishment naturally excites an aversion in the
sufferer, to the inflictor of the punishment; and as the sufferings and
torments increase and go forward, the enmity and (...) of those that endure
them, proceed and increase against their punisher." If this be true (as
undoubtedly it is) it is easy to see the dreadful tendency of your endeavors,
through your whole performance. Indeed, Sir, you have here outdone me, for I
want words to expres^ the inconsistency and impiety, appearing in the passages
put together, especially when I take into view the last sentence, -- "and let
all the human race, as we are required, serve Jehovah, our Lord and Judge, with
fear and trembling before him, from consideration of his holiness and
righteousness, his terrible majesty, and consummate truth and faithfulness; and
let us seasonably repent and give glory to God in Christ Jesus* that we may not
be vexed in his sore and perpetual displeasure, but that we may be blessed in
him, and with him completely and forever" Such an affront upon the human race,
at least on that part of them that will not be saved, according to your title
(such an affront on Jehovah our Lord, our God and Judge, God our Savor, is
here offered that repentance is here put in his place, as that which will go
beyond the ransom he paid, so that though all men will not be saved thereby,
yet if they repent and give glory to God in Christ, they may) that though they
will not be saved, they are called to repent, that they may. Was poor creatures
ever more tantalized.

But that I may not indulge myself too far, I will sum up what I hare to say in
the language of scripture. You seem to me to appear here, as the Jews, who
being ignorant of God's righteousness, and going about to establish their own,
have not submitted to the righteousness of God.

One would think both your extractor and yourself, were better acquainted with
the weapons that are carnal, and not mighty through God, by your opposing learned
and pious men, to learned and pious men, and sitting imaginations, and high
things that exalt themselves against the knowledge of God; and had the
extractor been led by the spirit of the truth, he would appear to vindicate, he
would have seen himself upon a perfect level with his fellow-sinners, beholden
to mere mercy with the vilest, and not, in confidence of his own superiority,
set at naught a stranger, by ignorantly endeavoring to slur his doctrine,
which he himself, as yet, appears unacquainted with: But he makes himself a
preacher -- is not made so as we are -- he follows not us.

When John, in the name of the rest of the disciples said to Jesus, we saw one
casting out devils in thy name and we forbad him because he followed not us, he
kn^w they were set apart to their work by Jesus Christ himself, yet he was
rebuk^d and got the repeated warning against offenses that we have taken notice
of in the 9th of Mark. from the 43d.

How unbecoming then must it be for those who have any ground to question the
truth of their being taught of God to know Jesus Christ, and of their being
divinely called to preach him, to treat those that preach Jesus Christ in such
a manner, because they followed not them.

It would become us whenever we find our selves disposed to offend any of those
little ones that believe in Jesus, or at least for whom he died, to attend
soberly to the above mentioned 9th of Mark, and when we come understand and
practice the exhortation in the 50th verse, have salt in yourselves, it will
lead us to peace one wi^h another.

I would also take noti^e of the extractor's endeavoring to distinguish
himself, by bringing in the state of unutterable m^ssery that many of the sons
and daughters of Adam will pass through, before they are prepared for, and
admitted to, the joys of God's presence in heaven.

If he intends this as the legal penalty they are to suffer for sin, he sets
aside the atonement, and puts sufferings in its room, as you appear to put
repen^ance in the place of the great propitiation, in your last paragraph I
think there is an obvious distinction betw^en the pu^ishment of sin and the
punishment for sin, held up in the scriptures.

When they speak of the punishment FOR sin, it is thus: Isaiah 53 5 He was
wounded FOR our transgressions, bruised FOR our iniquities. Verse 8. FOR the
transgressions of my people, was the stroke upon him

Romans 4 25. He was delivered* FOR our offenses.

Romans 5.6. Christ did FOR the ungodly.



When they speak of the punishment OF sin, it is thus.

Leviticus 26.41, 43. If then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they
accept the punishment OF their iniquities. And they shall accept ^he punishment
OF their iniquities.

Lamentati^ns 3.39. Why does a living man complain, a man for the punishm^nt OF
his sins. Chap. 4 6. For the punishment OF the iniquity of the daughter of my
people is greater than the punishment OF ^he sin of Sodom.

The punishment for sin, is what the law demands of the transgressor, for the
satisfaction of law and justice; the soul that sins shall die, every man
shall die for his iniquity. Now Jesus Christ being made under the law, was to
redeem them that were under the law, he took the fullness of the human nature
in its fallen state and became its universal head in as extensive a sense as
the first Adams; Romans 5.14. to the end. The Prophet I^aiah say, All we like
sheep have gone astray -- And the Lord said on him the iniquity of us all --
And he bear our sins in his own body to the tree -- When he was lift up he drew
al^ men unto him; so that they were all considered in him, and as the head of
every man the sword of justice awoke against the man God's fellow, and he died
for our offenses; and by his death finished transgressi^n and made an end of
sin and brought in everlasting righte^usness, and made full reconciliation for
iniquity, which is abundant^y witnes^ed in his resurrection, for he rose again
for our justifi^ation; his resurrect^on is the evidence and assurance, that law
and justice is satisfied, that the father is well pleased for his righteousness
sake.

We may then adopt that language; he bore our griefs, and carried our sorrows;
was ^ounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we are healed. Is
not this the scripture view of punishment for sin?

The punishment of sin, is that which is inseparably connected with it, and
consequent upon it: -- Darkness distress perplexity and misery, is ever
attendant upon transgression, and forever follows upon it.

To illustrate my meaning, let u^ view any person led by his lusts by the god
of this world to the grossest acts of abomination

Suppose a man led by the lusts of the flesh to fornic^tion ^hen to hatred of
the person seduced and abused by him then (...) neglect and despise the fruit
of his body, to take no care for its u^ ^at, maintenance or education unless by
compu^sion of the law ^^d then to wish it dead: -- Here we see the punishment
of si^ in^^^arably connected with it. Proverbs 6 33. A wound and dishonor
shall he get, and his repr^ach ^^all not be wiped a^ay. There we see the
transgressor not only be^r^n^ the contempt ^^d scorn of the world painful
enough to a tender mind but smarting under those wounds of the spirit which are
intolerable in those horrors of mind from the fearful apprehension of the
displeasure of him, who has said, fornicators shall not inherit the kingdom of
God; and he has reason to fear his being among those that shall rise to shame
and everlasting contempt. -- Here we see something of the punishment of sin,
but it has nothing of the nature of the punishment for sin, it does not satisfy
justice, it does not make atonement. If this man be relieved from the fear of
everlasting punishment, it must be the knowledge of Christ, the lamb of God,
who takes away the sin of the world, who died for our offenses, and rose again
for our justification; that must give him a living hope toward God; it is not
his sufferings, his sense of guilt, his present or dreaded future misery, while
he expects that justice will seek satisfaction from him in his own person. But
the knowledge of the truth concerning Jesus Christ, is his exclusive,
all-sufficient relief.

The same might be observed of pride, and a haughty contempt of such as the
scripture call little ones; the scripture says, Prove. 29.23. A man's pride
shall bring him low; so low as that nothing can cheer and raise the spirit to
consolation and peace, but the hope that arises from the abasement and
humiliation of Jesus Christ; -- and indeed in the view we have of our own
vileness, or the sins of others, we shall see that sin naturally, as well as by
the righteous judgment of God, brings us low, and leads to darkness,
confussion, perplexity and misery; and it would be profitable for us all to
reflect on our own ways of transgressing, and judge ourselves to the hu^bling
of the pride of our own uncircumcised hearts, and accept the punishment of our
own iniquity, with our mouths stoped, guilty before God, nothing to encourage
or give us hope, but the gospel report concerning Jesus Christ; this would be
more decent, becoming and profitable, than to exercise ourselves about the
theory of the eternal punishment of some vile men much more wicked than
ourselves; alas! where would such be found, if our consciences faithfully laid
before us the aggravations of the guilt we are ^^cargeable with; besides if we
view the state a man is in before the knowledge of Jesus Christ, under the
fearful apprehensions of suffering in his own person, the demerit of his
crimes, it is ever accompanied with hatred of God, till his true character,
which is love, is made manifest, and we love him, because he first loved us;
and what atonement can that make for past offense.

I would further take notice that the extractor appears as one a^^^med of the
doctrine of the common salvation as revealed in the ^cr^ptures, and therefore
chose to venture an acknowledgment of (...) company with eminent divines; and
so not the authority of scripture testimony held up; but the scriptures, as
held and explained by eminent men, is by him bro't to view, that our faith
might stand in the wisdom of men, not in the word of God, and thus has cause of
shame, especially that he should extract the one thing that you justly say is
quite inexcusable "and mark you, who is this savior, it is God, not Christ."
but why is this distinction, we know nothing of God, but as he manifests
himself in Christ: When Philip said to Jesus, Lord show us the father and it
suffices us; Jesus says unto him, have I been so long time with you, and yet
have thou not known me, Philip? He that has seen me, has seen the father; and
how said thou, show us the father; believe thou not that I am in the father
and the father in me: and no man knows the son but the father, neither
knows any man the father but the son, and he t^ whomsoever the son will,
reveals him; and Jesus Christ says, I have manife^ted thy name to the men
which thou gave me out ^f the world, and I have declared unto them thy name,
and will declare it, that the love wherewith thou have loved me, may be in
them, and I in them.

I do not conceive how men can have a satisfactory apprehension that they
worship one God, that make such distinctions, unless they mean to set aside
Jesus Christ as the object of worship, if he be not God our savior; if God,
not Christ is this savior; then Jesus Christ is not the object of worship; and
if this be the real sentiment, I need no longer wonder to hear men pray to God,
without any mention of the name of Jesus Christ, till they are one quarter or
one third through their prayer, or in some instances, not ^ill the close of
their prayer; it is enough to draw forth the lamentation of Mary from the
worshippers of Jesus, or them that call on that name: They have taken away my
Lord, and I know not where they have said him. Jesus Christ says. John 10, ^. I
am the door, by me* ^f any man enter in he shall be saved, and so in and out,
and find p^^ture. John 14.6. I am the way, and the truth, and the life, no man
comes to the father, but by me: But these seem to have access without the
door; by some other way.

I know nothing of God but as he reveals himself in Christ Jesus If I view the
creator, I must view him in Christ, for all thin^s were created by him, and
without him was not any thing made that was made. If I view the preserver, I
must view him in Christ; for by him all things consist, upholding all things by
the word of his power. If I view the redeemer, the savior, (...) view him in
Christ; for as much as ye were not redeemed but by the precious blood of
Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot, God was in Christ
reconciling the world* There is not any one thing in all the scriptures that is
mentioned as an attribute perfection of opperation of God, but the same is
manifest in Christ Jesus. If I had capacity and opportunity, this might be
illustrated from all the ^orks of Jesus Christ, when he was upon earth, and
from his doctrines; for instance, is it the peculiar prerogative of God to
forgive sins, and to heal diseases, as attributed to him in Psalm 103 3 ^his we
see thus manifested in Jesus Christ. Matthew 9 2d to the 8th Mark 2d from 5th
to the 12th. Luke 5 18th, to the 25th, ^e said, thy sins are forgiven thee: And
to pr^ve he had power on ear^h to forgive ^^ns, he says to the sick of the
palsy: Arise, take up thy couch, and go into thy house and he a^ose
immediately, etc. For my part I cannot conceive of any relat^on that God stands
in to us, as our God, but in Christ; if Jesus Christ bids his disciples when
they pray, say, Our Father, it is as considered in him by whom we have the
adoption of children; Jesus, after his resurrection, bid Mary Magdalon in John
20.17. Go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend to my Father and your
Father, and to my God and your God: And as the elder brother, not ashamed to
call them brethren, he says* in verse 21. Peace unto you; as FATHER has sent
me, so send I you. To add no more, the true character of God, or the character
of the true ^od, is, Isaiah 45 21. I the LORD? and no GOD else beside me; a
just GOD and a savior: none beside me. This is the character of Jesus Christ,
Zachariah 9 9. He is just, and having salvation, Isaiah 63.1. I that speak in
righteousness, mighty to save: And no where else is the just God and sav^our
made manifest; ho^ then could one, professedly pleading for the salvation of
all men, extract such a passage, as if he would plead for salvation, and s^t
aside the savior? But I am persuaded that every one that have their minds l^d
into the spirit of the doctrine of universal salvation will rejoice in that
explanation of Isaiah 7 14. which we have in Matthew 1 23. His name shall be
called Emanuel which being interpreted, is, GOD with us.

I would add the quotation from the 1st of Corinth 15. from the 24th to the
25th verse has rather excited my attention, than satisfied my mind from a^l
that has been said in both pieces, by the various authors. Therefore, as an
enquirer. I would attend to the chapter, if perhaps it may please him, from
whom comes wisdom and understanding, to enlighten my mind to understand a
passage, which through my life has been among the things, hard to be
understood; the first part from the beginning, to the 11th verse, is clear and
plain, and holds forth the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ as the gospel
of salvation* that all the apostles united in, that the first disciples
believed, and by which they ware saved with the evidences of it: From the 12th
to the end of the 19th verse, he inquires, i^ Christ be risen from the dead,
how say some, there is no resurrection, and argues in a manner, that shows the
union of Jesus Christ with the human nature, as members of his body; -- If the
dead rise not, then is not Christ raised -- if the body rise not, then is not
the head raised -- and if Christ is not raised then is our preaching and your
faith vain -- and we false witnesses and you, in your sins -- From verse 20th
he says. But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of
them that slept: The first fruits is the joy, the glory, the foretaste, the
earnest of the harvest and sanctified the whole. Since by man, death, by man,
the resurrection from the dead; -- For as i^ Adam all die, even so in Christ,
shall all be made alive -- How came death by Adam? Because he was head and
representative of his offspring, and they considered in him, and so universally
in him all die: Even so in Christ, shall all be made alive, because he is head
as universally as Adam; and all are made alive as extensively, else, it could
not be even so. But every man in his own order, Christ the first fruits; the
head, the first born among the many brethren that in all things he might have
the pre-eminence, the first begotton from the dead, the prince of the kings of
the earth, unto him that loved us, etc. After that, they that are Christ's at
his coming.

Who are they? Those that the father gave him; the Jews, the Gentiles, the ends
of the earth, Isaiah 49 5.6. The heathen his inheritance, the utmost parts ^f
the earth his possession. Psalm 2.8.

They that are Christ's at ^is coming: Who are they?

Those whom he came to save. John 3 17.

Those for whom he tasted death Hebrews 2.9.

Those for whom he gave himself a ransom. 1st of T^m. 2.6.

Those for whom he is the propitiation. 1st of John 2.2.

They are Christ's Yes, they are even when deluded by satan, and led away by
their own lusts, to prodigality and disobedience: The prodigal was a son when
dead and lost; he will not leave them there, if they are Christ's, they will
rise in their order after him: I know there are those in all ages of
christianity, that have been set apart by Jesus Christ, according to the good
pleasure of his will, as his, to be his witnesses, to bear witness to his name,
truth and ways, in opposition to the world, to many of whom it has been given
in behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but to suffer for his sake;
and the apostle says, If we suffer, we shall also reign with him: And the
scripture speaks of those that had not worshipped the beast, nor his image, nor
received his mark in their forehead, nor in their hands; and they lived and
reigned with him a thousand years. If the apostle is supposed to alude to
these, as them that are Christ's in the first place; yet not to the exclusion
of those that are Christ's, according to the scriptures above produced, for
certainly he knows how to fulfill his promises to his faithful witnesses,
without excluding the redemeption of the whole purchased possession: For his
ways are above our ways, and his thoughts above ours.
Then the end: What end? The end divine wisdom had in view, through the whole
of satan's reign as the god of this world: That Jesus Christ should destroy the
works of the devil, and deliver up the usurped kingdom to God, even the Father;
even him who is the mighty God, the everlasting Father; when he shall have put
down all rule, all authority and power; all the rule, authority and power in
the kingdoms of this world, and in the hearts of men that have been in
opposition to him, under the god of this world, the spirit that now works in
the children of disobedience. For he must reign till all his enemies be made
his footstool. -- The last enemy shall be destroyed -- Death: Death is the
last enemy, and it shall be destroyed; it is a conquered enemy -- For he has
put all things under feet. The apostle in Hebrews 2.8. says, Thou have put all
things in subjection under his feet. For in that he put all in subjection under
him, he left nothing not put under him. But now we see not yet all things put
under him. But we see Jesus who was made a little lower than the angels, for
the sufferings of death, crowned with glory and honor, that he, by the grace
of God, should taste death for every man.

And when all things shall be subdued unto him; when this shall take place,
then shall the son also himself, be subject to him that put all things under
him* that God may be all in all. By the son, I understand, the one new man;
that Jesus Christ makes in himself of all nations, kindreds, people and
tongues; that in Adam, their first head had been in a state of rebellion, and
were never as one in subjection before; never unitedly called God. Father: It
seems to be that state, that every creature groans and travils in pain together
for; and not only they, but those that have the first fruits of the spirit,
groan within themselves, waiting for the adoption; viz. the redemption of our
body. Romans 8.23. When the whole body of which Christ is the head, are subject
to him, are redeemed from sin and satan; it is called the adoption: When Adam,
who was the son of God; called the son of God in his relative capacity, as head
of the human nature, turned prodigal with all the disobedience, shame, sorrow,
guilt and misery attendant thereupon, is recovered by the second Adam, to
favor, to subjection, and to the adoption; the son himself is subject to him
that put all things under him. It cannot mean Jesus Christ* considered in
himself; he ever did the things that pleased the Father, never was in a state
of rebellion and disobedience; besides, Jesus Christ says, John. 10 30. I and
Father are one; and when he says, all things are put under him, it is manifest
that he is excepted, which did put all things under him: But the son in the
above sense, was never in subjection before.

That God may be all in all: While the rebellious son plays the prodigal,
captivated by satan, his will, his various lusts, whether it be in a way of
profaneness, uncleanness, religious pride or covetousness, he is pursuing not
the will of God in Christ Jesus, concerning him, but appears to be pursuing his
lusts as if they were his all; but when brought home to subiectjon, God is all
in all: Not God as distinct from Christ, but God in Christ, Emanuel, God with
us, the just God and the savior, there is none else: -- This view, is
consistent with Jesus, the same yesterday, to day, and forever; and with what
the apostle in Heb. 1.10, 11, 12. quotes from Psalm 102.25, 26, 27. and applys
to Jesus Christ: And thou Lord in the beginning, laid the foundations of the
earth; and the heavens are the work of thy hands. They shall perish; but thou
remainest; and they all shall wax old, as a garment; and as a vesture, shall
thou fold them up; and they shall be changed. But thou art the same, and thy
years shall not fail. -- and with Isaiah 9.6. and Luke 1.33. And he shall reign
over the house of Israel forever And of his kingdom there shall be no end. To
which the worshippers of the one, only, living and true God, manifest in Christ
Jesus; will unitedly add their Amen, and here find a source of eternal security
and joy.

But to draw to a close -- I would take notice of your last page; but indeed it
puts me in mind of the repeated direction in the 8th of Ezekiel. Turn thee yet
again; thou shall see greater abominations. You say, "If it be inquired, why
God should continue any to be the instances of his extreme and perpetual
vengeance." In reply, you say, "That the just judge of all the earth, has an
undoubted right to support the dignity of his government." And is not the
dignity of his government effectually supported by the obedience and sacrifice
of Jesus Christ, who died for the ungodly. You add "And not suffer any contempt
to be cast upon him, by the bold transgressors against his holy will and laws:
-- ^^ow is that to be prevented according to you? It is by making them examples
of his extreme displeasure and perpetual vengeance; that is, according to your
own words, page 24 line 9th from he bottom, "As the suffering of punishment,
natura^ly excites an avertion in the sufferer, to the infl^ctor of the
punishment; and as the sufferings and torments increase, and go forward, the
enmity and rage of those that under go them, proceed and increase against their
punisher." To put them in a state, where they will eternally be increasing
their enmity and rage against God! -- I^deed, si^ I want words to express the
horridness of your evil communications. What! A great part of the dominions of
the King, the Lord of hosts, to be in etern^l rebellion, in increasing enmity
and rage against him as the only way to prevent contempt to be cast upon him,
by bold transgressors of his laws. -- I believe it is the divine design, not to
suffer any contempt to be ^ast upon him by the bold transgressors against his
holy ^ill and laws; but how? I shall endeavor from the prophet Isaiah, to show
unto you a more excellent way; he lets us know, that every knee shall bow to
him.

Thus I believe the contempt of bold transgressors will cease, being brought to
bow to him. See an example of a bold transgressor being thus brought to bow in
Saul of Tarsus wh^ went to bind all that call on that Name; but behold he
prays -- he calls on the Name he persecuted before: There can be no
acceptable prayer but in that worthy Name.

But I suppose it will be objected that this bowing will be the bowing of an
overcome victim of justice in order to his confinement, trial and execution. In
answer to this I would beg your pattience till I again repeat the passage in
the 45th of Isaiah, from the latter part of the ^^st verse, just as it stands,
without the italick word supplied by the translators, and make some
observations upon them. I the Lord, and no God else beside me, the just God and
the savior none beside me: Look unto me, an^ be ye saved, a^l the ends of the
earth; for I God, and none else I have sworn by my self -- the word is gone out
of my mouth in righteousness, and shall not return, that every knee shall bow,
It is said, that the true reading of the apostles quotation of this text in
Philip. 2.10. is, that in the name of Jesus, not at the name, as it is said
that is the true reading, and that it is the same with Colossians 8.17. Do all
in the name of the Lord Jesus. If you please, you may look in your Greek
testament, and see if it is not so. Now when we consider this, it obviates the
objection that has been raised, after this manner: Yes, every knee shall bow at
the name of Jesus: One day they shall all be brought to own him Lord; to their
eternal confusion they shall bow at his name, as a poor criminal at the name of
the Judge that is just going to pronounce a sentence of death, from which,
there is no appeal nor escape.

But the text says, That in the name of Jesus, every knee shall bow, and every
tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. As
when a poor woman, who has no riches, no worthiness, nothing by which she can
attain any thing in her own name, is married to a Prince, she is entitled to
his name, his person, his riches, his honor, and now appearing in his name,
she is regarded as him. So when in the name of Jesus, every knee shall bow, it
is in this view, exactly similiar to the Prophet Isaiah, to which the apostle
here alludes; the very matter of what every tongue shall swear, is, Surely
shall say, in the Lord have I righteousness and strength, to him shall come; --
Surely shall say, the mind shall be as satisfied of this truth, as ever any
person was of any thing to which he was called to swear; these things being so,
we have the joint evidence of both testaments to this truth, confirmed by the
blood of the new testament, by the death of the testator, and witness in his
resurrection: So however dark, ignorant, guilty and miserable, we are in
ourselves; when we come to the knowledge of Jesus Christ, to bow in his name,
we may sing: Thou art our wisdom, Thou our guide,
Thou art our righteousness;
We Are blind and guilty, thee besides,
Thou art our holiness.
From slavery and bonds to sin,
Thou us, alone can free;
From captive state, where we have been,
Redemption we shall see.


For he is made to us, of God, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption: He has a name above every name, That in the name of Jesus, every
knee shall bow, every tongue surely shall say; In the Lord have I righteousness
and strength; to him shall come. So be it, the Lord hasten it, in his time.


and every tongue shall swear, surely shall say, in the Lord have I
righteousness and strength -- unto him shall come, and all that are insensed
against him in all be ashamed: In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be
justified, and shall glory.

I the Lord, and no God beside me; the just God, and the savior; none beside
me. The character of the true God, is the just God and the savior, there is
none else; no God beside; then certainly, the just God, that is not the
savior, is not the only, living and true God; but is such a one as is spoken
of in verse 20, A graven image, a God that cannot save: -- No matter whether
graven on wood, or in the imagination of those that pray unto a God that cannot
save; and as he is the same yesterday, to day and forever, with whom there is
no variableness, neither shadow of turning; consequently, whenever any come to
the knowledge of him, they know the just God and the savior; there is none
else, no God beside; and this is his true character, whether we know it or not;
-- So then, when the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of God, as we are
are assured it shall, it will be with knowledge of the just God and the savior.

Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth. -- Here is a call or
command, to all the ends of the earth, it is his pleasure that it should be so;
and what the Lord pleases, that he does: For I God and none else, I have sworn
by myself, the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness -- That unto me,
every knee shall bow, and every tongue shall swear. -- Then follows the matter
of the oath that every tongue shall swear, Surely shall say, in the Lord have I
righteousness and strength; -- This being considered, will invalidate the
objection; for if every tongue shall surely say, in the Lord have I
righteousness and strength, they shall surely be saved by him, they shall have
no lack of righteousness nor strength. -- Unto him shall come -- And surely the
comers are the true worshippers, they are so described, under the old testament
dispensation, as Hebrews 10.1. -- Could never make the comer thereunto perfect;
that is, the worshippers under that dispensation, and under the new testament
dispensation. In 1st of Peter, 2.4. the worshippers are described by coming to
Jesus Christ, who has promised rest to the weary and heavy laden, on their
coming to him. Matthew 11.28. Coming is also synonimous to believing: -- He
that comes unto me shall never hunger, and he that believes on me shall never
thirst. So then in this view, when it is said, unto him shall come, it intends
they shall be worshippers of him, believing on his name.

And all that are incensed against him shall be ashamed -- Who have been
incensed against him? Surely all Isaiah 53.3. He was despised and rejected of
men; He was despised, and we esteemed him not -- Surely, you and I have been
incensed against him, and it is high time for us to be ashamed of the carcasses
of our whoredoms and detestable things -- it is time for us, with our sisters,
Sodom, Samariah and Jerusalem, to be ashamed and confounded, and never open our
mouths any more because of our shame; when he has revealed himself in Christ,
pacified toward us for all that we have done.

In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory. By
Israel I understand Jesus Christ. Who are his seed? Those that are blessed in
him; that is, all the nations of the earth. Genesis 12.18. -- Psalm 22.27. All the
ends of the world shall remember and turn unto the Lord; and all the kindreds
of the nations shall worship before thee; for the kingdom is the Lord's, and he
the Governor among the nations: A seed shall serve him; it shall be accounted
to the Lord for a generation; they shall come and declare his righteousness
unto a people that shall be born, that he has done. The chosen seed that in
every age are brought to the knowledge of him, are a specimen, an earnest, the
first fruits unto God and the Lamb, and are chosen for this end, as we may see
in the first of Ephesians, from the beginning to the 10th verse: See verse 5th.
Having predestined us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ* to
himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory
of his grace. Verse 9th. Having made known unto us the mystery of his will,
according to his good pleasure, which he has purposed in himself: For this
end, verse 10th, That in the dispensation of the fullness of times, he might
gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and
which are on earth, in him.

This being the case, way is made to call upon "all the human race, as we are
required, to serve Jehovah our Lord, our God and Judge, with fear, and rejoice
with trembling, and seasonably repent and give glory to God in Christ Jesus;"
not as you express it, "that we may not be vexed with his sore and perpetual
displeasure," but because he has blotted out, as a thick cloud, our
transgressions, and as a cloud, our sins, we are called to return, for I have
redeemed thee. Isaiah 44.22.

But I would further take notice of another particular you mention.

You say, "that the same epithet is used for the punishment of the wicked* as
for the life of the righteous, and why must a twofold meaning be given to it?"
Page 22, line 14 from the top.

The reason I would offer, is in the words of the Apostle, Sin reigns to death,
but grace reigns through righteousness to eternal life by Jesus Christ, who
says, because I live, ye shall live also: But death, which is the wages of sin,
and the extent of its reign is to be destroyed and swallowed up in victory,
when the Lord God, with his own benign hand shall wipe tears from all faces.

Now Sir keeping in view, James 5.19.20 If any of you do err from the truth,
and one convert him let him know that he that conve^teth a sinner from the
error of his ways shall save a soul from death, and hide a multitude of sins.
As the only way to this end, I have endeavored faithful^y to discover some of
your errors, from the word of God; and as I have no design to offend you, I am
not conscious of any thing offe^ed ^o that end; I rest in the truth of that
word he that rebukes a man afterward shall find more favor than he that
flatt^reth with his tongue. So devoting my labor to the honor and glory of
GOD, our Savior, to whom be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now
and ever. AMEN.

I subscribe myself, your Servant, for Jesus sake. Shippie Townsend.
Boston, January 1. 1783.
INFERRENCES.
UPON reflecting on the truth contained in the foregoing letter, there arises
to view these reflections, as resulting therefrom, viz. 1st. The obligations to
love; 2dly Submission; 3dly, Gratitude and obedience; and 4thly. Thanksgiving.

1st. Love to him who has thus loved us. We love him because he first loved
us: God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him;
and this commandment have we from him, that he that loves God, love his
brother also; if God so loved us, we ought to love one another. How? Jesus
Christ told his disciples, John 13.34. that ye love one another as I have loved
you: How does he manifest and we perceive his love to us? John 3.16. Hereby
perceive we the love of God, because he said down his l^fe for us, and we ought
to lay down lives for the brethren; but whosoever has this world's goods, and
sees his brother have need, and shutt^th up his lowels from him, how dwells
the love of God in him? When we see him, who was rich, for our sakes become
poor, that we through his poverty, might be rich, it ought to excite us to lay
aside prospects and endeavors to lay up ^reasure on earth, and to engage us to
lay down these gay prospects of life; for the brethren to minister with
liberality to them; to the necessities of the poor that are always lest with
us, to prove the sincerity of our love: The poor ye have always with you; and
whenever ye will, ye may do then good; (...) means are small, we ought to ply
the greater diligenc^ in our callings. For this very end, the gospel motives
are; 1st of Thessalonians, 4 11, 12. That ye study to be quiet, and to do your
own business, and work with your own hands; that ye may walk honestly toward
them that are without, and that ye may have lack of no man. -- 2d epistle, 3d
chap. 11, 12 For we hear there are some which walk disorderly, working not at
all; now such we command and exhort by our Lo^d Jesus Christ, that with
quietnes^ they work, and eat their own bread. -- Ephesians, 4 28. But rather
let him labor, working with his hands the thing which is good, that he may
have to give to him that needs. These are gospel motives.

Next the gospel exam^les. We have already hinted at the example of Jesus
Christ, who went about doing good, healing the sick, relieving the afflicted,
feeding the hungry; came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and give
his life a ransom for many. We have the example of Paul, Acts 20 34. Yea,
yourselves know that these hands have ministered to my necessities, and to them
that are with me. The example of Paul and his companions, 1st of Tressalonians.
2 9. For ye remember, brethren, our labor and travel; for laboring night and
day, because we would not be chargeable to any of you, we preached unto you the
gospel of God And his exhortation to the Ephesian elders. Acts 20.35 I have
showed you all things how that so laboring ye ought to support the weak, and
to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said it is more blessed to give
than to receive.

For shame let none under such obligations as divine love lays, with such
examples. motives. pr^c^pts and exhortations, excuse themselves for want of
abi^ity, while they live in idleness; and let every one thus obligated,
di^ect^d and exhorted, remember we are to love one another, says Jesus, as I
have loved you. His love sought us as well as saved us: Our duty then is to
seek out the objects of distress, ag^eeable to the character of the virtuous
woman, the spouse of Christ, Prove. 31.20. She spreads out her hand to the
poor: Yea, she reaches forth her hands to the needy.

Again: Jesus Ch^i^t loved us when enemies -- Romans 5 10. Then it is our duty to
love our enemies, and to do good to them that hate us, and pray for them that
despitefully use us. Prove. 24.21. If thine enemy be hungry, give him bread to
eat; and if he be thirsty, give him water to drink. Again: Jesus Christ having
loved his own which were in the world ^^^eding the const^nt exercise of his
love, in his care of and kindness ^o them, he love them to the end. And would
we love one another according to ^is (...), as I have loved you, we must attend
to the exhortation -- Gal. ^.9. 2d of Thessal 3.13. But ye, brethren, be not
weary in well doing.

2ly. Ou^ obligations of submission to the will of God our savior in what he
alots to us in his providence. When we consider God is love, and ha^ a design
of love in all his dispensations toward us; if in his providence, v^nity is
wrote on our outward estate, we cannot be brought to low, as he who was rich and
became poor in love to us for our takes; and it is ordered by his wisdom, who
knows what is most needful to subdue ou^ coveteousness and fondness for a hope
in this life, and our pride of living independent, etc.

If we imagine our honor is struck at in some things, that we say, flesh and
blood cannot bear, we cannot be so abased, as he who being in the form of God,
and thought it not robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of no
reputation, was despised and rejected, derided, blindfolded, buffeted, spit
upon and suffered ignominy, till he could say as, Psalm 69.20. Reproach has
broken my heart -- yet he failed not, nor was discouraged, but went through his
undertaking, till he could say, it is finished; and has in his wisdom and
love, ordered this very circumstance to subdue our pride, and teach us our
honor lies in denying ourselves and following him, in conformity to his
example of meekness, who when he was reviled, reviled not again. And to his
precepts, and the precepts of his apostles: But I say unto you, that ye resist
not evil; but if any man smite thee on the one cheek, turn to him the other
also: Recompense to no man evil for evil; be not overcome of evil, but overcome
evil with good.

If he is pleased to bereave us of relations, even those that had the chief
place in our affections, it is ordered in wisdom and love by him, who gave his
own life a ransom for us, and knows what we need, to cure us of idolizing them,
and to show us, that he alone, is our chief good -- (a person who had
repeatedly been bereaved, upon inquiring, what have I done, that I must be so
afflicted; had his mouth stoped by this reply -- what have you not done) for
every Babel tower we build upon our children, to make us a name; every
spreading gourd that our imaginations bring up in a night, of which we are
exceeding glad -- our towering imaginations of future greatness, and worldly
happiness in our relations, are all known to him, and he sees when it is
necessary to take them from us; who corrects us for our profit, that we might
be partakers of his holiness. -- If our troubles are greater than these, and we
have living afflictions, and of long continuance in our relations, there is a
history in Mark 5th, from 1st to the 19th, designed for the consolation of such
relations. -- Go home to thy friends, and tell them how great things Jesus has
done for thee, and had compassion on thee -- He is the same, and has the same
designs in view, in his dispensations. The sickness of Lazarus was for the
glory of God, that the son of God might be glorified thereby -- The man was
born blind, that the works of God should be made manifest in him; yea, a
tribute of glory is arising to him who cast out seven devils from Mary
Magdalen, and set the adulteress free, with direction to go and sin no more. If
I could paint out greater affliction than any I have mentioned, it must be the
distressed case of poor prodigal children, from their fathers houses, ladened
with guilt, oppressed with shame, afflicted with a stubborn loathness to
return, pinched with hunger, going with reluctant steps toward the place where
the swine are fed, to look for relief from thence. -- Even this painting has a
bright side, when we consider that in all the distress into which their wilful,
shameful folly has plunged them; there is a design of love in overruling all
this misery, as a means to bring them to themselves, and return them to their
father's house: -- What, though they may not yet have come to this length, and
are resolvedly guarding against this depth of distress and poverty that has
been described; -- though they choose to continue in the way leading thereunto;
there is this consolation, that every knee shall bow, and the loftiness of man
shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of man shall be made low, and the Lord
alone shall be exalted, and the idols he shall utterly abolish.

I would further say, we are the property of our Creator, Preserver and
Redeemer, and obliged to glorify him in our spirits, and bodies, which are his;
then surely, we are not our own, nor at our own disposal, and it is our
indispensible duty to keep the place he allots, and do what he bids us, till he
calls us away. To suppose our lives at our own disposal, is a strong delusion
to believe a lie; and as this delusion has obtained in the minds of those that
have professed a high sense of honor and honesty in their dealings among men,
I would endeavor to show, 1st. that it is the most contemptible sentiment that
can be embraced -- 2d. it is the most knavish and dishonest, beyond highway
robbery -- 3dly. it is the most ungrateful:

1st. The most contemptible, not only as it tends to brand the name and memory
of a man from age to age among men, but first, as it is the evidence of
murmuring and discontent with the allotments of a wise and kind providence, it
is a delusion that has its rise from enmity to God. -- 2dly, As it tends to a
foolish, fruitless attempt to run away from our rightful owner; I say,
fruitless, because it is impossible, for If I ascend unto heaven, thou art
there; If I make my bed in hell, behold thou art there: If I say, the darkness
shall cover me, even the night shall be light about me; yea the darkness hides
not from thee, but the night shines as the day; the darkness and the light
both alike to thee. -- And what is more foolish and contemptible than a
runaway, who finally runs right into the hands of his master.

2dly. It Is the most knavish, as it tends to an attempt to rob God at once of
all his property that is in our power.

3dly. It is the most ungrateful, as it is directly contrary to all that love,
grace and mercy, that is made manifest in the gospel, and to our duty
consequent thereupon: For the grace of God, which brings salvation unto all
men, has appeared; teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we
should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world; looking for
that blessed hope, even the glorious appearing of the great God, even our
savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify unto himself, a peculiar people, zealous of good works.

3dly. A sense of obligation to gratitude and obedience, results from the
belief of this truth; whoever knows it, knows they are not their own, but
bought with a price, and under indisputable, indispensible, eternal
obligations, to glorify God in their spirit and bodies, which are his. Then
surely we ought always to keep our eye on his will, as our rule in all our
actions, and look on our interest, our time, and all our talents, as his, and
at his service, and be frequently enquiring of ourselves, whether what we speak
and do, is agreeable to the will of God in Christ Jesus, concerning us,
agreeable to the exhortation, Collossians, 3.17. Whatsoever ye do in word or
deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus. And whenever we act contrary
thereto, we are guilty of base ingratitude.

What is worse than to call a man ungrateful? Yet black as it is, we are guilty
of it every time we harken to the temptations of satan, and walk after our own
lusts. What can be conceived of, so ungrateful, as when the grace of God, that
brings salvation to all men, has appeared, instead of harkening to what it
teaches, men curse and damn one another, bite and devour one another?

When he feeds and clothes us, the tendency of our hearts is, to make empty the
soul of the hungry, and cause the drink of the thirsty to fail, devising wicked
devices, with lying words even when the needy speaks right. Isaiah 32.6, 7. O
our ingratitude! The ox knows his owner and the ass his master's crib; but my
people does not know Israel does not consider. Isaiah 1.3. But is there hope
for us? Yes; 1st of John, 3 5. And ye know that he was manifest to take away
our sins. 1st of John, 3 8. For this purpose the son of God was manifested,
that he might destroy the works of the devil. Well may we cry out with the
prophet Micah, 7.18, 19. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity,
and p^sseth by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retains
not his anger forever, because he delights in mercy: He will turn again, he
will have compassion upon us; he will subdue our iniquities; and thou will cast
all their sins into the depths of the sea. Yea, says God, by the prophet
Isaiah, chap. 44.22. I have blotted out as a thick cloud, thy transgressions,
and as a cloud thy sins, and calls upon us to return, for I have redeemed thee.

Surely then we are called, 4thly, to thanksgiving. Isaiah 44 23. Sing, O ye
he^vens, for the Lord has done it: Shout ye lower part^ of the earth: break
forth into singing ye mountains, O forest. and every tree therein: for the Lord
has redeemed Jacob, and glorified himself in Israel.

This is a subject that would lead our minds from eternity to eternity, back to
the source and fountain of mercy, which the apostle John speaks of, when he
says, God is love; and forward to the fruit of the purchase of Jesus Christ,
the reward of his righteousness, to the hope laid up in heaven, to what eye
has not seen, nor ear has heard, nor has entered into the heart of man to
conceive: For which all the dispensations of providence are overruled in the
present life; which, if rightly understood, would lead the mind to an
understanding of that exhortation to the disciples, 1st of Thessalonians 5.19.
In every thing give thanks, for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus,
concerning you. But as this opens a large field, and I have already been more
lengthy than I intended, I shall close with that short, comprehensive
exhortation, we have in psalm CXVII. O praise the Lord all ye nations; Praise
him all ye people, for his merciful kindness is great toward us, and the truth
of the Lord forever: Praise ye the Lord.


