THE PRECIPITATE CHOICE: OR, THE HISTORY OF LORD OSSORY AND MISS RIVERS, A
NOVEL. IN TWO VOLUMES.

By a LADY.

VOL. I.

BOSTON: Reprinted and sold by BENJAMIN EDES and SONS, in Cornhill.

M,DCC,LXXXIII.

THE PRECIPITATE CHOICE.
LETTER I. To CHARLES RIVERS, Esquire.
NOW help me to rail, to curse that seducing libertine sex, who have for so
many years been the subject of your satire. -- Yes, Charles, I have for some
time past been a convert to your opinion, my hopeful rib has followed the
example of her eldest sister, but in iniquity she far out does her: your wise
was comparatively a Diana, after being detected in a faux pas she had the grace
to bury herself and her shame in obscurity, -- she has ever since been dead to
the world, -- her prudent retreat in some measure, atoned for her fault; --
your honor received only a slight scratch, compared to that which mine has
suffered; the broad shame comes staring in my face, and boys -- pride forbids
me to finish the horrid sentence -- she is gone -- we are separated for ever; I
shall not take the trouble to sue for a divorce; why should I? since not even
the charms of a Venus, with Pallas's mind, could tempt me again to play the
fool and marry. I have thus got rid of one plague, but another still remains.
Can I sleep in peace. -- Can I enjoy that ease, of which your indolent friend,
as you often call me, is so fond, while it is still in the power of a female to
plunge me deeper in dishonor -- marry your daughter says somebody, I forget
who, least she marry herself, -- but an imprudent marriage in these our
degenerate days, is not the worst a parent has to fear.

The girl already, young as she is, discovers so much of her mother's
disposition, that I have the most dreadful forebodings of her future fate --
who would have the courage to marry, did they but seriously weigh the
consequence. -- This was not my case, -- caught by a (...) face, and sprightly
wit, without giving myself time to reflect, I rushed into the fatal snare. --
But all this you knew before; let me rather ask your opinion in regard to Bell.
-- What am I to do with her? she is now out of her teens, and has for some
yea^^ been under the tuition of a French governess, one of her mother's hopeful
confidants, as I have discovered upon our late rupture, -- a sweet tutoress for
a young girl to be sure! -- Too late I repent my indolent inattention to her
education. I saw she had a graceful ease in her manner, that she danced with
elegance -- sung agreeably and spoke French with fluency. Satisfied that she
was mistress of these superficial accomplishments, I gave myself no farther
trouble: Her mind, -- ah! I fear it is irreparably perverted; had it been left
in a state of nature, I might have had some hopes, but her native levity has
gained new force, by the precepts of an intriguing governess; and the example
of a mother lost to virtue.

Both these perverters, these poisoners of her youthful heart, are dismissed
with the infamy they deserve; but it is too late -- the mischief is done: --
What my next step must be, heaven knows: The girl's continuing to live with me,
is out of the question; I have neither talents nor inclination to commence her
preceptor; I have no maiden sisters to undertake the important charge; -- would
to heaven I could find some place of safety to send her to, till I can fix on a
fit husband for her.

Her beauty; (for Bell has all her mother's charms, and I fear all her
imperfections into the bargain) her beauty I say, and large fortune, will
easily procure her a suitable match in this prudent age: -- Do Charles, help me
by your sage advice out of this dilemma; do you know any old dowager to whom I
could commit her? -- it must be in the country remember; for our old harridans
in town, are only more practiced in the ways of vice than their
grand-daughters; but an ancient castle in the country, moted round, with a
starched virgin, neglected from her youth upwards, by the other sex; whom
nature has fenced round on every side, and effectually secured from all
attempts; who never heard the sepucing whispers of flattery; who never excited
a tender sigh, or amorous (...) -- could we find an unfortunate damsel like
this? compelled to chastity, from dire necessity; this was a fit, a watchful
dragon to guard the tempting fruit.

Adieu -- I have a thousand engagements on my hands, and a thousand plagues in
my head; but no situation in life, shall ever diminish the regard with which I
am,

dear Charles, yours, etc. HENRY RICHMOND.

LETTER II. Mr. RIVERS to Sir HENRY RICHMOND.
THERE is not a married man in England, but who sooner, or later, will be
compelled to subscribe to my creed. -- I need not tell you what that creed is,
since you have a thousand times, while an infidel, heard me repeat it. -- Poor
Harry; -- well, your condition (our condition I should say) is not to be
scorned, since the first men in the nation, "are nowadays horned."

A pretty task you would have me engage in, -- to go in quest of virginity, --
of an old maid; -- an old unmarried woman is, I trow, easily found; but for a
maid, -- you must first provide me with a few of those dogs mentioned in the
Spectator, -- my scent is not good enough to discover them.

I question if in all London such a phoenix is to be found out of
leading-strings; and you want, not a youthful, but an ancient Duena. -- The
scheme you propose is chimerical (...) the best advice I can give you, is, that
you send Bell to keep her cousin company. -- My girl has been in a convent ever
since her mother's fine pranks were discovered; -- and there she shall remain,
till I have a husband ready at the foot of the alter to receive her hand, and
to take the wayward charge out of mine.

I do not recommend a nunnery as a school of morality; on the contrary, I think
with Rousseau, that it is a nursery of coquettes; but since Mungo's receipt is
found ineffectual (for we have lost the art of which the English once boasted
padlocking the minds of our females, by a generous confidence and reasonable
freedom;) since this will no longer restrain them, or rather since they no
longer think it worth their while to deceive us, by an outward appearance of
virtue, but sin with a high hand, and in the face of day; -- since this, I say,
is the case, the Spanish padlock must be substituted in lieu of the English.

I have placed bolts and bars, as guards upon my daughter; marriage alone shall
release her from her prison -- she then becomes the property of her husband --
if after that she commences the modern fine lady -- his honor receives the
principal wound -- the disgrace glances only obliquely on me -- her name, her
condition is changed; from me he receives her pure -- it is his business to keep
her so -- if not, he must take the consequence. Ridiculous: -- Unjust however,
is that prejudice, which makes us confound the innocent with the guilty -- but
it is no longer the case -- ******* is now an honorable name -- no longer the
prerogative to city-husbands, but the high court fashion -- a title of
distinction. A woman of quality thinks it now adays absolutely necessary to be
divorced, in order to establish the reputation of her beauty (that is, the only
reputation of which she is ambitious!) The age of ^hival^y is past -- fighting
is no longer in vogue -- gallants are substituted in the room of knight-errants
-- no longer do we defend and contend for our mistress's charms, by the force
of arms, but we give a still more daring proof of their power -- we marry the
woman who has given us the strongest instance of weakness: -- We take as our
wives, the wantons whom our neighbors cast off -- who have been publicly
branded with infamy. -- What folly! -- What astonishing infatuation! -- Our
ancestors would have blushed at the bare mention of such depravity of morals;
but we, their more polished sons, glory in our shame.

Pardon me, Harry; you know there is no stopping either my pen or tongue, when
I stumble on this subject; but for once I will check myself -- it is hackneyed
-- all the world rail -- but nobody looks at home, and begins the reformation
so much wished for.

Let us return to the girls: -- If you choose to carry yours abroad, I Will
accompany you. -- I do not think, if she is the lively hussy you describe, she
ought to be trusted with any other escort but yourself. -- Yet why should I
say, if she is this, or that; vice is not confined to any particular temper or
age. Who could have a more seducing appearance, a more promising disposition
than my torment. -- Mild as the gentle breeze of May -- timid -- blushingly
modest -- full of tender sensibility -- her sentiments delicate and refined. --
Often have I, in the days of foolish love and rapture, read to her Milton's
fine description of Eve, and swore she sat for the amiable picture -- not
obvious, not obstrusive -- but retired. --

Such seemed to be her nature. Alas! too soon she threw off the mask. Do you
know, Harry? No, you do not: Let me then spare myself the shame of confessing
my weakness. Harriot is the exact image of her mother: As a daughter, she acts
with the greatest propriety. No one can be more dutiful, more submissive, more
affectionate; never has she uttered a single complaint at her confinement, --
but she is of a grave turn -- vastly sentimental, forsooth; -- in short, the
very character I have drawn above. But as I must from fatal experience, exclaim
with the poet, "Frailty, thy name is Woman."

So do I not place any manner of confidence in these favorable appearances; the
foundation of my security is good substantial iron bars. Let me know, whether
or no you choose to follow my example. Harriot is not much older than your
daughter: her gravity and prudence, however, will give her a sort of authority
over your giddy girl, and may be a means of moderating her too great vivacity.
If you determine to place her at the convent of B --, I will as I before said,
accompany you in your expedition, and there we will leave from safe under lock
and key, till we can find fit (...)

Adieu. Let me have your answer by the return at the Post; because, if I do not
go with you to France, I propose a visit of a few weeks to our old fellow
collegian, Tom Bertie.

I am, dear Sir Harry, yours sincerely, CHARLES RIVERS.

LETTER III. Miss RIVERS to Miss ELIZA DUDLEY.
OF how much happiness am I deprived by the loss of my sweet friend and
companion. Dreary now appears this malancholy enclosure -- so the world calls
it; but never till my Eliza's departure did it wear a gloomy aspect to her
Harriot; happy in your society, guarded by pious precepts from the love of a
tumultuous world, of which I know nothing, but from the description of those
whose interest it now is (...) dwell only on the dark side of the picture.

I was perfectly content with my tranquil retreat: With what cheerful alacrity
did you and I enter into our innocent amusements; not a moment of our time hung
heavy on our hands; -- but, since separated from you, I feel an aching void in
my heart; our little recreations have, to me, lost their charms; I still see
round me the same serene, contented countenances, but I see none to whom I can,
with unlimited* freedom, unbosom myself: I like and esteem them; but it is a
cool sentiment, compared to what I experienced for you. My judgment approves,
but my affections are unengaged: Let me not however dam^ your joy, at being
again received into the arms of a tender mother, by my complaints; rather let
me congratulate you on your felicity: A mother! O my friend! the very mention
of that endearing name, fills my eyes with tears. Long, long, have I been
deprived of mine: But, young as I was, when I enjoyed that inestimable
blessing, strongly is it impressed on my memory; I love to recollect her
tenderness on these occasions. I seem still to feel her kisses on my cheek, and
fancy my self pressed to her maternal bosom. She is no more! Yet let me not
repine, I have still a parent left: But it seems natural to our sex to be more
fondly attached to the mother, than the father. I reverence the latter, but my
affection is mixed with awe; a hasty word from him agitates my whole frame;
while his smiles excite only a sort of doubtful joy: A joy, alloyed by the fear
of inadvertently doing, or saying something that may dispel the sunshine of his
countenance, and substitute a cloud in its place. Whereas, had I a mother, I
feel that my heart would expand itself in her presence; I would presume to make
her the confidant of all my little secrets: Her feminine softness would
encourage me; on the contrary, my father's manly dignity, adds to my natural
timidity; perhaps I should be more at ease in his presence, were I of^ner
admitted to it; but though he frequently takes a trip to Paris. I enjoy at the
grate but little of his company: My first emotions at the sight of him, are
always of the most agreeable nature; but he no sooner beholds me, than his
native vivacity is exchanged for a melancholy pensive air; for some moments he
continues lost in thought* his visits are short, and he seems to leave me
without regret.

Perhaps, my dear, I have before now troubled you with the above remarks.
Pardon me, -- what led me to the subject, was a note, which I received from him
this morning, informing me that he, my uncle (Sir Harry Richmond) and my cousin
Isabella, will be here tomorrow; the latter is, I fancy, coming to add to the
number of our boarders; I never saw her, nor have I the least knowledge of her
character; but as the daughter of my mother's sister, I am prepared to love
her, and expect her arrival with that female impatience and curiosity, so
natural to us. Lady Richmond I have seen, she favored me last winter with a
visit, accompanied by my uncle; she is I think, without exception, the finest
woman I ever saw, and as lively as she is handsome: -- Sir Harry is no less
distinguished for the charms of his person, so that I expect to behold in my
little cousin, a perfect Venus; you know my dear, how fond I am of beauty -- in
others I mean. You will, perhaps, archly smiling, hint, that you could not
suspect, I could mean in myself, since you know of none I have to be fond of;
this some would say, therefore to save your friend from the imputation of
vanity, I saved them the trouble: Do not call this affected humility: I will
say no more on the subject.

Adieu! ^y dearest Eliza; remember, though absent, your affectionate

HARRIOT RIVERS.

LETTER IV. The SAME to the SAME.
THEY are come my dear: -- About eleven o'clock this morning I was summoned
into the parlour, the outward parlour I mean, where we receive company, the
lady abbess, and some of the sisterhood were ready at the other side of the
grate, to receive their new charge; my father entered, leading Isabella,
followed by Sir Harry; I was struck with the uncommon beauty of her person; she
is very tall of her age, her air is graceful and animated; her traveling dress
was inimitably becoming; she changed color at the sight of the nuns, and as it
appeared to her, their gloomy enclosure -- ah! those iron bars! -- cried she,
with a faint smile, pointing to the grate, the very sight of them makes a free
born English spirit revolt. I doubt not my dear cousin, said I, embracing her,
but time will effectually reconcile you to our serene and tranquil joys. Serene
and tranquil, repeated she, a pretty description, and admirably suited to the
gravity of the no less pretty speaker: In saying this, she obligingly returned
my caresses. -- All the English boarders dressed to the best advantage, now by
order of the abbess, made their appearance; this had before been requested by
my uncle, who knew some of their parents: Here, said he, turning with a smile
to my father, one might, I fancy, find that phoenix you despaired to meet with.
It Is possible, returned the other in the same tone, -- thanks to the strength
of their impregnable garrison; but how long will they remain so when they get
into the world? Sir Harry shook his head -- pity they should ever come there,
said he, to lose that engaging timidity, that seducing air of innocence, which
is so charming! did women know their own interest would they wish effectually
to enslave us; they would relinquish the bon ton for the ancient simplicity of
manners, and again become retired, which renders them the more to be desired.
While her father spoke, Isabella remained buried in thought; the abbess several
times addressed to her some po^^te compliments, to which she answered only by a
slight inclination of her head; at last starting from her reverie, she
whispered me, -- tell me, for heaven sake, Harriot, how do you make shift to
kill your time amidst those set of inanimates? -- ah! Lord, -- they had better
not admit me into their dreary prison, for I shall (...) a most unmerciful
delight in plaguing them, poor dear souls. What a collection of winter-faced
virgins are the nuns! It seems to me, that their vows were quite needless.

Some of them (the weather being extremely warm) had raised their (...), which
gave her an opportunity to make this remark. After chatting about half an hour
longer, Sir Harry said, that he wanted to have a little private conversation
with the lady abbess, recommending his daughter to my friendship, and promised
to call again next morning.

On this my fair co^sin and I paid our respects, she gave me her hand -- I
tremble, whispered she -- the entrance into our prison is easy, but ah! how
shall we get out again? -- Her father overheard her, and, in a half whisper,
kissing her cheek, said, I will 'ere long, send you a knight errant, who shall
set you at liberty; only to make me more effectually resign it -- returned she
archly, however send him -- the sooner the better; for it is liberty, dear
liberty alone, that gives fresh beauty to the sun: In warbling this air, she
entered with me the pious dwelling.

What an ease, what a vivacity is there in the manner of this charming girl!
how little is she restrained by the presence of her father, to what I am by
mine! but this is easily accounted for, not only by the difference of our
tempers, but by the difference of theirs: Sir Harry is gallant, polite, and
gay; -- my father is well b^ed, but it is mixed with a little haughtiness; he
is sensible, animated, and is, I fancy, naturally as (...) ^ively as the other;
but he has met with some (...) life. -- what I know not; -- I only judge to by
his manner, wherein one may discover a sort of affected (...); -- affected I
say, -- for his native good humor frequently breaks out in spice of himself,
but he laughs as if he scorned himself for laughing. -- You my dear have heard
him expatiate on the conduct of our sex; -- on this subject he is unmercifully
satirical; the unfavorable opinion he entertains of us, excites in me a
laudable ambition, if possible, by my conduct, to make him do us more justice.

Amidst the crowds of a populous city, there are no doubt, many exceptionable
characters, both male and female; but surely Eliza, our nature is not so
depraved as some gloomy moralists pretend. Virtue at least is the very
characteristic of our sex; those that forfeit that, forfeit the name of woman.

Adieu. Let you and I, my dear, ever study to deserve that amiable name, by
modesty, delicacy, and gentle timidity; which are all so many parts of our
nature: For my share. I glory in being what I am; nor would all the
prerogatives of which the lordly sex make their boast, tempt me to exchange the
soft, the feminine woman, for the bold, the less feeling man. However, were I
even to undergo this unfavorable metamorphose my attachment to you would
remain; as a female you excite my warmest friendship; -- and were I a male,
that friendship would be exchanged for love: This change would be so much more
flattering to your vanity, that I fear I shall sink in value as what I am, when
you consider what I might have been. But I forget, -- I talk to you as if still
in the convent, where lovers are so scarce; on the contrary, you are in the
beaux monde, where every heart endued with sensibility, pays you that tender
homage so justly your due.

Farewell, my sweet girl, believe me yours, H. RIVERS.

LETTER V. Miss RICHMOND to Lady BAB WILMOT.
MY father talked of sending me to a convent. You laughed at my fears: --
Impossible. -- Your papa, my dear, too much admires a woman of spirit, to send
his daughter abroad on any such gloomy errand. -- No child, he will rather
encourage, than damp your charming vivacity; you have already all the modish
airs and graces, which cost some of us (even women of fashion) so much trouble
to acquire. Do you recollect who said all this to comfort her friend? Ah! lady
Bab; -- how much did flattering hope deceive us? Look at the place from whence
I date this woe-begone epistle, the convent of R --. You doubt your senses.
Borrow your Aunt's specks, child; -- look again; -- alas! it is even so; -- but
do not be too much affected: not long will Bell Richmond be confined. By what
pretty method do you think I am to be released? -- By marriage! -- Delightful
state of freedom, as our modern wives manage the affair.

The poet makes Calista talk of the husband's imperious reign, "proud with
opinion of superior wisdom," but our modern dames have taught them better
manners. The tables are turned. It Is our reign now, not theirs, which then
commences. -- An unmarried woman is a mere cipher; -- but when once the
connubial knot is tied, then pleasures golden reign begins: -- then for
gallants, intrigues, the dear Coterie, and to crown all, a divorce. -- What
charming methods have the ladies of this polished age discovered, to render
marriage easy, Oh time! hasten that I may become a wife; no matter to whom -- I
mean as to sense and figure; and indeed, for rank and fortune, we may trust our
prudent parents, while we amuse ourselves with forming plans of future gaiety
and expense. You know Bab, I am absolutely wild to enter the joyou^ state, I
flatter myself I have talents to make some figure in it, and thanks to those
who superintend my education; I shall have none of those qualms of conscience
to struggle with, which those often have who have been cooped up in a nursery
till their hanging sleeves were taken off, and, from one extreme, are suddenly
^^rown into another. Young as I am, I know the world; early was I introduced
into scenes of gaiety; often have I stood at the elbow of my mamma, while she
has lost a cool hundred at Brag! -- By the by, Lady Bab, brag is one of the
most delightful games in nature -- something in it so spirited -- so fit for a
woman of quality; I dare say I should soon become mistress of it. Ah! would I
were now at the dear Coterie -- learning the enchanting lesson; instead of
which, behold me, in a melancholy cell, with a death's head and a weeping
Magdalene placed on my toilet, in the room of patch-box and cosmetics. The poor
unfortunate ***** of a penitent was depicted with a countenance so horribly
rueful, that there was no standing it, if she had not, by her sister saints,
been so effectually plaistered up against the wall, I should have taken the
liberty to remove her; but since this (without tearing to atoms the sacred
relict) could not be done, I have only with my pencil made a little reform in
her face, and now she appears with dishevelled hair beating her breast, while
her mouth is upon the broad grin: I never thought my drawing would have been of
so much service to me.

I was so diverted at the odd appearance of the picture, when I had thus
touched it up, that I determined to exercise my skill on some more of the
memento mori's; accordingly, while the honest virgins were in the chapel,
yawning over their beads I stole to their cells, and set their whole collection
of saints a laughing; scarce a picture in the house, but what, with a few of my
touches, I put into good humor, though before they were repenting in sackcloth
and ashes. This is the least humorous piece of mischief I have amused myself
with since I came here, and, to say truth, hardly worth relating; but the
Magdalene being facing me as I write, brought it to my remembrance: and
whatever whim seizes me, whether in thought word or deed, you know I never
check myself, so that if I am inclined to talk, or write nonsense, out it
comes; it is a talent in which I excel: I know not how it may be relished by my
own sex; but often have I by the most trifling prattle imaginable, drawn off
the attention of a circle of beaux, from plain sensible women, who were left to
entertain each other, while they hung enraptured on the pretty follies that
flowed from my ruby lips. Oh! Bab, when will those happy days of dear
flirtation return? -- Now I talk of wise women, I must tell you that I have met
with a female cousin of mine, one of the demurest little toads you ever beheld;
so sentimental, -- delicate, -- so timid, -- so feminine, -- so much the
antediluvian -- Ah I Lord, there is no bearing her: and yet it must be owned,
the girl has some agreeable talents, if she did but know how to make use of
them: she has seen nothing of life; what share of polish she has, is entirely
the gift of nature: there is something of a native grace about her, which one
would not expect from a poor thing, shut up from infancy, in such a dreary
mansion. Her person too, is, what some people would call handsome: but she is
inanimate -- at least, she appears so to me, when I compare her to those
charming affected lively coquettes, amongst whom I have been accustomed to
flourish: What I here mean by inanimate, is the want of that modish air of
freedom, so conspicuous in the town bred belles; the loud laugh, the confident
stare, which sets all rustic bashfulness at defiance. This kind of animation,
is easily acquired; a couple of winters spent amongst people of fashion, will
do the business; it has nothing to do with expression of countenance, or I
should have no reason to tax my cousin with the want of it, for her features
undisciplined by art, betray every sentiment of her heart: in her eyes, which
are large, black, and languishing, one may see the sparkle of joy; the tear of
pity, and the gentle beams of friendly sensibility by turns: in short, they are
such a pair of telltale eyes, that I know not what she will do with them, when
she comes to figure in the beau monde: her hair is dark, her complexion
delicate, rather inclined to pale; she has good teeth, and a pretty mouth; yet
will all this, is far from being a striking beauty; here is is of that kind,
which will not please the generality of men; but those she does affect will be
deeply so. See here a proof how void I am of envy; but my vanity is too strong
to admit that humble vice.

I do not think Harriot is at all to be feared as a rival; she is in every
thing so very opposite to your humble servant, that we shall never interfere
with each other's conquests. -- Conquests! Oh! the reviving sound! -- What is
life without them! What lifeless clods should we be were we not actuated and
animated by the transporting hope of admiration! I am, for my part, astonished,
how your plain souls make shift to support their insipid existence? To them the
brilliant bail, the playhouse, the opera, the part, and all the dear enjoyments
of public amusements, must lose their charms; a new fashion in them will not
excite the flush of delighted surprise: The looking-glass to them, must be a
disgusting object But I forget, that we all view ourselves through the medium
of self-love; and that, however we may accuse dame* fortune of injustice, we
all think nature has been sufficiently liberal in her gifts.

Fortunately for you, Lady Bab, -- the dinner bell put a stop to my moralizing
epistle; -- it is a strange mixture of -- of -- no matter what; it has served
to kill a tedious hour of my stupid existence; and by employing your eyes, has
saved half a hundred beaux, from falling a sacrifice to their fatal glances.

Adieu. Ever yours, ISABELLA RICHMOND.

LETTER VI. Mr. RIVERS to Sir HENRY RICHMOND.
YOU curse your wife for obliging you, by her shameless conduct; to quit a
place, so much to your taste, as this gay city: I on the contrary, hate it so
heartily, that I could curse you, as I do with less scruple, the Count D --,
for not suffering me more expeditiously to settle your business, that I may
quit it: There is no prevailing on these laughing, fluttering trifling,
giddy-brained mortals, to act like rational beings: I cannot get the Count to
dispatch the affair, though it is so much his interest to bring it to a
conclusion: How ridiculous! And yet, these are the people with whose manners
you are so much enamoured: to me they are the most insignificant coxcombs in
the creation, nothing can reconcile me to their fantastic follies: you will, I
know, tell me, that if they can sing and dance through life, and set every care
at defiance, they are a thousand times happier than the snarling philosopher
whose wisdom only serves to show him the defects of his fellow creature, and
how inadequate the joys of this world, are to communicate pleasure, to one who
has refined his taste, even to wretchedness. Which of these two, you will ask,
is the man timely wise? That wisdom which serves to render us miserable,
deserves the name of folly; and so vice versa, that folly which serves to
promote our felicity, deserves the name of wisdom. This is your favorite
doctrine: but a thousand such like arguments, would not make me a convert to
your opinion; you may as well prefer madness to reason, or an agreeable dream
to less pleasing realities. According to your system, the man who is,
constantly intoxicated, is both wiser and happier than him that is sober: but
are these sons of laughter really the happy beings you and they pretend?
Impossible! I should think, void as they are of sensibility, fashion governs
them in every thing; nature has given them no peculiar bias; -- they make love
-- take snuff -- fight -- dress -- run to public places -- and profess
friendship with the same indifference. -- I have no patience -- I am sick of
seeing perpetually, in all I meet, the same insipid gaiety of countenance; the
laugh without a joke, -- and of hearing a jingle of words without meaning. --
Why, since you are so fond of them, did you leave them? Why is your honor so
much easier wounded, than that of the people whose manners you so much admire?
You was in no danger of being either despised or ridiculed for your wife's
gallantries; they would rather congratulate you on being united to one, who is
so much mistress of la bon ton: sure never any thing equalled the assurance of
that woman! Far from being checked by my presence, she seems to watch for
opportunities to throw herself in my way: Not often do I go to public places --
but when I do, I am sure to meet her. The other night at the opera she made her
appearance, blazing with jewels; I happened unfortunately to place myself in
the next box, -- she had the impudence to curtesy to me; I was compelled to
return the compliment: With this I could have put up, but fate had determined
further to torment me. In coming out it was some time before my carriage could
draw up; while I stood waiting for it, behold her again close at my elbow. --
"Your servant Mr. Rivers," cried she, long have I wished to have a little
conversation with you; -- "with me madam!" and I darted at her a look of
ineffable contempt. -- Unparalleled assurance! why you far outstrip your elder
sister; she was a vestal when compared to you! -- or to almost any other of her
sex; -- interrupted she, treat me as you please: but for heaven's sake, -- for
your own sake -- be more just to your injured wife; -- upon my life Rivers she
is innocent. -- I hurried into my chariot without deigning to answer. She
called to me, "stay one moment, -- I have something of consequence!" I heard no
more, I was glad to make my escape.

The subject in which she strove to engage me, is that, which of all others, is
most trying to my naturally impetuous temper. There is a foolish weakness hangs
about my heart, which neither my reason or pride can conquer: I should have
spent a horrid night: past scenes had taken strong possession of me; when my
servant fortunately roused me from my disagreeable reverie, by delivering a
letter, the contents of which diverted my thoughts to another channel; it was
from my ^ate ward, Lord Oss^ry: he tells me, that he has since his return from
abroad, been constantly engaged in settling his household, and affairs relating
to his estate; that he is much pleased with his seat at --, and intends
principally to (...) there; for which purpose, he has formed an extensive plan
of improvements in the house and its in^irons which are going on with the
utmost expedition, under the inspection of Monsieur La Fare, who has a most
elegant taste in these affairs. It (...) remember right, you was present when
my Lord related to me (...) leman's unfortunate history; happy may he esteem
himself in having met with so noble minded, so generous'a patron: infinite are
the obligations he (...) to his young protector; indeed I do not believe all
England can produce a more amiable nobleman than (...). I never knew his equal
for good sense, good (...) sensibility and integrity. -- Happy will that wo^ an
be, on whom he shall think fit to bestow his heart: but where can he find one
worthy of that distinction? I have often cautioned him against a too
precipitate choice: but what avails our caution, when those against whom we
would be upon our guard, are such adepts in hypocrisy and deceit, that they may
bid defiance to the deepest penetration? I lately wrote to him on this subject,
-- a report prevailing that he was on the point of taking this important, and,
in general, as it proves, fatal step. I shall transcribe that part of his
letter which is an answer to mine: But first let me own to you, that I cannot
help forming a wish, since he is determined to play the fool and marry, that my
girl might have the good fortune to please him; she is, I think, without
partiality, as unexceptionable, in every respect, as most of her sex; nay, I
know none who comes so near the description of her on whom he seems inclined to
confer that honor: -- read what follows, and I dare say you will be of my
opinion. However, reason, as you and I have experienced, has very little to do
in these affairs, while at a distance from objects of temptation; he may form
the most prudent plans for his future conduct: but will a youthful heart like
his, alive to every tender feeling, wait for a reason to regulate his choice?
Hear at present with what calm philosophy he talks on the subject.

LETTER VII. Part of Lord OSSORY's letter to Mr. RIVERS.
YES, my good friend, I am indeed, in spite of all the discouragements you
muster up, determined to take a wife, as soon as ever I can bring my hitherto
insensible heart to second (...) judgment, for both these must join to decide
my choice; -- the latter, after the most mature consideration has convinced me,
that marriage is a state infinitely preferable to celibacy; and the former
tells me it has wants which neither friendship, wealth, nor grandeur, can
satisfy.

I am here placed in a little paradise -- so beautiful appear to me the scenes
that surround me: (but I must not again launch out in praise of my retreat; I
fear I have already tired your patience in the first part of this epistle, with
my description of it) What I was going to remark, is, that even the joys of a
more enchanting Eden was deemed imperfect, till man was blessed with a mate: --
It is true, fatal consequences sprung from that last most endearing gift, Woman
-- but ^e the consequence what it will, I am determined to run all ri^ques
rather than live without experiencing those pleasing ties, which only the
matrimonial union can form. -- I am returned from my travels, as much the
Englishman as when I set off; and after viewing all the celebrated beauties of
foreign courts, without prejustice, I must give my own fair country women the
preference, for personal charms, and would they but give nature fair play,
their minds would be equally amiable -- the only fault that foreigners formerly
found in them was, a too great reserve, a coolness and formality of manners,
which damped the gaiety of society. -- From one extreme they have now fairly
adopted the opposite. Ambitious to acquire what the French call la bon ton,
instead of agreeable originals, they are become a^kward copyists, and their
present forced insipid pert vivacity, is ten times worse than their native
taciturnity; our climate is not favorable to sprightliness, our women have more
sentiment than spirit, more sense than wit -- how much are the former to be
preferred to the latter, and how much more insinuatingly engaging is the
modest, timid, feminine maid, than the trifling, volatile, affected fi^e lady,
who shall stare you out of countenance to show her good breeding -- who talks
and laughs aloud at public places, that she may be thought easy and degage --
and who prattles i^cessantly, by way of passing for a wit. With what difficulty
does she support a character so contrary to her nature, and how contemptible
does it render her in the eyes of men of taste and understanding; nor is she
less ridiculed by the gay Parisian dames who laugh at their awkward imitators,
-- however, if our fair ones fail in acquiring the graceful ^ase of their
neighbors, and instead of becoming lively, sentimental coquettes, become only
childish, affected, and insipid pratlers, though they have not talents for
their agreeable follies; yet alas! they are but too apt scholars in lessons of
vice: but in spite of an almost general depravity of manners, my temper is too
sanguine to give up the hopes of meeting with one of the amiable exceptions, --
peradventure there are but ten virtuous women: for these ten's sake, I will
spare the rest. And oh! if heaven in mercy has destined one of these ten to
fall to my lot, to be the dear sweetner of my future days, then will my
happiness be complete.

If you, my good friend, should be so fortunate as to stumble on one of these
your Emilius's, at present undiscovered Sophia, inform me where the angel is to
be found, that I may fly to her on the wing's of love, and to you with
gratitude, for adding to the favors already conferred on,

dear Sir, your most obedient Servant, OSSORY.

Mr. RIVERS in continuality.
NOW Sir Harry, what say you to my scheme? -- To me it appears extremely
feasible, -- I shall not, however, too precipitately proceed in the affair --
to take Harriot out of her convent on the strength of it, might be attended
with disagreeable consequences; much as I wish honorably to dispose of her, yet
will not my pride suffer me to render her cheap in his eyes -- no, if the
character I shall give him of her, together with a few hints, that his alliance
will be acceptable, does not bring him to France, the girl's return to England
shall not be hurried on his account.

Adieu, I am going to answer his letter; your daughter is well. I saw her
yesterday; I believe the sober sisterhood would not be sorry to be rid of their
charge; the little gipsy has already played them a thousand mischievous pranks,
yet there is so much humor mixed with her rogueries, that they hardly know
whether to laugh or chide, she is a most seducing hussy; but in spite of all
her wit and beauty, I foresee the man will not be much to be envied, who calls
her his wife.

I am, dear Sir Harry, yours sincerely, CHARLES RIVERS.

LETTER VIII. Miss RIVERS to Miss ELIZA DUDLEY.
YOU fear that my charming cousin, as you justly call her, will supplant in my
affections, my absent friend -- Are you really, Eliza, visited with such humble
groundless apprehensions? -- Ought I to pardon a suspicion so injurious to us
both? -- Yes, since in spite of self-love, you could be so unjust to yourself,
I may certainly forgive your being so to me. -- No, my dear, I do not think it
possible, a friendship like yours and mine, can ever know decrease. -- They
say, people can love but once: -- And I am tempted to think, that one can also
but once in one's life, contract a sincere and genuine friendship. -- This
singular way of thinking, seems to argue in me, a narrow and contracted heart:
I hope it has not that fault; yet I own I cannot, like most young girls, form a
variety of intimacies, and solicit the friendship of almost every new and
agreeable face I meet with; I have one friend whom I love with an ardor -- a
zeal which is not to be expressed. -- I have also a few intimates, whose
company gives me pleasure: but there are a hundred others, amongst the number
of my acquaintance, who at the very first glance brought me, as my sprightly
cousin calls it, to the freezing point; and with regard to them, it is in my
heart winter all the year. I hardly or ever get the better of the first
impression, so that I am terribly afraid I shall be one of those indiscreet
damsels who are doomed to love at first sight -- Heaven shield us all from
Cupid's dart.

At present make me thankful I am pretty well out of his reach. The mischievous
boy was hardly known, even by same, in this peaceful mansion, 'till the arrival
of Bell Richmond: She has almost done as much mischief by her description of la
belle passion here, as the little deity did amongst the nymphs of the
unfortunate Dido. Without joking, this cousin of mine is constantly engaged in
some roguish prank or other: she has brought with her a whole collection of
novels, and those of the most passionate side; one of these she contrived to
place open upon the table of each of the nuns in their cells, in the room of
their prayer book, so that when they went to their devotions, instead of a
prayer, -- behold a bi^let doux. -- It would fill a quire of paper to tell you
half the tricks she has played the good creatures, since she was committed to
their charge; a charge of which they are already heartily weary of.

And is it a volatile being like this, Eliza, who you regard as a rival in my
friendship? -- No, my dear our hearts do not sympathize; -- our characters are
as opposite as light and darkness: Nevertheless, I have all that regard for
her, to which, as a rela^ion she is entitled. Her conversation too, is so
sprightly and entertaining, that it is impossible not to be pleased with it, --
on people of a melancholy cast it might have a disagreeable effect: the violent
flow of her spirits, would only serve more effectually to depress their's: but,
I thank Heaven, though not entitled to the appellation of a mad creature, I
have a native cheerfulness, which enables me both to promote, and relish
innocent (...); but then, as the sensible old song advises, "It is good to be
merry and wise."

I ^ear Bell does not always confine herself within those narrow limits; here is
borders on indiscretion: Mademoiselle D' Aubigny, has, you know, a very
handsome brother. (IN Abbe as we used to call him, because his friends intended
him for holy orders) who frequently visits her at the grate; my cousin saw him
one day by accident, since that time this girl and her have been inseparable:
Ninon is much of her own turn. The young man now dedicates almost every morning
to his sister -- Bell is always of their party: -- as her friend has never
hinted that my company would be acceptable, so, though I would wish to know
what passes on these occasions, my pride would not suffer me to intrude. I have
some disagreeable forebodings of the consequence of their interviews. But
pardon me my dear, I ought not to trouble you with such trifles; yet, what but
trifles can occur in my present situation, where all is peaceful, regular, and
as some would add, uniformly insipid? What a contrast is my life now to yours?
I do not wonder that you long for the time of your removal into the country: --
You know what our favorite Rosseau says, "Minds of delicate sensibility, etc."
purling streams and shady bowers, would much better suit the taste of my Eliza.

Adieu, and be assured that no time nor chance shall ever shake my firm, my
fixed regard for thee.

HARRIOT RIVERS.

LETTER IX. CHARLES RIVERS, Esquire to Sir HENRY RICHMOND.
YOUR presence here is absolutely necessary; -- come and take the charge of
your ungovernable daughter; -- a fine adventure she has been engaged in: -- You
left, you know, strict orders with the abbess, that she was not to permit Bell,
on any pretense whatever, to go out of the convent, except either you or I went
personally to fetch her: -- but what is a sufficient security against the
fruitful inventions of a woman's wit? She contracted an intimacy with one of
the pensioners, a lively French girl, of her own age and disposition; this girl
has a handsome brother, young, indiscreet, and impetuous who frequently visited
her at the grate: -- Bell always on these occasions accompanied her friend: --
you may guess the consequence. -- He made love -- she listened with complacency
-- and both cursed the envious bars that divided them. -- What was to be done?
Suppose they could surmount this obstacle to their happiness, the lad is a
younger brother, his patrimony small, and intended for the church: -- but what
signifies wealth, where people have laid up an inexhaustable stock of love. --
To be short -- they agreed to make their escape to England, where they were to
throw themselves at your feet, no doubt of your pardon. -- In consequence of
this scheme, Bell, resembling Mademoiselle D' Aubigny, in her size, shape, and
air, last Monday evening left the convent, disguised as her friend; she ^old
the abbess that her brother was come for her, and instantly obtained leave to
go; in her stead my giddy niece hurried out to her impatient lover; -- a chaise
waited, -- away they drove; -- not till morning was her flight discovered. -- I
was instantly sent for; -- Miss D' Aubigny, intimidated by the threats of the
sisterhood, revealed what I have above related. Is sat off post for Calais, --
fortunately the wind had not been favorable for their embarkation; -- after an
hour's ^^rch, I at last found them in a obscure lodging; they had, as you may
suppose, changed their names; nevertheless it was no difficult matter to trace
them by the description of their persons. Your daughter's uncommon beauty for
once was a disadvantage to her, as it helped me to trace out the place of her
retreat -- I left my servants and carriage at some distance from the house and
after a few enquiries of the landlady, softly walked up stairs -- threw open
the door -- when behold! Bell standing before a looking glass adjusting her
hair; while her lover stood by her side, the arm encircling her (...), the
other pointing out to her, her Venus's charms; both their delighted eyes fixed
on the mirror: I had but a moment to make this remark, the noise of the door
made them turn their heads; your daughter screamed, and sunk into a (...) the
stripling put his hand on his sword, -- "only with my life will I resign her."
Without taking any no (...) him, or his fierce airs, I turned to Bell, -- "my
carriage waits -- will you do me the favor" -- and I attempted to take her hand
-- she put it behind her with a sullen, air. The lad seeing that he was not
likely to get any thing by blustering, changed his tone* he ran and threw
himself at my feet, he clasped my knees. -- Oh, Sir! pity us -- divide not
(...) that heaven has united. -- Go, you are a boy, said I, and know not what
you would be at. -- You, niece, turning to her, have, I dare say, too much
sense, too much laudable pride, to throw yourself into a state of beggary; you
have in this affair been carried away by the giddiness of youth, but I am
convinced you want only a few minutes leisure to reflect cooly, in order to
induce you to quit the dangerous path of imprudence, into which you have
thoughtlessly strayed; be thankful that you was overtaken; that you was stopped
in your career of folly: never would you have obtained your father's
forgiveness. -- Go young gentleman, return to your studies; the most profitable
union you can form, will be that for which your friends intend you. He was
going to flame out, but your daughter gave him a significant look, the meaning
of which I did not comprehend; she at the same time made some motions with her
fingers, which were to me equally incomprehensible: they had however a
surprising effect on her lover, he threw himself into a chair; his air from
fierce and impetuous became pensively resigned. -- Bell rose -- she gave me her
hand, without speaking -- As we passed the young man he put one knee to the
ground, eagerly seized her other hand which she held out to him; he pressed it
to his lips. -- Oh remember! -- was all he had power to say; a burst of rears
stopped the passage of his voice -- Your daughter had not a wa^ry eye the whole
time, she loves pleasure, her passions are violent, yet does she not seem
endued with any great share of sensibility, I mean of the tender kind: her
disposition is selfish: from this disposition I (...), a new lover will easily
efface the ones she (...) with so little regret; now is your time, she would on
any terms purchase her liberty; the sooner you provide a husband for her the
better -- if you do not, you find she is determined to save you that trouble:
-- Again she is safe in her convent; -- all her motions strictly watched; --
debarred the use of pen and ink; -- her friend sent home; -- Monsieur L' Abbe
sent to pursue his studies at a distance from Paris, with a vigilant tutor, as
his companion -- None but his family and ourselves know any thing of this
disagreeable affair, which might cast an indelible blot on your daughter's
reputation; they being strict Catholics, and having designed their son for the
church, are as averse as we can be to so indiscreet an alliance. We may
therefore depend on their taking every precaution to prevent any intercourse
between the young people. -- I gave strict orders that no one shall upbraid my
niece with what had happened: a violent spirit like hers, can only be governed
by gentle methods. Harriot received her with the utmost affection, without
hinting at the cause of their separation; Bell silently, and rather sullenly
returned her caresses. -- She no doubt expected a lecture from the abbess; but
not a soul in the house took the least notice of what had happened. -- Thus all
things are settled upon the most amicable footing. -- I foresee however, that
this calm will not be of any long duration. -- Bell is not of a temper to brook
confinement. -- Get her a husband, I again repeat. -- She is not the kind of
fruit which will keep. -- I am in great hopes that my wishes in regard to
Harriot, will be accomplished: I have excited Lord Ossory's curiosity to see
her. -- He proposes a trip to Paris in a few weeks; if he likes my girl we
shall return to England. I think it will be most prudent to let your daughter
accompany us, dangerous would it be to trust her here by herself.

Adieu! -- Why don't you write! -- you are worse than indolent, you are
downright lazy. But in s^ight of all your faults, my heart compels me to
subscribe myself yours most affectionately.

CHARLES RIVERS.

LETTER X. Miss RICHMOND to Lady BAB WILMOT.
O CHILD! your mad-cap of a friend has been engaged in such an adventure --
onl^ (...) of it. -- I know not if I mentioned to you in my (...) a little
smirking white handed Abbe, of whom, for want of better amusement, I took it
into my head to become enamoured, le pauvre garcon -- Ah! how he loved! -- You
must know the idea of St. Prue and Eloisa got possession of my light head: I
talked, or rather I listened; and he talked so much of love, that I very wisely
fancied myself deeply in for it. There was no bearing this; -- I began to be
mightily foolish, sighed, grew pensive, restless, ceased to plague the nuns,
and for a mere chimera, plagued myself. What was the most likely remedy for
this disease? Marriage -- well then, since the man is so teasing on this head,
I think I must even take him. -- My father is good natured, I his only
daughter; he is rich, the poverty of my lover is of the less consequence: in
short, if they will not provide me with a husband, I must provide one for myself
-- to be cooped up in this odious house, prison I should say -- where one's
passions are doomed to starve; shut up between four walls, -- I can bear it no
longer. -- Death or liberty. -- On the strength of these wise reflections I
made my escape, no matter how, reached Calais with my swain, from thence
proposed to proceed to England. -- When behold! contrary winds forced us to
remain here at this seaport; and what was still worse, blew my uncle to the
place of our retreat, when we had sung, laughed and toyed away the time -- Oh,
Lady Bab, -- What is life without passion, sweet passion of love.

Well, I told you my uncle came to damp our joys. -- He behaved like a man of
sense -- in a few words, he clearly showed me my folly, the word beggary
dropped from his lips; away flew Cupid with extinguished fire. I looked at IN
Abbe -- my eyes were opened -- beggary -- all his graces vanished. -- How could
I be such an idiot! -- It Is a little insignificant fellow. -- What a figure I
should make in the beau monde with such a husband! -- Without fortune, --
without rank, -- my father inflexible: -- ah Lord! "'It Is well it is no worse."
-- And yet, Lady Bab, I was exceeding indiscreet -- I do not mean in regard to
virtue, and such stuff -- but I fear, -- I fear, -- hang it, we were both under
age. I must not tell you all. I hate to recollect the foolish adventure: I
terrified the poor silly youth, by letting him know, with the language of my
fingers, accompanied by a look still more intelligible, that for the present it
was necessary to put myself again into the power of my friends; that we must
endeavor to have patience; that I could not, wished not, to forget.

-- Lady Bab, dear Lady Bab, I must, I will forget it.

I have, since my return to prison, found means, in spite of all their
vigilance, to write to his sister, who has, on my account, been, to her great
joy, expelled our community: in it I enclosed one for our little Abbe, bidding
him rely on my constancy, and trust to my management for our re union, of which
I did not despair, knowing the great influence I had over the heart of my fond
father: I charged him not to stir in the affair; continue peaceably at your
studies, (I say to him in my letter) till I return to England; cruel fate shall
not after that, long separate hearts, which were formed for each other. When I
get into that dear land of freedom, I will endeavor to beguile our tedious
absence, by a constant intercourse of letters. If I find my father unexpectedly
inflexible, then must we patiently wait till I am of age, when I shall become
an independent mistress of a large fortune left me by my grandfather: (a fib
this, Lady Bab: many, many, I shall be obliged to tell before I can disentangle
myself; -- ah! if you knew all -- but -- but --) Then, continued I, my arms
shall be open to receive you; no longer need we wait for the consent of parents
-- Let us my dear friend condole ourselves with this happy prospect; -- and
thus, I trust, have I got rid of a troublesome lover; and thus, I trust, have I
also got rid of love; I mean of the romantic kind: now will I take the first
good offer I meet with; never once will I stop to consult my inclinations; for
I hold it as an infallible maxim, that no woman can properly govern her
husband, or shine as a fine lady, a modern wife I mean, if she is so foolish as
to bestow her heart on the man, to whom she gives her hand -- no, let all the
love be on his side -- the more fondly he doats the better; the easier task
will she find it to make him her dupe -- then if she has a mind to amuse
herself with la belle passion -- there are in charming London, a thousand
handsome idle young fellows, who have nothing else to do but to furnish her
with this amusement -- Thus you see how sensibly I reason on these affairs, and
how much I have profited by my early introduction into the beau monde. But the
wisest of us may, at some critical moments, be off our guard. -- This was my
case with the little Abbe: for two long, long tedious months I had not seen the
face of a male creature, except his: romances and iron bars had disordered my
imagination, -- I played the fool. -- It cannot be recalled -- I must do the
best to prevent any ill consequences from the mad headed expedition. My demure
cousin does not upbraid me with my imprudence; but her eves speak, though her
tongue is silent: before this adventure I regarded her with a sort of
neutrality; but now I heartily hate her, because I cannot help feeling a kind
of humbling inferiority: the time may come, when I will either bring her on a
level with myself, or else find means to blast that unsullied reputation, of
which she is so insolently proud: -- yes, I have vowed revenge -- from this
moment I am her foe, though in outward appearance never so much her friend.

Adieu, my kindred soul, you alone are worthy of that title; to you alone will
I open the heart of your

ISABELLA RICHMOND.

LETTER XI. CHARLES RIVERS, Esquire to Sir HARRY RICHMOND.
THIS daughter of yours was born to torment me: but I intend to give you a
minute account of the affair, and therefore will not anticipate. -- Last night
arrived in Paris, the Right Honorable Lord Ossory, who will neither find his
equal here, nor has he left his equal for every engaging quality, behind him.
After our first congratulations were over, he expressed his impatience to see
Harriot; her idea, said he, haunts me perpetually; and yet my good friend, in
spite of the strong prepossessions I experience in her favor, fate may not have
destined me the happiness of being allied to you; I must take the liberty to
hope, that my choice is still free, and that no offense will be taken -- he
paused: -- I easily understood his meaning, and as easily dissipated his
delicate apprehensions; he took his leave, promising to attend me next morning
at twelve to the important interview.

I wrote a note to Harriot, informing her of our intentions; but in regard to
Lord Ossory, I only said, I shall bring with me a young gentleman who is
desirous of being introduced to you. I own I did not wish Bell to be present,
therefore forebore to mention her in my billet -- the hour arrived, -- and
punctual to his time his Lordship arrived also elegantly dressed; -- we set
off; during our little ride, he was visibly agitated, I was not myself
absolutely indifferent as to the issue of our visit.

Harriot made her appearance with a modest air and downcast eye, she gave, by
her not having in the least degree altered the plain dress she wears in common,
a proof that she had either very little vanity, or a great deal of pride; this
at first glance appears a paradox. Rousseau has explained it in the description
of his Sophia: her dress however, is always elegant and simple, and seemingly
unstudied; she looked pretty, at least in my eyes; the sentimental expression
of her countenance, would, I thought, suit the taste of Lord Ossory.

She received me with her usual respect, then turned to his Lordship, who I
presented to her; she timidly raised her eyes to his face, instantly here is was
suffused with blushes; but a moment after, she grew pale: in a faltering accent
she returned his compliment. I never saw her so embarrassed; he on the contrary
appeared perfectly at ease; he examined her with attention, but in a manner
delicately cautious lest his glances should add to her already apparent
confusion: not a look of either escaped my notice. I had no reason to be
pleased with the serenity in his; I saw only a cool approbation: but in hers,
-- I wish the girl may be able to stop at that. While things were in this
situation, a sister came to inform me, that my niece begged leave to pay her
respects -- sly gipsy, she had seen my note: -- not to me, but to Lord Ossory
did she intend the compliment -- In she swam, adorned with all the charms that
nature could bestow, and embelished with every ornament which a delicate female
fancy could select; I never saw such a blaze of charms. Harriot, for the first
time in her life. I must do her the justice to believe, felt a momentary
sensation of envy; she changed color, and involuntarily retreated a few paces
to make way for her too powerful rival. -- This motion seemed to say -- I give
up the unequal contest. -- Bell approached the grate with all the town-bred
ease of a fine lady -- graceful her air, insinuating her smiles. Lord Ossory
was transfixed into a statute -- the statute of admiration -- she spoke -- the
harmony of her voice, her sprightly wit completed her triumph. -- He gazed, he
listened with rapture, -- involuntary praises burst from his lips. -- I had
seen enough -- too much, so arose to take my leave: -- with visible reluctance,
he followed my example: his eyes quitted not the lovely object, till the
envious door shut the delightful vision from his sight. I was not in a humor to
hear him tell me, as I saw he was preparing to do, that my girl had not
answered his expectations. I therefore pretended indispensible business, and
politely paying my compliments, hurried from him. And now Sir Harry I expect to
see you here That your daughter has made a conquest is past a doubt; the
alliance is every way desirable, -- pardon me, but I must say, that it is much
better than she deserves: -- her late adventure, I do not mean to call her
virtue in question, we must however allow that it was highly indiscreet. I
check my pen on this subject, there is a late in marriage -- always have I
remarked that to hear a bachelor, who is not in love, describe his future
wife, is positively to know that when he comes to make his choice, she will be
the very reverse of what he then thinks he shall approve. -- O man! of what use
is thy boasted reason! Adieu! let me know it I may hope for your presence. My
first prospect has been fruitless, but I have another in reserve, of the
success of which. I cannot doubt: -- my old friend Mrs. Williams, has made
overtures for her son, -- the young man is neither to be much liked, or much
disliked -- one of the common medly mortals, that make up the throng. -- It is
time my girl were settled in life, -- till then, I shall never be truly at
ease, nor can I till then indulge myself in my wish for retirement. Mr.
Williams then must be the man, -- instantly will I write to his mother: -- my
daughter has been accustomed to obey, -- on her part I fear not any opposition:
this is my present plan, come and see it executed. -- I think we have now a
fair prospect of getting rid of both our plagues. -- Farewell, believe me

Yours sincerely, CHARLES RIVERS.

LETTER XII. Miss RICHMOND to Lady BAB WILMOT.
I Have for the present silenced my little Abbe -- have obtained his solemn
promise not to stir in the affair, but to leave the management of it wholly to
your humble servant. -- You find then the poor soul is not totally void of
understanding, since he has sense and discernment enough to discover, that mine
is so much superior. -- But let us have done with this foolish adventure, I
have one of a far more agreeable nature or relate. -- Harriot, the other night,
received a note from her father -- she bro't it to me -- it promised her the
company of a beau next morning, not the least palpitation did this cause in the
little demure one, not so my experienced heart, it knows the full value of a
new conquest: this man, be he what he would, I determined to enlist amongst the
number of mine; but my prudent uncle had excluded me from the party -- a wise
precaution in favor of his daughter -- no matter, I nevertheless determined to
make one -- the hour approached I went into Harriot's cell -- found her in her
usual morning dress. -- Don't you expect company child? -- Yes, every moment.
And do you make no alteration? -- And yet, checking myself ere I finish the
indiscreet question, it would be needless trouble; your dress, though plain, is
inimitably becoming (a fib this as you may suppose Bab, for her cap absolutely
disguised her) you are too handsome, returned she smiling, to practice the
little mean arts, of which some of our sex condescend to be guilty. I believe
you speak as you think, but in general, I am sorry to say it, if one asks a
female friend's opinion of these matters, one may almost be sure, she will
advise you to wear what will be of the least advantage to your charms -- a
shrewd remark, to be made by so very good a creature; she knows more of her sex
than I imagined. -- A sister entered -- your papa, Miss Harriot, and another
very fine gentlemen wait for you: away she tripped to receive the homage of her
swain, and I to my faithful glass, by whose aid I hoped, ere long, to share
that homage with her -- I dressed, animated with the dear prospect of a new
conquest: I omitted no ornament that could add to my beauty: my heart
palpitated -- my cheeks glowed -- my eyes sparkled -- and, before I left the
agreeable task, every charm blazed forth with unusual luster -- down I flew
unsummoned. -- Well worth my pain was the conquest I have made, -- Yes Bab. I
have effectual done his business. -- Poor soul I how eagerly he drank in the
deliciously poison, that I darted from my love inspiring eves; then had you
seen my crest falling cousin, with such a dolorous countenance robbed of her
prey, the father too robbed of his hopes, while I sat like Helen in the night,
When Troy was sacked unconscious of the mischief I had wrought. -- But who do
you think this lover is? -- O child the very man a woman of spirit would wish
for. -- Lord Ossory -- the grave, the sentimental, Lord Ossory -- rich,
generous, handsome, open hearted, incapable of deceit himself, and suspecting
none in others; this is the character I have heard of him -- a character which
his engaging countenance confirms. -- What a fortunate creature am I! I make no
doubt of becoming his help mate, his wife we will rather say, for I know no one
living thing in which I shall help him, but to spend his money. -- Do you want
a more particular description of his person -- a true female. -- But child, you
forget I intend him for my husband, and in that case you know one regards not
such trifles; however, I think I told you above, that he is handsome; I could
wish he was less so; and yet, I hope I shall not be so weak as to love him. --
To say truth, the man is not without his attractions; but if I was to entertain
a slight partiality for the wretch, matrimony is an effectual remedy; besides,
I am of so fickle, so inconstant a nature, that I defy the finest man in
England, to fix, for a week together my fluttering heart. -- But a husband! --
heavens! -- the very sound of the word extinguishes each load desire. -- Lord
Ossory then is, as he ought to be sufficiently indifferent to your humble
servant. -- Not so my little cousin -- with far different eyes does she view
him. Alas! poor girl, it is her first love; a deadly disease for a soft romantic
soul like her: she pi^es and dies, for hopeless love and piercing care,
consumes her early prime -- the rose grows pale and leaves her cheek: this
circumstance is to me an additional cause of triumph: when I am married, I Will
invite the poor wretch to pass a month or two with me, on purpose to make her a
mortified witness of my felicity -- Oh! I shall have the transport to see her
die by inches! or, if I could contrive by thus throwing the lovesick nymph in
his way, -- I have a joyous plan in my head: strict as he is in his principles,
and outrageously virtuous as she affects to be, I do not despair: then if I can
but tempt him to fall into a serape of this nature, the coast will be clear for
your little Bell.

I have not time, he is below, -- the dear man. -- Harriot, child, dry thy
dove-like eyes -- come be a good girl, be a good girl until I come to thee
again. Poor thing, ha! ha! ha! she must not hear me laugh. But the man waits.

Farewell, ever yours, ISABELLA RICHMOND.

LETTER XIII. Lord OSSORY to Monsieur La FARE.
I Trust the kindest wishes of my friend are now in a fair 'way of being
accomplished: yes, I have at length discovered the charming maid who is, I
hope, formed for love and me. You are such an admirer of beauty, will be
enchanted with here is; it is past description. Oh! my dear La Fare; how perfect
will be the happiness of our Ossory, when united to this adorable angel; how
will she embellish that ^etr^at, of which I am so fond. Imagination cannot form
a more (...) f^licity, than that which I shall enjoy in the society (...) a
friend like you, and a wife like my Isabella. Her father arrive, last night in
Paris; he every way approves (...) my alliance (...) meet with no obstacles to
my passion; the heavenly maid with sweet complacency, listens to my suit: we
are preparing to return to England; where, as soon as the settlements can be
drawn, our nuptials will take place: my impatience is inexpressible; you will
not wonder at this, when you behold my charming bride: in my life I never saw
so striking, so dazzling a beauty; nor is her mind less perfect; such lively
wit, such just and noble sentiments, and, what more than any thing endears her
to me, and promises the best foundation for our mutual happiness, is, that in
most things, I discover in her a similarity of taste, she is, like me, a
passionate admirer of the country: prefers an agreeable retreat, with the
society of a few select friends, to the noise bustle, and unsatisfying
amusements of the beau monde. She has experienced both, and speaks with
virtuous indignation of the conduct of modern fine ladies; yet has not a
tincture of censoriousness in her amiable composition.

My passion gains new force every time I converse with her, she tells me,
however, with engaging frankness, that she was not always the good girl, she
now flatters h^rself she may, without vanity, pretend to be: "early," said she,
was I introduced into what is called life (...) and for some time, like other
young people, eagerly entered into scenes of dissipation: but very soon did the
novolty wear off; public places became insipid by constant repetition, and even
this gloomy mansion, continued she smiling, had to me attractions, as it
appeared a comfortable assylum from noise and folly. While she thus enchants my
soul by the justness of her sentiments, with what delight do I contemplate my
future wife, the sweet augmenter of my joys, and soother of my cares. But I
forget, you will all this while imagine that I am speaking of my late
guardian's daughter, Miss Rivers, on whose account I came to Pari^^ Misled by a
lively fancy, I was strongly possessed with an idea, that in here is I should
find my destined heart; and to do her justice, next to her lovely cousin, she
is the most amible girl I ever met with. I know not what impression she might
hate made, though I was not immediately struck with her charms, which are of that
kind, that gently, and by degrees insinuate themselves, and fix a lasting
empire in the heart: I know not I say, but she in time might have fixed my
choice, had not the transporting Isabella made her appearance, with such a
superior, such a ravishing blaze of beauty, that she perfectly dazzled my
senses, and rendered me blind to every other object but herself; -- no longer
had reason any thing to say in the affair: -- astonished -- over powered by her
charms, I have ceased to be a free agent, and at the first became her slave. --
Well is it for me, that she has merit as well as those powerful personal
attractions; for I feel, let her mind have been what it would, I was
irresistably doomed to love, however unworthy she might have been of my esteem:
But thank heaven this is not the case, for she is all that mortal man could
wish. Mr. Rivers seemed disappointed, but not offended at my being compelled to
decline the honor of his alliance; he appears however, less pleased than I
could wish, at that I am going to enter into with Sir Henry Richmond: out of
regard for him, I as much as possible, restrain in his presence, the
overflowings of my heart in regard to my Isabella, but when I involuntarily do
justice to her merit, he looks dissatisfied; tells me, with a forced smile,
that love is blind, that if my passion was more modera^e would stand a better
chance to be lasting: this kind of behavior, however, in him, is easily
accounted for: the unfortunate conduct of his wife, has given him an
unfavorable opinion of the (...) but never shall the children, with me, suffer
for the sins of their parents: I have ever made it my study to divest myself of
prejudice. -- Isabella is an angel, though her mother is a --; she will soon be
mine: let me for both her dear daughter's sake, and my own, draw a veil over
her foibles.

I shall tire you La Fare, pardon me. -- I have done -- I will drop my darling
theme. -- Do me the favor to hasten as much as possible, those improvements, in
and about the house, which you are so obliging as to superintend; my Isabella
shall thank you for your pains; -- shall smile her approbation, and amply
reward you, by admiring the elegance of your taste.

I am, dear La Fare, sincerely yours, OSSORY.

LETTER XIV. Miss RICHMOND to Lady BAB WILMOT.
IN a few weeks -- ah! still an age! -- Lady Bab Wilmot, will, I hope, behold
Bell Richmond, metamorphosed into a wife -- A wife! delightful -- no longer are
they ranked amongst the number of tame domestic animals. No longer are chaste
keepers at home, etc. -- but giddy, fluttering things, to be every where met
with, the before mentioned place excepted. Oh! I could die of laughing, when I
think, how effectually I have duped the poor lovesick soul, my future spouse
(...) -- heaven bless him! I never before knew how much I excelled in dear
dissimulation; I have converted the giddy volatile Bell Richmond, into a being
almost as soberly sentimental, as little Rivers: talk of domestic joy, -- the
serene pleasures of a country life, -- the (...) comforts o^ friendly society.
I sometimes harrangue so long on this subject, that I fancy myself seated
amidst a set of rustics, drawing for a king and queen, or playing at cross
purposes -- Horrid! -- Lord Ossory! -- I Will warrant yet, he expects to find in
me his future help mate, a second Andromache, sitting the live long day
spinning amongst her maidens. -- Heavens! what will be the honest man's
astonishment, when I unmask! but of that I must beware till he takes me for
better for worse. It requires all my skill to keep my affairs en train. I am
pestered with letters from the little Abbe: by means of his sister our
correspondence hitherto remains a secret. He has heard of Ossory's visits, and
takes upon him to be jealous forsooth -- Horrid creature! -- I now hate him as
much as I once fancied I loved: however, I have again made shift to silence him
by telling him that his lordship comes to see my cousin, to whom he is soon to
be united: that my father is here also: that he takes me with him to England:
that I find him inflexible, though I have omitted no endeavor to soften him in
our favor: that we must therefore patiently wait until I am of age, and
mistress of my fortune, and at liberty to follow my inclinations. -- I wish he
was hanged for making me tell so many fibs. Oh! do you know, my swain tells me
Rivers has found out a mate for my cousin? -- Such a wretched mortal! the girl
surely will never take him: -- though for my part. I think any thing on earth,
that is rich, and of certain rank, good enough for a husband; and perhaps the
greater fool the better, except he is one of the mulish breed: and to do poor
Williams justice, I believe he has very little of the obstinate in his
composition. Williams, you cry. -- Yes, child, he is to be the happy man. Don't
you remember him, when we ensemble spent a month at Lord Walton's, the (...) of
our raillery: the good-natured spaniel, who used to fetch and carry at the word
of command: the white-handed boy of one-and twenty, who excelled us so much at
netting; who embroidered the hems of his grand-mother's petticoats, -- ha! ha!
ha! a joyous mortal; civil and inoffensive; -- a commodious character for a
husband. -- But besides these agreeable accomplishments, he is possessed of
what renders him truly a man of merit, viz. Six thousand a year! clear of all
encumbrances, except his lady mother's jointure; and that he no doubt
cheerfully pays to her who has so prettily trained him up in the way he should
go; who has never lost fight of him since he became an inhabitant of this dear
wicked world; and who will not let go his leading strings till she resigns them
into the hands of his wife; who treats him with a pair of speck and span clean
gloves at the country assizes, with a shilling in his pocket; chooses a partner
for him; lets him dance till eleven; then muffling him up in a white
handkerchief, takes him home, gives him warm negus, and puts him to bed: who
tells him, when in company, how to place his hands; draws herself up and winks
at him when he sits in a lounging posture, with every now and then, Dicky,
don't pick your nose; don't kick your heels, child, etc. etc. etc. -- And this
-- this is the man -- The man did I say? -- He has no pretensions to any thing
that is manly. -- But this creature, for whom I cannot find a proper name, is
destined for the lord and master of Harriot Rivers; -- a girl, delicate,
elegant, sentimental even to excess: Oh! she will expire of absolute spleen and
vapors, long ere the end of the honey-moon. So much the better -- had I my
wish not one single prude should, in all England, (that delightful land of
freedom) be suffered to ^ear their stately haughty heads: I would extirpate
them root and branch. If this match takes place, she will be sufficiently
wretched; if it does not, then my plan of revenge shall. -- Revenge, you cry
for what? -- For daring to be more virtuous, more worthy than myself; for
knowing some of my faults, and having the insolent generosity not to upbraid me
with them; for compelling me to submit to this humiliating obligation: I say
again, I will be revenged -- and so ends the chapter.

Adieu. ISABELLA RICHMOND.

LETTER XV. Lord OSSORY to Monsieur LA FARE.
OUR wished for return to England, has, for some time past, been delayed on
Miss Rivers's account; the sweet girl is but just recovered from a dangerous
illness: some hints that were dropped by her friends of her intended union with
Williams, is suspected to be the cause of her indisposition: her spirits are as
delicate as her frame -- do you know, she is I find, on a second examination, a
much more lovelier creature than I at first imagined: the case is, I at my
first visit, only saw her, but on my last, I heard as well as saw; and it is in
conversation that she not only shows the charms of her mind, but those of her
fi^e face to perfection: the air of it changes according to the different
sentiments she utters; and as here is are always just and elegant, so the
expression of her countenance gives the most captivating graces to her features
-- Do not, by these just encomiums suspect me of inconstancy -- no, a heart
capable of that, is incapable of love: Isabella is (...), and ever must remain
sole mistress of mine. But I own I feel a friendship, a tender sort of sympathy
for her engaging cousin; the thoughts of so fine a creature going to be
sacrificed to an insignificant being, like Williams, excites my pity: alas! I
fear her fa^e is irrevocably fixed; the timid maid will never have courage to
oppose the will of an arbitrary father, whom she has, from childhood, been
accustomed implicitly to obey: -- the prospect of her misery -- for what else
can be the consequence of so ill concerted an union? -- damps my happiness --:
accursed be that ^elfish heart, which feels only for itself -- mine is not of
that number. I saw her this morning, and ever since then, in spite of the
charms of Isabella, she has engrossed a great part of my thoughts. -- If I have
formed a true idea of my lovely mistress, she would esteem me the more for
interesting myself in the welfare of her, who is not only a relation, but a
friend.

I wish I could prevail on Mr. Rivers to change his purpose; but in these
affairs he is unpersuadably obstinate; he has no tenderness for the sex; he is
more studious of his own ease than of his daughter's happiness; disgusted with
the world, he wishes to fly to retirement: but ere he can gratify his favorite
whim, he thinks it necessary to put his Harriot under the protection of a
husband: from the fatal conduct of her mother he has lost all confidence in
woman kind; he trembles for his honor, should he trust her in the world; from
infancy, he has confined her to the gloomy enclosure of a nunnery, nor dare he
take her from thence, till a husband's arms are open to receive her. -- Poor
Harriot! I accompanied him this morning, as I before said, on a visit to her,
and my angel: the latter did not for some time make her appearance: -- if she
has any foible, it is a too great regard for dress: I have often to wait till
she has finished the labors of the toilet. -- How unnecessary are ornaments to
a form like here is by nature so complete. Ah! could she, if she loved like me,
waste that time in trifles, which would be so much more delightfully employed
in the mutual effusion of two enamoured hearts? Harriot is as indifferent about
that, to most female's important affair, as the other is fond of it; there is
in her appearance an elegant neatness, which I hardly ever saw so happily
blended in any other woman: she has, as I told you, been indisposed, therefore
she came down to us in her morning dress. A spotless white muslin, sprigged by
her own fair hands, and trimmed with fine point; her ruffles of the same, as
was her cap, made like that worn by country girls, adorned with a pale pink
ribbon: it is impossible to give you an idea of the very pretty unstudied
simple air this same cap gave her face -- rendered the more dazzling fair and
delicate, by her la^e illness: -- a black velvet bracelet round each lovely
arm; a collar of the same around her neck; on my word I never beheld such an
inviting object, though I may have seen (my Richmond for example) more striking
dazzling beauties: and shall this insinuating gentle maid be sacrificed to a
wretch like Williams? -- poor Harriot! why is it not in my power to save you
from such unmerited misery! -- A modest blush on her entrance gave her
additional charms; a momentary blush, for soon the rose gave place to the
lilly; her father took her hand, and softened by her plaintive air, tenderly
enquired after her health: she sighed, and a tear stole down her cheek. Change
of air, continued he, will, I hope, be of service to you: are you well enough
recovered, think ye, to undertake a voyage to England? do you not long to be
released from your confinement, my dear? This kind speech he accompanied with a
smile. Alas! Sir, returned she, sighing, what joy can that prospect give me? --
Then I shall only exchange a prison, which I never found irksome, for a more
lasting, a dreadful bondage. O Sir! pity me; let me, if you dare not trust
(...) in the world but in a married state, still continue within this pious
enclosure. -- My religion forbids me to take the veil: but most cheerfully,
most contentedly will I live single, a pensioner for life, since you choose not
to rely on my discretion, since you have unhappily imbibed an unfavorable
opinion of our sex. Trust at least these bolts and bars -- let all my motions
be strictly watched -- place over me a guard as vigilant as you please, never
will I murmur; -- only spare your child, and sacrifice her not to a man she
cannot love. -- And how know you that you cannot love him? cried her father
sternly. O, Sir, the character I have heard: -- And from whom, interrupted he,
still more exasperated, from your giddy cousin? He then uttered some invectives
against my Isabella, which I cannot bear to repeat, nor did I calmly hea^ her
censured. He apologized for the warmth of his temper.

I am interrupted, my dear La Fare. -- It Is of no consequence. -- I only wished
to repeat the conversation, that you might join with me in admiring Miss
Rivers's just and truly refined sentiments. What a charming description did she
give of what matrimony might be, were a union of hearts to be the foundation I
And how effectingly did she paint the misery that must be the consequence of
that with which she is threatened! But all her eloquence was lost on her
inflexible father.

Adieu We shall now in a few days begin our journey. I long exceedingly to
assure you in person how sincerely I am yours, etc.

OSSORY.

LETTER XVI. Miss RIVERS to Miss ELIZA DUDLEY.
CHIDE me not, my dear Eliza* my spirits are weak. I have been ill. I could not
write. But ah! never injure me so far as to suspect I could forget my beloved,
my only friend. What is the matter with my eyes? They flow incessantly. Indeed
I have but too much cause to weep. O that you were here, that in your
sympathizing bosom I might hide my blushes, while I reveal my weakness. I die
with shame even when my heart whispers to myself the fatal secret. Why, alas,
was this most amiable of men thrown in my way? A hopeless passion consumes me;
-- but this is not all. Patiently would I endeavor to submit to my own
wretched fate; but to know that he is also doomed to misery, it is too much.
Eliza, his rash choice will be his ruin. That artful dissembler, my cousin, by
wearing before him the mask of hypocrisy, has shown herself to me in her true
colors. I know her utterly unworthy of his heart. Think not that I view her
with the malignant envious eye of a rival. Would it were so. Alas! I have
convincing proofs how little she is formed to contribute to his felicity. Their
taste, their disposition, opposite as light and darkness; with what anguish do
I behold the sensible, amiable, unsuspecting youth, duped by her artifice! But
who shall attempt to undeceive him? Alas! too soon his own fatal experience
will convince him of his error. How he idolizes her charms! with what fervor,
yet delicate tenderness does he manifest his passion! She affects to love with
equal ardor, while she cannot conceal, even from me, her triumph, at having so
artfully imposed on him. Indeed, Eliza, a heart like here is is incapable of that
passion. She has not one grain of tender sensibility in her composition. If she
had, no man on earth is more formed to awaken it than Lord Ossory. There is in
his countenance that winning, irresistible something, that is far more seducing
than the most regular beauty. His eyes, such softness, such expression, so
languishingly sweet! Fatal to your poor Harriot has been their tender glances;
for tender they are even to me; he cannot divest them of it, the language of
love is so natural to them. From the attentive complacency with which he treats
me, I flatter myself that I may, in time, aspire to the honor of his
friendship; with that I must endeavor to be satisfied. It will also, alas,
soon be criminal to view him in any other light. Every thing is now in
readiness for our return to England. Soon shall I have the happiness to embrace
my Eliza. That pleasing hope supports my drooping spirits -- well may they
droop. -- I have not yet told you half my misery. I cannot bear either to think
or write on the horrid subject. -- Let me not dwell on it. In a few words, my
father is determined to sacrifice me to a wretch. Eliza, it must not, cannot
be; death will free me from his cruel power, and nothing but death can, I fear,
save me from the threatened misery. My tears, my entreaties are ineffectual; he
is even deaf to Lord Ossory's persuasive eloquence! that generous nobleman has
condescended to become my advocate; but, alas, all he has been able to procure
for me is a few month's respire. Those months, O my friend, where do you think
they are to be passed? With the happy, happy bride, at her lord's country seat.
Sir Harry has a small, but pleasantly situated lodge in the neighborhood,
where my father and he propose to take up their residence, that the former may
be near enough to watch over the conduct of his unfortunate girl. The odious
Williams is also to be Lord Ossory's guest. Think* then, Eliza, what your
Harriot must suffer from such a situation; a mortified witness of her rival's
felicity -- pestered with the addresses of the man she hates -- spies placed
over her -- a hopeless passion to combat with, at the very time she is under
the same roof with the object who inspired it; -- she must see him daily --
must daily converse with him, and yet cease to love. -- What a task! -- All
that is possible I will attempt. Either I must conquer it, or it will conquer
me, and lay me in the silent tomb. No matter how soon. This scene of vanity
closes on me. Who would wish to be a restless inhabitant of this disordered
world? I feel a reluctance to lay down my pen, it is a great relief to me to
pour my griefs into your gentle bosom. You must permit me, when we meet, to
renew the melancholy theme. -- This is the last letter you will receive from
me, dated from the dear, the peaceful convent. I grieve to think of my parting
from the amiable women with whom I have spent so many tranquil years. In a
convent, as well as in the world, there is a mixture of good and bad; but in
this house the good is happily predominant. Many of the nuns, from sense,
sweetness of disposition, and unaffected piety, are entitled to our greatest
respect. In this I am sure Eliza will agree with her

affectionate friend, HARRIOT RIVERS.

LETTER XVII. From the SAME to the SAME.
AT length the important day -- the day which to Lord Ossory was a day of
exquisite love and rapture, the day which to Isabella was a day of triumph and
exul^ation, and the day which in your poor Harriot's breast excited such
various emotions, is passed good, blessed as it was to some, like other days it
ends in night: all the world but your unfortunate friend are retired to rest,
"Sleep lights on lids unsullied with a tear."

Mine are not of that number, I must not therefore expect a visit from the
welcome guest, instead of it, I sit down to fulfill the promise I made -- My
dear Eliza, you are too virtuous, too amiable to gain the good graces of my
cousin. -- I know she would not like you, but I thought she would have included
you in our party, that she might the better carry on the farce of friendship to
me, (how my disposition is changed) I am become suspicious, censorious, -- nay,
even I fear a little envious -- but I cannot -- do not -- Ah! how should I love
Lady Ossory (must I call her) Well my dear, the pleasure of your company, your
presence which I never more stood in need of, was denied me. With what soothing
gentleness did you endeavor, the night before, when I bad you a reluctant
adieu, to arm my weak heart for the approaching dreadful trial. Yet in spite of
all your sensible arguments I arose next morning, without having once closed my
eyes, more dead than alive, trembling, agitated to such a degree, that I could
hardly keep myself from fainting, while my maid put on me those ornaments,
which I was obliged to wear in honor of the happy bride. When the task was
finished I dismissed her, and raising my eyes to the glass, beheld a face so
pale, so pathetically moving, (if I may so express myself) that I burst into
tears, which flowed the faster, for my gazing on my streaming eyes: -- Thus was
I indulging a sad luxury of grief, when I received a summons to breakfast. It
was some time ere, by breathing on my handkerchief, I could render myself fit
to make my appearance: I endeavored to muster up a little pride. Weak,
imprudent Harriot, cried I, Lord Ossory does not love you, it is true, but why
will you also compel him to despise you. -- This thought roused me: I hurried
down least the impression of it should wear off; there I found the most amiable
of men, seated by his sparkling, smiling Isabella, holding between both his,
her passive hand; his fine eyes fixed on here is with such inexpressible delight,
transported with her charms; she engrossed every faculty of his soul. I felt at
that moment emotions for which I detest myself. -- I started, and put up an
ejaculatory prayer, for grace to co^quer the corruptions of my fallen nature: I
recollected Milton's description of the d -- (...), when be contemplated the
happiness of our first parents. Ah! cursed envy, never more shall you find room
in my heart! -- You have seen -- You admire my cousin's uncommon beauty; but on
this her bridal day, that beauty shone out with redoubled luster; well it
might, for -- ah! how inviting, how delightful were the smiling prospects which
opened to her view; light were her spirits, easy her deportment, no rustic
bashfulness, no timid modesty to embarrass her: -- but let me resume the thread
of my story. -- The company whom I found assembled in the breakfast parlor,
were, besides the bridegroom and bride, Sir Henry Richmond, Lady Bab Wilmot,
and my father. This fine lady of quality is my cousin's confidant and bosom,
friend, and well are their dispositions suited to each other. I know not
whether or not you recollect her, but I remember she was at St. James's square,
the first time I embraced my Eliza after my return to England. -- Bell and her
retired soon after you came in, I dare say she escaped your notice: it is
indeed that of the other sex which she alone wishes, and labors to attract --
In this she is, thanks to her rank, tolerably successful; her person is
naturally passable, but she renders it ridiculous and disgusting by her
unsufferable affectation; she is lively, haughty, coquette and satirical. This
slight description may suffice for my sister bridemaid, who had omitted no
ornament that could supply the defects of nature. The little bustle she made in
paying her compliments to me, which like other fine ladies, she always does in
a high key, made Lord Ossory turn his head; he rose politely, led me to a seat;
with a sort of tender pity pressed my hand; -- you have not yet my sweet
cousin, said he, recovered the fatigue of your voyage, but I hope the fresh
country air, to which we are hasting, will produce a favorable change. I forced
a smile, looked my gratitude for his kind attention to my health, but durst not
trust my voice. He again placed himself by his blooming Isabella, she did not
however now so wholly engross his attention but that he sometimes addressed his
pleasing discourse to me, and that always in the gentle soothing voice of
friendship; Lady Bab, for want of a younger beau, flirted with my uncle, whose
person is still excessively agreeable, and who has all the gallantry and
vivacity, requisite to the character of a fine gentleman. My father had been
amusing himself with the newspapers; but soon after I came in, he beckoned to
me; I followed him to a window at some distance from the rest of the company. I
had always intended, said he, to let you remain abroad, *till I had provided a
husband for you; in part I have kept my resolution. This husband is provided;
and had I not been teased out of my plan, you would this day have followed your
cousin's example. I already begin to repent my weak compliance with your
caprice. A strange weight hangs on my spirits. I dread the consequence of
unnecessary delay: I have yielded but to -- what purpose can it answer; you
must ere long, give your hand to Mr. Williams; nothing shall tempt me to
violate the promise I have made both to him and his mother; I expect therefore
that you will conquer your foolish prejudice, and prepare yourself to receive
him as your intended husband: Lord Ossory has, at my request invited him to be
present at his nuptials, in a few moments he will be here. (I started and
changed color.) "None of your female airs and graces," continued my father; I
am determined not to be trifled with; your fate is determined; I called you
aside in order to prepare you for his visit: this you must allow is acting with
all the tenderness of a parent; do you in return, act with that submissive duty
which becomes a child. You never saw the man, therefore ^alk like a foolish
girl when you say you cannot love him: he is young, handsome, rich, and (what
is still better) a man of morals. -- As he spoke this we heard a loud rap at
the door: It is him, exclaimed I, with a terrified emotion, and sunk almost
fainting into a chair. I was not mistaken: in a few moments, a tall* awkward
figure entered the room, dressed with inelegant finery, though early in the
morning -- I was going, my dear Eliza, to repeat the foolish compliments he
paid me; but I have not patience to dwell on the hated subject: his
conversation was interlarded with scraps of plays, the bombast of which, mixed
up with his own homespun country dialect, *formed a most ridiculous contrast,
and might truly be called the art of sinking in poetry. During breakfast, I
contrived to make my escape to the other side of the table, leaving him next to
Lady Bab, who was pleased with an opportunity of showing her talents for wit
and ridicule: she played him off most unmercifully, to the great entertainment
of Sir Harry, and the great displeasure of my father, who severely chid me with
his eyes for having changed my seat. Odious as this man appears to me, when
viewed in the light of a husband, -- yet, when I considered him unconnected
with myself, I was sorry to see him made a butt of. Want of sense is the fault
of nature; not he that labors under this defect, but those who take advantage
of it, are the persons who ought to excite our contempt. As Miss Richmond had
insisted on being married with a special license, we had not what she called
the vulgar parade of going to church. About twelve, we retired to the drawing
room, where the ceremony was performed by the bishop of London, who is related
to the family. -- The bride appeared perfectly at ease while repeating those
vows, the solemnity of which made me tremble. I ventured to steal a glance at
Lord Ossory in his amiable countenance, I beheld all the marks of genuine
piety, -- with a composed and manly voice, he plighted his faith, -- it was
plainly to be seen, that his heart seconded his lips, while he swore to live
for her alone, till death should dissolve their union -- A shivering seized me
-- ah! then, said I, from this moment I must tear the dear image from my
breast, -- from this moment to love thee is a crime. -- Now then, Harriot
kneeling at the foot of the altar, make a sacrifice of ^hy hopel^^^,
unfortunate passion: Lord Ossory is lost to thee forever! Assist me Heaven! --
Agitated with these painful emotions, my eyes grew dim, my head grew giddy, and
I sunk senseless on the carpet. When I recovered, I found myself on my bed; my
maid stood by the side of it, and my father at some distance; I uttered a deep
sigh; he approached, Harriot, child what is the matter with you; your illness
has thrown a damp over the general joy; you have delayed our journey; Lord
Ossory would not set out without you. Poor Mr. Williams is in despair; indeed
you have greatly alarmed us all. -- "I am sorry for it Sir," replied I but I
beg they will no longer wait for me; I am not sufficiently recovered to make
one of the happy party. -- But indeed you must, my amiable cousin, cried an
insinuating voice, which I knew to be Lord Ossory's, this smoaky town will
never agree with your delicate constitution. He advanced and took my hand as he
spoke this; I blushed, and conscious of my weakness, too hastily withdrew it,
then wept for fear I had betrayed myself. -- But pardon me, Eliza, I am
tiresomely minute; it would fill a quire to describe half the painful emotions
-- the struggles of my heart, during a day which to me appeared an age. I must
lay down my pen, not able to hold it any longer; quite overpowered with
fatigue, I will throw myself on the bed. -- How delightful is the situation of
this house, so elegant -- ah! I can say no more -- adieu! adieu! I am in the
next apartment to Lord Ossory, -- peaceful and refreshing ever be his slumbers.

H. RIVERS.

LETTER XVIII. The SAME to the SAME.
AT length I return to my favorite amusement. I have been very ill my dear
Eliza. My fever was violent while it lasted. Today, for the first time. I took
a short airing, accompanied by my maid. The rest of the family are too much
engaged with their pleasures to dedicate any of their time to a poor,
low-spirited invalid: I ought however, in justice, to except the amiable
Ossory. Nothing could equal his friendly anxiety for me during my illness.
Every hour of the day did he call at the door of my apartment to enquire how I
did. The most skilful physicians, were, by his order, sent for from town -- my
father also behaved with a tenderness which excites in my breast the warmest
sentiments of gratitude. But it was my cousin on whom I meant justly to
reflect, when I talked of being neglected: neither her or her friend Lady Bab
once condescended to honor me with a visit; both violently apprehensive of
fevers, it seems. Such was their excuse. Mr. Williams, honest man, never having
been accustomed to think or act for himself, did as he saw the rest do. When
they expressed sorrow for my illness, he endeavored to look sorrowful; when
they sent up to enquire after me, he followed their lead, and joined in the
ceremony. This account I had from Sally, who added, that he was very assiduous
about Lady Bab Wilmot. Heaven grant she may have made a conquest of him. I
doubt not but her Ladyship would snap at such an offer, as her rank is much
superior to her fortune. I was near a fortnight confined to my room, and still
find myself extremely weak and languid. My indisposition needed not to have
confined me so long, but I wished to be retired: I trembled at the thoughts of
being again exposed to the too attractive graces of Lord Ossory's conversation.
I spent my time in endeavoring, by the aids of religion and philosophy, to
cure my heart of i^s now criminal weakness. I flattered myself that I had, in
some measure, succeeded; and therefore entered the parlour where the company
were assembled with an air of composure, placing great confidence in the
strength of my laudable resolutions. Fortunately Lord Ossory had rode out to
pay some morning visits, and was not yet returned. I found only Lady Ossory,
Lady Bab, my uncle, Mr. Williams, and Monsieur La Fare. The latter sat by my
cousin, tuning her guitar; Sir Harry was engaged at piquet with Lady Bab; and
Mr. Williams was amusing himself with her ladyship's netting, at which he is
very expert. Such was the arrangement of the little party. Lady Ossory looked
like an angel; the country air had given an additional glow to her fine
complexion; and her morning dress was inimitably becoming. The agreeable
Frenchman seemed, by the homage he paid her with his large black eyes, to be
perfectly sensible of her attractions. You must permit me to give you a slight
sketch of this gentleman's history. As Lord Ossory's friend, he deserves the
honor of being introduced to my Eliza. I know not myself the particulars of his
story, which, I am told, is uncommonly unfortunate: all I have hitherto learnt
is, that he is descended from a younger branch of a noble family; that in
consequence of a love affair, he fought a duel, and killed his antagonist,
whose rank and power being superior to his, obliged him to fly his country,
where no pardon was to be hoped for; that in leaving his country he was also
obliged to leave all he had, escaping only with his life. -- He changed his
name, and fled to Holland, I think it was at Brussels; that fortune, weary of
persecuting him, presented him with an opportunity of rendering a signal
service to Lord Ossory, who was on his travels. Of what nature this service
was. I have not yet been informed; but from that moment the generous young
Englishman took him under his protection. He accompanied his patron hither: as
soon as they arrived here, Lord Ossory, whose favors are rendered doubly
valuable, by the noble delicacy with which they are conferred, made him
independent, by settling on him a very considerable annuity; he lives with his
benefactor from choice; is treated with so much respect by all the domestics,
and has so much command in the family, that one can hardly tell which of the
two is master. My Lord doats on him: and indeed he is so sensible, so agreeably
gay, and in every respect so accomplished, that one cannot wonder that he
should gain such an ascendency over his worthy friend. He has, it seems,
proposed himself, as a proof of his gratitude, to become tutor to Lord Ossory's
son and heir, if heaven should bless him with one -- a task for which he
appears admirably qualified. For this purpose, he is engaged in abridging
Rosseau's System of Education, -- selecting what is practicable, and omitting
what he and Lord Ossory think exceptionable. This man is though it, by the belles
of our society, uncommonly handsome: he is very well for a foreigner; -- but I
must own, his chief recommendation to me is, his being honored with the
friendship of Lord Ossory. This subject has run away with my pen. I was going
to describe the reception I met with. -- Mr. Williams was the first who espied
me. As I entered the room, he started up, and with ridiculous emphasis repeated,

"Angels and ministers of grace defend us.
"Art thou, etc.
Then advancing, led me to a chair, and swore I looked divinely. -- Since you
allow her to be a heavenly ghost, cried Lady Bab, laughing, your question of
'bring'st with thee blast from hell,' was needless. It must be owned, added
she, you have a pretty and very uncommon style of complimenting your mistress.
To have called her an angel, is what any fool might have done; but to call her
a ghost was indeed a superior stretch of folly. Mr. Williams, said Sir Harry,
has shows great judgment in the choice of a wife; he is a body, and if man and
wife become one, he will then also have a soul. "But I fear," cried Mr. La
Fare, with vivacity, that if this match should take place, the apostle's saying
will be reversed, and the spirit will war against the flesh. Then turning to
me, he paid me a compliment, with all the easy gallantry of a Frenchman,
saying, that my late illness had so refined my beauty, and rendered my
complexion so transparently clear, that it was no wonder Mr. Williams mistook
me for one of the celestial tribe. While every one was thus displaying their
wit at that poor man's expense, he was, at the expense of my Dresden ruffles,
endeavoring to disengage his netting pin, which in handing me to a seat, he
had aukwardly entangled in them. "I used to wish," said Lady Bab, to have our
beaus about town, taught a little needle work, or netting, to keep them out of
mischief; but I find Mr. Williams has such a happy nack of doing every thing,
that the very thing which I proposed as a remedy, is, in his hands, the cause
of -- "Spare him," interrupted La Fare, laughing, for if he should
unfortunately tear the lady's ruffles, he can perhaps do more than your
Ladyship could, that is, mend them again. The entrance of Lord Ossory and my
father, put an end to this chit chat. Oh! Eliza what became of all my boasted
resolutions at the ^ight of this amiable nobleman! how superior is he to the
rest of his sex! how delicate, how soothing were his compliments on my
recovery! He seated himself by me, he looked at me with such tender sympathy!
-- I must, I will console myself with the pleasing hope, that your poor Harriot
is honored with some share of his esteem. It shall be my study to deserve it.
My father was visibly displeased at Mr. Williams's behavior. Lady Bab
engrossed his whole attention with open mouth, and round unthinking face -- he
sat (...) with wonderment at all she said. -- had always a laugh and a bravo at
her service. -- This affair goes as I could wish. -- My only fear is, that when
his lady mother comes (and she is daily expected) things will take a less
favorable turn; -- so much does the tall boy of twenty-one stand in awe of her
-- Of love he is utterly incapable -- but he likes lady Bab, because she is so
pure and merry; and, as he said the other day, he should (...) for such a kind
of wife of all things, because she would keep him laughing from morning to
night. -- I fear honest friend, thought I, it would be of the wrong side of the
mouth, if once you have taken her for better for worse. -- As to me, I am a
restraint upon him: -- A pretty young body, he said I was (as my cousin told
me) but then so plaguey grave, that he did not know what to say to me: and,
indeed, when my father contrives to have us left to a tete a tete, nothing can
be more ridiculous. -- I sink into a reverie -- he talks of the weather --
admires my work -- offers to teach me a new method of netting. -- I answer at
random -- then begins a game at cross purposes, to which I put an end by making
my exit. If the match breaks of, as heaven grant it may, I see clearly it will
be on his fide, so I need give myself but little trouble: he is already
heartily disgusted with his intended bride. -- My father has no room to
complain of my behavior. -- I always treat him with civility -- never refuse
to be alone with him. All I fear, as I said before, is the arrival of this Mrs.
Williams. -- Adieu, my beloved Eliza: I am not good at description, or I would
with pleasure obey your commands -- The situation is delightfully romantic; the
house is large, commodious, and elegantly furnished; and the master of it --
Oh! who can pay attention to any thing else, when he is nigh! What a happy
woman is my cousin! his behavior to her is enchanting: -- but she, I fear, has
not yet lost her relish for flirting, and the admiration of a multitude. --
Unconscionable! to be admired by Lord Ossory, might satisfy the ambition of an
empress.

Believe me ever yours, HARRIOT RIVERS.

LETTER XIX. Lady OSSORY to Lady BAB WILMOT.
IT IS monstrous provoking my dear Bab, that your mother should take it into her
head to be sick, at a time so unseasonable both for yourself and your friend --
I could cry for vexation: your presence here is absolutely necessary. --
Williams is such an ass that there is no depending on his constancy: such a
passive soul, or rather body, for he has not a spark of spirit about him, that
his mother, when she comes, will, with half a word, be able to persuade him
that he never though it you tolerable, -- and that Harriot, against whom you had
taken such pains to steel his heart, is an angel. For some hours after your
departure, he did not know what to do with himself, and was ready, like a great
boy, to blubber for the loss of his play thing; but unfortunately for you, he
has at last hit upon a new method of making a netting shuttle, this entirely
engrosses his tho'ts -- and you, poor Lady Bab, may now bind your brow with
mournful willow. -- He seeks only to be diverted; and, honest man, every thing
has the good fortune to produce in him this effect; a wife, a monkey, a netting
shuttle, or a Lord Mayor's show, it is all one to Ranger. -- However, I Will do
what I can for you. Luckily Mrs. Williams is obliged to deny her visit; in that
time I do not despair of effecting the scheme we concerted ensemble. -- I have
only to persuade him that he is desperately in love with you. -- he will stare
no doubt, and perhaps be at first a little incredulous, but I shall tell him,
that I see it in his eyes -- that people are often affected with that disease,
without being sensible of it, and that it frequently proves fatal where timely
remedies are not applied. I will every day pretend to discover new symptoms of
it, both in his face and person. -- In short, let me alone to work him to our
purpose, -- if we can but divest him of the awe he has for the old lady, he
will be vastly pleased with a jaunt to Scotland, it will, to use his own style,
be rare fun. How my uncle will fret -- that is a trifle, -- but I am vexed to
death to think, that while I am laboring to promote the interest of my friend,
I am at the same time compelled to do an essential service to my foe. -- Yes
Bab, I must ever regard my cousin as such, her conduct is a constant reproach
to mine -- she loves my husband, I know she loves him to distraction. -- Yet
censure itself cannot find the slightest indiscretion in her behavior, -- she
struggles with her passion, even to the endangering of her life; her health is
visibly impaired, -- she has more sensibility than me, yet can she walk
steadily in the thorny path of virtue. -- I cannot bear her superiority -- how
I shall glory in her fall -- she must -- she shall be humbled -- strong are the
temptations that are flung in her way. Ossory (whose heart and mine were never
paired above, so very different are the form and temper of our minds) has
conceived for her, what the sentimental soul calls a tender friendship. -- When
I, as is often the case, drive him from me by my coolness or caprice, he flies
to her for consolation, -- in the mean time I am left at liberty to enjoy the
more delightful company of my dear La Fare. There Is a man for ye -- so lively,
so elegant, so formed to please, such a complete master of the art of love --
it is impossible to resist him. -- I may say with the old Countess Marmontel, I
am virtuous hitherto -- by good luck. Neither of us are troubled with very
squeamish consciences -- we must however be cautious. La Fare is under
obligations to my husband: he has too much gallantry to scruple making free
with his neighbor's wife; but he would not wish to appear openly ungrateful. I
wish also to wait till Ossory sets me the example. If I can but draw him into
the snare I have laid for him, I shall then think myself entitled to the
privilege of a modern wife: the fear of my exposing the frailty of his
dulci^ea, will tie his tongue. -- But I fear I shall never be able to wait for
the last act of their snail-moving intrigue. I long for the comme^cement of
mine -- heartily sick of wedlock's insipid joys, I feel no more emotion at
Ossory's caresses than I should from embracing his grandfather's bust. La Fare!
the dear La Fare! Can alone awaken my passion, and charm my senses. -- I speak
freely to you Bab, you can make allowance for the weakness of human nature --
you was from the first the confident of my new passion -- You have seen the
dear man at my feet -- You have heard his persuasive eloquence, -- and you have
owned, that instead of censuring our loves, you wished yourself in my place. --
How I miss you. -- the presence of a third person prevented all suspicion:
while you was here, I had a thousand opportunities of seeing him in private;
but now, how seldom does a favorable opportunity offer. -- Our enchanting
country rambles are no more; a tete a tete might give room for censure, and a
trio was alone supportable, with my kind Wilmot. -- I am become quite peevish,
-- that unsufferable prude, Harriot, has such a vile pair of penetrating eyes.
La Fare was this morning so indiscreet, as to put my hand to his lips, while
stooping at my knee to lift my handkerchief; he imagined the eyes
abovementioned, fixed on a piece of embroidery, the fittest place for them, but
behold on glancing mine toward them, full in my face did they dart a look of
mingled surprise, pity, and contempt. -- Contempt! heavens! -- it is not to be
borne! -- In revenge for this piece of impertinent watchfulness, I gave
Williams the hint, Harriot* said I, thinks you neglect her -- fie, who could
expect so fine a gentleman as you are, would give room for such a reproach.
From that moment till the evening, when Ossory came home and released him from
the task did he pester the girl with his nonsense. When this husband of mine
had paid his respects to the rest of the company, he pranced up to me, offered
to salute me, and aukwardly tore my apron with his spur. Oh! for heaven sake,
cried I, pushing him from me, none of your odious pawing; the hated familiarity
which matrimony admits of, is a perfect antidote to love -- "'It Is I madam,"
said he, not the familiarity, that is odious. He retired, and with a pensive
air seated himself by my cousin. Would you, amiable Harriot, repulse, with
scornful ill nature, a husband who adored you? Not if that husband expressed
his fondness with as much delicacy as your lordship. I am much obliged to you
for so flattering a compliment, returned he bowing, but Lady Ossory has, you
find, very different ideas of what you call delicacy: pawing is the expression
she thinks fit to make use of. He spoke with an air of disdain, equally
contemptuous. I tripped to the harpsichord, and began warbling, "None but fools
would marry now, etc." For the rest of the evening he took not the slightest
notice of me. He thought, honest man, to vex me, by being uncommonly assiduous
to my cousin: it was the very thing I wished for, as she wholly engrossed his
attention. La Fare found a thousand opportunities of expressing (at least by
his eyes) the ardent passion which glows in his breast. What but his dear
company could induce me, a moment longer, to stay in this odious country. He
"From a desert could banish solitude."

Adieu! My letters are unsufferably long, and what is still worse, horridly
stupid -- it is your own fault. -- I have never been myself since you left me;
nevertheless, I still remain very much yours,

ISABELLA RICHMOND.

LETTER XX. Lord OSSORY to EDWARD MILVILL, Esquire
YOU say that the encomiums I in my last bestowed on matrimony, have determined
you to follow any example. Stop -- my good friend -- I unintentionally deceived
you, because, alas! I was myself deceived. Too late my eyes are opened, and I
awake from the pleasing dream. I do not dissuade you from entering into a
state, which I still believe is capable of the highest happiness, though I, from
an imprudent choice, have failed of obtaining it: -- but I advise you to
beware: -- let my fate be a warning to you: -- trust not alone a lovely face, a
gentle air: -- endeavor, if possible, to penetrate the thick vale of
hypocrisy, with which the female heart is enveloped; most female hearts, I
should say, for I have found, alas! too late, one lovely, amiable exception:
but dazzled with the gaudy blaze of mere external charms, I overlooked, I was
blind to the more durable, the more enchanting graces of a heavenly mind. -- My
wife -- my torment as I fear she will prove, has thrown aside the mask, and now
stands confessed, the coquette, the modern fine lady; while her cousin every
day discovers new attractions. -- Fool that I was, to be caught by outward
show! -- What advantage do we derive from our boasted reason, when our senses
so easily mislead us? Happiness and misery were set before me. -- Rash,
infatuated fool that I was, I chose the latter. -- In Harriot I have found my
kindred soul -- with her I should have been supremely blessed -- she is really
mistress of those elegant sentiments, which the other only affected: -- And,
Oh, Edward! to add to my remorse, she loves: yes, in spite of all her modest,
delicate caution. I have discovered the dear, flattering, dangerous secret,
which she would rather die than voluntarily reveal, and which, with such
virtuous resolution, she struggles to conquer. --

"On her cheek, the residence of spring,
"Pale omen sits.
Her health declines. -- What an affecting object! -- And then to know myself
the cause, -- can you wonder if I feel more for her than friendship alone could
inspire? My wife's caprice, her mortifying indifference is insupportable. Short
is the reign of mere external beauty; yet she might ever have held me in her
chains, had she but have taken the least pains to please; if she had felt for
me a mutual passion: she made me believe she did. Artful creature! A heart like
here is is incapable of love. I fear she as strongly resembles her mother in her
mind as in her person -- that wanton libertine, who is a disgrace to her sex. I
shall not at present tell you my reasons for this apprehension; suffice it to
say, that my domestic happiness is at an end. In what gaudy visions did I
indulge my imagination! how many plans of future felicity had I formed with the
woman, (the angel as she then appeared) whom I adored, and a friend who I
believed so worthy of my esteem! How repeatedly did she talk of a country life,
of calm content, and rational joys! -- Infatuated wretch that I was, how could
I be so easily deceived? She now laughs at my folly, in supposing that she
would ever submit to be buried in obscurity, -- a person who is formed to
attract universal admiration. She sickens at the sight of country squires;
expires at the rustic conversation of their dowdy helpmates; a murmuring stream
throws her into the vapors; the birds deafen her with their unmeaning notes;
she cannot support the fatigue of walking over my parks and gardens; yawns when
I talk to her of my intended improvements; can just make shift to kill the
tedious day, by playing at piquet with La Fare; enters into none of my
amusements; hates reading; never touches her harpsichord in my presence,
because she knows I am passionately fond of music: but I can pardon her this,
since the sweet Harriot, with far more taste, supplies her place. This amiable
girl, who sees how much I suffer from her cousin's unkind, unmerited
perverseness, omits no endeavors to divert my melancholy: she plays at half a
word; sings to me, -- and O how ravishing are her plaintive notes! she rides
out with me, her physicians having ordered her to take this exercise; visits
with me the groves, the pleasing shades, which I had formed for the reception
of her rival; points out a thousand beauties in nature, which would otherwise
have escaped my notice. -- She is particularly fond of flowers -- I take care
that her dressing room is every day supplied with the finest that mine, or the
neighboring gardens can produce -- in reward for my pains, she constantly
wears a nosegay selected from these rural presents.

" -- Ye painted populace,
" Who dwell in fields, and lead ambrosial lives;
" You gladlier grow, ambitious of her hand,
" Which often crops your odours, incense meet
" To thoughts so pure" --
Trembling I indulge myself in her delightful society. I wish to act with honor
and integrity, but I fear the temptation would be too strong for me did I not
value her peace, her reputation, her happiness more than life. The same object
which endangers my virtue is als^ the preserver of it; my fervent regard for
her is my security. Adieu, my dear Melvill^ I shall make no apology for the
length of this epistle, depending on the friendship with which you honor

Your humble servant, OSSORY.

LETTER XXI. Lady OSSORY to Lady BAB WILLIAMS.
JOY, joy, to the bride! Well child, how are you after your flying expedition?
-- how is your spouse? -- Poor man -- not yet jealous I hope: ^ut patience; you
have not yet had time to give him cause. O what joyous lives will you and I
lead this winter! Masquerades, Almack's, and the dear Coterie -- not to mention
our still more delightful petite soupes, our little private quar^es with my La
Fare and your Romeo. Who would wish not to be a wife in these our modish days!
My affairs here are in the best train imaginable-my husband and Harriot bill
from morning to night -- I give them every opportunity they could wish --
prudes, I trow are flesh and blood as well as their neighbors -- my scheme
must be successful; then let me but catch her tripping, and all the joys of
unbounded liberty are mine besides the dear malignant triumph I shall
experience at her fall -- Ossory's mouth will be stopped: if he dares to
murmur, the world shall know the provocation I have received, and his idol, his
Harriot's reputation, as well as my own, shall be sacrificed to my revenge; the
world will justify me. What! to be forsaken for one, whose charms are so
inferior! who will wonder, that urged by wounded vanity, I should make
reprisals? -- My uncle storms at the trick you have played him, while his
daughter looks upon you as the guardian angel who has saved her from ruin. Your
double chinned ambling mother-in-law, was at first piqued at the disobedience
of her boy, but there is something so soothing in the name of my daughter Lady
Bab, to the pride of your half bred gentry, that it soon conquered her
resentment, a constant simper plays on her full blown features, while she
receives compliments of congratulation on her son's marriage. -- You would die
with laughing, did you see the ridiculous airs she gives herself, so much
stronger is her vanity than her avarice: had we been better acquainted with
her, it would have saved us some trouble: but no matter, you are married, that
is sufficient. Rivers is now again looking out for a mate for his daughter:
several neighboring male creatures have offered themselves; but though he is in
a violent hurry to dispose of his troublesome charge, yet has he so much family
pride about him, it is not every one will go down -- mean time Harriot it as gay
as a bird escaped from its cage: the tender assiduity of my honest man does not
a little contribute to raise her late dejected spirits -- I suspect they have
come to an explanation -- what the next step may be one may easily guess. -- Do
you not marvel to see me so passive in this affair? not a tincture of jealousy
in my whole composition -- but pride one would think -- Lard child! -- what
signifies losing the affections of a husband, when one is sure of being adored,
followed, admired, courted by all the rest of his sex; this will be the case
when I get to dear London, or at least you and I will share between us all that
we deem worthy of our smiles, -- at present give me La Fare, and take all the
rest.

"The world goes round."
Adieu! he waits for me in the grove. Ossory and his dulcinea are rode out -- I
fly to enjoy the raptures of a tete a tete.

Yours, I. OSSORY.

THE END OF VOL. I.
THE PRECIPITATE CHOICE: OR, THE HISTORY OF LORD OSSORY AND MISS RIVERS. A
NOVEL. IN TWO VOLUMES.

By a LADY.

VOL. II.

BOSTON: Reprinted and sold by BENJAMIN EDES and SONS, in Cornhill,
M,DCC,LXXXIII.

THE PRECIPITATE CHOICE.
LETTER I. Miss RIVERS to Miss ELIZA DUDLEY.
HARDLY is your Harriot delivered from one persecution, when another commences;
and I have reason to be much more apprehensive of the last than the first. --
The simple Williams was easily governed, easily persuaded to desist from his
suit: but Mr. Melvill, ah! what shall I do with Mr. Melvill? -- The most
accomplished, the most amiable man, next to Lord Ossory, I ever saw; approved
by my father, approved even by myself. What objections can I urge? -- that I
love another, -- a married man. I shudder at the thought. And yet is not this
the case? Unhappy guilty Harriot, Guilty! no, my passion is free from every
base alloy; it is more tender than friendly; but no less pure. My heart harbors
not a wish in regard to Ossory, but what I durst avow to all the world; and yet
he has such strong possession of that too susceptible heart that I cannot
govern its emotions in favor of any other. I will be virtuous, that is all I
can answer for. My Eliza deserves unlimited confidence -- I must tell you -- do
not too severely condemn me. Lord Ossory has discovered the secret I so
carefully strove to conceal. Think not I made a voluntary confession; O, no! I
should have expired with shame ere it could have found utterance. My eyes, --
some little inadvertency betrayed me.

We were alone the other day in the park. What a variety of emotions does the
recollection excite! I was too much agitated, too much confused at the time to
know the particulars of what passed; I only remember that he was at my feet;
that in the plaintive voice of woe he lamented his wretched ^ate, in having
chose my cousin; -- that he now too late found I alone was formed to make him
happy; that he had mistaken admiration for love; love! Which till I inspired
it, was a stranger to his heart; -- that heart, added he, which heaven has
united to yours by the strongest sympathy and similarity of sentiment.

I was ready to have fainted -- he started up, and supported me in his arms: --
Harriot; my beloved Harriot, long have I seen your virtuous struggles. O! then,
cried I, disengaging myself, and hiding my face with my hands -- I am
completely wretched. I cannot, cannot bear that you should despise me. And yet
added I, with a resolute and rather haughty air, -- I will, by my future
conduct, put it out of your power. You know the whole extent of my weakness; it
shall go no farther. I own I have not been able to behold you with
indifference; but were you a thousand times more engaging than you are; were
you in the slightest manner to presume on the discovery you have made, -- did
you dare to offer the least indignity; from that moment I should regard you as
the most despicable of your sex; -- from that moment contempt would be the only
sentiment you would excite. -- For your own sake then, my lord, forget that you
are become master of my unfortunate secret, and treat me, as you have hitherto
done as a friend.

I will treat you as the most amiable, the most virtuous of women, interrupted
he, -- as the friend of my heart. -- And here I swear, added he, putting one
knee to the ground, to restrain my passion -- to respect yours* to be the
guardian of your honor; and forgetting myself, to study only your peace, your
happiness and fame.

I am satisfied cried I, giving him my hand, so high an idea do I entertain of
your integrity, -- so confidently do I rely on your sincerity, that all my
fears are hushed to rest, and I am even pleased that we have come to this
painful but salutary explanation: a load is taken off my heart: now I shall act
with less restraint, depending on your promise, on your esteem: you shall
assist me to conquer my weakness.

The appearance of my father and another gentleman, put an end to our
interesting tete a tete. The stranger hastily advanced to Lord Ossory, who
uttering an exclamation of joyful surprise, ran to embrace him, calling out,
Welcome, welcome, my dear Melvill, I rejoice to see you at (...) grove

We proc^e^ed toward the house; the two friends walked on before my father and
(...). -- He talked to me of Mr. Melvill; made me remark the graceful elegance
of his person. If you could make a conquest here, Harriot, said he, you would
(...) I have cause to triumph; he is one of the finest (...) in England and
would, I dare say, make a (...) excellent husband. I shuddered at the thought,
but (...) no other answer than that it was very improbable so fine a gentleman
should think of an insignificant girl like me. While I spoke, Melvill looked
back; -- I blushed guessing from that, that I was the subject of their
conversation: -- This blush, I fear, proceeded from vanity: -- We women are
very apt to construe any little notice from the other sex as marks of
admiration. I had no great reason to suppose he would at that time view my
person in a favorable light: -- My morning dress was not calculated to show it
to advantage; -- and had he thought it tolerable, my cou^^n's charms, adorned
with every becoming ornament, so lately eclipsed mine, that I could not doubt
but she would efface the transient impression he might have received from your
Harriot. But, alas! my friend, there is no accounting for the caprice of
taste: I find I am mistaken. This engaging man has already made proposals to my
father, and I every moment dread a declaration of his passion. Hitherto I have
taken care that he should not find an opportunity. Lord Ossory is become
exceedingly melancholy: -- he shuns me and seeks retirement: -- no doubt
Melvill has made him his confident.

My cousin rewards us all with scrutinizing eyes: -- she seems displeased at
the latter's assiduity to your friend: -- her vanity is hurt to see any one so
blind as to give me the preference. Surely she might be satisfied with La Fare,
who is her slave from morning to night; too much so, I think, considering she
is the wife of his friend -- or any man's wife indeed. -- Stop, Harriot; ah!
shall you dare to censure? -- Shall you attempt to pluck the more out of your
neighbor's eye, who have such a beam in thine own? -- O conscience! I bow, I
humble myself under thy just reproof.

Adieu, my dear Eliza Pray that I may act so as to merit the regard with which
you honor your affectionate

HARRIOT RIVERS.

LETTER II. Lady OSSORY to Lady BAB WILLIAMS.
I AM out of all patience: -- Here is a foolish fellow, one Melvill, who has
taken it into his head to fall in love with that vile, little provoking
Harriot. -- I tremble for the success of my plots -- This man has a thousand
attractions, besides on overgrown estate, and a title which will devolve to him
on the death of an uncle. O! if the girl should be wise enough to take him, I
shall expire with vexation: -- all the gaieties of life will then be in her
power: -- but what is still worse, shall I suffer her to escape with unsullied
fame? Shall she triumph over me by her superior virtue? -- Shall Ossory be left
in possession of the insolent authority of a husband? -- Shall he, guiltless
himself, be by that means entitled to censure every levity in my conduct? --
Shall I still be obliged to wear the mask of hypocrisy, and steal me joys? His
example can alone give me the liberty, for which my free born soul so ardently
pants. -- Besides, I have vowed the ruin of my cousin: so long have I indulged
the pleasing hope, that I shall enjoy no rest till it is completed. I own too,
that I envy her the addresses of this Melvill; my capacious heart cannot be
satisfied with the ^omage of one, -- I would hold all mankind in my chains.
Till he came, every thing went on as I could wish. -- Ossory and Harriot were
perpetually together; my spies watched all their motions: -- the affair was not
indeed come to the crisis I expect with so much impatience, but it could not,
as they went on, be long ere it did so: -- but now this Melvill has put a stop
to all my schemes. Ossory is seized with the vapors, and like a despairing
inamarato, has shut himself up in his apartment, and fancies himself ill,
forsooth: Harriot is also in the dumps, while her swain racks his brain to
amuse her. My uncle, that he may be near to watch over the conduct of his
precious daughter, plagues me with his company from morning to night. La Fare
dares hardly look at me, for fear of attracting some of their vile penetrating
eyes: -- it is too much -- I die with envy. -- The country is detestable; I Will
go to town, yet, positively, if things continue in this train; I Will leave them
all to follow their own devices, while I fly to my dear Williams for
consolation; and plunging into delightful modish dissipation, forget every care.

La Fare may come if he will; if not. I shall find a thousand others to supply
his place: yet he is a charming fellow -- O! Bab! -- but I must not praise him
too much, left you should commerce my rival -- Poor Williams -- I am at present
too much out of humor to laugh heartily; but at any other time I should have
exotred at your droll description of the figure he made during that truly
matrimonial scene, in which you have been engaged. -- Go on, Bab, conquering;
-- and to conquer, hold fast the reigns of government. Women are formed for
power; not to rule a husband only, but an empire. What male wretch of a monarch
will date to set himself in competition with a Queen B^ss, and Empress of
Russia, and a hundred other noble (...)? in whose presence little insignificant
kingdoms hide their diminished heads -- crowns we will rather say; ^or kings,
trow, have very seldom any heads to ^ide. -- Let us assert our prerogative: the
Sal^que law is no where to be found but in a nation of slaves: and even there
female wit renders it of none effect; for no where do women reign with more
despo^e power than in France, -- and shall we, the (...) daughters of Britain,
yield the palm to them? -- Forbid it pride! -- Petticoat government for ever!
Adieu! -- Here has been my Abigail, with her naturally sharp (...) out of all
bounds, with an O! madam! O! my lady! My master is so ill! -- Well, and what
the^, child! do you take me for a physician? No, my lady; but I thought your
ladyship (...) like to know -- what! that my husband is ill, girl, should I
like that do you think?

Why, to say truth, twenty is a pre^ty age to wear widow's weeds -- This, Bab,
was only what I thought, not what I said. I have a (...) that I should not
break much art were this the case. But hark! the whole house is in confusion;
-- is sure as death the man is absolutely going to make his exit -- Curiosity
now will carry me to his apartment. -- No, 'twas only a qualm: but such
screaming among the females! I believe in my conscience all the girls in the
house are in love with him. Harriot fainted. -- Melvill is busy in her
recovery; -- he weak spirits took the alarm -- she was not in his room. -- A
set of poor souls and silly -- Dinner waits.

Adieu. Yours, I. OSSORY.

LETTER III. Lord OSSORY to Miss RIVERS.
YES, my dear, virtuous cruel -- O! no; my adorable Harriot, you deserve not
that reproach; -- you are all gentle sweetness; and yet you are the cause of
all my sufferings: -- but I applaud your conduct, though my death will be the
consequence. -- How could you ask my advice? -- What man can do, I will, to
convince you with what disinterested passion I love; but he must be more than
man, who would consent to yield you to his rival. Fool that I was, 'twas I
first prejudiced Melvill in your favor by my indiscreet, though just encomiums.
-- I excited his curiosity, -- he came, he saw, he heard, and ah! could he then
fail to love? and could I hope that after his arrival, I should any longer be
honored with -- what shall I call it, without offending my Harriot's delicacy?
-- It was that which constituted the felicity of her Ossory; 'twas that, for
the loss of which I wish to resign an insipid joyless existence: But heed not
my compliments take this happy man, this envied Melvill. Harriot, since he has
the good fortune to be acceptable to you. Obey your father, act up to your
duty: Once it would have cost you some struggles; but that time, so flattering
to the wretched Ossory, is now past -- Harriot, I will conquer my selfish
weakness; you shall at least be compelled to esteem me. I have promised to be
the guardian of your honor: I vowed to prefer your happiness to my own; -- so
sacrifice every wish that was inconsistent with your reputation and felicity.

Melvill is young rich, handsome; he deserves you; our friendship commenced at
school; the more intimate we grew, the more reason had I to admire and approve.
-- He loves you, take him if you think it will restore your peace, if you think
you can return that love.

The pen drops from my hand. Harriot, I recall what have I said, -- I cannot,
cannot give thee up, thou idol of my heart.

OSSORY.

LETTER IV. Miss RIVERS to Lord OSSORY.
WOULD I had never been born! Indeed my lord, this is too much; -- my own
griefs are more than I am able to support; must those of Lord Ossory, the man
on earth I most esteem, be added to my burden? and must I be accused as the
cause of all your misery? -- What can I do? How shall I, how ought I to act? --
I have, since deprived of your company, strictly examined my past conduct: --
thanks to my guardian angel, I have nothing criminal to reproach myself with;
but is this sufficient to justify me? -- Ah! no; I ought not to have beheld you
with partiality: ought not? alas! do I not still? -- Pure as my attachment is,
it is faulty in being placed on an improper object: firm as my resolution is, to
die, rather than forfeit my virtue; -- yet what reliance ought I to place on
the power of human resolutions, when unassisted by a power superior? -- And can
I, while I refuse to part with the idol of my heart, expect that assistance? --
No; my duty is to conquer; I wish to do so, that I may have nothing to reproach
myself with -- But I, blushing, own that the struggle is almost too much for my
weak frame to support: -- help me then, my lord; -- you promised to be the
guardian of my honor: -- relying on this generous promise. I must again solicit
your advice. -- Why should we go on to indulge a hopeless love? a love which
fills me with remorse. O let us endeavor to exchange it for that less
tumultuous, but no less endearing sentiment, friendship. -- Let us try if we
cannot bring it to that. We are discouraged from attempting it, because we
believe it impossible; but I again repeat, let us try; and that I may be the
better entitled to your esteem, help me to act as becomes a dutiful daughter, a
virtuous maid, and what is still more, the woman who aspires to the friendship
of Lord Ossory.

My father presses me to marry Mr. Melvill, a man to whom I have not been able
to offer one reasonable objection -- How perverse then must I appear in the
eyes of my parent! yet to marry that gentleman, however, while my affections
are, alas! engaged to another. I should deem a crime unpardonable. Yet I wished
to act up to my duty; -- I wished to guard myself by every possible precaution
against the weakness of my heart. I want to place new obstacles between me and
a passion which despair itself has not yet been able to conquer. The duties of
a wife may divert my attention; the sacred engagement may keep me more steady
to my laudable purpose, than I could otherwise be.

These and many more of the like reasons induced me to listen to Mr. Melvill;
-- he is a man of sense and honor, an agreeable man -- Mr. Williams I could
never have though it of -- I would be dutiful to my parent, but my duty to Heaven
is still superior -- (...) not perjure myself in obedience to his commands, and
that I must have done had I consented to take Mr. Williams; for how was it
possible I should ever honor o^ love him? -- Now I could both honor and esteem
Mr. Melvill; -- but for love, -- ah! dear Ossory! my heart was formed to admit
of one object, and that object the only one which ought never to have found
entrance there. In vain I listen to your rival; -- in vain I enumerate to
myself his various perfections: I see, I admire, but I do not feel their force.
What can I do? O my lord! pity and assist me to conquer, by setting a laudable
example to your

HARRIOT RIVERS.

LETTER V. Miss RIVERS to Miss ELIZA DUDLEY.
O MY dear! the day is fixed; urged by my father, -- importuned by the most
generous of men, for such Mr. Melvill has proved himself: with trembling
emotion I gave a reluctant consent: But ere I ventured to take this important
step, I thought it my duty to make the man to whom I am going to unite my
destiny, acquainted with my weakness.

From the moment I brought myself to regard him in the light of a husband, I
thought myself bound in honor to make him my unlimited confidant. Fatal is the
consequence of any secret reserve, any concealment between man and wife! --
With inexpressible confusion therefore I revealed to him my unfortunate, my
imprudent attachment to Lord Ossory. He stopped me ere I had finished the
painful task, and pressing me to his breast to hide my blushes, -- No more, my
adorable Harriot, interrupted he, you shall not be mortified by the humbling
confession of an involuntary error: the manner in which you have acted, in so
critical a situation, does you more honor than if you had never been tempted.
Your delicate frankness to me too in this affair, proves you be the noblest of
your sex. I own I wished you to come to this eclaircissement; not that you have
told me any thing, of which I was not before acquainted; but it would have been
inconsistent with your character to have acted otherwise. Now may I, with
undoubted security, deposit my honor in your hands, and place unlimited
confidence in yours. Now my esteem can know no increase; for I am now
convinced that you as much excel the rest of your sex in virtue, as you do in
every other amiable qualification. My only regret is, that I was denied the
exquisite pleasure of first inspiring your gentle heart with tender
sensibility, because first impressions are always the most fervent and most
lasting. However, give me at present all you can, my lovely girl; your esteem
and friendship: it shall be my unremitted study to deserve the rest. -- I offer
myself to be the guardian of your honor. Hitherto you have nobly struggled in
the cause of virtue, and I doubt not of your laudable perseverance. But I am
ambitious of sharing with you the glorious task, and O! how amply shall I be
rewarded, if, by my fond assiduity, my unbounded love, I should be able, not
only to banish my rival from your breast, but to have the inexpressible delight
to supply his place.

This flattering hope induced me to solicit your hand, though I knew the mutual
attachment subsisting between you and my friend; but then I also knew the worth
of that friend, and a very little acquaintance with Miss Rivers convinced me
that she was far superior to the common run of females; -- that she was a
treasure, for the purchase of whom one could not pay too high a price; deign
then, adorable Harriot, to bless me with your hand; but let me not owe it
merely to the authority of a parent. Were the man single whom you distinguish
with your regard, nothing should tempt me to trouble you with my addresses. No,
I would honor your choice, be he who he would; that choice alone would give him
merit; then would I bury my hopeless passion at the bottom of my heart: -- But
Lord Ossory is married. -- Your father will not suffer you to remain single --
I offer myself therefore, to save you from one who might be less sensible of
your worth, who might love you with a less disinterested affection. --
Ambitious as I am to possess your whole undivided heart; yet well I patiently
wait, without murmuring, till your can complete my happiness by that invaluable
gift: mean time, I will sympathize in all your tender distress, nor claim any
thing as a right, but receive every little mark of your regard as a favor: --
If on these terms my charming girl will consent to be mine -- He paused, and
fixed his sensible eyes on my face; -- I cast mine down, and sighed.

O! Mr. Melvil, you are a generous man: My reason, my virtue tells me I ought
not to hesitate; but pity me, for you know my weakness. Besides, it hurts my
delicacy to think of taking you from such selfish motives as my own security.
-- You deserve -- Talk not of my deserving, interrupted he, -- to deserve Miss
Rivers is the height of my ambition. While he spoke my father joined us; his
authority added to the persuasive eloquence of this amiable man. O Eliza! I
know not what I said or did, so violent were my emotions; but I know now, on
recollection, that I pronounced the fatal Yes -- that preparations are actually
begun for the important occasion -- and that there (...) but one short
fortnight more between me and -- happiness or misery: for in marriage there is
no medium; and alas! I dare not hope for the former. Lord Ossory (my hands
tremble while I write his name) still continues indisposed, or perhaps he only
keeps his room, that he may prudently avoid the sight of your Harriot. Alas!
soon, very soon, shall we be separated, and that forever, as I propose wholly
to reside at Mr. Melvill's country seat; it is far distant from hence, and Lord
Ossory is too discreet to think of visiting me there. -- What a weight hangs on
my spirits!

Farewell, my dear Eliza! I fear I am going to be ill. -- Such a shivering! -- I
cannot hold my pen. -- My head. -- O I faint.

HARRIOT RIVERS.

LETTER VI. Lady OSSORY to Lady BAB WILLIAMS.
AGAIN my hopes revive; -- yes, my genius will yet prove the stronger.
Harriot's has long struggled with mine for victory. But for a fortunate illness
Bab, she had by this time figured en bride, Melvill's bride; the stupid, or
rather the haughty, insolent Melvill, who dares to slight my advances; the
infatuated Melvill, who doats on a puny girl, while health and blooming beauty
plead in vain: not that I am in love with the wretch, but one would wish for a
little variety. La Fare always La Fare, from morning to night: it is rather too
much, Melvill and he are the only decent beings that are to be met with in this
desert. -- I forget Ossory, but he poor soul's a husband; no wonder I forget
him; for we have separate apartments, separate views, and separate pleasures.
-- Never did we experience an union of hearts; -- we were tacked together by
mere human ties. -- At which,

Love, free as air, spreads his light wings,
And in a moment flies.
But to return to my cousin; the conflict between love, duty, virtue, and all
that, threw her into a fever; she is now, however, out of danger, but will, I
dare say, keep her room as long as possible, in order to delay the evil hour of
matrimony; -- such it appears to this foolish infatuated girl; though, had she
the least spirit, she would wish for nothing more than such an opportunity of
escaping from the authority of

A rigid father,
Who deals her pleasures with a scanty hand.
Delays are said to be dangerous; to her at least I trust they will prove so.
-- Now is my time; if I do not seize this opportunity, she will, ere long, be
out of my reach and power. -- In the first place, her intended spouse shall be
informed of her criminal fondness for mine; shall know that to that she owes
her illness; if he has but one spark of jealousy in his whole composition, I Will
blow it to a flame, which will soon consume his foolish passion for Harriot;
and then may his eyes be opened to discover my ladyship's hitherto neglected
charms. -- This is not all, the girl must and shall be humbled; frail nature
would, I hoped, long e^e now have brought her to the point I wish, and given me
room to triumph in her fall; -- but she has such a stock of pride -- virtue as
she no doubt calls it -- that nature alone will not do my business; we must
call in her handmaid Art, to her assistance. -- I have no faith in love
powders; but La Fare assures me, that there are drugs of sovereign use in these
cases, and that he knows one in particular of wonderful efficacy, in inflaming
the passions, though he does not pretend it will inspire a flame, but only
augment what the little deity has already kindled: -- it is, added he, of an
intoxicating nature; for some time it accelerates the spirits, then stupifies
the senses, and ends at last in sleep. -- This medicine shall be administered;
-- her nurse is one of my creatures; Ossory daily visits her, generally in
company of his friend, or her father indeed, and that of a morning; but easily
can I contrive to entice him at a more convenient hour to her apartment. From
morning to night he hovers near its door; then, when opportunity offers, and
importunity both, from without and from within solicits, who will answer for
the consequence; -- it is at least worth the trial, and tried it shall be this
night.

And so I bid my friend Bab adieu! I. OSSORY.

LETTER VII. The SAME to the SAME.
LA Fare, I used to call thee a bewitching fellow; but I find thy witchcraft
reaches not my cousin. I cannot accuse thee of having gained me by the aid of
love powders at least -- No, my dear Frenchman, thou art a mere quack, and thy
drugs are drugs of no value, or perhaps too small a dose was administered: it
has, however, produced one good effect; -- Ossory, from having once, by my
contrivance, been admitted to see his adorable, with no other witnesses but the
faint burning tapers, and an old woman, (...) with watching, now, by his own
contrivance, finds means to continue his nocturnal visits, much against the
lady's inclination it seems, who never fails severely to remonstrate. But who
can resist the eloquence of love? -- Nurse always takes care to give her, ere
these interviews, a dose of La Fare's curious and wonderful efficacious
cordial, then sinks into her armed chair, covers her face, and is supposed
neither to hear or see: not that the knows the purpose for which we intend this
powder; -- in obedience to my orders, simply does she administer it; she takes
them for sleeping draughts, because they produce that effect; -- but the shrewd
old dame observes, that instead of doing her lady service, they absolutely
stupify her. -- So much the better; if she is so inclined to sleep, it will be
no great wonder if her virtue, harrasted with being so long, so continually
kept on guard, should also be tempted to slumber. I have told my ancient spy,
that I suspect an intrigue between my husband and cousin, therefore beg she
will keep a sharp look out. She has a small tent bed in an adjoining closet, to
which her lady, now being out of danger, obliges her frequently to retire; --
what think you then, Bab, will, nay must be the consequence, of her tete a
tetes with Ossory? Hitherto indeed old Watchful declares, nothing criminal has
passed between them; they talk together, she says, in a low voice; -- Miss
Rivers weeps, my lord kneels by the bedside; sometimes he holds her hand in
his, once too she saw him press it to his lips; -- this she sees through a ho^e
in her apron, which is cast over her head, while, by her snoring, she lulls not
herself, but their suspicions to rest, so that they regard her only as a part
of the furniture of a sick chamber. To night I have ordered her to give Harriot
a double portion, and to retire to her closet as soon as she has drawn the
curtains, and administered the draught. -- So far, Bab, have I been the agent
of mischief; the rest I leave to fate, and you to rest, child, in case you
should be half as much inclined to sleep as your

I. OSSORY.

LETTER VIII. Lady OSSORY to Lady BAB WILLIAMS.
I Triumph! -- the deed is done, -- and now forever blasted is her ^ame; --

She sets like a bright star,
That falls to rise no more.
Nurse had punctually followed my orders, capacious was the stupifying draught
she had administered; I had a curiosity to be myself a witness of its effect,
therefore took up my station in the closet; she followed me when her lady
seemed composed for the night, and threw herself on the bed, whilst I applied
my eye to the keyhole -- when all was hush, in glided, not Margaret's grimly
ghost, but my good man --

Harriot, in a voice that spoke her displeasure, exclaimed -- is it thus you
testify your esteem? -- is it thus you keep your promise? -- Oh! too
indiscreet, (...) Ossory* -- why will you continue to expose my reputation to
danger? -- Only one word, my Harriot, interrupted he, -- alas! this will be the
last opportunity I shall enjoy of seeing you in private -- of pouring out at
your feet the anguish of my heart; -- a conversation which passed to day
between Melvill and your father, is my motive for once more presuming to
approach my angel, in a way which she had forbid, -- oh my life, my only love,
added he, sinking down by her side; -- pity me; -- the fatal hour approaches,
in which I must behold you resign yourself to my rival's arms, -- again the day
is fixed by an arbitrary father. He took her hand and bathed it with tears.

I suspected that the drowly draught began to operate, for she either did not
make any answer to what he had said, or else did it in so low a voice, that I
could not hear her. The candles stood on her toilet facing the bed, -- he rose,
extinguished one, and placed the other at a greater distance; this deprived me
of light enough to see what passed, but for a good while after my Lord
continued to talk in a low plaintive tone. Need I tell you the consequence of
all this? Harriot dozed, and left her virtue to shift for itself. My Lord had
long struggled against a passion that now became too strong for all his
resolutions; -- powerful was the temptation, the passive state to which his
fair one was reduced; can one wonder, -- I am sure I do not. They fell; and now
my long threatened revenge is accomplished. -- In due time I rushed into the
room, threw open the curtains, -- there, looked in her lover's arms, lay the
sleeping Harriot. -- I affected to scream, and sunk, as if fainting, into a
chair, -- Nurse hobbled to my assistance; -- Ossory started from the bed; saw
me, and clasping his hands, exclaimed, wretch, -- dishonorable villain that I
am, what have I done? -- O Harriot, my love. I have ruined thee! -- he threw
himself with violence on the floor. Harriot awoke with the noise, -- she looked
wildly round, she had, I suppose, heard some part of Ossory's exclamation. --
She beheld me in a rage, and him stretched at his length on the ground; -- all
the horror of her situation rushed to her view; she lay half raised on her
elbow, one arm extended, -- distraction in her countenance, she seemed
converted into a statue, the statue of despair. I declare there was something
so terrifying in her aspect, that she absolutely made me shudder; -- for some
moments I was as little able to speak as the two delinquents; however, I soon
got the better of my terror, (I believe I might call it my remorse.) It Is well
my lord, cried I, at length you appear in your true colors, -- now am I able
to account for your indifference to me, -- long have I patiently borne it; --
long too have I suspected this intrigue.

And you vile, and detestable Harriot, -- what shall I say to you? thou
despicable prude, who strove to conceal the libertine under the mask of virtue.
Do you not shudder at the presence of an injured wife? but you are hardened in
iniquity; not a blush overspreads your cheek though thus shamefully detected,
odious strumpet.

At this word Ossory started from the ground; -- Strumpet! it is false, -- cried
he, -- fire flashing from his eyes, -- still, in comparison of thee, or almost
any other of her sex, she is an angel. -- Yes, one of the fallen angels, said
I, disdainfully; but you, Sir, are sunk even below my contempt. It Is to you I
speak, turning to Harriot -- ungrateful wretch, tho^ violater of the laws of
hospitality; say, dare you deny it, are you not a strumpet?

She was still in the posture before described; but on my thus addressing her,
she with a mild and humble air bowed her head, as much as to say, alas! I plead
guilty to the charge: Then casting a glance at Ossory, she uttered a faint
scream, and sunk insensible on the bed. He advanced to support her, but stopped
short, and folding his arms, gazed for some moments in silence on her pale
face, while deep sighs heaved his bosom. -- At last, you madam, said he, feel
an ill natured pleasure, while you contemplate our distress; you have the
inhumanity to triumph in that angel's fall; because, till this fatal night, she
was in virtue, in merit, so much your superior. O! Harriot, continued he, in an
accent that spoke the anguish of his soul, how could thy Ossory forget the
respect he owed thee? How I abhor myself! Villain that I was, to take advantage
of thy weakness; -- ah! shall I dare to talk of thee in a style so debasing, --
of thee, whose every thought was pure and spotless as thy form: There, my Lord,
cried I, that will do; I have long enough listened to your wonderously
affecting complaints: Now it is time to proceed to business; -- others have,
like me, been imposed upon, by the specious appearance of that vile hypocrite;
her intended husband in particular, -- be it my task to undeceive them, -- her
reputation shall not outlive her virtue, -- this night was doomed to put a
period to both; -- yes, I will have witnesses of the injury you have done me;
her father, her lover, the whole world shall be acquainted with my wrongs, and
her shame. So saying, I ran to the bell, but he seized hold of me, are I could
reach it: Go then, said I to nurse, summon the servants -- call Mr. Melvill.
Stir at your peril, cried Ossory, in a voice that made the beldam tremble: I
swear, added he, that if either of you dare to attempt exposing the misfortune
of that dying angel, both your worthless lives shall be sacrificed to my
revenge: so saying, he went and locked the door, and put the key in his pocket.

My courage began to fail me, terrified at the fierce wildness of his air. The
man was certainly out of his senses. I condescended to sooth him; he paid not
the slightest attention to what I said: Nurse was all this time busy in
administering medicines to restore her lady; but with as little success as I
found in attempting to quiet my Lord's violent emotions: At last, however, his
spirits were quite exhausted; he turned to Harriot with a mournful air, gazed a
few moments in silence, then exclaimed, -- yes, she is gone forever, and to me
she owes her death: The last words were hardly articulate: he clasped his
hands, and uttering a deep groan, down he fell, like a tragedy hero, by the
side of his dulcinea.

I now began to be alarmed at Harriot's long insensibility, and feared that La
Fare's drug was not of so innocent a nature as we had imagined, for death was
painted on her pale countenance. I sent for him; he assured me, there was
nothing dangerous in the draught; he had made physic one branch of his study. I
left him therefore to take care of the two insensibles while I went in quest of
Melvill; impatient to expose the frailty of his idol. I knew the generally
spent an hour in his closet ere he went to rest; it was now about the time of
his retiring thither, for he is as regular as a clock. -- I rushed in upon him,
where, after venting my well acted rage, I told him the particulars of my late
mortifying discovery. Hark! Bab, -- what is the matter now? Such a noise and
bustle! -- I must see. -- Farewell. --

Yours, I. O.

LETTER IX. From the SAME to the SAME.
POOR La Fare! -- these Frenchmen are so impetuous: Ossory and him have had a
tilting bout* they are both wounded, but neither dangerously, as Melvill came
in time to part them: Such confusion reigns amongst the whole set, that I can
get no satisfactory account of the quarrel. La Fare, as the nurse says, spoke
of Harriot's conduct as it seemed to deserve; my Lord took fire, called him a
villain, said it was time to wipe off the stain he had cast upon his honor;
your intrigues, your vile ingratitude, is no secret to me; but my mind, till
now, was too much engrossed by worthier objects, to find leisure to inflict on
you the punishment you merit. Much more was said, as you may suppose, but
nurse's memory reached no farther: She screamed with all her force; Harriot too
recovered her senses, and frantic with terror, sprung from the bed, and threw
herself between the combatants. At that moment Melvill fortunately made his
appearance, the scene changed, deadly weapons were cast aside, the bleeding
Ossory supported the fainting Harriot. Melvill, endesespoir, kneeled at her
feet: La Fare was carried to his own apartment by my orders; no one else
troubled their head about the poor Frenchman. After a proper bustle, my Lord
was also carried off the stage, insensible with loss of blood. Harriot is
replaced in her bed, which, it is believed, she will never quit more; death
seems to have marked her for his own, in defiance of all his rivals; the
expected nuptial bed, will now be exchanged for the silent tomb. Poor girl,
even from me, her, till now, implacable enemy, she extorts the pitying tear; my
enmity reaches not beyond the grave, to which she is hastening. Bab, I am
vapoured to the last degree, -- there is no bearing this horrid house, nothing
but sighs and groans are to be heard; -- I Will to dear London for consolation,
-- the invalids have a whole college of physicians to attend them; -- why then
should I stay, to die of the spleen? --

Melvill took upon him to break the affair to my uncle, -- I don't believe he
told him one syllable of truth, for he has so much of the Roman in him, that,
had he entrusted him with the secret of his daughter's fall, nothing I am
convinced, could have screened her from his fury. I don't know how it is, but I
cannot find in my heart to undeceive him; -- no, here I stop, sufficient has
been my revenge, -- if she dies, her disasterous adventure shall, for me,
remain a secret. -- If on the contrary (but there is little probability of
that) she should recover, then indeed, I will not answer for myself, for no two
characters can be more opposite, than that of your friend when low, and your
friend when high spirited.

I had almost forgot to tell you, that nurse vanished in the midst of the
bustle, and has never since been heard of* mounted on a broom-stick, she took
her flight through the air; -- the truth is, at least it does not admit a doubt
with me, that Melvill has got her removed to a proper distance, least she
should blab. Well, absolutely he is a worthy fellow; but how does he propose to
stop my tongue? -- there is one method by which he might effectually make me
his friend. -- Ah! a letter, -- from I'Abbe -- how has he found me out? -- who
has undeceived him in regard to my death? -- the epistle you wrote for me to
his sister, has not then produced the desired effect. I dread to open the
provoking scrawl; -- that wretch was born to be my torment. -- Adieu, let us see
what he has to say for himself.

LETTER X. Mr. MELVILL to Miss RIVERS.
I WILL not wound Miss Rivers's gentle heart, by attempting to describe my
sufferings on a late -- let the unfortunate adventure be buried in everlasting
oblivion; -- in spite of one moment, one fatal moment of -- how shall I
sufficiently guard my expressions? -- not for worlds would I add to your
distress; -- no, I wish to sooth your grief; -- still you appear superior to
the rest of your sex, many have fallen, but who ever, with such bitter anguish
as yours, lamented their fall; -- your virtue, for an instant only, was off its
guard; -- your senses erred, but your heart is not corrupted. Never did I
behold an object, at once so affecting, and so respectable as you are at this
moment, languishing on a bed of sickness, patiently without murmering, waiting
for the stroke of death, unable to survive the loss of your honor. Ah! must I
then lose thee my Harriot, my wished for bride! -- Oh! dwell not on the dark
side of the prospect, loath not a world which has still a thousand joys in
store for you, a world, in which you may still make a distinguished and
estimable figure. The arms of your Melvill are still open to receive and guard
you as their most precious treasure; -- few were witness to your late disaster,
some of these I have effectually bribed to secrecy, the character of the rest,
will render their malice impotent. Your becoming my wife, will silence the
tongue of censure; I will not enlarge on a subject that must wound your
delicacy. I shall only repeat, be mine, and every ill consequence will be
prevented; -- my friendship, as much as my love, urges me to solicit your hand;
-- never man was actuated by a more disinterested passion; -- your father
expects our union to take place; -- let us save him from the anguish of knowing
your misfortune. I shudder at the thoughts of such a discovery. O! then my
Hariot, let me shelter you from the impending storm -- Mr. Rivers sends for me.
Adieu my dear suffering angel.

MELVILL.

LETTER XI. Miss RIVERS to Mr. MELVILL!
WHAT a proposal! -- No, Mr. Melvill, vice has not yet so totally depraved my
heart, as to render me capable of so mean, so selfish a conduct. Your
compassion for a poor, ruined, miserable wretch has transported you beyond the
bounds of reason; -- your generosity excites my wonder more than my admiration;
when carried to such excess, it degenerates into weakness. -- Do you consider
to whom it is that you seek to be connected? -- it is not simply to a woman, who
has forfeited her virtue, but to one whose crime is of the deepest dye, --
adultery. -- Oh, heavens! hardly yet can I credit my senses; -- what demon
possessed me? -- it was madness. -- But stop, Harriot, attempt not to palliate
thy guilt, -- I am lost, undone, the darkness of the grave can alone hide my
shame: leave me then Mr. Melvill, leave me to the fate I merit, -- the world
and I can never more be reconciled. Ah! talk not to me of its joys, I was not
born to taste them, let me then die in peace. If you could form an idea of what
I suffer, but I wish not that you should, 'twould be too much for a heart so
tenderly susceptible as yours. Continue my friend, guard my unfortunate parent
from the knowledge of my dishonor, if it be possible; -- but alas! can I hope
it, when my reputation is in the power of Lady Ossory? -- now I have fatally
justified her enmity; now may she justly hate the ruined Harriot. -- Few, like
the generous Melvill, will pity me; but I deserve their scorn, they cannot
despise me more than I do myself. -- Patience! -- not long -- reviving thought!
-- not long have I to suffer -- my wearisome pilgrimage is almost finished. I
would ask, but my pen refuses to do its office; -- was he not wounded? -- Ah! I
think, I at this moment see his ghost beckoning me to follow. O! may our deaths
expiate! -- alas! and is he dead! -- I begin to wander -- my head is often
disordered. -- Pardon me, Mr. Melvill -- my gratitude to you shall be as
lasting as my life.

HARRIOT RIVERS.

LETTER XII. Miss RIVERS to Miss ELIZA DUDLEY.
GENEROUS Eliza, surely Melvill and you were born to be united; -- none but
yourselves could be capable of such a noble flight of friendship: -- humanely
compassionate as I knew you to be, I yet durst not hope, my letter would have
met with so favorable a reception, N. (...). This letter does not appear.
-- you do not upbraid, you do not scorn me, but with gentle sympathy, weep
over my fall. -- Indeed, my amiable friend, (you permit me still to call you by
that endearing name) I am not the depraved wretch my conduct seems to speak me,
-- I abhor, I shudder at the very thought of the crime, which yet I have
committed. O! why slumbered my guardian angel, when I was fatally beset by the
powers of darkness! -- but I perhaps was too arrogant, placed too much
confidence in my virtue, therefore was permitted to fall as a punishment of my
pride: how effectual is that punishment! -- I am humbled even to the dust! the
whole black transaction appears still to my terrified imagination like a
frightful, dream, -- I cannot distinctly remember any thing that passed. Why do
I seek to recollect it? it drives me to madness; -- not much longer will my
heart be able to struggle with such a weight of woe; -- my end approaches, I
feel a gradual decline. O! my Eliza, did you but see to what a shadow I am
reduced -- a walking ghost, how your dovelike eyes would stream, -- indeed I am
a pitiable object. -- But let me for a moment forget my sufferings, to indulge
a ray of pleasure, while I contemplate your goodness, your friendship: --
fallen, ruined as I am, the virtuous Eliza would open her hospitable doors to
receive me, offers to share with me that fortune which she so well me its, and
will so nobly employ; even Melvill's generous proposal must yield to this. --
Love rendered his friendship in some degree interested; but yours, my amiable
girl, has no alloy. What sweet pe^suasions do you make use of? How beautiful is
the description your lively imagination has formed of that rural retreat to
which you invite me? The plan of life you have laid down, is no less agreeable;
but ah! my friend, who is it that you wish to share with you those Sylvan
scenes? -- a poor dejected, broken hearted wretch, bending beneath a load of
misery, which only death can ease her of: what is still worse, a creature lost
to virtu^ and to fame: What! a companion for Eliza! No, my friend, since I
cannot partake of your innocence, of your deserved felicity, neither shall you
partake my infamy. My presence, my society, can alone, you kindly say, console
you for the loss of the best of mothers: -- What would not your Harriot do to
dissipate your grief; but, alas! she is now dead to all comfort herself, and
equally unable to administer it to others. Time, my love, will do that for you,
which is our of my power: there is even a degree of melancholy sweetness in a
grief, that, like yours, flows from a laudable source; but guilt gives a
double poignancy to mine, forbids its cure, and drives me to despair.

I must lay down my pen, ready to faint with the fatigue of writing. This is
the first day I have been able to quit my bed. I know nothing of what passes in
the family. I dare not ask questions, and my attendants are silent. Business of
consequence has obliged my father to go to town. I could not expect a visit
from Lady Ossory; I do not wish it. Melvill is too discreet to come alone; thus
am I (...) a prey to my own reflections: what torment can equal them! How
changed is your unfortunate friend: once she could take a pleasure in
self-examination. Satisfied with my conduct; conscious of my innocence, I
feared not to look into my heart: but now --

Adieu, my (...) us Eliza, -- I can no more. --

H. RIVERS.

LETTER XIII. Miss RIVERS to Mr. RIVERS.
HUMBLY on my knees, do I presume to address a father, whom I revere, and whom
yet I am compelled to disobey. -- O! Sir, pardon and pity your unfortunate
daughter! forget that you have a child; but oh! let not a parent's curse be
added, to overwhelm her with misery. I dare not reveal the cause of my flight;
I have bid an eternal adieu to the world, and all its delusive joys: my
separation from you, Sir, is the only thing I regret; but alas! I am no longer
worthy to appear in your presence. I am now hid in an obscure retreat; and
here, unknowing and unknown, will I spend my few remaining sorrowful days --
You, Sir, may regard me as already dead, for never more will you behold me. Do
not hate my memory; faulty as I have been, want of love, of reverence, and duty
to my parent, was not amongst the number of my crimes. From others you will, I
doubt not, hear that fatal story which I dare not reveal: ill nature may
exaggerate, but for your sake, Sir, I wish that they would speak of me as I am,
"nothing extenuate, nor set down aught in malice," -- then, if they take into
the account, the sincerity of my repentance, I would hope that compassion would
mix with your too just resentment. May that portion of happiness, which seemed
to await me, had I acted so as to merit it, be added to yours; and may the
years which grief has cut off from my life, be, with every blessing this world
can bestow, also added to those of my beloved father; for whom, while I have a
being. I shall offer up my most fervent prayers. A flood of tears has almost
blotted out what I have wrote. -- O Sir! it is impossible to describe the
anguish I feel, while I bid you a long, a last adieu. -- I have hardly strength
to subscribe myself,

your affectionate, unfortunate daughter, HARRIOT RIVERS.

LETTER XIV. Miss RIVERS to Miss ELIZA DUDLEY.
I Have just finished a letter to my father, and in consequence of it am almost
blind with weeping: grief is much more slower in its progress than I experted
-- How little did I think I should have so long survived the loss of my honor;
but I must not be impatient, heaven's will be done: -- I hope my punishment
will not extend beyond the grave; and surely it cannot now be many wearisome
days ere I reach that peaceful asylum; till I do I have chosen one less to my
taste. -- The absence of my father gave me an opportunity to execute my
project: long had my mind been bent on flight; not kingdoms should have bribed
me to face the world, after so fatal an adventure; -- neither could I have
appeared in the presence of my friends, how would my eyes have fallen under
their penetrating glances! -- no, I seek to hide my guilt and shame, in a
retreat as gloomy as my mind; -- here I may weep at leisure, and brood over my
sorrows, till death shall close the melancholy scene. Providence has put it in
my power to procure myself the necessaries of life; a wretch like me ought not
to expect or ask for more. You may remember my poor faithful Nancy Hargrave,
who had been my attendant from childhood: the worthy girl was a foundling
brought up by the parish: my mother -- O! with what tears of anguish do I
lament her loss I had I been blessed with her protection, -- but I must not
impiously murmur at my fate, that is adding to my sins. Let me resume my story;
-- My mother, I say, took the little Hargrave into her family, and gave her an
education suitable to her humble station: (...)her extreme attachment to me,
who was then the idol of both my parents, so gained their favor, that my
father, at the request of his lady, settled on her an annuity for life: -- she
accompanied me to the convent; I treated her more like a friend and companion
than a servant. -- She had for fourteen years received her annuity, and being
of a frugal turn, very little of it was expended, so that the sum she had
amassed was not inconsiderable; the interest alone amounted to about sixty
pounds a year. At her death (you my friend was witness to my grief on that
melancholy occasion) she left me her little fortune as a testimony of her
gratitude -- Ah! little did the good girl imagine, that I should ever be
reduced to the necessity of appropriating it to my own use; -- hitherto it has
been bestowed on more worthy objects; -- with regret I do rob the poor of what
I had dedicated to them; but who now, alas! is poorer than your unfortunate
Harriot? charity must now begin at home. -- Not long, I hope, shall I be
obliged to borrow from my indigent pensioners* ^t my death it will return to
them again. -- I did not (...) prudent to entrust any one with the secret of my
intended flight: nay, I must even from my generous Eliza, beg leave to conceal
the place of my retreat. -- Little did I think, when the sweet romantic
situation of my present cottage, and the neighboring village, struck me on a
late excursion, that I should, in this place, end my unfortunate life. -- I
arrived here early this morning; very short was the conversation which passed
between me and mine hostess; her husband was out at his labor: he is an honest
farmer, she an industrious, modest looking woman, who is too much employed
about her own affairs, to trouble her head with those of her neighbors. By
letter I had prepared them for my reception. -- This house is old, large and
irregular: -- my apartments are at a distance from those of the rest of the
family, so that I may enjoy as much of my now beloved solitude as I desire; a
rosy faced country-girl is my only attendant, who is very attentive and
obliging in her manner; she has just removed (untasted) a neat repast, which
wanted only an appetite to recommend it: -- ah! how should I eat, my heart dies
within me, when I look round, when I reflect -- O! Eliza, my dear Eliza, there
is no dissembling, I shall not attempt it; -- never more must I behold the
cheering countenances of my friends; an out cast from the world! In future
times, travelers who pass through this village may stop at my humble grave,
and in the language of Row, exclaim --

A hapless wretch, who was by love undone,
Found this sad place out,
To despair and die in.
Adieu, my amiable, sympathising Eliza, it will be an alloy to your happiness,
yet I cannot help being so selfish, ^s to wish, that you would not totally blot
from your memory the ruined, unhappy

HARRIOT RIVERS.

LETTER XV. The SAME to the SAME.
WHAT wonders have I to relate, my dear Eliza! the particulars would fill a
quire, but I will endeavor to be concise: -- Yesterday was Sunday; though the
doors of the great, the happy, and the virtuous, are shut against me, not so,
the courts of the Most High. -- To the footstool of his throne, the most
wretched, the most heavy laden with their sins and woes, may freely approach,
and what is still more, receive a gracious welcome: -- I went to church; so
truly edifying was the sermon, that neither my eyes or thoughts were tempted to
wander; my whole attention was fixed on the reverend, the apostolic preacher.
-- A storm of thunder, lightning and rain, just as divine service was over,
stopped us at the church door: the clergyman had a passage from the vestry to
his house; he passed me in going to the former, followed by a graceful looking
woman, plainly, but genteely dressed: -- she stopped when she came to me, and
with a voice, the sweetness of which penetrated my heart, politely invited me
to accompany her to a warmer shelter till the storm abated: I curtisied my
consent: -- she took a hold of my arm with a winning familiarity, and led me
into a near parlour, where the good pastor was already seated in his elbow
chair. -- This, said my conduct^ess, (who I took to be his wife) is the young
gentlewoman who I told you had so much disturbed my devotion: -- is there not
something exceedingly engaging in her countenance? -- I might, my dear Eliza,
have justly returned the compliment; for never did I behold one so invitingly
gracious, as that of the amiable speaker. I cannot describe the pleasing
emotions I felt, while I gazed upon her: -- the hopes of her friendship was a
balm to my wounded heart. She appeared to be about thirty-six; -- had the
remains of uncommon beauty, and an air and manner far superior to her seeming
humble station. Mr. Stephens asked me how long I had been in his neighborhood;
-- I regard my young parishioners, added he, as my children; if you continue
amongst us, said he, with a smile of benignity, you must permit me to rank you
in the number of my daughters. I could not restrain my tears; ah! Sir, cried I,
pressing his hand to my lips, it will be an act of generous charity, to take
under your protection a poor distres^ed orphan. -- I may say, long have I lost
my mother; my father indeed lives -- but alas! he is dead to me -- you, Sir,
must supply his place, for the short time that still remains of my wearisome
pilgrimage. Death! I shudder at the bear idea of your death! interupted my new
friend, -- I, my child, will be a mother to you. -- She stopped -- she looked
wistfully in my face -- it was all bathed in tears -- she clasped me in her
arms with a sort of frantic air, and raising her voice, exclaimed, tell me,
tell me! who you are! the likeness is so striking, the gentle accents, the
winning softness is so like my Harriot! ten years ago I saw her by stealth, but
durst not reveal myself even to her. She was afterward removed; nor by the
most diligent search, could I, since then, discover the place of her retreat. I
would hardly breathe, lest it should interrupt my attention to what she said.
How madam! cried I, ten years ago! -- Harriot, do you say? -- but ah! no, added
I, in a more dejected tone, -- it cannot be, the blessing of a mother is not
reserved for the unfortunate Harriot Rivers; -- mine is dead. Harriot Rivers!
repeated the lady, clasping her hands, -- then you are my child! The last word
faultered on her tongue, her eyes closed -- I caught her in my arms, and for
some moments we both remained insensible, locked in each others embrace. -- O!
Eliza! what a scene was this, and what a surprising discovery! -- But I must
lay down my pen -- a flood of joy rushes on my heart, and quite overpowers me:
-- my transports have been too violent for my weak and emaciated frame to
support, -- even this pleasing event (...) joined with its opposite grief to
shorten the life of

your affectionate H. RIVERS.

LETTER XVI. From the SAME to the SAME.
YES, Eliza, I have indeed a mother, a mother who has been less guilty, but not
less unfortunate than her daughter. In her sympathizing bosom. I have dared to
pour out my grief; I have told her all my fatal story. She bathed me with her
tears. -- Alas! even those pure, those precious drops, cannot wipe out the
stain of my dishonor; nor can her pardon, her soothing pity, or her kind
maternal care, save me from the grave, to that I now make quick advances. I am
almost reduced to a skeleton; my consumption is passed all cure; fresh air and
asses milk just keep me alive, and that is all. -- Well might my amiable mother
be in doubt, whether or not to claim me as her daughter; nature pleaded for me
in her breast, or I am so unlike the blooming, happy, innocent creature, I was
ten years ago, that none but a mother could have known me.

Eliza, you have almost reached the last page of my sad story; one scene more,
and you may close the book forever; till that arrives, the intermediate space
will be a mere blank: to fill that blank, give me leave to treat you with a
melancholy tale, in which my dear mother is the principal character.

She is of a noble family, but her fortune was small* nevertheless, her
personal attractions were so great, that even from a child, she was surrounded
with admirers. My grandfather had a country seat near Windsor: -- When my
mother was about fifteen, she, for the first time, made her public appearance
at a ball in that town; several of the Eaton scholars were there; amongst the
rest, Lord W -- 's second son, a handsome youth: he danced with her, was struck
with her beauty, and from that moment became her admirer. -- He was not
remarkable for interior accomplishments; but he flattered agreeably, and was
too gay and too assiduous, not to please a young unexperienced girl, who was
hardly out of her leading strings; -- they parted with mutual regret; -- it was
not long ere they met again. At length, in a most passionate epistle, he
declared his love; and having no hopes, that either of their parents would
consent to the match, proposed a jaunt to Scotland -- The lady liked him, but
her attachment was far from being so indiscreetly violent as his: she answered
not his letter; he wrote again: -- terrified at the tho'ts of a clandestine
correspondence, against which she had received so many cautions, she prudently
resolved to reveal the whole affair to her mother: -- She received the praises
so justly merited for a conduct so laudable. Her father instantly wrote to Lord
W --. The youth was sent on his travels; -- a new lover soon presented himself
to supply his place -- a lover every way unexceptionable. My mother was not
long ere she became sensible of the wide difference between Mr. Rivers and Mr.
W --: She now found that she had never loved the latter, and that the former
was the only man who ever had, or ever could make an impression on her heart.
In short, with the consent and approbation of all parties, they were married,
and for more than three years, nothing could equal their felicity. My father
perfectly doated on his charming wife, and she almost adored her husband. About
ten months after their union, your unfortunate Harriot first made her
appearance in this world of wretchedness. -- I became the idol of both, and the
more so, as for near three years after my birth, there was no prospect of an
^^rease to their family.

At this time M. W --, now Lord W --, by the death of his father and elder
brother, returned to England, to take possession of his new dignity: neither
time nor absence had weakened his attachment to my mother: he had indeed
forborne to write, not doubting but his letters would be intercepted: now,
however, he flattered himself, that every obstacle was removed. What then was
his cruel disappointment, when the first news he heard on his return, was her
marriage with Mr. Rivers! He raved, stormed, and vowed revenge for her
inconstancy; nay, rash and impetuous by nature, he vowed she should still be
his, either by stratagem or force! The first step he took was to cause a report
to be spread, in order to excite my father's jealousy, tha^ my mother had been
compelled by the arbitrary will of her parents, to give her hand to one man,
while another had possession of her heart; he was named as the latter: --
Ambiguous and censorious hints were dropped in regard to their private meetings.

To corroborate these reports. Lord W --, uninvited, made his appearance at
Rivers' Park, where he behaved to my mother in a manner so daringly indiscreet,
that my father, without much ceremony, forbad him the house: he thought sit to
put up with this affront, the better to facilitate his horrid purpose.

My unsuspecting mother rejoiced that they had so easily got rid of a man,
whose unexpected visit had caused her much uneasiness. From that time, however,
a fatal alteration was visible in my father's behavior; he became watchful and
suspicious: -- no longer did he return his lady's tender caresses; no longer
was he amused with her innocent cheerfulness. The most artless of women, was
now regarded as the most artful. But how was his jealousy increased, when
informed by one of his spies, that Lord W -- had taken up his abode at a farm
house in the neighborhood, and that he every night in disguise was seen,
either in the park or gardens.

This villain of a spy, as appears from the sequel, must have been a creature
of his lordship's, though my too credulous father believed him wholly devoted
to his interest: -- to be short, this deluded husband, one morning, rose early,
on pretense of going a hunting; he took leave of my mother, and said he should
not be back till evening; -- she, as soon as he was gone, again composed
herself to rest. But ah! my dear Eliza, to what misery did she awake! -- a
noise she heard at the door of her apartment made her start from her peaceful
slumber; it was bol^ed on the inside, a precaution she had never thought of,
but her enemies had done it for her, and strongly did that circumstance appear
to confirm her guilt. Those without, forced it open; -- she with trembling
emotion, drew back the curtains; -- by her bedside, she beheld the villainous
plotter, Lord W --, in his shirt, as if he had just sprung from it, and a few
paces from him, her husband, his sword drawn, and inexpressible fury in his
countenance. She uttered a piercing scream and fainted: her fit must have
continued a considerable time, for all was silent when she recovered, and none
present but two of her female attendants, almost distracted with despair and
grief. -- She arose, in spite of the remonstrances of her women, and hurrying
on a few of her clothes, ran wildly through the house, in quest of her
wretched, deluded husband. -- She found him in his closet, stretched at his
length on the floor. -- She sprung forward, and falling on her knees by his
side, exclaimed, O Rivers! my life, my husband, cast me not off, I am indeed,
indeed I am innocent. She ceased, and remained, with clasped hands, streaming
eyes, and dishevelled hair, a silent moving suppliant. He looked up, and with a
fierce air and determined accent, said, Leave me; were an angel to descend from
heaven, as a voucher for your innocence, I would not believe: -- go, let me
never see you more; fly and hide your shame, my dishonor nothing can hide. He
resumed his posture, she threw herself upon him, in speechless agony; -- he
spurned her from him, started up, and hastily left the room.

For some time she lay almost deprived of sense and motion; -- at length, a
burst of tears came to her relief: still, however, she continued on the ground,
and that for several hours; at last the door opened* a maid entered with the
rest of her clothes; those she placed on a chair, and retired without speaking.
-- O! then, cried this unfortunate wife, he has indeed abandoned me! A spark of
resentment was kindled in her gentle breast, at such unmerited cruelty. --
This, and conscious innocence, supported her spirits: She dressed herself; --
the task was hardly finished, when my father, with redoubled rage in his
countenance, again entered the room; tossed a letter to her. -- there, madam,
said he, judge if I can about. Go; I will not give you the satisfaction of
being divorced from the man you hate; but I do not hinder you to join your
infamous paramour: -- Go, since you prefer the shelter of his arms, to those of
a husband who adored you: go, lead a life of infamy, since it is your choice.
-- O! Harriot, added he, striking his breast, while his voice was hardly
articulate, -- how have I deserved such treatment? Why did you deceive me? or
rather, why, ah! why am I not still deceived? You appeared to be the gentlest,
kindest, loveliest of your sex; a pattern of every female virtue. He pulled out
his handkerchief: She kneeled and clasped his knees; -- Rivers, my adored
husband, listen to your injured wife; let me clear my innocence; still we may
be happy. -- Never, never, exclaimed he, disengaging himself; it is the last
struggle of my ill placed love, and now it is passed: -- I tear you from my
heart: -- Go, take your clothes, your jewels; -- fly, least rage should get the
better of my reason; -- fly, and never let me see you more; -- read that, --
pointing to the letter, -- and then judge, if there is a possibility of my
forgiving you.

He left her. She dried her eyes, raised them to heaven, put up a short, but
fervent prayer; -- it was instantly answered; -- a composed sadness succeeded
the transports of grief, which had lately torn her gentle bosom, and she felt a
degree of fortitude that seemed supernatural. She took up the paper, the
contents of which were as follows: --

Lord W -- to Mrs. RIVERS.
NOTHING but a wound, which by loss of blood deprived me of my senses, should
have prevented my staying to protect the idol of my heart from the fury of a
jealous husband: -- I am not, however, sorry that he surprised us. -- You were
mine, my Harriot, by the most solemn vows, ere that cruel spoiler came, and in
my absence stole my treasure. -- Still you shall be min^, and that by the most
honorable ties. -- A divorce will now, I make no doubt, take place. Much have I
to say on this interesting subject, but they will not let me write; -- yet be
not alarmed, my angel, my wound is far from dangerous; -- being absent from all
my soul holds dear, gives me more pain than any he sword of my rival could
inflict. I who have of late, each day feasted my ravished eyes with your
charms; -- oh! for a return of our delightful in^erviews; -- our impassioned
tete-a-tetes. I am faint, and compelled to lay down my pen. -- Adieu, my only
love. W --.


Was there ever, Eliza, so artful a villain? -- well might my father be
deceived. My afflicted, injured mother, saw by this scrawl, that her ruin was
irretrievable, therefore, with calm, and pious resignation, submitted to her
fate; -- all that she now wished for, ere she bid a last adieu to her late
peaceful mansion, was to see her child. While she was writing a few lines to
request this favor, a servant entered, he bowed, and for some moments his voice
refused to do its office, so much was the honest fellow affected at the
disgrace of his lady; -- at last, -- a chaise waits, madam, -- and there, --
presenting it, is a billet from my master: -- again he bowed* and retired. --
The note was as follows:

Mr. RIVERS to Mrs. RIVERS.
MADAM, a carriage waits for you at the gate, to convey you where you think
proper. In the seat is your casket, which contains your jewels, and some bank
notes for your present necessities. I shall settle with your unfortunate
father, in regard to your separate maintenance; your clothes are also sent with
you: -- farewell! -- O Harriot! I did not deserve such treatment! -- perhaps you
will one day be sorry for the injuries you have done to the wretched

RIVERS.


She read and wept, -- wept more for her deluded husband, than for herself. She
took leave of me, and her tears flowed with redoubled violence; -- then hurried
into her chaise -- looked back, as Eve did when driven from Paradise, --
uttered a deep sigh, -- reclined her languid head on her hand, and proceeded to
London: there she sold her jewels; most of them were her own before her fatal
marriage, being left her by an aunt. -- She found herself, after she had
disposed of these, including her bank notes, mistress of about five thousand
pounds: this she placed in the funds, resolved to stint herself to the interest
of it, and on no account to receive any thing further from her husband; -- nay,
her determination was, never more to see any of her relations or friends, but
to bury herself in some obscure retreat. This melancholy plan she accordingly,
as soon as she had settled her little affairs, put in execution. Chance
directed the mourning fugitive to this village.

The worthy Mr. Stephens, whose wife was then alive, received her as a boarder;
with him she has continued ever since, except a few weeks which she spent in
France: having discovered that I was sent there with my faithful Hargrave,
maternal affection led her to my convent. -- Ah! why did she not then discover
herself to me? -- Nancy, it seems, was in the secret, but by this too prudent
mother, sworn to keep it. She had the satisfaction to see me well, and happily
ignorant of her dishonor -- having indeed been made to believe, that death had,
while I was an infant, robbed me of this valuable parent. -- She settled a
correspondence with my worthy companion, which was regularly continued till the
good girl's death; -- then she returned to her peaceful asylum.

The exemplary piety and cheerful conversation of her (...), has been of
infinite advantage to her: -- he is quite a primitive christian, both in his
faith and practice. -- She treads in his steps. -- Religion is the business of
his life; -- from that poor source, she derives all her peace and joy; -- her
heavenly Lord has amply rewarded her for the loss of her earthly husband, --
has abundantly supplied to her the loss of father, mother, and of friends: --
his grace even endues her with such fortitude, that without murmuring, she
beholds me, her late found, her darling child, withering in my prime, and
visibly hastening to my tomb. -- Ah! Ossory, how justly am I punished for my
criminal attachment to thee! thou most amiable of men: -- but I check myself;
-- I must not indulge the fatal remembrance.

Adieu! Eliza, the pious family are assembled; I go to join their evening
devotions, -- before the throne of grace, I will ease my heart, by freely
pouring out its grief.

Yours affectionately, HARRIOT RIVERS.

LETTER XVII. Lord OSSORY to Mr. MELVILL.
I Commend your friendly attention to the unfortunate Rivers: But must he alone
engross your care? Does not the still more unfortunate Ossory, also claim a
share of your generous compassion? Oh! how weak are the feelings even of a
father, compared to those of a passionate lover! The wound his honor has
received, affects him more than the loss of his daughter, -- more than the loss
of my angelic Harriot; while I mourn only for her; -- and how poignant does it
render my grief, when I reflect that to me she owes her ruin. -- to me, who had
vowed to be her protector and friend. Melvill! my worthy Melvill! where can she
have concealed herself? The dear, suffering, lovely wande^er! All that I have,
would I give to discover the place of her retreat. I would not for worlds --
for her sake, whom I value more than a thousand worlds, I would not repeat the
crime that has undone her, and forever destroyed my peace: but I wish to find
her, that with the soothing voice of friendship, I might calm her grief -- that
I might shelter her from the storms of adversity. Alas! of what use is my
fortune, since I am denied the privilege of relieving her want? Poor and
friendless! how much may she at this moment stand in need of assistance? Why is
not that delightful task reserved for her Ossory? Dear Melvill, forgive me; --
you have reason to be tired of my letters, -- always filled with complaints, --
always engrossed by this one sad subject; -- yet to you, it is almost equally
interesting as to myself.

But let me answer the questions in your last: -- first, in regard to my
torment, -- my wife, must I call her! She has for this week past been shut up
in her apartment, having first given strict orders to be denied to all company:
-- Her women, I am told, are busily employed in packing up her clothes; she in
writing. I foresee an elopement: if she knew how much I wish to get rid of her,
she need not take such precaution to conceal her design. She means, I suppose,
to follow her worthless paramour, who, the very night you took leave of us,
privately left the house, though not out of danger from his wounds. With what
ingratitude did that villain repay the benefits I had loaded him with! and what
a dupe have I been to his pretended friendship!

I am particularly indebted to you, for so cautiously concealing from Mr.
Rivers, the unfortunate share I had in his daughter's -- ruin, must I call it.
But for her own affecting letter to him, her flight might have appeared only a
step taken in order to avoid a hated marriage; but in it the noble hearted
sufferer hints at her dishonor; it is however, one great point to keep her
father from a more particular knowledge of her fatal story. -- Did he know the
man! -- ah! why am I that man! -- his wounded honor would prompt him to seek
revenge: my life is at his service: -- There is little merit in being willing
to part with what is become a burden; but though I would cheerfully resign it,
the consequence might be fatal to him; and I would sooner lose a thousand lives
than draw my sword against the father of my ill fated love. -- Much therefore,
I again repeat, am I indebted to your prudent conduct, to your watchful care,
which has saved me from so distressing a dilemma. You say, that he is now eager
to put his favorite scheme in execution, -- I mean his retreat from the world:
-- misanthrophy grows upon him -- one cannot wonder at it. -- I, who am so much
younger, and naturally sanguine, already see life in its true colors, and
consequently am sick of it: like him, I bid adieu to its empty delusions. But
there is one tree of happiness planted in this wilderness -- fortunate are they
who pluck and ^at, -- that tree is friendship; it bears the noblest fruit -- of
a nature so refreshing, that it alone can support the weary languid traveller
through the fatiguing journey of life. -- You, dear Melvill, are now the only
consolation, the only support that is left your affectionate

OSSORY.
P. S. My too youthful father-in-law has, I find, taken a strange step. In his
last trip to Paris, at a masquerade, he met his libertine wife: -- He was
struck with her figure, -- he had unmasked; but she carefully concealed herself
from his knowledge, till she had by her wit completed that conquest, which her
fine form had begun. -- He was caught; she suffered him to accompany her to her
hotel; there she so effectually, by her artful blandishments, wrought on his
easy nature, that they are reconciled, and appear together in public, all
harmony and love. I don't, however, imagine, from the character of the lady,
that this harmony will be of any long continuance. I suppose her financies were
low, and that necessity urged her to solicit this reunion.

Adieu! OSSORY.



LETTER XVIII. The SAME to the SAME.
A MOST surprising event has happened, my dear Melvill, -- an event, which at
first threw me into a transport of joy, -- but already does that begin to
subside. I dare not indulge the delightful hope, that I shall be freed from my
unfortunate engagement: -- and if I were, of what advantage would it be, since
the amiable Harriot, for whose sake alone I wish to be restored to liberty, --
since she, that idol of my heart, is lost? O! that she were now here, -- but
let me explain this mystery.

Yesterday morning I was sitting in my library, which has, you know, a view of
the road; -- I was reading, -- often have I recourse to books, -- but alas! how
vain are precepts of philosophy? how ineffectual to sooth a grief like mine? --
Seneca was in my hand, -- but an unhappy passion wholly engrossed both my head
and heart; my eyes were fixed on the road, -- I, in imagination, traced my
Harriot in her flight, -- every carriage that passed, seemed to be conveying
that dear suffering angel from my sight.

In this manner was I indulging my woe, when a chaise, which drove at a furious
rate, attracted my notice: there was nothing in this, which could reasonably
excite in me the least emotion; -- and yet I found myself uncommonly agitated:
it drew nearer, and at last entered my courtyard. -- I started up. -- O!
heaven, exclaimed I -- can it be her? Not a moment was I suffered to enjoy this
improbable hope. -- A young man, of genteel appearance, sprung from the
carriage: -- the arrival of this stranger excited some curiosity, -- I hurried
to meet him; -- he was at that instant enquiring of the servants, in broken
English, for Lady Ossory. -- They answered, agreeable to her orders, that she
was not at home. -- I addressed him in French; -- there was something in his
countenance, that, in spite of the disgust La Fare's treachery had excited in
me, for his countrymen, prejudiced me in his favor -- He returned my civilities
with great politeness. -- I led him into a parlour, for he seemed excessively
fatigued: -- When we were seated, to my infinite surprise, he said to me, You
see before you, my Lord, one of the most unfortunate of men, -- a man, injured
by you in the most tender point. By me! -- Yes, Sir* but that injury was
unintentional: we have both been the dupes of an artful woman; a woman, whom
though I have reason to hate and despise, my ungovernable heart still fondly
doats on. In me, my Lord, behold the dishonored, the wretched husband of her,
who has, for some months past, assumed the title of Lady Ossory; a title to
which she can have no claim -- since, long before she saw you, she was mine by
the most sacred ties: but, preferring the splendour of your rank to my humble
station, she forgot her vows, -- deceived me with false hopes, till she
returned to England, -- then, still more fatally deceived me, by spreading the
report of her death. A friend of here is, wrote to my sister on this subject,
pretending that she did so, in compliance with her dying request. Confined to
my studies, and strictly watched by an arbitrary father, I had no opportunity
of detecting this falsehood. I was inconsolable for the supposed loss of a wife
whom I adored: -- so violent was my grief, that my life was despaired of. -- I
was ordered to the Spa: there I, a few weeks ago, became acquainted with an
English gentleman, who was also an acquaintance of your Lordship's; -- you may
guess the rest. The sudden death of my father obliged me to defer my journey
here for some time. I am now independent; can incontestibly prove my marriage,
and have therefore a right to claim my wife: of you, my Lord, I claim her. I am
well informed she is in this house, though your servants have denied her: --
but from you, Sir, I expect justice.

I am only sorry, returned I, that this wife is so little worthy of your
affections: -- but believe me, Sir, I have (...) to with hold her from you; on
the contrary, I am ready (...) conduct you to her apartment: I imagine (...) is
there, though I have not seen her for some days. The character I have heard of
your Lordship, said he, convinces me, that I may firmly rely on your honor: go
then, Sir, do me the favor to lead me to that fallen angel, whom, infatuated
with her charms, I am compelled to worship.

I leave you, Melvill, to judge my transports on this occasion, for I will not
swell my narrative with reflections or comments: he followed me; but neither in
her own apartment, nor in any other apartment in the house, was the fallen
angel to be found. My gentleman began to suspect me of a design to rob him of
his right; and in consequence of that thought, assumed an air, which in any
other person, or on any other occasion, I might have been tempted to resent;
but I felt so much compassion for the poor enamoured, injured youth, that it
left no room for any other sentiment. I condescended to expostulate, and
dropped some hints of the treatment I had received from the woman he so eagerly
sought; -- hints, that one would have thought, might have damped his ardor; or
at least were sufficient to have convinced him, that instead of wishing to
withold her, I should rejoice to quit all right and title to her. My
assurances, however, did not satisfy him: I therefore called up my servants,
every one of whom, in his presence, underwent a strict examination: they, one
and all, denied any knowledge of her flight. As length, however, intimidated at
my threats, or perhaps won by my promises of reward, one of her women
confessed, that the instant the stranger arrived, her lady, who had seen him
from her window, rang for her; -- that she found her almost fainting; but after
taking a few drops, she hastily cried, follow me, and bring that casket with
you. She then descended the back stairs, and hurrying through the park, reached
the neighboring village, -- when pulling out her purse, she gave it to her
attendant; charged her not to betray the trust reposed in her, nor on any terms
to confess, that she was witness to her flight; ordered her, as soon as she
conveniently could, without being suspected, to hire a chaise, and follow her
to town with her clothes; added, that she would hear of her at Lady Bab
Williams's: then procured a man and horse, mounted behind him, took the road to
London, and was soon out of sight. This intelligence was sufficient for the
impetuous Frenchman; he staid not to ask any more questions, only wrote Lady
Bab Williams, and the place of her residence in town, in his pocketbook, bowed
to me and sprang into his carriage, ordering the man to make all possible
expedition.

And now Melvill, what think you of this unexpected adventure? -- I dare not
freely indulge my joy: they were both under age -- no consent of parents; --
Sir Harry will spare neither pains nor expense to set aside this first
marriage, and to establish mine. -- Faint, very faint are my hopes of a
release. -- Her father acted most dishonorably in concealing from me her
elopement from the convent. The story is too long: -- I am interrupted.

Adieu, my dear Melvill; call at Williams's; I make no doubt, but she would fly
to her friend Bab for shelter. I am exceedingly anxious to know what will be
the issue of this affair.

Your account of Mr Rivers, gave a deep impression to my peace: -- you, I
suppose, are entrusted with the knowledge of his retreat. May that retreat
afford him the tranquillity, which he has in vain sought for in the world; --
Once more adieu.

OSSORY.

LETTER XIX. To Lord OSSORY.
OH! my Lord! what have I done! -- My wife -- my adored wife! my Isabella, lies
murdered by my side! -- murdered by me!

No, she is not yet dead, -- she grasps my hand -- she strives to speak: --
alas! my love, thy tuneful voice is stopped forever!

A thousand lives would I give even for a hope of her recovery! -- yet she has
highly injured me: -- had she been virtuous -- but she is an angel, even as she
is -- the most perfect form that Nature ever created!

I found her here, in the arms of my rival, the cursed La Fare. He is punished;
-- there he lies weltring in his blood: -- despair is painted on his ghastly
countenance.

Swift as lightning did I execute my vengeance! -- Ah! why spared I not my
Isabella? -- but I could not -- she threw herself between me, and the victim of
my fury. Besides, my injured honor called loudly for revenge, and drowned the
gentle whispers of compassion. It Is done, and I must answer for the deed. Yes,
the law shall take its course: no cowardly regard to my own safety, shall tear
me from my dying love: -- I will attend her to the grave -- embalm her with my
own tears: -- then let the stern officers of justice deprive me of a life,
which, without her, is hateful to me: -- O! never more shall one ray of hope or
peace visit my benighted heart! -- I have rashly hurried an impenitent, a
poluted soul into the regions of darkness, with all its sins upon its head! --
Ah! will they not also fall on mine? will not his blood call for vengeance on
me, his unpitying murderer? -- How his eyes stare!

Hark! it is the faint voice of my Isabella. --

She takes the pen from me: -- To you, my Lord, she is going to write; the
trembling arms are open to support her. Ah! it will not do, -- her eyes close!
Oh! despair and anguish! My life! my love! is gone for ever! --

LETTER XX. To Lord OSSORY.
NO, my Lord, a few moments are still (...) me; -- for your sake, more than the
wretched Isabella's, is this short respite vouchsafed me.

I shall say nothing of the injuries I have done you as a wife. -- I was not
your wife. -- There, deprived of sense and motion, lies my real husband, whom,
too late I love. -- So numerous are my fins, I ^o not with which of them to
begin my humiliating confession. -- The ruin I have brought on that dear
unfortunate youth hangs most heavy on my guilty soul. -- O! my Lord, pity him,
and save him from the ignominious death, with which he is threatened; -- he
will not fly: -- use then, a generous friendly violence, and if possible get
him conveyed to a place of safety; -- but my request will come too late.

It is with the utmost difficulty I am able to hold my pen.

A cordial has a little revived me, that I may clear the innocent, -- some
degree of strength is granted me.

Harriot, whose virtue and merit excited my hatred, is innocent. -- A fatal
draught was administre d; -- 'twas the contrivance of --

O! let me not stain the paper with his name, my trembling hand refuses to
write it: -- unhappy wretch! thou partner of my guilt and shame! -- how horrid
now is that disfigured face, on which, with guilty fondness, I have so often
gazed: -- not a moment was in mercy allowed to thee; -- from the criminal
embrace of my arms, those of death received thee: -- numerous were thy enemies;
-- severe has been thy punishment.

But I distractedly wander from my subject: -- In consequence of an
intoxicating draught she fell; -- by such accursed arts alon^ could I hope to
humble her haughty virtue, -- still she is virtuous: a momentary delirium
misled her senses; but so involuntary a crime could not pollute her mind.

It now only remains for me to inform you, where the innocent sufferer has
concealed herself. I had placed my spies to watch all her motions, -- by that
means I became acquainted with the place of her retreat. She is at a small
village near Durham, and boards at a clergyman's house, whose name is Stephens.

You are now, my Lord, at liberty to indulge that passion, against which you
have long honorably struggled. Your Harriot will now amply reward you for all
you have suffered from our ill concerted union, -- and death will soon release
you from the wretched

ISABELLA.

LETTER XXI. Lord OSSORY to Mr. MELVILL.
THE enclosed letters made me shudder! What a scene of horror do they disclose!

In compassion to the ill-fated Aubigny, I instantly set off for Barnet, that I
might, if possible, save him from the consequences of his rashness. -- I would
not wish to screen a criminal from justice: But the circumstances of this
melancholy affair, the provocation he had received, greatly extenuated his
guilt, and rendered him an object of pity. Alas! my pity came too late; ere I
arrived he had finished his part, the tragedy was at an end. I was led to the
apartment: the first object that struck me, was the body of La Fare; be his
crimes forgot, they ought not to outlive their punishment. I heard a deep sigh,
and passed on to the bed, -- there, in the last agonies of death, lay the
wretched Isabella, the fair cause of all this mischief: she was closely pressed
in the arms of her unfortunate husband, -- his eyes were closed, and he was
totally deprived of sense and motion; -- yet, so firmly did he clasp her, that
the nurse, who wanted to raise her a little, could not disengage her from him.
-- 'Twas no matter, she was too far gone, nothing could save her life. -- I
guessed by the expression of her countenance, that she knew me, but she could
not speak; -- all she could do, was to turn her languid eyes toward Aubigny;
-- a tear dropped on his pale face; -- she then raised them to me (now deprived
of all their luster) with a mournful supplicating look, as if to solicit my
assistance for him: a deep groan followed that moving glance, which pierced my
heart, and will never be effaced from my memory: -- that glance was her last,
-- a second groan released her struggling soul from its narrow prison; and her
once brilliant eyes were closed forever.

Our whole attention was now engrossed by Aubigny. -- With great difficulty we
unfastened his clasping hands, a surgeon bled him, a few drops only issued; but
his pulse ceased to beat, all remedies were fruitless; -- he no longer stood in
need of our assistance.

What we had mistaken for a swoon, was death: -- grief and despair had broke
his tender heart. -- I have seen them decently, though very privately interred;
-- one grave contains the ill-fated pair. -- La Fare, out of respect to the
memory of Aubigny. I ordered to be placed at the opposite side of the church:
-- in death, at least, his Isabella shall be all his own. -- Peace be to their
ashes -- She who in life, out-shone the fairest of the fair; -- she who so
late, triumphant in her charms, her rank and riches now lies low, her dust
mixes with beggars, and not a stone marks out her humble grave.

Favor is deceitful,
And beauty is vain:
A virtuous woman
Is a crown to her husband.
Adieu, my dear Melvill: the prospect of happiness, which now opens to my view,
would be too much for me to support, were it not for the melancholy scenes in
which I have been engaged. -- I could wish however, that my joy had received a
more moderate alloy. -- Tomorrow morning I shall proceed to London. -- The
rapturous subject nearest my heart, I defer till meeting: I shall then write to
Mr. Rivers; he will, I hope, accompany us to the retreat of my love. I am now
convinced that my Harriot and I were destined for each other. But ah! how fatal
were the events, by which our union was to be accomplished.

Why hangs this weight upon my heart? -- It Is true, I cannot yet call her mine,
-- but what now is there to prevent her being so? -- every obstacle is removed
-- O! I will not admit a doubt of my approaching felicity.

I am, my worthy friend, most sincerely yours, OSSORY.

LETTER XXII. Miss RIVERS to Miss ELIZA DUDLEY.
GRIEF was slow in its operations; -- joy was forced to come to its assistance,
and now indeed the blow is struck; -- the transport was too violent: to find
myself in a great measure cleared from a crime, which hung so heavy on my
heart; -- to be clasped in the arms of a reconciled father; to behold at my
feet the amiable man, who I have long so fondly loved; to be at last permitted
to indulge (...) without a crime; -- the joy was too exqu^si^e; -- human nature
could not support it, -- but I am satisfied. One moment of my life I have
tasted happiness without (...); and now I shall die in peace. Adieu, my true,
my worthy friend. Death only could dissolve that sweet sympathetic friendship,
which commenced almost from infancy, and has ever since increased. Adieu! -- a
long adieu! -- This is, I fear, the last assurance you will receive of your
Harriot's love. Will you not come and close my eyes, and shed a gentle tear
over the poor remains of your affectionate,

H. RIVERS.
Mr. Melvill is here. I have obtained his promise to write to you when I have
breathed my last. I would wish you to know how I acquitted myself in that
trying moment, when the divine grace can alone support us: that grace I most
fervently implore; already do I feel its efficacy; all within is at peace. --
Farewell.



LETTER XXIII. Mr. MELVILL to Miss DUDLEY.
Dear Madam,
IN compliance with the request of your angel friend, (every request of here is
was a law to her Melvill) I intended to have given you a minute account.

I cannot, -- my full heart swells to my eyes. -- I do not blush to own my
sensibility; -- I have wept -- I still weep -- a Stoic would have been softened
at the mournful scene, to which I was a sad witness -- Poor Ossory! -- that
relief is denied him: to fall from such a height of happiness! -- Need I tell
you that the lovely Harriot is no more? this I might tell you; but to describe
our grief, is not in the power of language! -- she alone was calm and piously
resigned. -- O! how beautiful did she look! -- her form seemed more than human,
-- while with placid sweetness she strove to console us, -- while she kissed
off a mother's tears, and besought a father's blessing; -- but when she turned
to the despairing Ossory, -- sighs stopped the passage of her soothing voice;
-- she grasped his hand, -- she raised her eyes to heaven; -- heaven only could
support her in so severe a trial.

Why do I attempt it? -- No human pen is equal to the task.

He was forcibly dragged from the lifeless body. The first transports of his
grief were terrible: -- this mornning I left him for a moment to the care of
his servant, while I went to feed my woe by paying a visit to the chamber of
mourning; -- there dressed in the pale habiliments of the dead, lay the now
literally angel Harriot,

Strewn with flowers;
Herself the fairest flower;
A drooping lily, withered in its prime.
I took my seat by her bed: I had not sat long, when in rushed my unfortunate
friend. The curtains on his side were closed; he threw them open, fixed his
eyes on the corpse, clasped his hands, and stood fixed in silent grief, the
statue of despair; -- not a tear flowed -- not a sigh heaved his bosom: at last
his color changed, his eyes closed, and he fell to the ground in a deep swoon.
We have restored him to some degree of life; he breathes, and that is all. I
beg leave to subscribe myself, with great esteem,

Your most obedient servant, ED. MELVILL.

LETTER XXIV. Mr. RIVERS to Mr. MELVILL.
HOW is your unhappy friend, my dear Melvill? Has the exercise of traveling
and change of scenes, in any measure produced the wished effect? Is he yet
recovered from that alarming stupefaction, in which I saw him depart -- when he
appeared a mere machine, moved at our pleasure? Continue, most valuable and
amiable young man, your generous care of him. There are few instances of a
friendship like yours, and yet in Mr. Melvill it seems nothing extraordinary.
So much as the whole te^or of his life prepared us for noble and disinterested
actions. Never woman could boast the conquest of two more exalted, more worthy
hearts, than my poor ill-fated Harriot. In this life we must not hope for
unmixed felicity. Had my lovely girl been spared, mine would have been perfect,
and I should have descended to my grave in peace: she alone is wanting to fill
up the measure of my happiness; but let me be thankful for the inestimable
blessings that are still left me, -- a wife, whom I have ever loved, at length
restored to me -- pure and unsullied; all my injurious suspicions removed; the
strongest, the most convincing testimonies of her innocence produced: that
villain Lord W --, on his deathbed, confessed to Mr. Stephens, who he
purposely sent for, the accursed arts he had used to excite my jealousy; he
expected a divorce would have followed, and that he should by that means become
master of that amiable wife, of whom my rash credulity had rendered me so
unworthy. This best of women condescends to be reconciled to me; she has not
uttered one single reproach; with pious charity she forgives my past cruelty:
she is now, if possible, more dear to my ^ond heart than when I first received
her to my arms, in all the blooming pride of youthful beauty. What a salutary
effect has her example, and the conversation of the worthy Stephens, produced
in me? Long have I studied philosophy, and from its specious precepts hoped for
peace. Vain hope! Fruitless remedy for the ills of life; "their force alone
religion can disarm."

Here then I fix, and here only can I find a firm anchor for my soul.

My wife, whose will shall now be a law to me, is fond of this retreat. I have
as little inclination as her to launch again into a tumultuous world: I have,
therefore, in compliance with her request, purchased a commodious, pleasantly
situated house, which is not a quarter of a mile from our present habitation.
We cannot prevail on Mr. Stephens to live with us: nothing, he says, could
bribe him to quit his humble cottage, wherein he has passed so many years of
contentment and tranquillity. He will, however, be frequently our welcome guest.
A more youthful one, but one no less worthy, is come to console, to wipe off
the ^ears of a disconsolate mother, and to supply to her the loss of a dear
lamented daughter; the person I mean is the amiable Miss Dudley, the friend and
confidant of my departed Harriot; she is independent mistress of a large
fortune; is naturally of a grave turn; her gentle heart is formed for
friendship, but seems averse to attachments of a more tender nature: the late
melancholy event has added to her pensive cast of mind.

She had let off to pay her Harriot a visit ere she received your letter: long
before would she have given that proof of her regard, but that her friend
refused till our arrival here, to reveal to her the place of her retreat. The
moment she was informed of it, she set off, and traveled post; greatly was she
fatigued; -- when I handed her from her chaise, she was obliged to support
herself on my arm; -- yet with all her friendly haste she came too late to
receive her Harriot's last adieu. She fainted on being told the fatal news; --
when recovered, she gave me her hand, -- Lead me to her Sir, -- bursting into a
flood of tears she exclaimed in broken accent, -- Yes, Harriot! my sister, my
friend, I will close thine eyes. -- My child had just been placed in her
coffin; -- the serene smile of innocence rendered her lovely even in death. --
The moment we entered the room, Miss Dudley hastily quitted my arm, and rushed
forward; she wrung her hands in an agony of grief, while her streaming eyes
were fixed on her friend? -- at length, uttering a deep sigh, she threw her
arms round the coffin, and laid her cheek close to here is; -- sobs choked the
passage of her voice; at last, -- Not one tear only, my Harriot, raising her
head, -- O, no! my eyes shall never cease to flow! -- in retirement will I bury
myself, till thy grave receives me. You will not deny your Eliza a place by
your side? -- there will I join thee, my sweet companion, -- my friend, -- how
benign is the air of that pale face! -- so have I seen thee look, when
listening to a tale of woe; -- the tears with which I have bedewed thee, seem
thine own. -- Such were the gentle drops that pity has often caused to flow; --
but where is that dimpled smile of innocent vivacity, with which you used to
enliven our little parties? -- Alas! long, long has mirth been a stranger to my
Harriot's breast, -- and now it is for ever banished from that of thy friend.
Thy voice is stopped, my love; but I know what would have been thy last
request, Comfort my mother, -- supply my place. Yes, Harriot, that late-found
amiable mother shall be mine; -- we will mix our tears, and talk of thee for
ever. And now farewell, farewell my angel friend, -- daily will I visit thy
grave. -- not a weed shall be suffered to grow near thee; thou withered rose,
untimely cropped by the rude hand of death. One kiss more. While she spoke, my
disconsolate wife entered the room; there is a solemn dignity in her grief,
that is not to be dissembled. -- Eliza rushed into her arms, and sobbing,
exclaimed, -- O Madam, let me, let me be your child; I am an orphan, -- receive
to your protection the friend of your Harriot.

Such scenes as these lose by the recital; to feel their force you should have
been present; but I cannot wish you had at this; it was too affecting.

Let us, my dear Melvill, fly to the sacred volume of inspiration for
consolation, -- there we shall find that sovereign balm which

Can clear the cloudy front of wrinkled care,
And dry the tearful sluices of despair.
It is not just we should be without sense and feeling of grief, in the
afflictions and sad accidents that befall us, as if we were angels that have no
sense of nature; neither is it just that we should be quite dejected, like
heathens that have no sense of grace; -- but it is just that we should be
afflicted and comforted like christians. -- Pascall's Thoughts.

Adieu, my dear Melvill, success attend your friendly expedition. Believe me
with the most perfect esteem,

Yours, etc. CHARLES RIVERS.

FINIS.

