President STILES'S ELECTION SERMON. MDCCLXXXIII.

The UNITED STATES elevated to Glory and Honor. A SERMON, Preached before His
EXCELLENCY JONATHAN TRUMBULL, ESQUIRE L.L.D. Governor and Commander in Chief, And
the HONORABLE The GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF The State of CONNECTICUT, Convened at
Hartford, At the Anniversary ELECTION, May 8th, 1783.

By EZRA STYLES, D. D. PRESIDENT OF YALE-COLLEGE.

NEW HAVEN: Printed by THOMAS and SAMUEL GREEN. M,DCC,LXXXIII.

At a GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the Governor and Company of the State of CONNECTICUT,
holden at Hartford on the second Thursday of May, Anno Dom. 1783.
ORDERED, That ROGER SHERMAN, Esquire and Captain HENRY DAGGETT, return the Thanks
of this Assembly, to the Reverend Doctor EZRA STYLES, for his Sermon delivered
before the Assembly, on the 8th instant; and desire a copy thereof, that it may
be printed.

A true copy of Record, Examined by GEORGE WYLLYS, Sec'ry.

AN ELECTION SERMON.
DEUTERONOMY. xxvi. 19. And to make thee high above all nations, which he has made in
praise, and in name, and in honor; and that thou may be an holy people unto
the Lord thy God.
TAUGHT by the omniscient Deity, Moses foresaw and predicted the capital events
relative to Israel, through the successive changes of depression and glory,
until their final elevation to the first dignity and eminence among the empires
of the world. These events have been so ordered as to become a display of
retribution and sovereignty; for while the good and evil, hitherto felt by this
people, have been dispensed in the way of exact national retribution, their
ultimate glory and honor will be of the divine sovereignty, with a not for your
sakes, do I this, says the Lord, be it known unto you -- but for mine holy
names sake.

However it may be doubted, whether political Communities are rewarded and
punished in this world only; and whether the prosperity and decline of other
Empires have corresponded with their moral state, as to virtue and vice: yet
the history of the hebrew theocracy shows, that the secular welfare of God's
ancient people depended upon their virtue, their religion, their observance of
that holy covenant, which Israel entered into with God, on the plains at the
foot of Nebo on the other side Jordan. Here Moses the man of God assembled
three million of people, the number of the united states, recapitulated and
gave them a second publication of the sacred jural institute, delivered
thirty-eight years before, with the most awful solemnity at mount Sinai. A Law
dictated with sovereign authority by the Most High to a people, a world, a
universe, becomes of invincible force and obligation without any reference to
the consent of the governed: -- it is obligatory for three reasons, viz. its
original justice and unerring equity, the omnipotent Authority by which it is
enforced, and the sanctions of rewards and punishments. But in the case of
Israel, he condescended to a mutual covenant; and by the hand of Moses lead his
people to avouch the Lord Jehovah to be their God, and in the most public and
explicit manner voluntarily to engage and covenant with God to keep and obey
his Law. Thereupon this great prophet, whom God had raised up for so solemn a
transaction, declared in the name of the Lord, that the Most High avouched,
acknowledged and took them for a peculiar people to himself; promising to be
their God and Protector, and upon their obedience, to make them prosperous and
happy. Deuteronomy. xxix. 10 and 14. C. xxx. 9 and 19. He foresaw indeed their
rejection of God, and predicted the judicial chastisement of apostasy; a
chastisement involving the righteous with the wicked. But as well to comfort
and support the righteous in every age and under every calamity, as to make his
power known among all nations, God determined that a remnant should be saved.
Whence Moses and the Prophets, by divine direction interspersed their writings
with promises, that, when the ends of God's moral government should be answered
in a series of national punishments, inflicted for a succession of ages, he
would by his irresistible power and sovereign grace, subdue the hearts of his
people to a free, willing, joyful obedience; turn their captivity; -- recover
and gather them from all the nations whither the Lord had scattered them in his
fierce anger -- bring them into the land which their fathers possessed -- and
multiply them above their fathers -- and rejoice over them for good, as he
rejoiced over their fathers. Deuteronomy. xxx. 3. Then the words of Moses, hitherto
accomplished but in part, will be literally fulfilled; when this branch of the
posterity of Abraham shall be nationally collected, and become a very
distinguished and glorious people, under the great Messiah the Prince of Peace.
He will then make them high above all nations which he has made in praise, and
in name, and in honor, and they shall become a holy people unto the Lord their
God.

I shall enlarge no further upon the primary sense and literal accomplishment
of this and numerous other prophecies respecting both Jews and Gentiles, in the
latter day glory of the church. For I have assumed the text, only as
introductory to a discourse upon the political welfare of God's American
Israel; and as allusively prophetic of the future prosperity and splendour of
the United States. We may then consider

I. What reason we have to expect that, by the blessing of God, these States
may prosper and flourish into a great American Republic; and ascend into high
and distinguished honor among the nations of the earth. To make thee high above
all nations, which he has made in praise, and in name, and in honor.

II. That our system of dominion and CIVIL POLITY would be imperfect, without
the true RELIGION; or, that from the diffusion of virtue among the people of
any community, would arise their greatest secular happiness: which will
terminate in this conclusion, that Holiness ought to be the end of all civil
government. That thou may be an holy people unto the Lord thy God.

I. The first of these propositions will divide itself into two branches, and
lead us to show,

1. Wherein consists the true political welfare and prosperity, and what the
civil administration necessary for the elevation and advancement, of a people
to the highest secular glory.

2. The reasons rendering it probable that the United States will, by the
ordering of heaven, eventually become this people. But I shall combine these
together as I go along.

Dominion is founded in property; and resides where that is, whether in the
hands of the few or many. The Dominion founded in the feudal tenure of estate,
is suited to hold a conquered country in subjection, but is not adapted to the
circumstances of free citizens. Large territorial property vested in
individuals is pernicious to society. Civilians, in contemplating the
principles of government, have judged superior and inferior partition of
property necessary in order to preserve the subordination of society, and
establish a permanent system of dominion. This makes the public defense the
interest of a few landholders only.

A free tenure of lands, an equable distribution of property, enters into the
foundation of a happy State: so far I mean, as that the body of the people may
have it in their power, by industry, to become possessed of real freehold
fee-simple estate. For connected with this will be a general spirit and
principle of self-defence -- defense of our property, liberty, country. This
has been singularly verified in New England; where we have realized the capital
ideas of Harrington's Oceana.

But numerous population, as well as industry, is necessary toward giving
value to land, to judiciously partitioned territory. The public weal requires
the encouragement of both. A very inconsiderable value arose from the sparse
thin settlement of the American aboriginals; of whom there are not fifty
thousand souls on this side the Missisippi. The protestant Europeans have
generally bought the native right of soil, as far as they have settled, and
paid the value ten fold; and are daily increasing the value of the remaining
Indian territory a thousand fold: and in this manner we are a constant
increasing revenue to the Sachems and original Lords of the Soil. How much must
the value of lands, reserved to the natives of North and South-America, be
increased to remaining Indians, by the inhabitation of two or three hundred
millions of Europeans?

Heaven has provided this country, not indeed derelict, but only partially
settled, and consequently open, for the reception of a new enlargement of
Japhet. Europe was settled by Japhet; America is settling from Europe: and
perhaps this second enlargement bids fair to surpass the first: for we are to
consider all the european settlements of America collectively as springing
from, and transfused with the blood of Japhet. Already for ages has Europe
arrived to a plenary, if not declining population of 100 millions: in two or
three hundred years this second enlargement may cover America with three times
that number, if the present ratio of increase continues with the enterprising
spirit of Americans for colonization and removing out into the wilderness and
settling new countries: and if Spain and Portugal should adopt that wise
regulation respecting the connection of the sexes, which would give a spring to
population within the tropics, equal to that without. There may now be three or
four millions of Whites. o^ Europeans, in North and South-America: of which one
half are in rapid increase, and the rest scarcely keeping their number good
without supplies from the parent states. The number of French, Spaniards, Dutch
and Portuguese, may be one million souls in all America; although (...) have
transfused their blood into twice the number of Indians. The United States may
be two million souls Whites, which have been an increase upon perhaps fewer
than twenty or thirty thousand families from Europe. Can we contemplate their
present, and anticipate their future increase, and not be struck with
astonishment to find ourselves in the midst of the fulfillment of the prophecy
of Noah? May we not see that we are the object which the holy ghost had in view
four thousand years ago, when he inspired the venerable Patriarch with the
visions respecting his posterity? How wonderful the accomplishments in distant
and disconnected ages! While the principal increase was first in Europe,
westward from Scythia, the residence of the family of Japhet, a branch of the
original enlargement extending eastward into Asia, and spreading round to the
southward of the Caspian, became the ancient kingdoms of Media and Persia Jos.
ant. lib. 1. c. 6.
: and thus he dwelt in the tents of Shem. Hence the singular and almost
identical affinity between the Persic and Teutonic languages through all ages
to this day. And now the other part of the prophecy is fulfiling in a new
enlargement, not in the tents of Shem, but in a country where Canaan shall be
his servant, at least unto tribute.

I rather consider the American Indians as Canaanites of the expulsion of
Joshua: some of which in phoenician ships coasted the Mediterranean to its
mouth, as appears from an inscription which they left there. Procopius who was
born in Palestine, a master of the Phoenician and other oriental languages, and
the historiographer of the great Belisarius, tells us, that at Tangier he saw
and read an inscription upon two marble pillars there, in the ancient
Phoenician (not the then modern Punic) letter, " We are they who have fled from
the face of Joshua the robber, the son of Nun." Ibi ex albis lapidibus constant
COLUMNAE DUAE prope magnum sontem erectae, phoenicios habentes characteres
insculptos, qui phoecicum lingua sic sonant: NOS II SUMUS QUI FUGERUNT A FACIE
JOSHUAE PRAEDONIS (...) NAUE. -- Evagr. hist. ecc. l. 4. c. 18. Procop.
Vandalic. l. 2.
Bochart and Seldom conjecture the very Punic itself. Plato, AElian, and
Diodorus siculus, narrate voyages into the Atlantic ocean thirty days west from
the pillars of Hercules, to the island of Atlas. This inscription examined by
Procopius, suggests, that the Canaanites, in coasting along from Tangier, might
soon get into the trade winds and be undesignedly wafted across the Atlantic,
land in the tropical regions, and commence the settlements of Mexico and Peru.
Another branch of the canaanitish expulsions might take the resolution of the
ten tribes, and travel north-eastward to where never man dwelt, become the
Tchuschi and Tungusi Tartars about Kamschatka and Tscuko^skoinoss in the
north-east of Asia: thence, by water, passing over from island to island
through the northern Archipelago to America, became the scattered Sachemdoms of
these northern regions. It is now known that Asia is separated by water from
America, as certainly appears from the Baron Dulfeldt's voyage round the north
of europe into the pacific ocean, A. D. 1769. Amidst all the variety of
national dialects, there reigns a similitude in their language, as there is
also in complexion and beardless features, from Greenland to delseugo, and from
the Antilles to Otaheite, which show them to be one people.

A few scattered accounts, collected and combined together, may lead us to two
certain conclusions, 1. That all the american Indians are one kind of people.
2. That they are the same as the people in the north-east of Asia.

An asiatic territory, 3000 miles long and 1500 wide, above the 40th degree of
latitude, to the hyperborean ocean, contains only one million of souls settled
as our Indians; as appears from the numerations and estimates collected by M.
Muller, and other Russian Academicians in 1769. The Koreki, Jakuhti and
Tungusij living on the eastern part of this territory next to America, are
naturally almost beardless, like the Samoi^ds in Siberia, the Ostia^s and
Calmuks, as well as the American Indians: all these having also the same custom
of plucking out the few hairs of very thin beards. They have more similar
usages and fewer dissimilar ones, than the Arabians of the Koreish tribe and
Jews who sprang from Abraham: or than those that subsist among the european
nations, who sprang from one ancestor; or these asiatic nations, which sprang
from Shem. The portrait painter Mr. Smibert, who accompanied Dr. Berkeley, then
Dean of Derry and afterward Bishop of Cloyne, from Italy to America in 1728,
was employed by the grand Duke of Tuscany, while at Florence, to paint two or
three Siberian Tartars, presented to the Duke by the Czar of Russia. This Mr.
Smibert, upon his landing at Narraganset-bay with Dr. Berkeley, instantly
recognized the Indians here to be the same people as the Siberian Tartars whose
pictures he had taken. Moravian Indians from Greenland and South-America, have
met those in our latitude at Bethlehem, and have been clearly perceived to be
the same people. The kamschatdale Tartars have been carried over from Asia to
America, and compared with our Indians, and found to be the same people. These
asiatic Tartars, from whom the american aboriginals derived, are distinct from,
and far less numerous, than the mongul and other Tartars which, for ages, under
Tamerlane and other chieftans, have deluged and overran the southern ancient
Asiatic empires. Attending to the rational and just deductions, from these and
other disconnected data combined together, we may perceive, that all the
Americans are one people -- that they came hither certainly from the north-east
of Asia; probably also from the me^^terrane^n; and if so that they are
canaanites, though arriving hither by different routs. The ocean current from the
north of Asia might waft the beardless Samoieds or T^^aschi from the mouth of
Jen^sea or the Oby, around Nova Zembla to Greenland, and thence to Labrador,
many ages after the refugees from Joshua might have colonized the tropical
regions. Thus Providence might have ordered three divisions of the same people
from different parts of the world, and perhaps in very distant ages, to meet
together on this continent, or, " our Island," as the six nations call it, to
settle different parts of it, many ages before the present accession of Japhet,
or the former visitation of Madoc, 1001, or the certain colonization from
Norway A. D. 1001, as well as the certain christianizing of Greenland in the
ninth century; not to mention the visit of still greater antiquity by the
Phoenicians, who charged the Dighton rock and other rocks in Narragansett-bay
with Punic inscriptions, remaining to this day. Which last I myself have
repeatedly seen and taken off at large, as did Professor Sewall. He has lately
transmitted a copy of this inscription to M. Gebelin of the Parisian academy of
sciences, who comparing them with the Punic paleography, judges them punic, and
has interpreted them as denoting, that the ancient Carthaginians once visited
these distant regions.

Indians are numerous in the tropical regions, not so elsewhere. Baronla Hontan
the last century, and Mr. Carver so lately as 1776 and 1777, traveled
north-west beyond the sources of the missisippi. From their observations it
appears that the ratio of indian population in the very heart of the continent,
is similar to that on this side of the missisippi. By an accurate numeration
made in 1766, and returned into the plantation office in London, it appeared,
that there were not forty thousand souls, Indians, from the Missisippi to the
Atlantic, and from Florida to the Pole. According to Mr. Carver, there are
about thirty, Carver's trav. p. 415.
and certainly not forty Indian tribes, west of the Senecas, and six nation
confederacy, and from the Missisippi and Ohio northward to Hudson's bay, and
from Niagara to the Lake of the Woods. The chiefs of all these speak the
Chipeway language. And perhaps all the remaining territory north of New Spain,
and even on this side the northern tropic, and north-westward to asia, will not
exhibit five times that number at highest.

Partly by actual numeration, and partly by estimate, the Indians in the
Spanish dominions in America are considered as a million souls in New Spain,
and a million and half in Peru, or two or three million souls in the whole. And
perhaps this would fully comprehend those of Paraguay and the Portuguese
provinces. In my opinion, great defalcation must be made from these numbers.
The aboriginals have been injudiciously estimated at twenty millions: but I
believe they never exceeded two or three million souls in all North and
South-America since the days of Columbus.

The European population so surpasses them already, that of whatever origin,
they will eventually be, as the most of them have already become, servants unto
Japhet -- six hundred and twelve thousand Indians pay tribute in Peru. We are
increasing with great rapidity; and the Indians, as well as the million
Africans in America, are decreasing as rapidly. Both left to themselves, in
this way diminishing, may gradually vanish: and thus an unrighteous SLAVERY may
at length, in God's good providence, be abolished and cease in this land of
LIBERTY.

But to return; the population of this land will probably become very great;
and Japhet become more numerous millions in America, than in Europe and Asia;
and the two or three millions of the United States may equal the population of
the oriental empires, which far surpasses that of Europe. There are reasons for
believing that the English increase, will far surpass others; and that the
diffusion of the United States will ultimately produce the general population
of America. The northern provinces of China spread for ages, and at length
deluged the southern with a very numerous and accumulated population. Prove.
xiv. 28. In the multitude of people, is the king's honor.

But a multitude of people, even the two hundred million To elucidate the
Chinese population it may be considered, that "in the reign of KANG-HI who died
A. D. 1722, there were found 11,052,872 families, and 59 788, 364 men able to
hear arms," exclusive of a million of Bonzas, and an 100,000 mandarians and
literati, the army of near a million, and young people under twenty years of
age, and the multitudes living on the water. So the total of men in the empire
above sixty millions, implying 250 million of souls. Tribute is paid by all the
males between aetat. 20 and 60: the poll tax revenue is fifty millions
sterling; fifty eight millions once paid this tribute. Europeans consider this
the number of souls and not of adult males. All the brothers and sisters while
they live constitute one family, according to the custom in China, whether the
ancestor be living or dead. So the 11 millions families would be equal to 50 or
60 million of European families.

In the time Du Halde, V. p. ^09.
of Ching-tsong A. D. 1014, "the number employed in agriculture was found to be
21,976,965 able persons, exclusive of the mandarins and literati, the eunuchs,
the soldiers, the bonzas, and those who live in barks and floating cities on
the rivers, of whom the number is incredible." Hence above half the people are
employed in manufactures, the mechanic arts, the literary; military and
official departments. Now 21 millions farmers imply 80 or 90 million of souls;
evincing that the 59 millions of 1722 are not to be considered as the number of
souls, but of adult males, or taxables. Hatton in his geography estimates the
total of the souls 24 millions. Very different are the estimates. There is an
intricacy and want of elucidation in these Chinese numerations. I rather
consider the total of the empire 250 millions of souls. Among other reasons,
the number of principal mandarins, army and literati correspond to an higher
population than 60 million souls, which is the general estimate. But this
matter may be easily ascertained, for no nations on earth keep so accurate a
census and numeration of all classes as the Chinese and Japonese.


of the Chinese empire, cannot subsist without CIVIL GOVERNMENT. All the forms
of civil polity have been tried by mankind, except one: and that seems to have
been reserved in Providence to be realized in America. Most of the states of
all ages, in their originals, both as to policy, and property have been founded
in rapacity, usurpation and injustice: so that in the contests recorded in
history, the public right is a dubious question; it being rather certain that
it belongs to neither of the contending parties: the military history of all
nations, being but a description of the wars and invasions of the mutual
robbers and devastators of the human race. The invasion of the lawless
Macedonian who effected the dissolution of the medo-persian empire, the wide
spread roman-conquests, the inundation of the Goths and Vandals, the descents
of the Tartars on China, the triumphs of Tamerlane, Ulugh-beg, and Aurengzebe,
and the wide spread domination of the impostor of Mecca, with his successors
the Caliphs and Mameluhs down to Kouli-Kan, who dethroned his prince and
plundered India of 200 millions sterling: -- these, I say, with the new
distribution of property and new erected policies, were all founded in
unrighteousness, and tyrannical usurpation. The real interest of mankind and
the public good has been generally overlooked. It has really been very
indifferent to the great cause of RIGHT and LIBERTY, which of the billigerent
powers prevailed, a Tangrolipix or an Mahomet, an Augustus or an Antony, a
Scipio or an Hannibal, a Brennus or an Antiochus -- tyranny being the sure
portion of the plebeians, be the victory as it should happen. These things have
led some very enlightened as well as serious minds to a fixed conclusion and
judgment against the right and legality of all wars. In the simplicity of my
judgment, I have for years been of this opinion, except as to the offensive
wars of Israel, and defensive war of America. War in some instances, especially
defensive, has been authorized by heaven. The blessing given by Melchisedec to
Abraham, upon his return from the slaughter of Chelderlaomer and the kings of
the east, justified that holy patriarch. The war with Amelek, and the
extirpation of the Canaanites by Joshua, were of God. The location of the
respective territories to the first nations, was so of God, as to give them a
divine right defensively to resist the Nimrods and Ninus's, the first invading
tyrants of the ancient ages. The originally free and glorious republics of
Greece, had a right from God, to withstand the haughty claims of the Assyrian
empire, which they successfully resisted for ages, till the Roman power arose
behind them, and at length prostrated their liberties.

But after the spirit of conquest had changed the first governments, all the
succeeding ones have, in general proved one continued series of injustice,
which has reigned in all countries for almost 4000 years. These have so changed
property, laws, rights and liberties, that it has become impossible for the
most sagacious civilians to decide whose is the abstract political right in
national controversies -- ^ather we know that none of them have any right. All
original right is confounded and lost. We can only say that there still remains
in the body of the people at large, the body of mankind of any and every
generation, a POWER with which they are invested by the author of their being,
to wrest government out of the hands of reigning tyrants, and originate NEW
POLICIES, adapted to the conservation of liberty and promoting the public
welfare. But what is the happiest form of civil government, is the great
question. Almost all the polities may be reduced to hereditary dominion neither
a MONARCHY or ARISTOCRACY, and these supported by a standing army. The Roman
and Venetian senates were but an hereditary Aristocracy with an elective head.
The senatorial succession is preserved independent of the people. True liberty
is preserved in the Bell ic and Hoe^^ve^ic republics, and among the nobles in
the elective monarchy of Poland. For the rest of the world, the civil dominion,
though often wisely administered, is so modelled as to be beyond the control of
those, for whose end God instituted government. But a DEMOCRATICAL polity for
millions, standing upon the broad basis of the people at large, amply charged
with property, has not hitherto been exhibited.

Republics are democratical, aristocratical, or monarchial. Each of these forms
admit of modifications both as to hereditation and powers, from absolute
government up to perfect liberty. Monarchy might be so limited, one would
think, as to be a happy form, especially if elective: but both monarchy and
aristocracy, when they become hereditary, terminate in the prostration of
liberty. The greater part of the governments on earth may be termed monarchical
aristocracies, or hereditary dominions, independent of the people. The nobles
and nabobs being hereditary, will at first have great power; but the royal
factions have not failed to intrigue this away from the nobles to the Prince:
the assembly of even hereditary nobles, then become ciphers and nullities in
dominion. The once glorious Cortes of Spain experienced this loss of power. It
is next to an impossibility to tame a monarchy and few have ruled without
ferocity. Scarcely shall we find, in royal dynastics, in long line of Princes,
a few singularly good Sovereigns, a few Cyrus's, Antonini, Alfreds, Bor^i^mes.
Indeed, if we look over the present sovereigns of Europe, we behold, with
pleasure, two young Princes, the EMPEROR, and the MONARCH of France, who seem
to be raised up in providence to make their people and mankind happy. A
Ganganelli in the pontifical throne was a phoenix of ages, shone for his
moment, and scarcely to be found again in the catalogue of a Platina: -- We see
enterprising, literary, and heroic talents in a Frederick III. and wisdom in a
Poniatowski. I add no more -- But when we contemplate the other European and
Asiatic potentates, and especially the sovereigns of Dehli, Ispa^aun, and
Constantinople, one cannot but pity mankind, whose lot is to be governed by --
despots of small abilities, immersed and rioting in the splendour of a luxurious
effeminacy. Nor could government proceed, were not the errors and desultory
blunders of royalty frequently corrected by the circumspection of a COLAO, a
few sensible characters venerable for wisdom, called up among the stated
councillors of Majesty.

Lord Bacon said, that monarchy had a platform in nature; and in truth
monarchical ideas reign through the universe. A monarchy conducted with
infinite wisdom and infinite benevolence, is the most perfect of all possible
governments. The Most High has delegated power and authority to subordinate
monarchies or sole ruling powers, in limited districts, throughout the
celestial hierarchy, and through the immensity of the intellectual world; but
at the same time he has delegated and imparted to them, wisdom and goodness
adequate to the purposes of dominion: and thence the government is, as it ought
to be, absolute. But in a world, or region of the universe, where God has
imparted to none either this superior power or adequate wisdom, beyond what
falls to the common share of humanity, it is absurd to look for such qualities
in one man; not even in the man Moses, who shared the government of Israel with
the Senate of Seventy. Therefore, there is no foundation for monarchical
government, from supposed hereditary superiority in knowledge. If it be said,
that monarchs always have a council of state, consisting of the wisest
personages, of whose wisdom they avail themselves in the government of empires;
not to observe that this is a concession indicating a deficiency of knowledge
in Princes, it may be asked, why not then, consign and repose government into
the hands of the national council, where always resides the superiority of
wisdom? The supposed advantage of having one Public Head for all to look up to,
and to concenter the attention, obedience, and affection of subjects, and to
consolidate the empire, will not counter-balance the evils of arbitrary
despotism, and the usual want of wisdom in the sovereigns and potentates of the
earth. For the hereditary successions in the dynasties of kings in the
effeminate families of the great, seem to be marked and accursed by providence,
with deficient wisdom. And where is the wisdom of consigning government into
such hands? Why not much better, since we for once have our option or choice,
to commit the direction of the republic to a Wittena-gemot, or an
aristocratical council of wise men? Should we call forth and dignify some
family, either from foreign nations or from among ourselves, and create a
monarch, whether an hereditary Prince or Protector for life, and seat him in
Supremacy at the head of Congress; soon, with insidious dexterity, would he
intrigue and secure a venal majority, even of new and annual members; and by
diffusing a complicated and variously modified influence, pursue an accretion
of power till he became absolute.

The celebrated historian Mrs. CATHARINE MACAULAY, that ornament of the
republic of letters, and the female LIVY of the age, observes, "The man who
holds supreme power for life, will have a great number of friends and
adherents, who are attached by interest to his interest, and who will wish for
continuance of power in the same family. This creates the worst of factions, a
government faction in the state. The desire of securing to ourselves a
particular, unshared privilege, is the rankest vice which infests humanity; and
a Protector for life, instead of devoting his time and understanding to the
great cares of government, will, be scheming and plotting to secure the power
after his death to his children, if he has any, if not to the nearest of his
kin. This principle in government has been productive of such bloodshed and
oppression, that it has inclined politicians to give the preference to
hereditary rather than elective monarchies; and as the lesser evil to consign
the government of society to the increasing and at length unlimited sway of one
family, whether the individuals of it should be idiots or madmen. It is an
uncontroverted fact, that supreme power never can continue long in one family,
without becoming unlimited." Mrs. MACAULAY'S letter to the author, 1771


We stand a better chance with ARISTOCRACY, whether hereditary or elective,
than with monarchy. An unsystematical democracy, and an absolute monarchy, are
equally detestable, equally a magormissabib, the terror to all around them. An
elective aristocracy is preferable for America, as it is rather to be a council
of nations (agreeable to the humane, liberal, and grand ideas of Henry IV. and
the patriot Sully) than a body in which resides authoritative sovereignty; for
there is no real cession of dominion, no surrendery or transfer of sovereignty,
to the national council, as each state in the confederacy is an independent
sovereignty.

In justice to human society, it may perhaps be said of almost all the polities
and civil institutions in the world, however imperfect, that they have been
founded in and carried on with very considerable wisdom. They must have been
generally well administered; I say generally, otherwise government could not
proceed. This may be said even of those governments, which carry great defects,
and the seeds of self-destruction and ruin in their constitution -- for even an
Ottoman or an Aurengzebe, must establish and prescribe to himself a national
constitution, a system of general laws and dominion. But the abstract rationale
of perfect civil government, remains still hidden among the desiderata of
politics, having hitherto baffled the investigation of the best writers on
government, the ablest politicians, and the sagest civilians. A well ordered
DEMOCRATICAL ARISTOCRACY, standing upon the annual elections of the people, and
revocable at pleasure, is the polity which combines the UNITED STATES: and from
the nature of man, and the comparison of ages, I believe it will approve itself
the most equitable, liberal, and perfect.

With the people, especially a people seized of property, resides the aggregate
of original power. They cannot however assemble from the territory of an
empire, and must therefore, if they have any share in government, represent
themselves by delegation. This constitutes one order in legislature and
sovereignty. It is a question whether there should be any other. To resolve
which it may be considered, that each of these delegates or representatives,
will be faithful conservators of local interests, but have no interest in
attending extensively to the public, further than where all particular local
interests are affected in common with that which one delegate represents in
particular.

It should seem then that the nature of society dictates another, a higher
Branch, whose superiority arises from its being the interested and natural
conservator of the universal interest. This will be a senatorial order,
standing, not on local, but a general election of the whole body of the people.
Let a bill, or law, be read in the one branch or the other: every one instantly
thinks how it will affect his constituents. If his constituents are those of
one small district only, they will be his first care; if the people at large,
their general or universal interest will be his first care, the first object of
his faithful attention. If a senator, as in Delaware, stands on the election of
only the same district as a deputy, the upper-house is only a repetition of the
lower: -- if on the election of several counties combined, as in Virginia, each
member of the upper-house stands and feels himself charged with a greater and
more extensive care, than a member of the house of burgesses: not but that it
is the duty of each deputy to attend to the general interest. Georgia,
Pennsylvania, and Jersey, have each a senate or legislature of one order only;
for although in Jersey it seems otherwise, yet that interest which will
determine a vote in one, will determine it in both houses. The same is true of
the two Carolinas.

The constitutions of Maryland and New York, are founded in higher wisdom. The
polity of Massachusetts is excellent and truly grand. It retains indeed some of
the shadows of royalty, which may give dignity, but never operate an essential
mischief, in the hands of a chief magistrate, who is annually elective by the
people at large. But Connecticut and Rhode Island have originally realized the
most perfect polity as to a legislature: any emendations and improvements may
be made by the assembly with respect to the establishment of the law courts,
and a constitutional privy council, which in all future time will be necessary
to attend the chief magistrate in the ordinary civil administration. These
things are remedied in Virginia, whose constitution seems to be imperfect in
but one thing -- its twenty-four senators, though elected from local districts,
should be elected by the people at large, being men of such public eminence,
and of merit so illustrious, as to be known not to a few only, but to all the
tribes throughout the state. It establishes judges quamdiu se been gesserint.
It provides perfectly for legislation and law courts, for the militia, and for
that continual administration of government in absence of assemblies, and while
the judiciary tribunals are sitting, which must reside in and be
uninterruptedly exercised at the head of sovereignty in every civil polity.

It gives me pleasure to find, that public LIBERTY is effectually secured, in
each and all the policies of the United States, though somewhat differently
modelled. Not only the polity or exterior system of government, but the laws
and interior regulations of each state, are already excellent, surpassing the
institutions of Lycurgus or Plato; and by the annual appeals to the public, a
power is reserved to the people, to remedy any corruptions or errors in
government. And if even the people should sometimes err, yet each assembly of
the states, and the body of the people, always embosom wisdom sufficient to
correct themselves: so that a political mischief cannot be durable. Herein we
far surpass any states on earth. We can correct ourselves if in the wrong. The
Belgic states in their foederal capacity, are united by a perfect system,
constituted by that great prince WILLIAM of Nassau, and the compatriots of that
age: but they left the interior government of the jural tribunals, cities, and
provinces, as depotic and arbitrary as they found them. So the elective
monarchical republic of Poland, is an excellent constitution for the nobles,
but leaves despotism and tyranny, the portion and hard fate of the plebeians,
beyond what is to be found in any part of Europe. Not so the American states:
their interior as well as exterior civil and jural polities are so nearly
perfect, that the rights of individuals, even to numerous millions, are guarded
and secured.

The crown and glory of our confederacy is the amphictyonic council of the
GENERAL CONGRESS, standing on the annual election of the united respective
states, and revocable at pleasure. This lays the foundation of a permanent
union in the American Republic, which may at length convince the world, that of
all the policies to be found on earth, not excepting the very excellent one of
the Chinese Empire, the most perfect one has been invented and realized in
America.

If in the multitude of devices for improving and carrying our policy to
greater perfection, and a more permanent and efficacious government, if, I say,
some elevated geniusses should go into the ideas of monarchy, whether
hereditary or elective; and others think of a partition of the united states
into three or four separate independent confederacies; perhaps upon discussing
the subject calmly and thoroughly, and finding that the policy which will at
last take place, must stand on plebeian election; they may at length be
satisfied, that the die is already cast, and the policy has taken its
complexion for ages to come. Thus the NINE BOWLS engraved with the map of
dominion, established the policy of the Chinese empire for near twenty ages. Du
Halde Hi^t. China.
The ancient division of the empire subsisted by means of these symbols of
dominion, which passed in succession to the nine principal mandarins or supreme
governors under the imperial sovereignty; and this for the long tract from
their first institution by the Emperor YOU, who reigned two thousand two hundred
years before Christ, to GHEY-LIE-VANG, who was cotemporary with the great
philosopher MENZIUS three hundred years before Christ. So that symbol of union
the american flag, with it, increasing stripes and stars may have an equally
combining efficacy for ages. The senatorial constitution and consulate of the
roman empire lasted from Tarquin to Caesar. The pragmatic sanction has probably
secured the imperial succession in the house of Austria for ages. The
medopersian and alexandrine empires, and that of Timur Beg, who once reigned
from Smyrna to the Indus, were for obvious reasons of short and transitory
duration: but that of the Assyrian endured without mutation through a tract of
one thousand three hundred years from Semiramis to Sandanapalus. Nor was the
policy of Egypt overthrown for a longer period, from the days of Mitzraim till
the time of Cambyses and Am^sis. Whatever mutations may arise in the United
States, perhaps hereditary monarchy and a standing army will be the last.

Besides a happy policy as to civil government, it is necessary to institute a
system of LAW and JURISPRUDENCE founded in justice, equity and public right.
The american codes of law and the lex non scripta, the senatus consulta and the
common law, are already advanced to great perfection -- far less complicated
and perplexed than the jural systems of Europe; where reigns a mixture of
Roman, Gothic, Teutonic, Salic, Saxon, Norman and other local or municipal law,
controlled or innovated and confused by subsequent royal edicts and imperial
institutions: superinducing the same mutation, as did the imperatorial Decrees
of the C^sars upon the ancient jus civil or Roman law. A depuration from all
these will take place in America, and our communication with all the world will
enable us to bring home the most excellent principles of law and right, to be
found in every kingdom and empire on earth. These being adopted here, may
advance our systems of jurisprudence to the highest purity and perfection: --
especially if hereafter some FLETA, BRACTON, COKE, some great law genius should
arise, and with vast erudition, and with the learned sagacity of a Trebonianus,
reduce and digest all into one great jural system.

But the best laws will be of no validity, unless the tribunals be filled with
JUDGES of independent sentiment, vast law knowledge, and of an integrity beyond
the possibility of corruption. Even a Bacon should fall from his highest
honors, the moment he tastes the forbidden fruit. Such infamy and tremendous
punishment should be connected with tribunal bribery, that a Judge should be
struck into the horror of an earthquake, at the very thoughts of corruption.
The legislatures have the institution and revocation of law: and the Judges in
their decisions are to be sacredly governed by the laws of the land. Most of
the states have judged it necessary, in order to keep the supreme law courts
uninfluenced and uncorrupted tribunals, that the Judges be honorably supported,
and be fixed in office quamdiu se been gesserint.

But I pass on to another subject in which the welfare of a community is deeply
concerned, I mean the public REVENUES. National character and national faith
depend on these. Every people, every large community is able to furnish a
revenue adequate to the exigencies of government. But this is a most difficult
subject; and what the happiest method of raising it, is uncertain. One thing is
certain, that however in most kingdoms and empires the people are taxed at the
will of the prince yet in America the people tax themselves, and therefore
cannot tax themselves beyond their abilities. But whether the power of taxing
be in an absolute monarchy, a power independent of the people, (...) a body
elected by the people, one great error has, I apprehend entered into the system
of Revenue and Finance in almost all nations, viz. restricting the collection
to money. Two or three millions can more easily be raised in produce, than one
million in money. This collected and deposited in stores and magazines, would
by bills drawn upon these stores, answer all the expenditures of war and peace.
The little imperfect experiment lately made here, should not discourage us. In
one country it has been tried with success for ages, I mean in China, the
wisest empire the sun has ever shined upon. And here, if I recollect aright,
not a tenth of the Imperial revenues has been collected in money. In rice,
wheat and millet only are collected 40 million of sacks, one hundred and twenty
each; equal to 80 million bushels: in raw and wrought silk one million pounds.
The rest is taken in salt, wines, cotton, and other fruits of labor and
industry at a certain ratio, per cent. and deposited in stores over all the
empire. The perishable commodities are immediately sold, and the mandarins and
army are paid by bills on these magazines. In no part of the world are the
inhabitants less oppressed, than there. England has eleven hundred millions
property, real personal and commercial, and five million souls. Their ordinary
revenue has for many years been ten or twelve millions; and during this war the
national expenditures have been annually twenty millions. A great part is
raised by excise; by the land tax, not above a fifth or sixth, although the
annual rental of England is really sixty millions. The funded debt has arisen
from 123 millions A. D. 1775, to 230 millions in 1783, and can never be paid.
It is unparalleled in the annals of empires, that six or seven millions of
people ever discharged so heavy a burden. The Roman Imperial debt was once in
the times of the Caesar's 300 millions sterling, when the empire consisted of
thirty million of people. One emperor at his accession wiped out twenty
millions, and the Goths, and Vandals settled the rest, to the ruin of
thousands. May God preserve these States from being so involved. The present
war being over, the future increase of population and property will in time
enable us, with convenience to discharge the heavy debt we have incurred in the
defense of our rights and liberties. The United States have now two hundred and
fifty millions of property, pretty equally shared by two or three million
people. And our national debt 42 millions of dollars at the peace.
is not ten million sterling: which is to the whole collectively, as it would
be for one man, possessing an estate of L. 250 in land and stock, to oblige
himself to pay ten pounds. The interest only of the British national debt, upon
six or seven million people, is above ten millions sterling annually, that is,
greater than the whole national debt of the United States, upon half that
number. Our population will soon overspread the vast territory from the
Atlantic to the Missisippi, which in two generations will become a property
superior to that of Britain. Thus posterity may help to pay for the war, which
we have been obliged to fight out for them in our day. It will not, however, be
wise to consign to posterity so heavy a debt; least they should be tempted to
learn, like other nations, the practice of public injustice, and broken
national faith.

Another object of great attention in America, will be Commerce. In order to
form some ideas respecting it, in the united states, we may take a summary view
of it, while we were in connection with Britain; and thence judge what it may
be, after we shall have recovered from the shock of this war.

The British merchants represented that they received some profit indeed from
Virginia and South Carolina, as well as the West Indies: but as for the rest of
this continent, they were constant loosers in trade. Mr. Clover has heartily
disclosed the truth; and he and other writers enable us to form some ideas of
the matter. It appears from an undecennary account laid before parliament in
1776, that the state of commerce between England only and English America, for
the eleven years preceding hostilities, was thus: Exports to the Imports from
the Continental colonies, 26mil. ster. 13 mil. ster. West Indies, 14 35 mostly
on acct. of the cont. col. 41. 49 A commerce of 26 mil. exports, and only 13
mil. imports, is self-annihilated and impossible. The returns from the
West Indies comprehended a great part of the continental remittances. The
American merchants, by a circuitous trade from this continent, and from Africa,
remitted to London and Britain, by way of the West Indies, in bills of exchange
drawn on sugars, the balance of what they seem to fall short, in direct
remittances on the custom-house books.

The whole American commerce, monopolized by Great Britain, must be considered
collectively; and was to England only in the above account 41 million exports,
and 49 million imports. This inclusive of the 12 per cent. changed, amounted to
a real annual profit of 32 per cent. to the English merchants in actual
remittances of the year, besides a standing American debt, it is said of six
millions carrying interest. Well might the British merchants sustain a loss in
American bankruptcies of a million a year (though probably at an average not
five or ten thousand) in so lucrative a trade. An idea of the mercantile debt
may be thus conceived. There is a district within the united states, upon which
the state of European trade, at the commencement of hostilities, was thus;
being chiefly carried on by foreign factorages, a mode of commerce which the
British merchants intended to have been universal. In the course of a
systematical trade, had at length arisen a standing debt of a million sterling
among about a quarter of a million of people: to feed this the British
merchants sent over one quarter of a million s^erling annually; for which and
collected debts, they received in actual remittance half a million sterling
within the same year, i. e. a quarter of a million returned half a million, and
fed or kept up a debt of one million, paying to Britain an annual lawful
interest; the security of all which complicated system stood upon american
mortgages. This is true mercantile secret history.

If this specimen applied to all the states (and God be thanked it does not) it
would show, not only the greatness and momentous importance of our trade to
Europe, but the necessity of legislative regulations in commerce, to invalidate
future foreign mortgages, and yet support credit by the enforcement of punctual
speedy and certain payments, whether with profit or loss. Without this no
permanent commerce can be supported. I observed that the above specimen may
assist us. It is not necessary for every purpose, to come to great exactness in
capital estimates. The total exterior commerce of Great Britain with all the
world, is about twelve millions annually; of which five millions, or near half,
was of American connection, and four millions of this directly American, as Mr.
Glover asserts; and the real profits of the American trade was become to
Britain equal to nearly half the benefit of her total exterior commerce to the
whole world. The total of British exports to all the world, A. D. 1704, was
only six millions and an half sterling. The American British trade in its
connection, returns, and profits, nearly equalled this, A. D. 1774. We were
better to Britain, than all the world was to her 70 years before. Despised as
our commerce was, it is evident, that had the union continued, our increasing
millions would soon have made remittances, for more than the fewer millions of
Britain could have manufactured for exportation. For the greater part of the
manufactures of every country must be for domestic consumption. A specimen of
this we have in the woollen manufacture. England grows eleven million fleeces a
year, worth two million sterling, manufactured into eight million; of which six
million is of domestic consumption, and two million only for exportation. When
it is considered that a great part of this went to other countries, how weak
must be the supposition that Britain clothed America; while America, from the
beginning in their own domestic manufactures, furnished nine-tenths of their
apparel.

Our trade opens to all the world. We shall doubtless at first overtrade
ourselves every where, and be in danger of incurring heavy mortgages unless
prevented. The nations will not at first know how far they may safely trade
with us. But commerce will find out its own system, and regulate itself in
time. It will be governed on the part of America by the cheapest foreign
markets; on the part of Europe by our ability and punctuality of remittance. We
can soon make a remittance of three or four million a year in a circuitous
trade, exclusive of the iniquitous African trade. If Europe should indulge us
beyond this, our failures and disappointments might lay the foundation of
national animosities. Great wisdom is therefore necessary to regulate the
commerce of America. The caution with which we are to be treated, may occasion
and originate a commercial system among the maritime nations, on both sides of
the Atlantic, founded in justice and reciprocity of interest, which will
establish the benevolence as well as the opulence of nations, and advance the
progress of society to civil perfection.

It is certainly for the benefit of every community that it be transfused with
the efficacious motives of universal industry. This will take place if every
one can enjoy the fruits of his labor and activity unmolested. All the variety
of labor, in a well regulated state, will be so ordered and encouraged, as
that all will be employed in a just proportion in agriculture, mechanic arts,
commerce, and the literary professions. It has been a question whether
agriculture or commerce, needs most encouragement in these states? But the
motives for both seem abundantly sufficient. Never did they operate more
strongly than at present. The whole continent is activity, and in the lively
vigorous exertion of industry. Several other things call for encouragement, as
the planting of vineyards, and olive yards, and cotton walks; the raising of
wool, planting mulberry trees, and the culture of silk; and I add, establishing
manufactories. This last is necessary, very necessary, far more necessary
indeed than is thought by many deep politicians. Let us have all the means
possible of subsistence and elegance among ourselves, if we would be a
flourishing republic of real independent dignity and glory.

Another thing tending to the public welfare, is removing causes of political
animosities and civil dissension, promoting harmony, and strengthening the
union among the several parts of this extended community. In the memorable
bellum sociale among the Romans, 300,000 of Roman blood, fought 700,000
brethren of the Italian blood: After a loss of 60,000 in disputing a trifling
point of national honor, they pacificated the whole by an Amnesty, and giving
the city to the Italians. Vid. Velleius pater^,
We may find it a wise policy, a few years hence, under certain exceptions, to
settle an amnesty, and circulate a brotherly affection among all the
inhabitants of this glorious republic. We should live henceforward in amity, as
brothers inspired with and cultivating a certain national benevolence, unitedly
glorying in the name of a COLUMBIAN or AMERICAN, and in the distinguished honor
and aggrandisement of our country. Like that ancient national affection, which
we once had for the parent state, while we gloried in being a part of the
british empire; and when our attachment and fidelity grew to an unexampled
vigor and strength. This appeared in the tender distress we felt, at the first
thoughts of the dissolution of this ancient friendship. We once thought Britain
our friend, and gloried in her protection. But some demon Bute.
whispered folly into the present reign: And britain forced upon America, the
tremendous alternative of the loss of liberty or the last appeal -- either of
which instantly alienated and dissolved our affection -- it was impossible to
hesitate -- and the affection is dissolved, never, never more to be recovered:
-- like that between syracuse and athens, it is lost forever. A political
earthquake through the continent has shook off America from Great Britain. Oh!
how painful and distressing the separation and dismemberment! Witness all ye
patriotic breasts, all ye lovers of your country, once lovers of Great Britain;
witness the tender sensations and heartfelt violence, the reluctant distress
and sorrow, with which ye were penetrated, when spurned from a parent's love,
ye felt the conviction of the dire necessity of an everlasting parting, to meet
no more, never to be united again!

Oh England! how did I once love thee? how did I once glory in thee! how did I
once boast of springing from thy bowels, though at four descents ago, and the
nineteenth from sir adam of knapton! In the rapturous anticipation of thine
enlargement and reflourishing in this western world, how have I been wont to
glory in the future honor of having thee for the head of the Britannic^.
American empire for the many ages till the millennium -- when thy great
national glory should have been advanced in then becoming a member of the
universal empire of the Prince of Peace. And if perchance in some future period
danger should have arisen to thee from european states, how have I flewn on the
wings of prophecy, with the numerous hardy hosts of thine American sons,
inheriting thine ancient principles of liberty and valor, to rescue and
reinthrone the hoary venerable head of the most glorious empire on earth? But
now farewell -- a long farewell -- to all this greatness! And yet even now
methinks, in such ^n exigency, I could leap the Atlantic, not into thy bosom,
but to rescue an aged parent from destruction; and then return on the wings of
triumph, to this asylum of the world, and rest in the bosom of liberty.

Moreover, as we have seen the wisdom of our ancestors in instituting a
militia, so it is necessary to continue it. The Game Act, in the time of James
I, insidiously disarmed the people of England. Let us not be insidiously
disarmed. In all our enlargements in colonization, in all our increasing
millions, let the main body be exercised annually to military discipline,
whether i^ war or peace. This will defend us against ourselves, and against
surrounding states. Let this be known in Europe, in every future age, and we
shall never again be invaded from the other side of the Atlantic. The militia
of this country, says general Washington, must be considered as the palladium
of our security, and the first effectual resort in case of hostility.

Another thing necessary, is a vigilance against corruption, in purchasing
elections, and in designations to offices in the legislatures and Congress;
instituting such efficacious provisions against corruption, as shall preclude
the possibility of its rising to any great height, before it shall be
controlled and corrected. Although in every political administration the
appointment to offices will ever be considerably influenced by the sinister,
private, personal motives either of interest or friendship; yet the safety of
the state requires that this should not go too far. An administration may
indeed proceed tolerably, when the officers of a well arranged system are in
general ordinary characters, provided there is a pretty good sprinkling of men
of wisdom interspersed among them. How much more illustrious would it be, if
three quarters of the offices of government were filled with men of ability,
understanding, and patriotism? What an animation would it diffuse through a
community, if men of real merit in every branch of business, were sure of
receiving the rewards and honors of the state? That great and wise monarch OLAM
PODHLA, the Alfred of Ireland, 1000 years before Christ, instituted an annual
review and examination of all the achievements and illustrious characters in
the realm; and being approved by himself and the annual assembly of the nobles,
he ordered their names and achievements to be enrolled in a public register of
merit. This continued 2000 years to the time of that illustrious chieftan BRIEN
O'BORO^^ME. This had an amazing effect. By this animation, the heroic, military
and political virtues, with civilization, and I add, science and literature,
ascended to an almost unexampled and incredible perfection in Ireland, ages
before they figured in other parts of Europe, not excepting even Athens and
Rome. I have a very great opinion of hibernian merit, literary, as well as
civil and military, even in the ages before St. PATRICK.

But to return: -- The cultivation of LITERATURE will greatly promote the
public welfare. In every community, while provision is made, that all should be
taught to read the scriptures and the very useful parts of common education, a
good proportion should be carried through the higher branches of literature.
Effectual measures should be taken for preserving and diffusing knowledge among
a people. The voluntary institution of libraries in different vicinities, will
give those, who have not a liberal education, an opportunity of gaining that
knowledge, which will qualify them for usefulness. Travels, biography, and
history, the knowledge of the policies, jurisprudence, and scientific
improvements among all nations, ancient and modern, will form the civilian, the
judge, the senator, the patrician, the man of useful eminence in society. The
colleges have been of singular advantage in the present day. When Britain
withdrew all her wisdom from America, this revolution found above two thousand
in New England only, who had been educated in the colleges, intermixed among
the people, and communicating knowledge among them. Almost all of them have
approved themselves useful; and there have been some characters among us of the
first eminence for literature. It would be for the public emolument should
there always be found a sufficient number of men in the community at large, of
vast and profound erudition, and perfect acquaintance with the whole system of
public affairs, to illuminate the public councils, as well to fill the three
learned professions with dignity and honor.

I have thus shown wherein consists the true political welfare of a civil
community or sovereignty. The foundation is laid in a judicious distribution of
property, and in a good system of polity and jurisprudence; on which will
arise, under a truly patriotic, upright, and firm administration, the beautiful
superstructure of a well governed and prosperous empire.

Already does the new constellation of the united states begin to realize this
glory. It has already risen to an acknowledged sovereignty among the republics
and kingdoms of the world. And we have reason to hope, and I believe to expect,
that God has still greater blessings in store, for this vine which his own
right hand has planted, to make us high among the nations in praise, and in
name, and in honor. The reasons are very numerous, weighty, and conclusive.

In our civil constitutions, those impediments are removed, which obstruct the
progress of society toward perfection: such, for instance, as respect the
tenure of estates, and arbitrary government. The vassalage of dependant
tenures, the tokens of ancient conquests by Goths and Tartars, still remain all
over asia and europe. In this respect, as well as others, the world begins to
open its eyes. One grand experiment in particular has lately been made. The
present empress of russia, by granting lands in freehold, in her vast
wildernesses of volkouskile, together with religious liberty, has allured and
already draughted from poland and germany a colonization of six hundred
thousand souls in six years only, from 1762, to 1768. Marshal's trav.


Liberty, civil and religious, has sweet and attractive charms. The enjoyment
of this, with property, has filled the english settlers in america with a most
amazing spirit, which has operated, and still will operate with great energy.
Never before has the experiment been so effectually tried, of every man's
reaping the fruits of his labor, and feeling his sh^re in the aggregate system
of power. The ancient republics did not stand on the people at large; and
therefore no example or precedent can be taken from them. Even men of arbitrary
principles will be obliged, if they would figure in these states, to assume the
patriot so long, that they will at length become charmed with the sweets of
liberty.

Our degree of population is such as to give us reason to expect that this will
become a great people. It is probable that within a century from our
independence the sun will shine on fifty million of inhabitants in the united
states. This will be a great, a very great nation, nearly equal to half europe.
Already has our colonization extended down the ohio and to koskajeah on the
missisippi. And if the present ratio of increase should be rather diminished in
some of the other settlements, yet an accelerated multiplication will attend
our general propagation, and overspread the whole territory westward for ages.
So that before the millenium, the english settlements in america, may become
more numerous millions, than that greatest dominion on earth the chinese
empire. Should this prove a future fact, how applicable would be the text, when
the Lord shall have made his american Israel, high above all nations which he
has made, in numbers, and in praise, and in name, and in honor!

I am sensible some will consider these as visionary utopian ideas. And so they
would have judged, had they lived in the apostolic age and been told, that by
the time of constantine the empire would have become christian. As visionary
that the twenty thousand souls which first settled new england, should be
multiplied to near a million in a century and a half. As visionary that the
ottoman empire must fall by the russian. As visionary to the catholics is the
certain downfall of the pontificate. As utopian would it have been to the
loyalists, at the battle of lexington, that in less than eight years, the
independence and sovereignty of the united states, should be acknowledged by
four european sovereignties, one of which should be britain herself. How
wonderful the revolutions, the events of providence! We live in an age of
wonders: we have lived an age in a few years: we have seen more wonders
accomplished in eight years, than are usually unfolded in a century.

God be thanked, we have lived to see peace restored to this bleeding land, at
least a general cessation of hostilities among the belligerent powers. And on
this occasion does it not become us to reflect, how wonderful, how gracious,
how glorious, has been the good hand of our God upon us, in carrying us through
so tremendous a warfare! We have sustained a force brought against us; which
might have made any empire on earth to tremble -- and yet our bow has abode in
strength; and having obtained help of God, we continue unto this day. Forced
unto the last solemn appeal, america watched for the first blood: this was shed
by britons on the 19th of April, 1775; which instantly sprung an army of 20,000
into spontaneous existence, with the enterprizing and daring, if imprudent,
resolution of entering boston, and forceably disburdening it of its bloody
legions. Every patriot trembled till we had proved our armor, till it could be
seen, whether this hasty concourse was susceptible of exercitual arrangement,
and could face the enemy with firmness. They early gave us the decided proof of
this, in the memorable battle of bunker-hill. June 17, 1775.
We were satisfied. This instantly convinced us, and for the first time
convinced britons themselves, that americans both would and could fight with
great effect. Whereupon Congress put at the head of this spirited army, the
only man, on whom the eyes of all israel were placed. Posterity, I apprehend,
and the world itself, inconsiderate and incredulous as they may be of the
dominion of heaven, will yet do so much justice to the divine moral government,
as to acknowledge, that this american JOSHUA was raised up by God, and divinely
formed by a peculiar influence of the Sovereign of the Universe, for the great
work of leading the armies of this american Joseph (now separated from his
brethren), and conducting this people through the severe, the arduous conflict,
to liberty and independence. Surprising was it with what instant celerity men
ascended and rose into generals, and officers of every subordination; formed
chiefly by the preparatory discipline of only the preceding year 1774; when the
ardor and spirit of military discipline was by heaven, and without concert,
sent through the continent like lightning. Surprising was it, how soon the army
was organized, took its formation, and rose into firm system and impregnable
arrangement.

To think of withstanding and encountering britain by land was bold, and much
more bold and daring, by sea: yet we immediately began a navy, and built ships
of war with an unexampled expedition. It is presumed never was a 35 gun ship
before built quicker than that well built, noble ship the Raleigh, which was
finished from the keel and equipt for sea in a few months. Soon had we got,
though small a very gallant initial navy, which fought gallantly; and wanted
nothing but numbers of ships, for successful operations, against that superior
naval force before which we fell. We have, however, exhibited proof to
posterity and the world, that a powerful navy may be originated, built and
equipped for service, in a much shorter period than was before imagined. The
british navy has been many centuries growing; and france, holland, the baltic
powers, or any of the powers of this age, in twenty years, may build navies of
equal magnitude, if necessary for dominion, commerce, or ornament.

A variety of success and defeat has attended our warfare both by sea and
land. In our lowest and most dangerous estate in 1776 and 1777, we sustained
ourselves against the british army of sixty thousand troops commanded by How,
Burgoyne, and Clinton, and other the ablest generals britain could procure
throughout europe, with a naval force of 22,000 seamen in above eighty british
men of war. To lose america, has cost britain the loss of more than an hundred
thousand men, and an hundred and twenty millions sterling in money. Mr. Thomas
Pit, from authentic documents, lately asserted in parliament, that only the
first five years of this war had cost britain five millions more, than all the
wars of the last age, including the splendid victories of the duke of
Marlborough.
These generals we sent home one after another, conquered, defeated, and
convinced of the impossibility of subduing america. While oppressed by the
heavy weight of this combined force, heaven inspired us with resolution to cut
the gordian knot; when the die was cast irrevocable in the glorious act of
INDEPENDENCE. This was sealed and confirmed by God Almighty in the victory of
General WASHINGTON at TRENTON, and in the surprising movement and battle of
PRINCETON; by which astonishing effort of generalship, general How and the
whole british army, in elated confidence and in open-mouthed march for
Philadelphia, was instantly stopped, remanded back, and cooped up for a shivering
winter in the little borough of brunswick. Thus God turned the battle to the
gate; and this gave a finishing to the foundation of the american republic.
This with the Burgoynade at saratoga by general GATES; and the glorious victory
over the earl of CORNWALLIS in virginia, together with the memorable victory of
eutaw springs, and the triumphant recovery of the southern states by general
GREEN, are among the most heroic acts, and brilliant achievements, which have
decided the fate of america. And who does not see the indubitable interposition
and energetic influence of divine providence in these great and illustrious
events? Who but a Washington, inspired by heaven, could have struck out the
great movement and maneuver of princeton? To whom but the ruler of the winds
shall we ascribe it, that the british reinforcement, in the summer of 1777, was
delayed on the ocean three months by contrary winds, until it was too late for
the conflagrating general CLINTON to raise the siege of saratoga? What but a
providential miracle detected the conspiracy of Arnold, even in the critical
moment of the execution of that infernal plot, in which the body of the
american army, then at west-point, with his excellency general WASHINGTON
himself, were to have been rendered into the hands of the enemy! -- Doubtless
inspired by the Supreme Illuminator of great minds, were the joint councils of
a Washington and a Rochambeau, in that grand effort of generalship, with which
they deceived and astonished a Clinton, and eluded his vigilance in their
transit by new york, and rapid marches for virginia. Was it not of God, that
both the navy and army should enter the chesapeak at the same time? Who but God
could have ordained the critical arrival of the gallic fleet, so as to prevent
and defeat the british, and assist and cooperate with the combined armies in
the siege and reduction of york-town? Should we not ever admire and ascribe to
a supreme energy, the wise and firm generalship displayed by general GREEN,
when (leaving the active, roving Cornwallis to pursue his helter-skelter ill
fated march into virginia) he coolly and steadily went onwards, and
deliberately, judiciously, and heroically, recovered the carolinas and the
southern states?

How rare have been the defections and apostacies of our capital characters,
though tempted with all the charms of gold, titles, and nobility? Whence is it
that so few of our army have deserted to the enemy? Whence that our brave
sailors have chosen the horrors of prison ships and death, rather than to fight
against their country? Whence that men of every rank have so generally felt and
spoken alike, as if the cords of life struck unison through the continent? What
but a miracle has preserved the union of the states, the purity of congress,
and the unshaken patriotism of every general assembly? It is God who has raised
up for us a great and powerful ally, an ally which sent us a chosen army, and a
naval force; who sent us a ROCHAMBEAU and a CHATELLUX, and other characters of
the first military merit and eminence, to fight side by side with a WASHINGTON
and a LINCOLN, and the intrepid americans, in the siege and battle of
york-town. It is God, who so ordered the ballancing interests of nations, as to
produce an irresistible motive in the european maritime powers, to take our
part. Hence the recognition of our independence by spain and holland, as well
as france. Britain ought to have foreseen, that it must have given joy to
surrounding nations, tired and wearied out with the insolence and haughtiness
of her domineering flag, a flag which spreads terror through the oceans of the
terraqueous globe, to behold the era when their forces should have arrived to
such maturity and strength, that a junction of national navies, would prod^ce
an aggregate force, adequate to the humiliation of britain and her gallant and
lofty navy. Nor could they resist the operation of this motive, prompting them
to assist in the cutting off of a member, with which the growing aggrandisement
and power of britain were connected; as thus she would be disarmed of terror,
and they should be at rest. If britain does not learn wisdom by these events,
and disclaim the sovereignty of the ocean, the junction of national navies will
settle the point for her, in less than half a century. So wonderfully does
divine providence order the time and coincidence of the public national
motives, cooperating in effecting great public events and revolutions.

But the time would fail me to recount the wonder working providence of God, in
the events of this war. Let these serve as a specimen; and lead us to hope that
God will not forsake this people; for whom he has done such mavelous things
(whereof we are glad and rejoice this day) having at length brought us to the
dawn of Peace. O PEACE! thou welcome guest! all hail, thou heavenly visitant!
calm the tumult of nations, and wave thy balmy wing to perpetuity over this
region of liberty. Let there be a tranquil period for the unmolested
accomplishment of the magnalia dei, the great events in God's moral government,
designed from eternal ages to be displayed in these ends of the earth.

And here I beg leave to congratulate my country, upon the termination of this
cruel and unnatural war, the cessation of hostilities, and the prospect of
PEACE. May this great event excite and elevate our first our highest
acknowledgments to the sovereign monarch of universal nature, to the supreme
disposer and controller of all events; let this our pious, sincere and devout
gratitude ascend in one general effusion of heartfelt praise and hallelujah,
in one united cloud of incense, even the incense of universal joy and
thanksgiving to God from the collective body of the united states.

And while we render our supreme honors to the Most High, the God of armies;
let us recollect, with affectionate honor, the bold and brave sons of freedom,
who willingly offered themselves, and bled in ^he defense of their country. Our
fellow-citizens, the OFFICERS and SOLDIERS of the PATRIOT ARMY, who, with the
Manlys, the Jones's, and other gallant commanders and brave seamen of the
American navy, have heroically fought the war by sea and by land, merit of
their once bleeding but now triumphant country, laurels, crowns, rewards, and
the highest honors. Never was the profession of arms used with more glory, or
in a better cause, since the days of JOSHUA the son of Nun. O WASHINGTON! how
do I love thy name! how have I often adored and blessed thy God, for creating
and forming thee the great ornament of human kind! upheld and protected by the
Omnipotent, by the Lord of Hosts, thou have been sustained and carried through
one of the most arduous and most important wars in all history. The world and
posterity will, with admiration, contemplate thy deliberate, cool, and stable
judgment, thy virtues, thy valor and heroic achievements, as far surpassing
those of a CYRUS, whom the world loved and adored. The sound of thy fame shall
go out into all the earth, and extend to distant ages. Thou has convinced the
world of the BEAUTY OF VIRTUE -- for in thee this BEAUTY shines with
distinguished luster. Those who would not recognize any beauty in virtue in the
world beside, will yet reverence it in thee. There is a glory in thy
disinterested benevolence, which the greatest characters would purchase, if
possible, at the expense of worlds, and which may excite indeed their
emulation, but cannot be felt by the VENAL GREAT -- who think every thing, even
virtue and true glory, may be bought and sold, and trace our every action to
motives terminating in self. Find virtue local, all relation scorn,
See all in self, and but for SELF be born. Dunciad, b. 4, p. 480.

But thou, O WASHINGTON, forgottest thyself, when thou lovedst thy bleeding
country. Not all the gold of ophir, nor a world filled with rubies and
diamonds, could effect or purchase the sublime and noble feelings of thine
heart, in that single self-moved act, when thou renouncedst the REWARDS OF
GENERALSHIP, and heroically tookest upon thyself the dangerous as well as
arduous office of our GENERALISSIMO -- and this at a solemn moment, when thou
did deliberately cast the die, for the dubious, the very dubious alternative
of a gible^ or a TRIUMPHAL ARCH. But, beloved, enshielded and blessed by the
great MELCHISEDEC, the king of righteousness as well as peace, thou have
triumphed gloriously. Such has been thy military wisdom in the struggles of
this arduous conflict, such the noble rectitude, amiableness and mansuetude of
thy character, something is there so singularly glorious and venerable thrown
by heaven about thee, that not only does thy country love thee, but our very
enemies stop the madness of their fire in full volley, stop the illiberality of
their slander, at thy name, as if rebuked from heaven, with a touch not mine
anointed, and do my HERO no harm. Thy fame is of sweeter perfume than arabian
spices in the gardens of persia. A baron de Steuben shall waft its fragrance to
the monarch of prussia: a marquis de la Fayette shall waft it to a fa^ greater
monarch, and diffuse thy renown throughout europe: The author does not doubt
but that the capital events in the mediatorial kingdom on earth, into which
angels desire ^o look, especially those which respect the protestant zion, are
sub^ects of extensi^^e attention in heaven, and that characters of real and
eminent merit in the cause of liberty and virtue, are ecchoed and contemplated
with great honor in the celestial realms.
listening angels shall catch the odor, waft it to heaven, and perfume the
universe.

And now that our warfare is ended, do thou, o man of God, greatly beloved of
the Most High, permit a humble minister of the blessed Jesus, who, though at a
distance, has vigilantly accompanied thee through every stage of thy military
progress, has watched thine every movement and danger with an heartfelt
anxiety and solicitude; and who, with the most sincere and servant wishes for
thy safety and success, has not ceased day nor night to pray for thee, and to
commend thee and thy army to God; -- condescend to permit him to express his
most cordial congratulations, and to share in the triumphs of thy bosom, on
this great and joyous occasion. We thank the Lord of Hosts, that has given his
servant to see his desire upon his enemies, and peace on israel. And when thou
shall now at length retire from the fatigues of nine laborious campaigns, to
the tranquil enjoyment, to the sweetness and serenity of domestic life, may you
never meet the fate of that ornament of arms and of humanity, the great
BELISARIUS; but may a crown of universal love and gratitude, of universal
admiration, and of the universal reverence and honor of thy saved country, rest
and flourish upon the head of its VETERAN GENERAL and glorious defender; until,
by the divine Jesus, whom thou have loved and adored, and of whose holy
religion thou art not ashamed, thou shall be translated from a world of war, to
a world of peace, liberty, and eternal TRIUMPH.

The time would fail me to commemorate the merits of the other capital
characters of the army. To do this, and to pay the tribute of fraternal honor
and respect, to our glorious ALLIED ARMY, will belong to the future Homers,
Livys and Tossos of our country; for none but americans can write the american
war. They will celebrate the names of a WASHINGTON and a ROCHAMBEAU, a GREEN
and a LA FAYETTE, a LINCOLN and a CHARTELLUX, a GATES and a VIOMENIL, a PUTNAM
and a duc de LAUZUN, a MORGAN, and other heroes who rushed to arms, and offered
themselves voluntarily for the defense of liberty. They will take up a
lamentation and drop a tear upon the graves of those mighty ones, those
beauties of israel, who have fallen in battle, from the day of lexington to the
victory of york-town. And while they commemorate those who have lived through
singular sufferings, as those honorable (...), a LAUREN, and a GADSDEN; the
names of the (...) martyr-generals WARREN, (...) DE KALB, WOOSTER, THOMAS, with
a POLASKI, (...) others, will be recorded as heroically raising in these (...)
of the Lord. But I may not enlarge, save only that we drop a tear, or rather
showers of tears, upon the graves of those other brave officers and soldiers,
(...) in battle, or otherwise perished in the war. Oh! (...) my (...) were
waters and my eyes a fountain of tears; that I might weep the thousands of our
brethren, that have perished in prison-ships -- in one of which, the jersey,
then lying at new york, perished above eleven thousand the last three years!
while others have been barbarously exiled to the east indies for life! -- Come
mourn with me all ye tender parents and friends, the fate of your dear -- dear
-- But these scenes are too tender and distressing! -- Can we ever love britain
again? -- Can the tender, affectionate fathers and mothers, brothers and
sisters; can the numerous bemoaning friends and relatives, and perhaps the
espoused bosoms of the tender sex -- can they, I say, ever forget the cruel
mockings, scourgings, starvations, deaths, assassinations, of their dearest
offspring and connexions in british captivity? Can they forget the numerous
thousands of their captivated countrymen instantly consigned to destruction, to
dungeons, prisons, places of variolous infection and certain death? Will they
be soothed by telling them this is the fate of war? As well may inquisitorial
cruelties be soothed, by alleging they are salutary corrections, and necessary
for the good of the church. Our enemies took occasion, from this fate of war,
to reek their vengeance, and to lash us with a severity too unmerciful ever to
be forgotten. Can we forget the conflagrations of charlestown, norfolk, esopus,
fairfield, and other american towns, laid in ashes by a Tryon, and other
incendiaries? Were these the kindnesses american brethren received from the
hands of britons, and their more cruel associates the indians and loyalists?
Can we forget the barbarous tragedy of colonel Haine, or the murder of captain
Huddy, in violation of the most sacred laws of war and of national honor?
Blush, oh britain, for the stain of your national glory! Can we ever forget
with what cruel and malicious delight they tortured, entowered, and insulted an
american plenipotentiary, the illustrious LAURENS, although by the laws of
honor and nations the person of an ambassador is sacred? Can we ever forget the
cruel and infamous treatment of the honorable Mr. GADSDEN? -- O Gadsden! how I
reverence thy piety, thy firmness in captivity, thine intrepid and uncorrupted
patriotism, thine enlightened politics, thy unremitted fervor and zeal in the
cause of liberty! But how painful is it to recount the even less than ten
thousandth part of the series of distresses, the complicated woe and misery,
that make up the system of sufferings, which we have been called to endure, in
the pangs and throes of the parturition of empire, in effecting our glorious
revolution, in rescuing millions from the hand of oppression, and in laying the
foundation of a great empire. General Washington's address to the army, in
general orders, April 19, 1783, on the cessation of hostilities.


The PATRIOT ARMY merits our commemoration, and so do the great characters in
the patriotic ASSEMBLIES and CONGRESS. Let america never forget what they owe
to those first intrepid defenders of her rights, the honorable Mr. SAMUEL
ADAMS, and the hon. JAMES OTIS, Esquire add to these the hon. Dr. JOHN WINTHROP,
hon. JAMES BOWDOIN, Esquire who, with others, were the marked objects of ministerial
vengeance; who early stepped forth and heroically withstood tyranny, and alarmed
their country with its danger; while venal sycophants were lulling us to rest,
and hushing us into silence. His excellency Mr. president RANDOLPH, merits our
grateful commemoration; and so do the governors RUTLEDGE, WARD, LIVINGSTON,
HOPKINS, NASH, CLINTON, the honorable Messieurs WITH, DYER, SHERMAN,
PENDELTON, HENRY, ELLERY, the LEES, president HUNTINGTON, LYNCH, WITHERSPOON,
WOLCOTT, gov. PACA, gov. HALL, LAW, MERCHANT, president M'KEAN, ELSWORTH,
VANDYKE, JEFFERSON -- Jefferson, who poured the soul of the continent into the
monumental act of independence. These, and other worthy personages of this and
the other states, will be celebrated in history, among the cardinal patriots of
this revolution. All the ages of man will not obliterate the meritorious name
of his excellency governor HANCOCK, as president of congress at a most critical
era, nor the meritorious names of that illustrious band of heroes and
compatriots, those sensible and intrepid worthies who, with him, resolutely and
nobly dared, in the face of every danger, to sign the glorious act of
INDEPENDENCE. JOHN HANCOCK.
New Hampshire. JOSIAH BARTLETT, WILLIAM WHIPPLE, MATTHEW THORNTON.
Massachusetts Bay. SAMUEL ADAMS, JOHN ADAMS, ROBERT TREAT PAIN^, ELBRIDGE
GIRRY.
Rhode Island. STEPHEN HOPKINS, WILLIAM ELLERY.
Connecticutt. ROGER SHERMAN, SAMUEL HUNTINGTON, WILLIAM WILLIAMS, OLIVER
WOLCOTT.
New York. WILLIAM FLOYD, PHILIP LIVINGSTON, FRANCIS LEWIS, LEWIS MORRIS.
New Jersey. RICHARD STOCKTON, JOHN WITHERSPOON, FRANCIS HOPKINSON, JOHN HEART,
ABRAHAM CLARK.
Pennsylvania. ROBERT MORRIS, BENJAMIN RU^H, BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, JOHN MORTON,
GEORGE CLYMER, JAMES SMITH, GEORGE TAILOR, JAMES WILSON, GEORGE ROSS.
Delaware, CAESAR RODNEY, GEORGE R^AD,
Maryland, SAMUEL CHASE, WILLIAM PACA, THOMAS STONE, CHARLES CARROLL (of
Carollton)
Virginia. GEORGE WITH, RICHARD HENRY LEE, THOMAS JEFFERSON, BENJAMIN
HARRISON, THOMAS NELSON, jun. FRANCIS LIGHT^OUT LEE, CARTER BRAXTON.
North Carolina. WILLIAM HOOPER, JOSEPH H^WES, JOHN PENN.
South Carolina. EDWARD RUTLEDGE, THOMAS HEYWARD, jun. THOMAS LY^CH, jun.
ARTHUR MIDDLETON.
Georgia. ^^TTON GW^^NEIT, ^^MA H^LL, GEORGE WALTO^.


May their names live, be preserved, and transmitted to posterity with deserved
reputation and honor, through all american ages. Those great civilians and
ambassadors, the illustrious FRANKLIN, ADAMS, JAY and LAURENS, have approved
themselves equal to the highest negotiations in the courts of nations; been
faithful to their country's liberties, and by their great and eminent services
have justly merited to have their names sent forward to immortality in history,
with renown and unsullied glory.

Great and extensive will be the happy effects of this warfare, in which we
have been called in providence to fight out, not the liberties of america only,
but the liberties of the world itself. The spirited and successful stand which
we have made against tyranny, will prove the salvation of england and ireland:
and by teaching all sovereigns the danger of irritating and trifling with the
affections and loyalty of their subjects, introduce clemency, moderation and
justice into public government at large through europe. Already have we learned
ireland and all other nations the road to liberty; the way to a redress of
grievances, by open systematical measures, committees of correspondence, and
military discipline of an armed people. Ireland has become gloriously
independent of england. Nor will the spirit rest, till scotland becomes
independent also. It would be happier for the three kingdoms, to subsist with
parliaments and national councils independent of one another, although
confederated under one monarch. The union of 1707 has produced the loss and
dismemberment of america. It is just possible, that within this age, some
ill-fated counselor of another connection, might have arisen, and prompted
majesty and parliament to sanguinary measures against america: but it is more
than probable, that their enforcement would have been deferred, or
procrastinated a century hence, or to a period when our accumulated population
would have dictated wiser, milder measures, to the british court; and so
america, by a gentle, fraternal connection, would have remained cemented to
britain for distant ages. But a rehoboam counselor stepped in, et actum est de
republica -- the ten tribes are lost. Had it not been for the insidious and
haughty councils of a Bute and a Mansfield, imbued with principles incompatible
with liberty; with the unwieldly faction of their despotic connexions in the
empire, america and ireland had remained united with britain to this day.
Chagrined and mortified by the defeat and dishonor brought upon them by Butean
councils and dominion, as well as with their curtailed and unequal weight in
parliament, scotland, emulous of the glory of ireland, will wish for and obtain
a dissolution of the union, and resume a separate sovereignty. It must be the
lenity, the wisdom, the gentle and pacific measures of an augustan age, that
can conserve the remnant of the british empire from this tripartite division.

Nor will the british isles alone be relieved into liberty, but more extensive
still will be the peaceable fruits of our righteous conflict. The question on
the mare liberum and the mare clausum, heretofore discussed by the (...) of the
last century, will no more require the learned labors of a Milton, a Seldom, a
Grotius. This war has decided, not by the jus maritimum of ^hodes, oleron or
britain, but on the principles of commercial utility and public right, that the
NAVIGATION OF THE ATLANTIC OCEAN SHALL BE FREE: and so probably will be that of
all the oceans of the terraqueous globe. All the european powers will
henceforth, from national and commercial interests, naturally become an united
and combined guaranty, for the free navigation of the atlantic, and free
commerce with america. Interest will establish a free access for all nations to
our shores, and for us to all nations. The armed neutrality will disarm even
war itself of hostilities against trade; will form a new chapter in the laws of
nations, and preserve a free commerce among powers at war. Fighting armies will
decide the fate of empires by the sword, without interrupting the civil, social
and commercial intercourse of subjects. The want of any thing to take, will
prove a natural abolition of privateering, when the property shall be covered
with neutral protection. Even the navies will, within a century, become
useless. A generous and truly liberal system of national connection, in the
spirit of the plan conceived and nearly executed by the great HENRY IV. of
FRANCE, Sully's memoirs.
will almost annihilate war itself.

We shall have a communication with all nations in commerce, manners and
science, beyond any thing heretofore known in the world. Manufacturers and
artizans, and men of every description, may, perhaps, come and settle among us.
They will be few indeed in comparison with the annual thousands of our natural
increase, and will be incorporated with the prevailing hereditary complexion of
the first settlers: -- We shall not be assimilated to them, but they to us,
especially in the second and third generations. This fermentation and communion
of nations will doubtless produce something very new, singular, and glorious.
Upon the conquest of Alexander the great, statuary, painting, architecture,
philosophy, and the fine arts were transplanted in perfection from athens to
tarsus, from greece to syria; where they immediately flourished in even greater
perfection, than in the parent state. Not in greece herself, are there to be
found specimens of a sublimer or more magnificent architecture, even in the
grecian style, than in the ruins of baalbeck and palmyra. So all the arts may
be transplanted from europe and asia, and flourish in america with an augmented
luster: not to mention the augment of the sciences, from american inventions
and discoveries -- of which there have been as capital ones here, AMERICAN
INVENTIONS.
1730. Reflecting Quadrant. By Mr. Tho's Gods^y, at Philad. 1745. Mercurial
Inoculation. By Dr. Muirson. 1750. Electrical pointed Rods. By Dr. Franklin.
1762. Sand-Iron. By Dr. Jared Elliot. 1769. Quantity of Matter in Comets. By
Professor Winthrop.

the last half century, as in all europe.

The rough sonorous diction of the english language may here (...) athenian
polish, and receive its attic urbanity; as it will probably become the
vernacular tongue of more numerous millions, than ever yet spoke one language
on earth. It may continue for ages to be the prevailing and general language of
north america. The intercommunion of the united states with all the world, in
travels, trade, and politics, and the infusion of letters into our infancy,
will probably preserve us from the provincial dialects, risen into
inexterminable habit before the invention of printing. The greek never became
the language of the alexandrine, nor the turkish of the ottoman conquests; nor
yet the latin that of the roman empire. The saracenic conquests have already
l^st the pure and elegant arabic of the koreish tribe, or the family of
Ishmael, in the corrupted dialects of egypt, syria, persia, and indostan.
Different from these the english language will grow up, with the present
american population, into great purity and elegance, unmutilated by the foreign
dialects of foreign conquests. And in this connection I may observe, with
pleasure, how God, in his providence, has ordered that, at the reformation, the
english translation of the Bible should be made with very great accuracy, with
greater accuracy, it is presumed, than any other translation. This is said,
allowing that some texts admit of correction. I have compared it throughout
with the originals, hebrew, greek and syriac; and beg leave to judge, and
testify it to be, a very excellent translation. Nor do I believe a better is
ever to be expected in this imperfect state. It sustained a revision of
numerous translators from Tyndal, to the last review by the bishops and other
learned divines, in the time of James I. 180 years ago; and has never been
altered since. Vid. Lewis's hist, transl. bib.
It may have been designed by providence for the future perusal of more
millions of the human race than ever were able to read one book, and for their
use to the millennial ages.

This great american revolution, this recent political phenomenon of a new
sovereignty arising among the sovereign powers of the earth, will be attended
to and contemplated by all nations. Navigation will carry the american flag
around the globe itself; and display the thirteen stripes and new constellation
at bengal and canton, on the indus and ganges, on the whang-ho and the
yang-tse-kiang; and with commerce will import the wisdom and literature of the
east. That prophecy of Daniel is now literally fulfilling -- ishotatu rabbim
vetrabbeh hadaugnt -- there shall be an universal traveling too and fro, and
knowledge shall be increased. This knowledge will be brought home and treasured
up in america: and being here digested and carried to the highest perfection,
may reblaze back from america to europe, asia and africa, and illumine the
world with truth and liberty.

That great civilian Dr. John Adams, the learned and illustrious american
ambassador, observes thus, Let. Dec. 18, 1781.
"But the great designs of providence must be accomplished; -- great indeed!
The progress of society will be accelerated by centuries by this revolution.
The emperor of germany is adopting, as fast as he can, american ideas of
toleration and religious liberty: And it will become the fashionable system of
europe very soon. Light spreads from the dayspring in the west; and may it
shine more and more until the perfect day." -- So spreading may be the spirit
for the restoration and recovery of long lost national rights, that even the
Cortes of spain may re-exist, and resume their ancient splendour, authority, and
control of royalty. So jealous were the Cortes of their liberties, that the
states of Arragon in particular, after sundry previous stipulations, exacted a
coronation oath of the king, which was pronounced by the Justitia arragonensis
(who represented the person of the supreme power in the state) a power which
they asserted to be superior to kings, in these words, NOS QUI VALEMOS TANTO
COMME VOS, Y PODEMOS MAS QUE VOS, VOS ELEGIMOS REY: CON ESTAS Y ESTAS
CONDITIONES, INTRA VOS Y NOS, UN QUE MANDA MAB QUE VOS. "We who are as powerful
as you, and have more authority than you, elect you king: with the stipulated
conditions; between you and us, there is one ( viz. the Justiciary) higher in
command than you." -- See a learned tract de jure magistratuum in subditos and
officio subditorum erga magistratus: printed lions, 1576, full of jural and
political erudition -- and for that age, full of liberty.
The same principles of wisdom and enlightened politics, may establish
rectitude in public government throughout the world.

The most ample religious liberty will also probably obtain among all nations.
Benevolence and religious lenity is increasing among the nations. The reformed
in france, who were formerly oppressed with heavy persecution, at present enjoy
a good degree of religious liberty, though by silent indulgence only. A
re-establishment of the edict of nantz, would honor the grand monarch, by doing
public justice to a large body of his best and most loyal subjects. The emperor
of germany, last year, published an imperial decree granting liberty for the
free and unmolested exercise of the protestant religion within the austrian
territories and dominions. The order of jesuits, suppressed in rapid succession
by the european princes 1765, was finally abolished 1773, by the sensible and
sagacious Ganganelli, who bid fairer to reunite the protestants, had it been
possible, than any pontiff since the secession from Leo X. Nor can the order be
revived; nor the suppression of religious houses in spain and austria, nor
austrian liberty, be prevented by the bigot^ed austere Braschi, the present
reigning pontiff.
The inquisition has been in effect, this year, suppressed in spain, where the
king, by an edict of 3d of November, 1782, proclaimed liberty for inhabitants
of all religions: And by a happily conceived plan for literary reformation, the
aurora of science will speedily blaze into meridian splendour in that kingdom.
An emulation for liberty and science is enkindled among the nations, and will
doubtless produce something very liberal and glorious, in this age of science,
this period of the empire of reason.

The united states will embosom all the religious sects or denominations in
christendom. Here they may all enjoy their whole respective systems of worship
and church government, complete. Of these, next to the presbyterians, the
church of england will hold a distinguished and principal figure. They will
soon furnish themselves with a bishop in virginia and maryland, and perhaps
another to the northward, to ordain their clergy, give confirmation,
superintend and govern their churches; the main body of which will be in
virginia and maryland, besides a diaspora or interspersion in all the other
states. The unitas fratrum, for above thirty years past, have had moravian
bishops in america; and I think they have three at present, though no^ of lo^al
or diocesan jurisdiction, their pastorate being the whole unity throughout the
world. In this there ever was a distinction between the bohemian episcopacy,
and that of the eastern and western churches; for in a body of 2000 ancient
bohemian churches, they seldom had above two or three bishops. -- The baptists,
the friends, the lutherans, the romanists, are all considerable bodies, in all
their dispersions through the states. The dutch, and gallic, and german
reformed or calvinistic churches among us, I consider as presbyterian,
differing from us in nothing of moment, save in language. There is a
considerable body of these in the states of new york, jersey, pennsylvania, and
at eben^zer in georgia. There is a greek church brought from smyrna, but I
think it falls below these states. There are westleians, mennonists and others,
all which make a very inconsiderable amount, in comparison with those, who will
give the religious complexion to america; which for the southern parts will be
episcopal, the northern presbyterian. All religious denominations will be
independent of one another, as much as the greek and armenian patriarchates in
the east: and having, on account of religion, no superiority as to secular
powers and civil immnities, they will cohabit together in harmony, and I hope,
with a most generous catholicism and benevolence. The example of a friendly
cohabitation of all sects in america, proving that men may be good members of
civil society, and yet differ in religion: this precedent, I say, which has
already been intently studied and contemplated for fifteen years past by
france, holland, and germany, may have already had an effect in introducing
moderation, lenity, and justice, among european states. And who can tell how
extensive a blessing this american Joseph may become to the whole human race,
although once despised by his brethren, exiled and sold into egypt? How
applicable that in Genesis xlix. 22. 26. Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a
fruitful bough by a well; whose branches run over the wall. The Archers have
sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him. But his bow abode in
strength, the arms of his hands were made strong by the arms of the mighty God
of Jacob. -- The blessings of thy father, have prevailed above the blessings of
my progenitors, unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hill: they shall be on
the head of JOSEPH, and on the crown of the head of him that was SEPARATED from
his brethren.

Little would civilians have thought ages ago, that the world should ever look
to america for models of government and polity: little did they think of
finding this most perfect polity among the poor outcasts, the contemptible
people of new england, and particularly in the long despised civil polity of
connecticut; a polity conceived by the sagacity and wisdom of a WINTHROP, a
LUDLOW HAYNES, HOPKINS, HOOKER, and the other first settlers of hartford, in
1636. And while europe and asia may hereafter learn that the most liberal
principles of law and civil polity are to be found on this side the atlantic;
they may also find the true religion here depurated from the rust and
corruption of ages, and learn from us to reform and restore the church to its
primitive purity. It will be long before the ecclesiastical pride of the
splendid european hierarchies, can submit to learn wisdom from those, whom they
have been inured to look upon with sovereign contempt. But candid and liberal
disquisition will sooner or later have a great effect. Removed from the
embarrassments of corrupt systems, and the dignities and blinding opulence
connected with them, the unfettered mind can think with a noble enlargement,
and with an unbounded freedom, go wherever the light of truth directs. Here
will be no bloody tribunals, no cardinals inquisitors-general, to bend the
human mind, forceably to control the understanding, and put out the light of
reason, the candle of the Lord, in man; to force an innocent galileo to
renounce truths demonstrable as the light of day. Religion may here receive its
last, most liberal, and impartial examination. Religious liberty is peculiarly
friendly to fair and generous disquisition. Here deism will have its full
chance; nor need libertines more to complain of being overcome by any weapons,
but the gentle, the powerful ones of argument and truth. Revelation will be
found to stand the test to the ten thousandth examination.

There are three coetaneous events to take place, whose futurition is certain
from prophecy, the annihilation of the pontificate, the reassembling of the
jews, and the fullness of the gentiles. That liberal and candid disquisition of
christianity, which will most assuredly take place in america, will prepare
europe for the first event, with which the other will be connected, when,
especially on the return of the twelve tribes to the holy land, there will
burst forth a degree of evidence hitherto unperceived, and of efficacy to
convert a world. More than three quarters of mankind yet remain heathen. Heaven
put a stop to the propagation of christianity, when the church became corrupted
with the adoration of numerous deities and images, because this would have been
only exchanging an old for a new idolatry. Nor is christendom now larger than
it was nine centuries ago. The promising prospects of the propaganda fide at
rome are come to nothing; and it may be of the divine destiny, that all other
attempts for gospelizing the nations of the earth shall prove fruitless, until
the present christendom itself be recovered to the primitive purity and
simplicity. At which time, instead of the babel confusion of contradicting
missionaries, all will harmoniously concur in speaking one language, one holy
faith, one apostolic religion, to an uncontroverted world. At this period, and
in effecting this great event, we have reason to think, that the united states
may be of no small influence and consideration. It was of the Lord, to send
Joseph into egypt, to save much people, and to show forth his praise. It is of
the Lord, that a woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and
upon her head a crown of twelve stars, not to say thirteen.
should flee into the wilderness, where she has a place prepared of God, Re^.
xii. (...)
and where she might be the repository of wisdom, and keep the commandments of
God, and have the testimony of Jesus. It may have been of the Lord, that
christianity is to be found in such great purity, in this church exiled into
the wildernesses of america; and that its purest body should be evidently
advancing forward, by an augmented natural increase and spiritual edification,
into a singular superiority -- with the ultimate subserviency to the glory of
God, in converting the world.

When we look forward and see this country increased to 40 or 50 millions,
while we see all the religious sects increased into respectable bodies, we
shall doubtless find the united body of the congregational, consociated and
presbyterian churches, making an equal figure with any of them; or to say the
least, to be of such magnitude as to number, that it will be to no purpose for
other sects to meditate their aversion. This, indeed, is enterprized, but it
will end in a sisyphean labor. There is the greatest prospect that we shall
become thirty out of forty millions. And while the avenues to civil improvement
and public honors, will here be equally open to all sects, so it will be no
dishonor hereafter to be a presbyterian, or of the religious denomination which
will probably ever make the most distinguished figure in this great republic.
And hereafter when the world shall behold us a respectable part of christendom,
they may be induced by curiosity, with calmness and candor to examine, whether
something of christianity may not really be found among us. And while we have
to lament our laodiceanism, deficient morals and incidental errors, yet the
collective system of evangelical doctrines, the instituted ordinances, and the
true ecclesiastical polity, may be found here in a great degree of purity.
Europeans and some among us, have habituated themselves to a most contemptible
idea of the New England churches -- conceiving us to be only a colluvies of
error, fanaticism, irregularity and confusion. Peter's hist* of Connecticu^t.
They have taken this idea in part from our brethren in britain, who have
viewed us very much also in the same light, to this day. This on the contrary
is the truth, that, allowing for offenses unavoidable, for imperfections and
controversies, incident to the churches in their most regular state, our
churches are as completely reformed, and as well modelled according to the
scripture plan, as can be expected till the millenium. Particularly these
essential things may be found among them upon examination, that the churches or
particular congregations are regularly formed, and duly uphold public worship
every Lord's day, and this ordinarily in a very decent solemn manner; that the
preaching of the word, baptism and the Lord's supper are regularly and duly
administered by the pastors: that the pastors are orderly and regularly set
apart to the ministry, by the laying on of the hands of the presbytery, or of
those who have regularly derived office power, in lineal succession, from the
Apostles and Jesus Christ. We have no classical or synodical tribunals: yet we
have ecelesiastical councils. And our church discipline, although not
sufficiently attended to, is such that persons of evident scandal and
immorality, and vicious ministers (of which God be thanked, there have been but
few, very few indeed) cannot live long in our churches. With all our humbling
imperfections, I know of no amendment necessary, as to our general system of
church polity. Nothing of moment (unless it be grace) no doctrine, no ordinance
or institution of the primitive churches, but may be found in general reception
and observance among us. If we are condemned for having no tribunals or
judicatories out of the church, which however is not true, let it be remembered
that neither Christ nor his apostles ever instituted any: and that in this
respect, we are just in the same state, with regard to ecclesiastical polity as
the 150 churches of the apostolic age, It has been computed, that the churches
of the apostolic age did not exceed 150 or 200 congregations in the whole world.
and particularly the seven churches of asia, in the time of St. John.

The invalidity of our ordinations is objected against us, and so of
consequence the invalidity of all our official administrations. And now that we
are upon the matter, give me leave to exhibit a true, though summary state of
it, as the result of a very full, laborious, and thorough inquiry. It was the
mistaken opinion of some of our first ministers in new england (than whom,
there never was a more learned collection, for they embosomed all the
theological and ecclesiastical erudition of all ages), it was, I say, their
opinion, that the power of ordination of all church officers, was in the
church, by their elders. They well knew, from ecclesiastical and scripture
antiquity, that the power of election was there; and they judged ordination the
lesser act: but their great reason was, that the church might not be controlled
by any exterior authority, whether episcopal or presbyterial, and so no more be
harrassed by bishops courts, or any other similar tribunals. Our fathers held
to an eldership, for they saw it in all antiquity, as well as the bible: and it
was their judgment, that elders should be ordained by elders of the same
church. The most of the first forty churches had ruling elders; a few had not.
These few created an early difficulty; on which our fathers early made a
mistaken decision, that where there were no elders in the church, ordination
might be done by the laying on of hands of delegated brethren. The introduction
of ministers, already ordained, into the pastoral charge of a particular
church, was at first done by lay-brethren; and this was, from the beginning,
improperly called ordination, how often soever repeated. A repetition of
ordinations or baptisms, does not nullify the first regular administrations.
All the first new england ministers were ordained before. Thus Mr. Wilson was
first ordained by a bishop in england; then 1630 by governor Winthrop and
others he was ordained teacher in boston; he then ordained an elder: and upon
the accession of Mr. Cotton, 1633, he was, by this elder and governor Winthrop,
again, a third time, ordained and constituted pastor. So the learned and
courtly Mr. Davenport was ordained by a bishop, then by the brethren, pastor of
the church in new haven, in 1639; and 1668, was again ordained, pastor of the
first church in boston, by elder Penn. Mr. Hooker was ordained a presbyter by a
bishop in england, and then again by the brethren at Newtown, 1633, who removed
with his church to hartford. Mr. Bulkly, of concord, and Mr. Noyes, of newbury,
and others, expressly adhered to their former ordinations in england by the
bishops, though not as bishops, but as presbyters. A few extracts from the
first governor Winthrop's entries in a manuscript diary, may e^in^e that the
ministers relied upon their ordinations in england. At August 27, 1630, "We of
the congregation kept a first and chose Mr. Wilson our Teacher, and Mr. Newel
our elder, and Mr. Gager and Mr. Aspinwall Deacons. We used impositions of
hands, but with this protestation by all, that it was only ^s a sign of
election and confirmation not of any intent that Mr. Wilson should renounce his
ministry he received in england." Mr. Gager died 20th September, and October
25th 16^0 "Mr. Colburne, who was chosen a Deacon by the congregation a week
before, was invested by imposition of hands of the minister and elder."

Now (...) A fast was held by the congregation of boston and Mr. Wilson
formerly their teacher, was chosen pastor, and -- Oliver a ruling elder, and
both were ordained by imposition of hands first by the teacher and two deacons
-- upon the elder, and then by the elder and the deacons upon the pastor."

Oct. 10, 1633. -- 'Mr. Cotton was then chosen Teacher of the congregation of
Boston and ordained by imposition of the hands of the presbytery. -- The pastor
and two elders laid their hands upon their head, and the pastor prayed, and
then taking off their hands laid them on again and speaking to him by name did
thereby design him to the said office -- and did give him the charge of the
congregation. -- Then the neighboring ministers which were present did at the
pastor's notice give him the right hand of fellowship."

Oct. 11; 1633, "A fast at Newtown where Mr. Hooker was chosen pastor and Mr.
Stone teacher in such manner as before at Boston."

Mr. Bulkley's ordination was 2m. 6d. 1637. "The church of concord kept a day
of humiliation -- for the ordination of their elders, and they chose Mr.
Bulkley teacher and Mr. Jones pastor. Upon a question being moved by one sent
from the church of Salem it was resolved by the ministers there present, that
such as had been ministers in england, were lawful ministers notwithstanding
their acceptance of the call of the bishops -- but having come hither, they
accounted themselves no ministers, until they were called to another church,
and that upon election they were ministers before they were solemnly ordained."

Another specimen of the first new england ordinations we have in the church of
Dedham "April 24, 16^9. John Hunting one of the brethren was ordained to the
office of a ruling elder by fasting and prayer and the laying on the hands of
Mr. John Allin their pastor elect and two other brethren. The same day Mr. John
Allin was ordained to the office of pastor by prayer and the laying on of the
hands of the ruling elder and two other brethren" Mr. Allen had been ordained
by a bishop: and he communicated ordaining power to the elder He died 1671: and
was succeeded in the pastorate by Mr. Adams, who in 1673 was ordained by
neighboring pastors only.


But in general the induction of the ministers of the first churches, was
performed by lay-brethren, and this was called ordination, but should be
considered what in reality it was, only induction or instalment of those who
were vested with official power. These, as I said, were all ordained before by
the bishops in england. Nor have I ever found, with certainty, more than one
instance of lay-ordination, of a person never before ordained, the last
century, (and there are few but what I have examined) and this was done by the
advice, and under the inspection of ministers ordained by the bishops in
england, one of whom prayed at the solemnity of the consecration, and all gave
their approbation and right hand of fellowship; which in my opinion, amounts to
their performing the ordination themselves, they being present and assisting in
the transaction. This was at woburn, 1642. I believe there were two or three
more similar ordinations of unordained canditates, before the ministers saw and
corrected their error -- which, indeed, was almost the only error, of moment,
which the ministers went into the last century.

Immediately upon publishing the cambridge platform, 1648, our brethren in
england remonstrated against allowing lay-ordination. They alleged, that we
had no example in scripture of lay-ordination; that the sacerdotal gift or
office-power, was conferred and given by the laying on of the hands of the
presbytery, i. Tim. iv. (...)
and that we had examples of presbyterian ordination in scripture, and not only
that it was safest to proceed in this way, but that it was the only scriptural
ground. These arguments convinced our fathers, and they immediately set about
to remedy the practice, which had hitherto, providentially, wrought no
mischief, as the body of the pastors had been ordained by bishops. It instantly
became a custom for some of the ordained ministers present to lay on hands in
ordinations, it being for some time judged necessary, that the delegated
brethren should join, in token of subjection of the church to the pastoral care
of the minister. But at length it became a custom, so early as before 1660,
that, at the desire of the church, the ordaining ministers performed the whole,
both conferred office-power on the pastor elect, by the laying on of hands, and
committed the church to his pastoral charge; which, with the joint fellowship
of the pastors and churches, finished the ordination. Thus ordinations were
recovered into their right state and order, the last century, and before
lay-ordinations had wrought any evil. Thus office-power, by scripture
presbyters, continued to be transfused through the clergy. I have reason and
even assurance to believe, that there was no candidate ordained in new england,
before 1746, but whose ordination may be traced to the bishops in england. I
have found no instance to the contrary, although I have searched and examined
all the ordinations of the first half century here, and most of them for the
first hundred years. And as to the wild and enthusiastic period between 1740
and 1750, though it gave birth to perhaps thirty little separate congregations,
yet some have dissolved, others become regular, and the ten or a dozen now
remaining, are more and more convinced of the duty of seeking ordination from
among the standing ministers. And it is remarkable, that Mr. Thomas Dennison,
now living, assisted, laid on hands, and gave the charge at the first
ordination, in 1746, and at the three succeeding ordinations among the
separates in new england, from whence all the ordinations in the churches of
that description have proceeded. And although in the first, but not in the
others, he acted as a brother delegated by the church, and in the others as an
elder of another church, yet it is remarkable, I say, that he himself had been
ordained, in 1743, by one, whose ordination I have traced to the Mathers, and
other boston ministers, and through them up to the bishop of chester, and other
bishops in england. It is probable the few separate churches remaining, will,
in time, become regular, by seeking ordinations among the pastors of the
standing churches, where the ordinations are indubitable.

For, as I have said, the ordination of our clergy is regular and scriptural,
and may be traced, in the line of presbyters, up to the apostolic age: and so
in general may the ordinations, in this line, through the whole christian
world, especially in the great divisions of lutherans, calvinists, and church
of england. So wonderfully has Christ preserved the sacerdotal or presbyterian
order in the church, that the succession in this line is without a doubt. The
first ninety-four ministers who came over and settled new england, Long Island,
and the jerseys, before 1669, and chiefly before 1640 -- These, I say, were all
educated in the english universities, and were ordained in england. Some of
whom, as Hooker, Davenport, Chauncy, Lee, Bulkley, Noyes, Norton, were men of
universal reading in theological literature, and were profoundly versed in the
writings of the greek and latin churches, in the councils and historians, the
fathers, the writers of the middle ages, and the reformers -- especially those
miracles of human and divine learning, Chauncey and Lee. Of these ninety four,
one or two only were ordained by the puritans; as the fourteen, who came over
after the ejection of 1662, were ordained by the bishops, or more probably by
the presbyterians in the protectorate: all the rest by the bishops. All these
were ordained presbyters by the bishops in england: particularly the Rev. Mr.
Richard Mather was ordained a presbyter by Dr. Morton bishop of chester 1618.
Life of Dr. Increase Mather.
The bishops did not intend to communicate ordaining powers; but they really
intended to convey all the power of a scripture-presbyter; and by the
scripture, we find this power conferred by the laying on of the hands of the
presbytery. i. Tim. iv. 14.
If the succession in the line of bishops, might have been interrupted at the
reformation, yet not so in the line of presbyters. Office-power has
unquestionably been preserved in england among presbyters, not only to the
times of its subjugation to rome by Austin the monk, but ages before even to
Lucius, according to venerable Bede. And indeed we have it more directly to the
apostolic age, without going through rome, for bishop Jewel asserts truly, that
the ancient churches of england, were of greek, that is, oriental derivation.
We have in this manner an historical evidence and assurance, that the
new england ordinations in particular may be traced back to the holy apostles.

There is not an instance in the apostolic age, of bishops, priests, and
deacons, being stated officers of more than a single congregation. I risque
this historic assertion with the examination of the whole learned world;
although I well know that, like the evidences of revelation, it has been
examined a thousand times, with different judgments. Every congregation,
regularly and fully organized, had them: as appears from Dionysius the
areopagite, and St. Ignatius. The succession of bishops, who were only the
first presbyters, as well as of the other elders, was preserved by ordinations
performed by presbyters in or out of a church. And though ordinations were
usually performed by three or more, yet if only one presbyter laid on hands, it
was valid. Titus, a single elder, was left thus, to ordain elders in crete. The
church of alexandria, founded by St. Mark, retained presbyterian ordination,
exclusive, for 300 years, as appears from Eutychius, the patriarch there in the
ninth century, who wrote the originals of that church in arabic, from which I
have translated the following extract, viz.

"The ninth year of Claudius Caesar, while Mark, the evangelist, resided at
alexandria -- Hananies being converted to christianity, Mark baptized him, and
constituted or ordained him chief father at alexandria; and he became the first
patriarch of alexandria. Mark, the evangelist, likewise constituted and
ordained twelve (Cashisha The title Cashies is given to the coptic clergy to
this day.
) presbyters with Hananias; who should abide with the patriarch; so that when
there should be a vacancy in the patriarchate, they should elect one of the
twelve presbyters, upon whose head the other eleven should impose their hands,
bless him, and create him patriarch; and then elect some eminent person, and
constitute him a presbyter with themselves, in the room of him who was made a
patriarch; so that there should always be twelve. Nor did this institution
concerning the presbyters, cease at alexandria, that they should create the
patriarchs out of the twelve presbyters, until the times of Alexander,
patriarch at alexandria, who was of the number of the three hundred and
eighteen" (at the council of nice, A. D. 325) "For he forbade the presbyters
afterward to create a patriarch. And decreed, that upon the death of a
patriarch, the bishops should assemble and ordain a patriarch. And he farther
decreed, that on a vacancy in the patriarchate, they should elect, either from
the twelve presbyters, or from any other country, some eminent person, and
create him patriarch. And thus evanished the ancient institution, by which the
patriarch had been created by the presbyters; and there succeeded in its place
his decree concerning the creation of the patriarchs by the bishops. Thus from
Hananias to the time of Demetrius, who was the eleventh patriarch at
alexandria, there was no bishop in the provinces of egypt: nor did any
patriarchs before him, constitute bishops. But he being made patriarch,
constituted three bishops. And he was the first alexandrine patriarch who made
bishops. Upon the death of Demetrius, Heraclas became patriarch, and
constituted twenty bishops." Enty chij origines eccl. alexand.


Thus, in this most valuable piece or reject of ecclesiastical antiquity, we
have preserved and transmitted to us a specimen and exemplar of a truly
primitive and apostolic church. And herein we have a full proof, that while
there were fifteen hundred pastors or Kashisha, yet there were no bishops in
egypt in the posterior appropriate sense of the latin and greek churches, until
the fourth century: although the christians had by that time become so numerous
in egypt, that in the most severe and memorable persecution under maximianus,
the predecessor of Constantine the great, one hundred thousand christians were
put to death there, and seven hundred thousand were sold for slaves! a
barbarity which satiated and glutted the malice of persecution, and wrought a
conviction in the whole roman empire, of the impossibility of subduing
christianity.

Correspondent to this idea of a church and its officers was the form
particularly of the church of ephesus, and the seven churches of asia, in the
apostolic age; and the churches of new england; wherein at their primitive
institutions, were originally two or more elders, besides the pastors and
teachers, i. e. four presbyters: although, having generally, though not
universally, dropped the ruling elders, they now more nearly resemble the church
of philippi, in having, at present, only bishops and deacons. It might,
however, be well to resume the eldership as in the days of our ancestors.

Agreeable to this primitive idea of a church, was the church of ireland
planted and formed, by that great light of christendom St. Patrick; who, (as
Titus traveled crete, and ordained elders in every city) himself traveled
ireland, converted it to christianity, and constituted 355 churches, and in
each ordained a set of elders, with a bishop at their head; Nonnius, speaking
of St. Patrick, says, "Ecclesias 255 fundavit, episcopos ordinavit eodem
numero, presbyteros autem usque ad tria millia ordinavit." -- See Nonnius, and
Keating.
as did M^rk in alexandria. Agreeable to that of the irish poet in the psalter
of Cashe^, which doubtless while it retains the historical sentiments, looses
its beauty in translation.

" The blessed Patrick, with his priestly hands,
" The rite of consecration did confer,
" Upon the most religious of his clergy,
" Three hundred and fifty-five in number.
" He likewise, for the service of the church,
" As many sacred structures did erect,
" And preshyters ordained three thousand.
This was A. D. 432. And it is remarkable, that this institution of the pious
Patrick, continued for 400 years, until the danish invasion. If the whole
christian world were to revert back to this original and truly primitive model,
how far more simple, uniform, and beautiful, and even glorious, would the
church universal appear, than under the mutilated artifical forms of the
pontifical or patriarchal constitutions, of the middle and present ages? And
how far more agreeable to the ecclesiastical polity instituted and delivered by
the holy apostles? May this be exhibited and displayed in the american
churches. Of this it gives (...) joy to believe there is the greatest prospect.
The initial revival of this primeval institution is indeed already so well
established here, where the presbyerians hold so great a proportion in the
american republic, that there can be but little doubt, but that in the ordinary
course of events, our increasing and growing interest, without any interference
with the other sects, will at length ascend to such a magnitude, and become so
great and respectable a part of christendom, as to command the attention,
contemplation, and fraternal love of our brethren and fellow christans, of the
church universal, and even of the world ieself. And when the set time to favor
Zion shall come in God's good and holy providence, while christendom may no
longer disdain to adopt a reformation from us, the then newly gosg^lized
heathen may light up their candle at america. In this country, out of sight of
mitres and the purple, and removed from systems of corruption confirmed for
ages, and supported by the spiritual janissaries of an ecclesiastical hierarchy,
aided and armed by the secular power, RELIGION may be examined with the noble
berean freedom, the freedom of american-born minds: and revelation, both as to
the true evangelical doctrines, and church polity, may be (...) here, before
they shall have undergone a thorough discussion, and been weighed with a calm
and unprejudiced candor elsewhere. Great things are to be effected in the world
before the millennium, which I do not expect to commence under seven or eight
hundred years hence; and perhaps the liberal and candid disquisitions in
america, are to be rendered extensively subservient to some of the most and
glorious designs of providence, and particularly in the propagation and
diffusion of religion through the earth, in filling the whole earth with the
knowledge of the glory of the Lord. A time will come when six hundred millions
of the human race shall be ready to drop their idolatry, and all false
religion, when christianity shall triumph over superstition, as well as deism
and gentilism, and mahometism. They will then search all christendom for the
best model, the purest exemplification of the christian church, with the fewest
human mixtures. And when God in his providence shall convert the world, should
the newly christianized nations assume our form of religion; should american
missionaries be blessed to succeed in the work of christianizing the heathen,
in which the romanists and foreign protestants have very much failed, it would
be an unexpected wonder, and a great honor to the united states. And thus the
american republic, by illuminating the world with TRUTH and LIBERTY, would be
exalted and made high among the nations in praise, and in name, and in honor. I
doubt not this is the honor reserved for us: I had almost said in the spirit of
prophecy, the zeal of the Lord of Hosts will accomplish this.

" So the dread seer in patmos waste who trod,
Led by the visions of the guiding God,
Saw the dim vault of heaven its folds unbend;
And gates and spires, and streets and domes, descend
Far down the skies; with suns and rain-bows crowned,
The new formed city lights the world around. Vision of Columb. b. 2.

Having shown wherein consists the prosperity of a STATE; and what reason we
have to anticipate the glory of the american empire: I proceed to show,

II. That her system of dominion must receive its finishing from religion; or,
that from the diffusion of virtue among the people of any community, would
arise their greatest secular happiness: all which will terminate in this
conclusion, that Holiness ought to be the end of all civil government -- That
thou may be an holy people unto the Lord thy God.

On the subject of RELIGION we might be concise and transient, if indeed a
subject of the highest moment ought to be treated with brevity.

It is readily granted that a state may be very prosperous and flourishing,
without christianity: witness the egyptian, assyrian, roman, and chinese
empires. But if there be a true religion, one would think that it might be at
least some additional glory. We must become a holy people in reality, in order
to exhibit the experiment never yet fully made in this unhallowed part of the
universe, whether such a people would be the happiest on earth. It would
greatly conduce to this, if MOSES and AARON, if the MAGISTRACY and PRIESTHOOD,
should cooperate, and walk together in union and harmony. The political effort
of the present day, through most of the united states, is to disunite, divide
and separate them, through fear, least the united states, like the five
vice-royships of new spain, should be entangled and oppressed with the
spiritual domination of european and asiatic hierarchies. As if, by the title
of minister or pastor, we might not as well be reminded of the ministers of
holland and geneva, or the mild and peaceable pastors of the primitive church,
as of the domineering prelates and other haughty intriguing dignitaries of the
romish church. Hence AARON is spurned at a distance, and the LEVITES are beheld
with shy contempt, as a useless, burdensome, dangerous tribe: and in some of
the states, for the only sin of being priests of the Most High God, they are
inhibited all civil offices, and to a great degree, disfranchised of their
civil immunities and rights of citizenship. I thank my God for this ordering of
his holy providence (for I wish the clergy never to be vested with civil power)
while I am considering the spirit and disposition of the public toward the
church of God, indicated by such events. A general spirit reigns against the
most liberal and generous establishments in religion; against the civil
magistrates encouraging or having any thing more to do about religion, than to
keep the civil peace among contending sects: as if this was all that is to be
done for religion by the friends of Jesus. And hence, in designating to the
magistracy and offices of government, it begins to be a growing idea that it is
mighty indifferent, forsooth, not only whether a man be of this or the other
religious sect, but whether he be of any religion at all: and that truly
deists, and men of indifferentism to all religion, are the most suitable
persons for civil office, and most proper to hold the reins of government; and
that to prevent partiality in governors, and emulation among the sects, it is
wise to consign government over into the hands of those who, gallio like, have
no religion at all. This is machiavellian wisdom and policy! And hence examples
are frequently adduced, of men distinguished truly for deism, perhaps
libidinous morals, and every vice, yet of great abilities, it is said, great
civilians, lawyers, physicians, warriors, governors, patriots, politicians:
while as great or greater and more numerous characters, in the same
departments, a Thuanus, a Grotius, a Paul, of venice, a Sir Henry Wotton, a Sir
Peter King, a Seldom, a Newton, a Boil, those miracles of wisdom and friends
to religion and virtue; are passed by with transient coolness and neglect. I
wish we had not to fear that a neglect of religion was coming to be the road to
preferment. It was not so here in our fathers days.

Shall the Most High send down TRUTH into this world from the world of light
and truth, and shall the rulers of this world be afraid of it? Shall there be
no intrepid DANIELS? -- great in magistracy, great in religion! How great was
that holy man, that learned and pious civilian, when he shone in the supreme
triumvirate, at the head of an empire of 120 provinces -- venerable for
political wisdom, venerable for religion!

If men, not merely nominally christians, but of real religion and sincere
piety, joined with abilities, were advanced and called up to office in every
civil department, how would it countenance and recommend virtue? But, alas! is
there not too much laodiceanism in this land? Is not Jesus in danger of being
wounded in the house of his friends? Nay, have we gone already such lengths in
declension, that if even the Holy Redeemer himself, and his apostles, were to
reappear among us, while unknown to be such, and importune the public
government and magistracy of these states, to become nursing fathers to the
church; is it not to be feared that some of the states, through timidity and
fearfulness of touching religion, would excuse themselves, and dismiss the holy
messengers, the heavenly visitants, with coldness and neglect; though
importuning the spouse with an, open to me my beloved, my sister, my dove.

But after the present period of deism and skeptical indifferentism in
religion, of timidity and irresolution in the cause of the great Emmanuel,
perhaps there may arise a succession of civil magistrates, who will not be
ashamed of the cross of Christ, nor of patronizing his holy religion; with a
generous catholicism and expanded benevolence toward all of every
denomination, who love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity and truth;
patronizing it, I repeat, not with the insidious views of a Hutchinsonian
policy, but from a rational and firm belief and love of evangelical truth.
Zion's friends will rejoice in Zion's welfare: and the religious as well as
civil patriot will shine in the faces of the future Moses's and Joshuas of this
land. So shone it in the first governor WINTHROP, and so shines it in a
WASHINGTON. Yea, I glory in believing and knowing, that there are many now in
the public magistracy of this and the other states, who feel with that
illustrious and most excellent governor, upon whom rested much of the spirit of
Samuel and David, and of Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, and Josiah, I mean Nehemiah the
Tirshata, who, with Moses, esteemed the reproaches of Christ greater riches
than the treasures of egypt, who was of so pious, so noble, so patriotic a
spirit, such a lover of his country and the true religion, that he preferred
the very dust of zion to the gardens of persia, and the broken walls of
jerusalem to the palaces of shushan.

Whenever religion is erected on the ruins of civil governvernment; and when
civil government is built on the ruins of religion, both are so far essentially
wrong. The church has never been of any political detriment here, for it never
has been vested with any civil or secular power in new england: although it is
certain, that civil dominion was but the second motive, religion the primary
one with our ancestors, in coming hither and settling this land. It was not so
much their design to establish religion for the benefit of the state as civil
government for the benefit of religion, and as subservient, and even necessary
toward the peaceable enjoyment and unmolested exercise of religion -- of that
religion, for which they fled to those ends of the earth. An institution is not
made for the laws, but the laws for the institution. I am narrating an
historical fact, not giving a position or principle, which by shrewd
politicians may be abused to justify spiritual tyranny, and to support the
claims of the pontificate over all the civil states, kingdoms and empires in
christendom.

The american Nehemiah, the opulent and pious Governor WINTHROP I. and the
other first magistrates of the several new england republics, were men of
singular wisdom and exemplary piety. And, God be thanked, the senatorial
assembly of this happiest of all the united states, still embosoms so many
Phinehas's and Zorobabels, so many religious patriots, the friends of Jesus and
his holy religion: and that the Messiah's cause is here accompanied with civil
government and the priesthood -- allusively the two olive trees upon the right
of the candlestick (the churches) and upon the left; the two golden branches,
which through the two golden pipes, Moses and Aaron, empty the golden oil out
of themselves, Zech. iv. 11.
and diffuse their salutary influence of order and happiness through the
community.

As to nominal christianity, I have no doubt but that it will be upheld for
ages in these states. Through the liberty enjoyed here, all religious sects
will grow up into large and respectable bodies. But the congregational and
presbyterian denomination, however hitherto despised, will, by the blessing of
heaven, continue to hold the greatest figure in america; and, notwithstanding
all the fruitless labors and exertions to proselyte us to other communions,
become more numerous than the whole collective body of our fellow protestants
in europe. The whole proselytism of new england in particular, for 60 or 70
years past, has not exceeded eight or ten thousand, while our augment in that
term, by natural increase, has been half a million. The future difference in
our favor will be far greater, even admitting a tenfold increase of
proselytism. We anticipate, with pleasure, the growth and multiplication of our
churches. God grant that we may not, like the seven churches of asia, have a
name to live, while we are dead. Happy will it be for us, should we become a
holy people, zealous of good works. For it is undoubtedly the will of heaven,
and especially after the recent salvations of the Most High, that we should be
a holy people unto the Lord our God.

It is greatly to be wished that these principles of our common christianity,
might be found in general reception among all the churches of these states.

The trinity in unity, in the one undivided essence of the Great JEHOVAH.

The sacred scriptures are of divine inspiration.

In the immense universe, two little systems of intelligences, or orders of
being, have lapsed: and that unhappily we have the dishonor of being one of
them.

The second person of the coeternal trinity, having assumed human nature, made
a real atonement for sin, and by his vicarious obedience and sufferings,
exhibited that righteousness and vicarious merit, by which alone we are
forgiven and justified.

The holy ghost is equally a divine person with the father and the son; sharing
with them divine, supreme, equal and undivided honors.

True virtue consists in a conformity of heart and life to the divine law;
which is as obligatory upon christians as if eternal life was suspended on
perfect obedience.

The internal principle of holiness essentially consists in DIVINE LOVE, a
disinterested affection for moral excellency, a delight in the beauty and glory
of the divine character, that is, the supreme LOVE OF GOD. And connected with,
and issuing from this, is a joyful acquiescence in his will, a rejoicing in his
sovereignty, and universal dominion.

While salvation and pardon is of free grace, the retributions of eternity will
be according to our works.

Whenever I find these principles, with others connected with them, and the
real belief of them evinced by an amiable life, there I judge the essentials of
christianity to be found, and thither my charity and benevolence extends, with
equal ardor and sincerity, be the religious denomination as it may. Of these,
the doctrines of the DIVINITY of the Lord Jesus, and his real vicarious
ATONEMENT, are the most important, the jachin and boaz, the pillar truths of
the gospel, the articuli stantis and cadentis ecclesioe.

This was the system of theology brought over from the other side of the flood,
by our pious forefathers, now with God. The more this is realized in a state,
the more will its felicity be advanced. For certainly the morals of
christianity are excellent. It enjoins obedience to magistracy, justice,
harmony, and benevolence, among fellow citizens; and what is more, it points
out immortality to man. Politicians indeed usually consider religion only as it
may affect and subserve civil purposes: and hence it is mighty indifferent to
them, what the state of religion be, provided they can ride in the whirlwind,
and direct the storm. No thing is more common than to see them, in every
country, making use of sects for their own ends, whom they, in their hearts,
despise and ridicule with supreme contempt. Not so the christian patriot, who,
from his heart, wishes the advancement of christianity, much less for the civil
good than for the eternal welfare of immortal souls. We err much, if we think
the only or chief end of civil government is secular happiness. Shall
immortals, illuminated by revelation, entertain such an opinion? God forbid!
Let us model civil society with the adoption of divine institutions, so as
shall best subserve the training up and disciplining innumerable millions for
the more glorious society of the church of the first born! Animated with the
sublime ideas which christianity infuses into a people, we shall be led to
consider the true religion as the highest glory of a civil polity. The
christian institution so excelled in glory, that the mosaic lost all its glory.
So the most perfect secular polity, though very excellent, would lose all its
glory, when compared with a kingdom wherein dwells righteousness, a community
wherein the religion of the divine Jesus reigns in vigor and perfection.

Let us institute a comparison of religions in three different polities, which
will sufficiently represent the state of the whole world. And may that spirit,
which justly springs from such a comparison, animate all, whether in humble
life, or in the most elevated stations among mankind. We may consider three
contiguous empires of the same civil polity, all alike as to the social
virtues, laws of justice, benevolence, and the morals of civil society -- for I
mean to institute a very liberal and candid comparison. On the one of these
shall be established the idolatry of the BONZAS, as a specimen of all the
idolatrous religions: Deism shall cover the second: and of the unidolatrous
religions, I will select for the third, not the mohammedan, not the jewish, but
the christian, in its purest apostolic form.

As to the first, the species of idolatry is indifferent, whether ancient or
modern, that of the Druids or Zoroaster, of the Bramins or Romanists, or
lastly, that of the great LAMA, of Potola, which is the most extensive, as well
as most splendid, religion on earth, being the religion of one third of the
human race. Let us select the last: it has for its basis, in common with all
other idolatrous systems, adoration and worship, of some kind or other, to an
hierarchy of celestial spirits as our intercessors and protectors under the
supreme God. These have been, in all ages, the MAHUZZIM of Daniel; who predicts
the apostasy of the church to the worship of Mahuzzim departed souls, invisible
spirits as intercessors with God. This is the real basis of all idolatry,
ancient and modern. These were the Baalim and the Heroes. And it is just
indifferent, whether we sacrifice and pray to Hercules or to St. Paul, to the
thirty thousand gods of athens, or the saints of the calender, as advocates
with the Father of the Universe. Now let the inhabitants of an empire be
resolved into religious assemblies and convocations, for the sacrifical worship
of these inferior divinities, with a splendid ceremonial and priesthood. Who
does not see, in these enlightened realms, that all this is religious delusion,
a transfer of worship to the creature from the Creator -- who may well say, who
has required this at your hands? If it be said that supreme worship is not
rendered to the saints of the pontifical canonization: so neither was it by the
ten tribes, all of whom, but eight thousand, kissed the calves and worshipped
the numerous Baalim, Heroe^, or demigods. Dr. Middleton has shown that the
specifical worship, with a change of names only, is paid at rome to the modern
canonized saints, as to the deified heroes of the ancient romans and greeks.
The last effort of the philosophers against christianity, was in the time of
Julian; and they subordinated the whole system of ethnical worship to the
worship of the supreme Being, asserting that as christians acknowledge the
ministry of angels, so they held with the ministry of genii that of deceased
and departed spirits, who must be supposed to retain a peculiar affection for
their families, cities and kingdoms on earth; especially for those who should
have referred themselves to their protection and intercession with the Deus O.
M. the supreme God. Thus they defended themselves upon the very same reasoning,
as that upon which the christian idolatry is defended. We are directed to ask
the prayers of our fellow christians on earth; and by parity why should we not
ask their prayers in heaven, where they must be supposed to have far greater
influence? And if we are directed to treat one another, and especially great
benefactors of our country, with public respect while here, why not by parity
continue this respect and the symbols of honor to them in heaven? What a
beautiful gradation is there, it is said, in the ethnical and christian worship
or ascription of gratitude to inferior and powerful intercessors? And how does
it tend to keep alive in our minds and impress them with glorious ideas of that
grand, august, and beautiful system of agency and subordinate administrations,
in the great government of the one Great Supreme? How beautiful the subordinate
mediation of angels and saints, under the all-comprehensive mediation of the
blessed JESUS, through whom all worship, adoration and homage is to ascend to the
Sovereign of the Universe! Let us be assured that the romanists think
themselves to have great reason for the adoration of the superior powers.

Adjacent to this, an empire of the same excellent constitution, shall be
overspread with DEISM exclusively. And to give the idea the most candid extent,
perhaps beyond the desires of a Tindal, or even of a Shaftsbury the amiable
Confucius of deism, not to mention the smaller and more desultory geniusses of
a Hume, or a Voltaire; neither of whom had any more taste or judgment in
religion, or moral reasoning, than Cicero in poetry, or Cibber for the drama:
-- I say, to give the fairest idea of perfect deism, let the people of this
empire be resolved into occasional, but not too frequent, worshipping
assemblies for worshipping the God of nature, under the direction of the
illuminated brethren, or of some right worshipful brother: and also to thank
God for his goodness in this life, and for a certain prospect of a blessed
immortality, if there should be any; when, perhaps some noble minds, spirits of
elevated and sublime genius, of bold, refined, and independent sentiment, might
descant upon the common principles of social virtue and benevolence. I have
certainly done justice to deism; although we hear nothing of pardoning mercy,
because truly we need none -- such being the excellency and dignity of man,
who, as Phocelides says, is the image of God, that he well answers the end of
existence, merits reward, and must hereafter be happy under the
all-comprehending, the most benevolent administration of the universal FATHER.
How pure and sublime is natural religion!

CHRISTIANITY shall be the establishment of the third territorial empire. And
to preclude the sectarian prejudications from disturbing the clearness and
calmness of the mental perception, let any one overspread it with the BIBLE
christianity, according to his own idea. I for myself might overspread the
whole with the congregational churches; being not simply satisfied, but sure,
from a thorough perlustration of all ecclesiastical history, that they are
nearly apostolical as to doctrine and polity. And let this justice further be
done, that religion shall reign in the hearts and lives of the people at large;
and that it be the great and harmonious endeavor of the ruling characters and
influential personages through the state, both by example and precept, to
support such a reign of virtue and holiness. All that is valuable and truly
excellent in the other empires, is embraced; and in addition, we have
discoveries, and offers, and assurances, great in the confession of all men, if
true, and glorious beyond description, infinitely momentous indeed, and
infinitely surpassing what is to be found in all the mythologies or moral
systems around the globe. But I do not enlarge.

Ten thousand myriads of ages hence, in which of these three, would the
civilian, the patriot, the man of religion, wish to have been found? In which
to have acted his part? -- for most certainly they are not indifferent -- and
in advancing its glory, to have exerted the talents and activity, with which
the Author of Nature had blessed him?

Which of these governments is it probable would most contribute to the secular
welfare, and be attended with the greatest dignity, and even the greatest
worldly splendour? But above all, which most subservient to eternity and its
momentous concerns? In which, as a school of institution and discipline, should
we enjoy the happiest advantages for immortality? Which of these empires would
be the favorite of JESUS? Or is he indeed an unconcerned spectator of human
affairs? If not, why should we doubt or hesitate to give the preference to the
christian republic? If revelation be not true, it does us no hurt: we are as
safe and as well off as others, having all their moral virtue. But if
revelation be true, it is true exclusively, and therefore to be attended to at
peril. This is no proof: but it is a reason for exciting our attention to its
evidence, both in miracles and prophecy, as well as in a certain internal
beauty and glory opened by heaven upon a benighted world: -- Peradventure with
other happy millions we may be also blessed to perceive it to be, not a
cunningly devised fab^e (as was conceived by that impious pontiff, who could
exclaim eheu! quantum lucrisecit nobis hoec fabula christi?) but the wisdom and
power of God, to have issued from the fountain of unerring wisdom and
consummate benevolence. Which will be the case, the happy fact, the moment we
perceive the evidence of the one single fact of the RESURRECTION OF CHRIST,
after his undoubted crucifixion: -- a fact testified by eye witnesses, and
supported by evidence (preserved in memoirs, which have come down to us with
greater authenticity than Justin or Tacitus) evidence, I say, overlooked
indeed, but never overthrown, and which at once will support the whole glorious
superstructure of christianity.

But I need pardon that I should institute this comparison in a christian
assembly, and in a country where we seem to be in no danger of idolatry, and
where, God be thanked, Deists are very thinly sown, although, like another set
of men among us, of illaudable and invidious description, they magnify
themselves into legions.

I have supposed all religions equal as to virtue: and that civil virtue is the
only end of civil society: but I must resume both these mistakes. Vices and
every species of wickedness are found, more or less, to enter into the essence
of all religions, except that of divine revelation. If christians are wicked,
and even should they surpass the gentiles in vice, their religion never taught
them so. But the very institution of the festivals of the ancient gods and
goddesses directly taught the most impure obscenities and libidinous
revellings. And this is continued to this day in the East Indies. An indian
Bramin ARUNASALEM, a Pandarum or Priest of Tarmaburam, was converted to
christianity in 1765: upon which the college of Pandarum sent him a letter to
reclaim him. Too long, says he in his reply, too long have I been a witness to
public lewdness in the sacrifices and worship of your pagodas or temples. My
conscience told me these institutions could not come from a pure and holy God.
O my God! how do I lament that I have been 28 years thine enemy. No ablution,
no sacrifice of Lingam can wash away sin and purify the soul: the blood
sufferings and sacrifice of JESUS Nadar the redeemer, alone cleanse from all
sin. In an account of his conversion, written by himself, he says, "I was much
scandalized by the profane and immoral service performed in our Pagodas At
Supramanciam a famous pagoda three leagues from Goa, the image of a serpent
with seven heads is worshipped: at a certain festival, three girls of the most
beautiful shape dance before him, stark naked, in sight of an innumerable
company of spectators. At the sacrifice of Satty, men and women eat and drink
together, and afterward mix promiscuously. Daily are entertained in our
pagodas the dancing girls, which are professed prostitutes, who sing, at
morning and evening sacrifices, the impurest songs, and offer in their pagodas,
with the obscenest language, their persons to the spectators, and invite them
to lie with them.

"All this the feelings of my heart told me could not come from the eternal
God, whom reason, and the still voice of nature, proclaim to be a holy being.
-- However since our whole nation is zealously attached to this worship. I
stifled the clamours of my own conscience, thinking that if it was really
wrong, so many thousands of people could not follow it.

"When I visited you (the Rev. Mr. Hutteman, danish missionary) and heard the
Wedam, religion of Parabara West^ (Jehovah) the mists of my understanding began
to clear up and all that you said of the perfections of God, and the manner to
worship him, was immediately approved by the silent voice of reason and
conscience. All the doctrines which your Wedam proposes, lead directly to the
honor of the holy God: may his name be blessed forever! It describes man as he
really is, sinner and guilty; it rejects the unavailing atonements performed by
a miserable, sinful wretch. -- The holy and dreadful sufferings of JESUS
Mattia^ler (reconciler) have atoned for the violated lights of the divine
government. Your wedam enables a man to curb and subdue his passions -- and
makes a man in love with holiness and the spirit of Jesus. It contains the
clearest revelation of life and immortality, and such grand promises, that are
more than sufficient to bear us up in the course of a christian, virtuous life,
notwithstanding the discouragements from a wicked world. -- It is, therefore,
my firm resolution to embrace this wedam, to live and die in it. I have weighed
the Malabar religion against it; but, alas! the former is too light.

PARABARA WESTU, creator of the universe, have mercy upon me! oh how do I
bewail that I have been twenty eight years Born 17^7 -- Converted 1765.
thine enemy! -- JESUS NADAR, redeeming Lord, impute thy blood unto me, and
procure me the forgiveness of my sins. Thou spirit of holiness, sanctify my
heart, and form me into the likeness of the blessed Jesus. Amen."

Whereupon the college of Pandarams, at Tarmaburam, wrote him a very flattering
and expostulatory letter. In which, among other things, they say, "It is
needless to write many words to a man of your understanding. -- Remember,
Arunasalem, your change is like, a king turning Pareiar. What have you wanted
among us? Had you not honor and subsistence sufficient? -- Consider,
Arunasalem, the noble blood of the TONDAMAR from whence you sprang. -- The
moment you receive this letter, return again to this place. May Siwen give ye
understanding."

To which the christian convert returned this answer: "The grace of Parabara
Westu, who is Jehovah, the living God the very blessed creator and preserver of
the universe, fill the souls of all pandarams at tarmaburam I have received
your letter, and have read the contents with true compassion." And then renders
his reasons, and adds -- "My heart melts within me. I weep over you. Fourteen
years have I been witness of your infamous worship in your pagodas and I am in
my conscience convinced, that you are in the road that leads directly to hell
and eternal ruin. How holy, how majestic is GOD described in the wedam of the
christians! -- Come, my dear friends and worship, with me the God that made
you. Be not deceived, to expiate your sin by washing and sacrifice of Lingam:
the christians alone have a sacrifice worthy of God. When I think on your
blindness, my heart pit^eth you. You know the integrity of my life: and you
never heard scandal of me. Could you then think that I would renounce the
religion of my fathers, without conviction of its falsehood and dreadful
tendency? The God of infinite compassion has delivered me, wretched sinner,
out of satan's captivity. Your promises of honor and riches, touch me not. I
have the hopes of an everlasting kingdom. You also can inherit it when you will
repent. -- Turn to the living God. So writes Arulananden, formerly a Pandaram,
but now a disciple of the blessed JESUS." Who does not love this sincere, this
amiable convert? Who does not with that his example may be of extensive
influence among the hundred millions of india? -- See the letters of the danish
missionaries, 1765.




This, with a survey of the state of man in all ages, may show us that ethnic
morals do not merit the high encomiums the rapturous eulogies, which some have
given them. Nor are deistical morals very promising. A world, a universe full
of Rochesters and Chester fields, what would it be? Characters, which may blaze
their moment in an earthly court, but can never shine in the court above.

Modern deists -- but why do I say modern, for the very fraternity is but of
yesterday -- the deists have more lately improved and adopted suicide and fate
into their system; holding it in common with the Bramins of Asia, and the aulic
chieftans in Africa. We might trace the matter of suicide through a tract of
ages, from Calenus the indian philosopher, who from the funeral pile laughed at
Alexander the great, to that sublime genius, that deistical madman, who lately
"stole away" out of life with his wife and four children at once, "closing the
eyes of six persons, out of perfect humanity, and the most endearing fondness
and friendship." William Beadle, who professing himself a deist, on the (...)
December 1787 out the throats of his wife and four children, and then pilloled
himself.


Sir William Temple, Sale, and other learned deists, fond of depreciating
christian virtue by comparisons, have extolled and celebrated the mohammedan,
chinese and other oriental morals, as far superior to the christian. But the
learned historiographer Principal Robertson asserts with historic verity, that
upon the comparison of europe in particular in its gentile and christian ages,
her morality will appear to have been greatly improved and meliorated, and that
the ethnic morals fell far below the christian. While we have to confess and
lament the vice rampant in christendom, we have reason to believe that the more
christianity prevails in a country, civil society will be more advanced,
ferocious manners will give way to the more mild, liberal, just and amiable
manners of the gospel.

Be it granted that in all countries are to be found men of integrity, honor,
benevolence and excellent morals, even where vice has a prevalent reign, to the
greatest excesses of a general licentiousness; yet supposing a community, a
kingdom, a world overspread with such characters, with the finest morals of a
Socrates or a Confucius, what would be the moral state of such a country, in
comparison with one overspread with the reign of the christian morals? I mean
in perfection.

How much soever we may admire the morals of Plato or Epictetus, they are not
to be compared with those taught by Moses and the divine Jesus. Nor are we to
conceive that civil virtue is the only end of civil government. As the end of
God's government is his declarative glory in the holiness and happiness of the
universe; so all civil government ought to subserve the same end. The most
essential interests of rational beings are neglected, when their secular
welfare only is consulted. If therefore we defend and plead for christianity,
from its secular and civil utility only, and leave it here, we dishonor
religion by robbing it of half, nay its greatest glories. It serves an higher
purpose. For although it subserves the civil welfare infinitely beyond the morals
of deism and idolatry, yet it also provides for the interests of eternity,
which no other religion does. It opens to us the most grand and sublime
discoveries concerning God, reconciliation with him, and the reunion of this
lapsed world with the immense universe. Discoveries momentous and interesting
beyond conception! Without which we are left to perfect incertitude, if not
totally in the dark with respect to eternity and its vast concerns.

Should we have recourse to the goodness of God; yet of all beings, angels
would think, that man should be the last, to reason from the benevolence and
goodness of the universal parent, to the impossibility of his offspring being
involved in future ill, when from thence we might equally reason against the
existence of present ill. If some distant seraph, who never knew nor heard of
ill, should reason thus, it would be no marvel, perhaps: but that we, with all
our sins and sufferings about us, should go into such reasonings, is the height
of folly, the absurdity of absurdities! And why should that infinite goodness
preserve the numerous millions that die in finished, though half punished vice,
that did not preserve the lives of those upon whom the tower of Siloam fell --
who did not avert the desolations of Lisbon, Naples, Herculaneum and Palermo?
Cast thine eyes thither, O man, remember the battle, and do no more. Job xli. 8.


If instead of reasoning from the works and word of God, and thus ascending
upwards into Deity, " we take the high priori road, and reason downwards 'till
we doubt of God." Pope.
If by inductive reasonings from the perfections of God to what can and what
cannot be, we should among other things boldly conclude a TRINITY, and the
incarnation of the eternal WORD absurd nullities, and yet it should appear in
another state, that a crucified JESUS sits at the right hand of the Majesty on
high; how would these mighty sensible characters, these fine geniusses, these
sublime these foolish reasoners be disappointed? May I be forgiven a very
earnest solicitude here? -- having myself passed through the cloudy darksom
valley of skepticism, and stood on the precipice, from whence I was in danger
of taking a juvenile leap into the irrecoverable depths of deism. For so rare
are the FORBES'S and the JENNINGS, the instances of emancipated real infidels,
that nulla vestigia retrorsum, No return from hence.
may be inscribed on the temple of deism. Knowing these dangers, I pity from my
heart, and almost bleed at every pore, for those who are caught in the vortex,
and are captivated with the wiley satirical delusory and deficient reasonings
of deism. Elevated with the pride of mental enlargement, of a supposed
untrammelled understanding, they ascend aloft above the clouds of prejudices
into the pi^gah heights, from whence they fancy that they see all religions the
same, that is, equally nothing but priestcraft and artificial error. Whereupon
they complement themselves as endowed with a superiority of discernment in
morals, with high sensibility, sentimental and liberal ideas, and charm
themselves with other fine self-applied diction, which in truth only clothes
the taedium the weariness of half discussed unfinished inquiries; or perhaps
the hope that at worst the want of certain knowledge may pass with God, if
there is any, as a sufficient excuse for some of the doubtful levities of life.

But errors in judgment, it is said, will be of no account with God. In ten
thousand matters they may not. We may trifle on many things; but on the things
that respect eternity, the things of religion, it is too solemn, too dangerous
to trifle. Although most religions are false and ridiculous, there may however
be one, which we must renounce or trifle with at our peril. For if revelation
be true, as most assuredly it is, it is in Jesus only that we have eternal
life. Infidels, and those excessively benevolent christians, who consider all
religions alike and equally ridiculous, do well, in their calmer moments to
ponder those words of the eternal Judge, Mat. x. 33. WHOSOEVER SHALL DENY ME
BEFORE MEN, HIM WILL I ALSO DENY BEFORE MY FATHER WHICH IS IN HEAVEN. Where
then will a Judas, and a Beadle appear? Step forth, thou Herbert, the father of
deism; come hither ye Bolingbrokes, Tindals, Collins's, Humes, Voltaires with
all your shining abilities; and that disappointed groop of self-opinionated
deniers of the Lord that bought them, with that cloud of deluded followers, who
would not that I should reign over them -- evanish from my presence, with all
the light of your boasted wisdom, into the blackness of darkness forever and
ever! On what principles can the despised, the amiable JESUS withhold or recede
from so awful a sentence, so tremendous a denunciation!

How infinitely happier they who, believing the record which God gives of his
Son, have received him, and are become the sons of God? Is it nothing, is it a
small thing to be initiated into the glorious idea of God and the trinity
revealed in the scriptures, to contemplate the hierarchy and government of the
universe and the high dignity of that most illustrious personage, who is our
intercessor, advocate and sovereign? Shall this light come into the world, and
we neglect it? And shall it be said that these views do not animate a sublimer
virtue than the motives taken from civil society? Shall the consideration of
being citizens of a little secular kingdom or community, be equally animating
with those taken from our being citizens of the august monarchical republic of
the universe! But I must desist, with only observing that the United States are
under peculiar obligations to become a holy people unto the Lord our God, on
account of the late eminent deliverance, salvation, peace and glory, with which
he has now crowned our new sovereignty. Deuteronomy. iv. 34.

I have thus finished the two heads upon which I at first proposed to
discourse. And I shall not further trespass upon the patience of this very
honorable auditory, by an application: but close with the addresses usual upon
this anniversary solemnity.

To Governor TRUMBULL.
I beg leave in the first place, with the greatest honor, the most profound and
dutiful respect, to address myself to his excellency the Governor of this State.
May it please your Excellency,
We account ourselves happy, most illustrious Sire, that by the free election
and annual voice of the citizens, God has for so many years past called you up
to the supreme Magistracy in this commonwealth. And while we rejoice that this
State embosoms numerous characters equal to the highest offices of government:
yet should this day's election fall again upon him, who, according to the
interpretation of his name, Jonathan, Jehovah-natan,
Jehovah has given us, it would diffuse a joy through the United States. And
should you now resign the chair, you would enjoy the reflection that you had
been carried through a scene of the most distinguished usefulness, and lived to
see the end of the war and establishment of American liberty and INDEPENDENCE.

It is observable, that, by a particular turn of genius and a peculiar
discipline in early life, God often prepares great characters, for that future
usefulness and eminence, for which they are designed in the world. This was
conspicuous in the instances of Joseph, Moses, and Daniel: neither of whom in
youth, thought that they were training up for the eminent spheres of action in
which they afterward moved.

Endowed with a singular strength of the mental powers, with a vivid and clear
perception, with a penetrating and comprehensive judgment, embellished with the
acquisition of academical, theological, and political erudition, your
Excellency became qualified for a very singular variety of usefulness in life.
Instituted in the sciences, the hebrew literature, and theology, you was not
only prepared for the sanctuary, but being expert in all questions touching the
law of your God, you became qualified to judge how we the Ministers of the
Gospel under your government ought to behave ourselves in the house of God;
while it has pleased God to call you up to other services in civil life. Thus
the great Melchizedec was priest of the Most High God, and King of Salem. So
Moses, though of the tribe of Levi and learned in all the wisdom of egypt, was
called of God to be King in Jeshurum.

An early entrance into civil improvement, and 50 years 1732 elected
representative. 17^^ elected into the Council. 17^6 elected Deputy Governor.
17^9 elected Governor.

service of our country, with an uncommon activity and dispatch in business,
had familiarized the whole rota of duty in every office and department,
antecedent and preparatory to the great glory of your Excellency's life, the
last eight years administration at the head of this commonwealth; an
administration which has rendered you the Pater Patri^^ the Father of your
country, and our dulce decus a^que tutamen.

We adore the God of our fathers, the God and father of the spirits of all
flesh, that he has raised you up for such a time as this, Esth. iv. 14
and that he has put into your breast a wisdom, which I cannot describe
without adulation -- a patriotism and intrepid resolution, a noble and
independent spirit, an unconquerable love of LIBERTY, RELIGION and our COUNTRY,
and that grace, by which you have been carried through the arduous labors of
an high office, with a dignity and glory never before acquired by an American
Governor. Our enemies revere the names of TRUMBULL and WASHINGTON. In honoring
the state and councils of Connecticutt, you, illustrious Sire, have honored
yourself to all the confederate Sister States, to the Congress, to the Gallic
empire, to Europe and to the world, to the present and distant ages. And should
you now lay down your office, and retire from public life, we trust that you
may take this people to record, in the language, in which that holy patriot the
pious SAMUEL addressed Israel, and say unto us -- 1 Samuel xii. 2,
I am old, and grey-headed -- and I have walked before you from my childhood
unto this day. Behold, here I am, witness against me before the Lord: -- whose
ox have I taken? or whose ass have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have
I oppressed? or of whose hand have I received any bribe, to blind mine eyes
therewith? and I will restore it you. And they said thou have not defrauded nor
oppressed us, neither have thou taken ought of any man's hand. And he said unto
them, the Lord is witness against you, and his anointed is witness this day,
that ye have not found ought in my hand. And they answered, he is witness.

May you receive a reward from the supreme Governor of the Universe; which will
be a reward of grace. For although your Excellency might adopt the words of
that illustrious governor NEHEMIAH, and say, think upon me, my God, for good,
according to all that I have done for this people, yet your ultimate hope for
immortality, will be founded in a more glorious merit, than that achieved by
mortals, in the most illustrious scenes of public usefulness. May the momentary
remnant of your days be crowned with a placid tranquillity. And when you shall
have finished your work on earth, may you be received to the rewards of the
just, and shine in the general assembly of the first born through eternal ages.
Amen.

To the LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR and COUNCIL.
With great respect would I next address myself to his Honor Lieatenant
Governor GRISWOLD, and the rest of honorable COUNCILLORS of this State.
May it please your Honor, and the other Members of the honorable Council.
That senatorial order must be truly important, which stands upon the general
voice and election of the public at large, because it must comprehend men of
such public and conspicuous merit, as to be known among all our tribes, men of
approved patriotism and wisdom, as well as popularity. We esteem it our
happiness that our GOVERNORS and our NOBLES proceed from ourselves. When we
consider the trifling and inferior characters of the most of the venal
counselors in the late royal governments, when compared with the solid wisdom
of the council of this state, we may be convinced that a legislature, standing
upon the free election of the people to be governed, bids fair to ensure more
wisdom and incorruptibility, than if in the appointment of the most august
sovereigns in the world.

We glory in it, that this state has at all times furnished gentlemen, in the
appointment of the people, of abilities equal to every department and branch of
dominion, whether legislative or executive. It is particularly happy, that men
impressed with the feelings of the people, of great knowledge in laws and
jurisprudence, in the civil polity especially of this state, have hitherto been
and still are found at the council board, in the military departments, and in
the highest judiciary tribunals of this commonwealth.

This state has ever preserved a grave, sensible and weighty council, in a
pretty delicate situation indeed, but of great prudence and influential wisdom.
It is this council which combines and consolidates the whole common wealth.

The general anniversary election dictates annually the general sense of the
community. And while a rotation to a considerable degree, though not by
constitution yet by usage, and the mutability of human passions, and in the
course of events, does in effect take place, we have been happy however, and I
hope always shall be, in the retention of a number of ancient and venerable
counselors, to transmit the wisdom and experience of their predecessors, and
to give a steady and immutable complexion to the succession in the general
assembly, especially as to the capital matters of law, liberty and government.

We glory in you, gentlemen, as our crown of rejoicing. We securely confide our
liberties and safety, the civil, religious and literary welfare of this
republic to your superintendence. We pray God, that in all your momentous
deliberations and resolutions, you may be guided by the wisdom from above, by
the mighty Counselor the Prince of Peace. Amen.

To the House of REPRESENTATIVES.
It is my duty in the next place, to pay the tribute of public honor to the
respectable and numerous body of the lower house of assembly, the second branch
in the honorable legislature and sovereignty of this state.
Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen of the House of Representatives.
Your house is already formed standing on the free, local elections of a free
people. From the character of your constituents, we doubt not you bring with
you the love of liberty, justice and public right. Assembled from all our
tribes to consult the public good, so far as this is left to your judgment, you
will act with well informed wisdom and integrity; while so far as you know the
minds of your constituents, may we not presume that you will hold it your duty
to act and represent their judgments, be your own as they may. You have matters
of high moment to attend to, and some of a very insidious nature. Besides
matters of internal government, a liquidation of the expenditures of the way,
finance, revenue, funds, are some of the subjects before this assembly. It is
not impossible but you may perceive some hovering genius, something of an
antiamerican spirit flitting about, and at times alighting upon some within the
walls of the senate. Will you not hunt it down, and send it to the shades? May
you all be inspired with a real, hearty and uncorrupted patriotism, and
firmness in the cause o^ liberty and independence. Let an independent
liberality of sentiment, and reverence for right and equity, reign in this
branch of the senate: that the world may see that the administration of the
united branches, combined in the sovereignty of this state, is conducted with a
certain plain but noble dignity and majesty.

This assembly at every session for eight years past, has been full of the most
anxious and weighty concerns, for our bleeding country. But this house is no
more called to raise armies, or amidst the most complicated distresses, to
devise means for their support. What a load, what a burden and weighty care has
devolved upon this house through the war? But these conflicts are at an end. And
you will be now called to the arts of peace, and to promote the welfare and
aggrandizement of our country.

And while this honorable house is attending to the secular concerns of civil
government, may we not humbly wish that you would not repudiate the idea of
being nursing fathers to our spiritual Israel, the church of God within this
state? Give us, gentlemen, the decided assurance, that you are friends of the
churches, and that you are the friends of the pastors, who have certainly, in
this trying warfare, approved themselves the friends of liberty and government.
(...) predecessors 100 years ago accounted this among (...) principal honors.
They were solicitous to promote reli^^^^^ learning, and to give suitable
encouragement to both.

And in this connection will it be forgiven me, if I humbly recommend
YALE-COLLEGE to the smiles of government? Through the good hand of our God upon
us, we may truly say, in the language of the sons of the prophets to Elisha,
behold now, the place where we dwell is to strait for us. 2 Kings vi. I.
May we not humbly ask of the public, that they would be pleased to build us
another house, or the necessary edifices for the reception and accommodation of
the youth, but about one third of the students being provided for in the
present college edifice? Was I not so nearly connected with it, I might say
with truth, what has often been told me by others, that there is not a state
upon the continent, but would account such a feat of learning, in whose hands
so ever it might be, as an illustrious ornament to their community.

A trust may be well executed, when the end of the trust is answered, although
there may have intervened some mismanagements. Small bodies as well as great,
not even Congresses and Assemblies, and may I not add not even this honorable
assembly excepted, are not only frequently aspersed and censured, but have
sometimes erred: -- so perhaps have the governors of the college: when however
upon a candid inquiry, it may be found, that in money concerns they have
managed with an unexampled frugality, even to parsimony, -- that never was
there more done to purpose with so small means in a literary institution -- and
that the college is at present in a pretty flourishing state. At my accession
in 1778, the number of matriculated undergraduates in the four classes, was
119; and this current year they have been 251. There are ten colleges in the
united states, from New England to Virginia inclusive: besides two intended
ones in the Carolinas. The numbers of undergraduates in the most considerable
are estimated as follows: Founded. Undergraduates. 1636 Harvard Coll. 150 School
William and Mary Coll. 100 1746 Jersey Coll. 60 1750 Philadelphia Coll. 30 1769
Dartmouth Coll. 80
And in point of scholarship and literature, I hope we do not fall very far
behind the other sister colleges in america.

How happy, were its foundations and emoluments adequate to the civil and
religious purposes of this institution? An enlargement of the public library, a
complete apparatus for experimental philosophy, premiums for stimulating genius
in every branch of literature, endowments of professorships especially those of
philosophy, law and medicine, would be of inconceivable benefit in the liberal
education of youth. These things I doubt not will be effected in time: but the
literati wish to see them accomplished in the present day.

The college has often since its foundation,* experienced the liberality and
smiles of the general assembly; for which it is always ready to return and
repeat its thanks and gratitude. Some unhappy differences of sentiment
(together with the war) have interrupted the stream of public munificence. But
is there no balm in Gilead to heal the wound; is there no way to accommodate
and adjust matters, so as to conciliate the friendship of the state toward its
university?

The states of Holland, in the midst of their expensive wars in the cause of
liberty, founded and endowed the university of Leyden. Should this state be
pleased to endow two or three professorships, and appoint a board of civilians
to elect the professors in concurrence with the present corporation, and see
that the moneys granted by the state were applied to the use to which they were
appropriated by the general assembly -- might not this give satisfaction?

But I trespass upon your patience. All the great interests of this state,
whether as a separate sovereignty, or in its connection with the united states,
are entrusted to you. A very weighty trust! You have a thousand pious prayers
going up for you daily at the throne of grace. You have all the patriots
saying, be strong O ZOROBBABELS: you have all the ministers inculcating
obedience to you. And may you above all, have the influential guidance of
unerring wisdom, to render you acceptable to the multitude of your brethren, to
make you eminent blessings in your day, and reward you with immortality and
glory in the world to come. Amen.

To the MINISTERS.
And now I turn myself to the PASTORS of the churches.
Reverend and beloved Brethren.
I have not assumed upon me to dictate to the civil magistracy, nor do I
dictate to the sacerdotal order: albeit I might speak to the most of my
brethren present, as being such an one in years, as Paul the aged. Condescend
however, holy brethren, to receive a humble address from o^^, who loves the
order with a sincere and fervent affection, although pantoon toon hagioon
elakisto elakistoteros.

Permit me then to say, that, while we do not fail to inculcate obedience to
the magistracy and laws, and recommend to our people the election of a pious
magistracy; our principal work is not secular but spiritual and divine. Let us
with the greatest assiduity devote ourselves to our Lord's work, as ambassadors
of the Prince of Peace. Let us preach the divinity and unsearchable riches of
Christ, and salvation by his atonement; that theological system, which places
the whole of redemption upon free grace -- a grace free as to us, though merited
by the holy Redeemer. Let us search the scriptures for the real evangelical
verity: and inquire, not so much for new theories in divinity, as what truths
were known and realized in faith and life, by the primitive christians of the
apostolic age, and the three first centuries; and believe that no other system,
no other doctrines are essentially necessary to carry men to heaven in these
ages, than those which enabled the myriads of holy martyrs to seal the
testimony of Jesus with their blood.

There is but one true system of theology, and this has been equally known in
all the christian ages. For although great improvements and discoveries are daily
making in philosophy and natural science, yet there have been no new
discoveries in divinity, since the apostolic age: I do not mean merely no new
revelation, but of the innumerable latent truths concealed in the bible (and
there are infinitely greater treasures hidden there than in nature) none have
been percieved in later ages, but what have been as clearly discerned by the
contemplative theologians of all ages. The sentiments are the same, though
clothed in different diction. Philosophy, as I said, is improving, nor has the
progress of civil society yet reached its summit: but divinity, I apprehend,
has been long at a stand, having ages ago come to the highest perfection
intended us at present by heaven; which did not design any further improvement
in it, from the sealing of the vision till the second coming of Christ. In the
millenium these hidden treasures will be brought forth. But for the preceding
period, divinity will be and remain at a stand, except perhaps that toward the
close of it, the prophecies will disclose themselves.

Religion has had and will have different fashions, even where it is still
essentially the same. Previous to the tenth century, the writings of St.
Augustine gave an extensive complexion to theology: afterward Lombard's
collection of sentences o^ opinions of evangelical divines: but he was shoved
into neglect by Aquinas, who reigned umpire till the reformation. Luther
followed Augustine, and Calvin Aquinas. The real theology of Melancthon, Calvin,
archbishop Cranmer and Owen, was one and the same.

We despise the fathers and the pious and learned divines of the middle ages:
pious posterity will do the same by us; and twirl over our most favorite
authors with the same ignorant pity and neglect: -- happy they, if their
favorite authors contain the same blessed truths.

I rejoice that God has hitherto preserved a learned and evangelical ministry
in these churches. The theology in general reception, comprehends all the
excellent things of our common christianity. And if some favorite hurekas, some
fancied discoveries, should be burnt up in the day of the Lord, yet there will
be left as great an abundance of precious stones, of the tried and pure gold of
truth, as in any part of the world. Indeed we have gotten all the light of
christendom, and we need no more. We have enough: we are wealthy in sacred
knowledge. We may spend long lives, in making ourselves masters of that vast
treasure of sacred wisdom, which holy men of great light have attained. May I
comprehend with all saints the height and depth of this knowledge, may my God
possess me of this treasure, and I am content. All this knowledge, to the
greatest extent of the human limit, has been gotten and acquired over and over
again and again. Like other science, to every generation it seems new, while it
is only possessing the knowledge familiar to our predecessors.

Moreover, charity, union and benevolence are peculiarly ornamental in the
ministerial order. Let us cherish these amiable graces in ourselves and others.
Let us be faithful. And the nearer we come to the solemn moment when we must
render our account to God the Judge, the more may we be quickened and animated
in the ministry: and think no labor, no assiduity too great, nothing too much
to be done for the salvation of precious and immortal souls, nothing too much
for the cause and kingdom of him who has loved us to the death. May you, holy
brethren, be strong in the grace which is in our Lord Jesus Christ: may the
work, the pleasure of the Lord prosper in your hands: may you be honored of
Jesus to turn many to righteousness. And when the chief Shepherd shall appear,
may you receive a ^^own of glory which fades no^ away. Amen.

To the Assembly at large.
And now, my fellow citizens of this independent republic, my fellow christians
of every order and denomination in this assembly, and all you that fear God and
hear me this day, give audience.
The Most High planted our fathers, a small handful, in this Jeshimon: and lo!
we their posterity have arisen up to three millions of people. Deuteronomy. x. 22. Our
ears have heard, and our fathers have told us, the mavelous things God did
for them; but our eyes have seen far more mavelous things done for us,
whereof we are glad and rejoice this day. Should our ancestors look down from
the high abodes of paradise into this assembly, and attend to the things which
we have been this day commemorating, methinks they might catch a sensation of
joy at beholding the reign, the triumph of LIBERTY on earth! Hitherto has our
bow abode in strength, and our arms been made strong by the hands of the mighty
God of Jacob. And while amidst the festivity of this anniversary election, we
congratulate one another and our country upon the cessation of hostilities, and
that having fought the good fight, our warfare is ended: let us not fail to
look through Providence up to the God of Providence, and give glory to GOD the
Lord of Hosts, the God of our fathers; whom let us serve with a perfect heart
and a willing mind. Let us cultivate and cherish the virtues of the divine as
well as civil life, bearing in mind that we are all hastening to that period
wherein all the glories of this world will be swallowed up and lost in the
glories of immortality. Be it our great ambition, our incessant endeavor, to
act our parts worthily on the stage of life, as looking for and hastening to
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. May we be prepared for the solemnities of
a far more august assembly, than the most splendid assembly on earth. We are
ardently pursuing this world's riches, honors, powers, pleasures -- let us
possess them, and then know that they are nothing, nothing, nothing. They serve
a temporary gratification, ^vanish, and are no more. But we cannot be dissuaded
from the pursuit. Death however kindly ends it. Let us think that we have two
worlds to live for, proportion our attention to their respective interests, and
we shall be happy forever. We shall then be prepared to shine in the assembly
of the just at the right hand of the Sovereign of Life. How glorious to bear a
part in the triumphs of virtue, the triumphs of the Redeemer, in the last day
of the great and general assembly of the universe? How glorious to make a part
of that infinitely honored and dignified body, which clothed with the
Redeemer's righteousness and walking in white robes, shall b^ led by the
Messiah, through the shining ranks of archangels, seraphims, and the innumerable
hosts of the whole assembled universe, up to the throne of God, and being
presented to and received by the triune Jehovah, shall be seated with Jesus in
his throne at the summit of the universe, to the conspicuous view, and for the
eternal contemplation of the whole intellectual world, as an everlasting
monument of sovereign grace, Ephesians. iii. 10, 11, to (...) intent that now unto
the principalities and powers in the heaven places might be known, by the
church, the manifold wisdom of God, according to the eternal purpose which he
purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord. To whom be glory in the church th^^ he never
ending succession of eternal ages.

AMEN.

