Mr. Thacher's THREE SERMONS, On Future Punishment.

That the Punishment of the finally Impenitent shall be eternal; Or, That all
Men shall not be saved, ATTEMPTED TO BE PROVED AND ILLUSTRATED IN THREE
SERMONS, Preached at MALDEN, OCTOBER, 1782. By Peter Thacher, A. M. PASTOR of
the First Church of Christ in that Town.

-- -- Facilis descensus Averni:
Noctes atque dies patet atri janua Ditis;
Sed revocare gradum, superasque evadere ad auras
Hoc opus, hic labor est. --
VIRGIL.

SALEM: Printed by SAMUEL HALL, and to be sold at his Printing-Office near the
Courthouse. MDCCLXXXIII.

PREFACE.
IT may be supposed by many, that the following publication needs an apology:
the author is sensible of it, and offers, as such, the reasons which he gives,
in the beginning of the subject, for entering upon it.

He is not fond of religious controversy; but there are times when a minister
of religion may feel it necessary to bear his testimony, feeble as it may be,
against errors, which, in his view, teem with the most pernicious consequences
to the interests of real piety, and the welfare of society.

Such a time the author esteems the present to be. Alarmed at the progress of
the errors which the following Sermons are designed to refute, and at the
patronage afforded them by some distinguished characters in our theological
world, he was willing to contribute his mite to the cause of truth, and to
hazard his name and (some may think) his reputation as a writer, in the support
of it.

He has treated the subject in a general and diffusive manner, with the
design, that it may be understood by all. He has treated it practically; for
it is, or ought to be, the end of every discourse, to make men not only wiser,
but better. If he can establish the wavering mind of one serious Christian; if
he can arouse one careless sinner to a sense of his danger, he will esteem it a
rich reward for all his trouble, and a better recompense than the highest
reputation as a polemical writer.

He is not conscious to himself of feeling any bitterness against those who
think differently from him. Though he considers them as mistaken, yet he hopes
them to be good men, and influenced by the dictates of their consciences.
Perhaps there may some warm expressions have escaped him, in the course of the
argument; they are not meant for the men, but for the doctrine which they
assert and patronize.

The unanimous desire of those who heard them, and the opinion of such as have
read them in manuscript, have led to the publication of these discourses.

P. T.
Malden, November, 1782.
THREE SERMONS, PREACHED AT MALDEN, OCTOBER, 1782.
ISAIAH lxvi. 24. AND they shall go forth, and look upon the carcases of the
men that have transgressed against me: far their worm shall not die, neither
shall their fire be quenched: and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh.


THIS remarkable denunciation of divine vengeance concludes the prophecy of the
princely Isaiah. He had the clearest views of any of the prophets, of the
gospel dispensation; he delivered the promises and encouragements of the
covenant of grace to believers in striking, and animating language, and at the
same time denounced the judgments of Heaven against all the workers of iniquity.

The chapter whence our text is taken, contains both promises and threatenings;
for it evidently refers to the days when all men, then upon the face of the
earth, shall be made acquainted with the gospel of Christ, and submit truly
unto it. And these shall know the misery of the men who, in times past, have
rejected the counsel of God against themselves: they shall be made acquainted
with this, to excite their gratitude to the great God, for saving them from
such a ruin, to keep up a lively view of the infinite evil of sin in their
minds, and perhaps to be a means of preserving their integrity, and preventing
them from desiring to return unto folly.

That the prophet was speaking in the text of the future punishment of the
wicked, a punishment which should take place in a state different from the
present, is evident by the quotation which our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ
made of this very passage, Mark ix. 43, 44. And if thy hand offend thee, cut it
off; it is better for thee to enter into life maimed, than having two hands to
go into hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched: where their worm
dies not, and their fire is not quenched.

The text is metaphorical, and points out the future, endless misery of the
impenitent, by the destruction which comes upon the carcases of those who fall
in battle, and are left unburied. The saints shall behold the misery, and ruin
of those who die in their sins, as we behold, with a gloomy melancholy, the
unburied carcases which cover a field of battle. The accusations of their
consciences shall be to the wicked as a worm which gnaws without ceasing, and
as a fire which no art, nor force can quench; their moral character shall be
such as to render them an abhorrence to all those who love, and delight in that
which is good, in the same manner as a corpse, which is covered with filth, and
infested with worms, is disagreeable, and abhorrent to those who behold it.

Thus is the misery of the finally impenitent represented by the text, in
language metaphorical, it is true, but adapted to the design of the prophet,
and elegantly expressive of his meaning. The worm that dies not, the fire that
shall not be quenched, present us with a grand, but alarming idea, of the
future state of the impenitent sinner.

That there shall be a state of punishment for the wicked beyond the grave,
scarce any believer in revelation will doubt. But many scruple whether this
punishment shall be eternal in its duration; they suppose that it shall last
only for a limited time, and then, that all things, and all men shall be
restored to a state of happiness. Many indulge to these scruples at the present
day. The doctrine of the eternal punishment of the wicked is openly attacked.
Many, and those men of eminence (and, we would hope, of virtue and goodness
too,) patronize the opposers of this doctrines and this consideration has led
me to make choice of the present subject.

This choice needs no apology. The doctrine before us is important, and
interesting to every individual of us. If we are rational and accountable
creatures; if we are made for immortality, and must be happy or miserable,
throughout eternity, as we are righteous or wicked here, it becomes us to know
it; for the knowledge, one would think, must have a powerful effect upon our
conduct.

The ministers of religion are set for the defense of the gospel. They are not
at liberty to permit their private feelings, or their worldly interest, to
restrain them from delivering the whole counsel of God. However disagreeable
their sentiments may be, to the pride or corruption of the human heart: however
painful it may be to them to deliver truths, which will occasion uneasiness,
and terror to their hearers; yet they must set their faces as flints; they must
resolutely determine to deliver every part of divine truth, let it please, or
displease whom it may.

It has been observed, that men's principles in religion, were often formed by
their natural disposition and habit; and that the doctrine of eternal
punishment, was the product of a dark and gloomy mind. But that mind must be
gloomy and malevolent indeed, which can delight in causing needless terror to
its fellow creatures: and the disposition must be truly diabolical, which can
take pleasure in reflecting upon human misery, capriciously or unjustly
inflicted. But if this doctrine is really true, it is a part of the warmest
benevolence, and truest friendship, to warn men of their danger, and caution
them to avoid it. What influence my natural temper may have upon my creed, I
determine not; but this I know, that I believe fully, from the word of God,
that those must be eternally miserable, who die in their sins. And therefore I
feel, that I am performing an act of the truest kindness, when I am
endeavoring to convince you of this truth, and urging you to flee from the
wrath to come.

The design of this, and some following discourses, is to show,

DOCT.] That the punishment of the finally impenitent, (meaning those who die
so) will be eternal in its duration; or, that all nun shall not be finally
saved.

Those propositions are so closely connected with each other, as that the proof
of one, necessarily confirms and establishes the other. We must be excused,
therefore, for blending them together.

The doctrine before us, we will endeavor, first, to prove from scripture: and
then we will answer, and attempt to invalidate, the objections and arguments of
its opposers.

And here, we are ready to acknowledge, that this doctrine depends entirely
upon the testimony of revelation. We know little of the eternal world, of the
nature or extent of our existence there, by the light of reason, Life and
immortality are brought to light by the gospel. We are indebted to revelation
for the most which we know, concerning the invisible world, and those who do
now, or shall hereafter, inhabit it. We are content, therefore, to wave the
testimony of the heathen writers; to omit the opinions of their philosophers,
upon the immortality of the soul; and to lay aside their descriptions of
Elysium and Tartarus, which might possibly tend to prove, that they had an idea
of the eternal happiness of the good, and the eternal misery of the wicked, in
the future-world. But these testimonies would weigh but little; they are merely
the effects of tradition, transmitted in a manner sufficiently dark and
doubtful. We are much safer when we attend to the dictates of revelation. Here
we may rest, with the utmost security. We know this will not deceive us.

I. Our first argument, to prove the doctrine we advance, is taken from the
very great difference, which is made in the word of God, between the character,
and end of the righteous and the wicked.

It is most certain, that, in every part of the word of God, there is a very
plain, and express distinction, kept up between saints and sinners. The one are
represented, as directly opposite to the other, in disposition, in manners in
character and end. The one are styled children of God: the other are
represented as children of the evil one, at children of wrath, a generation of
vipers, and the like. There is such a difference, in the character and state of
the righteous and the wicked, as that the latter are told, that they must pass
through a change, great as a natural birth, before they can be numbered with
the former. Except a man be born again, says our Savior, Joh. iii. 3. he
cannot see the kingdom of God. The saints of God are styled his workmanship,
created in Christ Jesus unto holiness and good works. It is said, that neither
circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but the new creature. And
good men are said to be born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor
of the will of man, but of God.

It is true, that regeneration is a metaphorical term; but still it means
something, and tends to convey an idea somewhat similar to that from which it
is taken. The expressions we have but now quoted, must (if they mean any thing)
serve to convey as much as this; that when men are brought to leave their sins,
and turn to God, or, in scripture language, are regenerated, the moral frame,
and disposition of their minds, are totally changed; their views of things
become essentially different from what they were, and their conduct and
behavior are altered in consequence. It seems as if a metaphor, taken from a
change so great as that, from nonexistence to existence, could not convey less
than this.

This change must pass upon men, while they are in a state of probation, while
they are under the influence of those passions and affections, which, we have
reason to think, are peculiar to the present state of existence. The scripture
every where represents, the change made upon us by death, as essentially
altering our situation, with respect to the things of eternity, and the
concerns of our souls. The effects of this regeneration, are works of piety,
charity and kindness, adapted to the present state of mankind only. Which
things prove, that the idea of a regeneration, beyond the grave, is ridiculous
in itself; and could be produced, only by the necessity of getting rid of a
powerful argument, which militated with a darling scheme.

The design and intention of the gospel ministry is said, Acts xxvi. 18. to be,
to open men's eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power
of Satan unto God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins. Surely the
apostle must here intend something important! He must mean to convey, that
there is a very great alteration made, not only in the present state of men's
minds, by the gospel, but also in their condition with respect to eternity. It
cannot be imagined that those who have experienced the effects of the gospel,
mentioned in this text, are, or will be ever, in the same situation with those,
who are under the influence of darkness, and are in a state of death. But if
all men are saved, they will be as truly, and as eternally happy, as any who
submit to the gospel, and experience its transforming efficacy. The doctrine we
are combating, then, has a tendency to lead men to disregard the gospel, and
to prevent their being so influenced by it, as to partake of its blessings.

The righteous and the wicked are said to be treated differently by God in this
world. The first are promised the light of his countenance, and communion and
fellowship with him. It is engaged to them, that all things shall work together
for their good; and they are said to possess all things: while it is declared,
that there is no peace to the wicked -- that they are poor and miserable, blind
and naked. And a denunciation like this, is pronounced against them, Mal. ii.
2. If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory unto
my name, says the Lord of hosts, I will even send a curse upon you; and I will
curse your blessings; yea, I have cursed them already, because ye do not lay it
to heart.

The deaths of the righteous and wicked are represented, as essentially
different: the wicked is driven away in his wickedness; but the righteous has
hope in his death. In the parable of the rich man and Lazarus, Luke xvi. the
beggar is said to have died, and to be carried by the angels into Abraham's
bosom. The rich man also, we are told, died, and was buried; and in hell, goes
on the history, he lift up his eyes, being in torments, and sees Abraham afar
off, and Lazarus in his bosom. The death of the saints is declared, to be
precious in the sight of the Lord; while the wicked are represented, as dying
under his wrath and curse, and exposed to his everlasting displeasure.

In short, there is, through the whole of the word of God, a plain, and evident
distinction made between the character, the situation, and circumstances of
good and bad men. There are marks, and signatures pointed out to us, in the
scriptures, by which we are to judge, whether we hear the one, or the other
character. We are pressed earnestly, to examine ourselves as to this point; and
are cautioned against deception. We are moreover assured, that this distinction
shall be kept up in the future, as well as the present world, in Mal. iii. 18.
Then shall ye return, and discern between the righteous and the wicked; between
him that serves God, and him that serves him not. An examination of the
context, will convince every man, that this declaration refers to the day of
judgment; represented there, as the day when God makes up his jewels, and as
the day that shall burn as an oven.

Now, my brethren, why is all this distinction made? Why are the characters,
the state, and the ends, of good and bad men, represented as so entirely
different, if there is a time coming, when they shall both stand upon the same
footing, and both be equally acceptable to God, and happy in the enjoyment of
him? Why is all this parade, in the word of God, concerning the necessity of a
change of heart, the importance of faith, and the indispensable necessity of
holiness, in order to our seeing God in happiness, if we are all to do so,
sooner or later, let us be ever so unholy, or unbelieving? Why are eternal
life, and happiness, promised only to men, of a certain character, if men of
all characters are finally to partake of them? Why is it said, without holiness
no man shall see the Lord, if we shall all see him, sooner or later, whether we
are holy or no? Why is it said, with so much solemnity, 1 Cor. vi. 9, 10. Know
ye not, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not
deceived, neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate,
nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor
drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God!
Why is this declaration made, I say, if men of these characters, be they ever
so vicious, though they may live and die in the love and constant, allowed,
deliberate practice of every one of these vices, shall finally enter the
kingdom of heaven? If the man, who wallows in blood, who breaks through every
social, and moral obligation; who prevents and destroys the happiness of
millions; who wantons in the misery and wretchedness of whole nations, and
communities of men: if this man, living and dying under the influence, and
government of these ferocious passions, is to be finally happy, and glorious to
all eternity, what need is there of self-denial, and mortification? Why need we
give diligence to make our calling and election sure? Why should we study, and
take pains to be saints, and conformed to the image of God? Surely, this is
labor lost, and good men are in this life most miserable!

If the time is to come, when all men shall be admitted to the divine favor
and happiness; then, surely, the distinction, which is so carefully made in the
scriptures of God, between good and bad men, is nugatory and vain! We need take
no pains to become Christians, or to live and walk as they are directed to do.
We may as well gratify our passions and appetites, as not do so; for throughout
eternity, it will be the same thing to us, every distinction shall be levelled,
and we shall all be happy alike! Perhaps there cannot be conclusions, more
natural in themselves, or which will be more universally drawn by mankind, from
the doctrine we are opposing, than these. And can there be conclusions, more
fatal to the interests of virtue and holiness, or more pernicious to human
society? To what purpose tend exhortations to saints, or alarms to sinners, if
they are to meet at last, without distinction, in the same happy world? And
what is there to prevent a believer in the doctrine of universal redemption,
from committing any crime, which his interest, or his passions may dictate, if
he can escape present shame and punishment?

Brethren, solemnly would I caution, and warn you all, as you expect to answer
it another day, to remember, that the word of God makes a very great
distinction, between the righteous and the wicked: that the one are to be
happy, while the other are to be miserable: that it is, in this word,
represented, as above all things necessary, to be believers in Jesus Christ,
and to be sanctified by his holy spirit. Do not let any thing, any sentiment or
doctrine, diminish your concern about the one thing that is needful; for the
hour is hastening, when we shall every one find, that we could never take too
much pains, nor bestow too much solicitude, upon the salvation of our immortal
souls.

II. A second argument, to prove that the duration of the punishment of the
impenitent, in the other world, shall be eternal; or that all men are not
saved, arises from the nature of sin. However light some may esteem this, yet
we are taught, by the word of God, to view it as an evil and a bitter thing
under the sun. It is there spoken of, in terms adapted to convey to us, the
most formidable ideas of it; and in its consequences, it is said to bite like a
serpent, and sting like an adder.

It is right for us to judge of the nature of an offense, from the dignity,
situation, and circumstances of the person, against whom it is committed; and
from the obligations, of the person committing it, to a contrary course of
conduct. We cannot arrive at a precise idea of the nature of an offense,
without taking these into view; for they have an intimate connection and
relation. An offense of a servant against his master, of a subject against his
king, is greater than the offense of either of them against an equal.

Sin is an offense committed against an infinite authority, for it is a
violation of the laws of an infinite God. He has guarded the injunctions of
his law, and the precepts of his gospel, (...) no less a sanction, than the
whole weight of his infinite authority. This every sinner knows. But
notwithstanding this knowledge, he goes directly in the face of this infinite
authority. He commits sin, though the infinite, and eternal Jehovah forbids it.

The sinner is under the highest obligations to a contrary course of conduct.
God is his creator, preserver, and benefactor. He has the most powerful
motives set before him, to excite him to his duty, and restrain him from sin.
God is daily increasing the number of his benefits to him. But notwithstanding
all this; notwithstanding all his light, knowledge, and advantages, he does
that which is entirely wrong -- he may justly be charged, then, with an
infinite offense.

An infinite offense, merits an infinite punishment. But man is a finite
creature, he cannot be punished by a vengeance infinite in its nature. His
punishment, therefore, must be eternal in its duration, in order to its being
adequate to the offense: and thus we shall find, that the scriptures of God
represent it.

There is no one thing, which all the declarations, promises, and threatenings
of the word of God, has a more direct tendency to show us, than that God views
sin as a most pernicious evil; that it is directly contrary to his nature,
which is holiness itself; and has the most pernicious effects upon human
happiness. The scriptures speak of it, as a great and horrible evil, as
exceeding sinful, as that which God's soul hates, that which separateth
between God and man, and that against which his wrath is revealed.

The word of God leads us to view sin, as the cause of the death of Christ, and
as that which produces every calamity to which mankind are subject. We are
warned against it, as our bane. We have every motive, and inducement set before
us, to restrain us from it; and are directed to make use of every occurrence in
providence, as a motive to take away sin. Every page of divine revelation
furnishes more or less arguments, to restrain us from iniquity.

So directly contrary is sin represented to be to the pure nature of the
divinity, and so subversive of human happiness, as that without repentance of
it, and turning from it, we are expressly told, that we shall not enjoy the
mercy of God. We read, Prove. xx^ 13. He that covers his sins, shall not
prosper: but whosoever confesses and forsakes them, shall have mercy. Without
repentance of sin, which includes forsaking it, we are told, that we shall not
enjoy eternal life. Except ye repent, says our Lord, Luke xiii. 3. ye shall
all likewise perish. At the same time that we are called upon to believe the
gospel, Mark i. 15. we are directed to repent, which proves, that this is
equally necessary to salvation, with faith in Jesus Christ.

How unscriptural must that doctrine be, then, which tells us, that how many
soever infinite offenses against God we may be guilty of, and how long or
obstinately soever we may persist in them; though we may live disobeying the
divine authority, and die blaspheming, and cursing the name, the nature, and
the works of the great and dreadful God; persisting in our hatred and
opposition to him; yet we shall be happy at last: yea, that the time will come,
when we shall be as really, and truly glorious and happy, as those who have
been ever so penitent for their offenses against God, and ever so desirous of
conformity to him! Is that doctrine agreeable to scripture, which says, that
whether a man repents and forsakes sin or no, yet he shall be happy at last? Is
it not, on the contrary, reprobated by every page of the gospel?

It is most certain, that our partiality in our own favor, renders us apt to
excuse, and justify ourselves. Our crimes do not appear so heinous to us, as
they are in themselves; neither do we think that they deserve a very heavy
punishment. Let a man, who has been guilty of the most capital and atrocious
crime, judge of the punishment which ought to be inflicted upon him, and we
know that it will not be very heavy. Our partiality in our own favor, leads us
to suppose, that we cannot deserve any great suffering, for such trifling
offenses, as natural men are ready to esteem their sins to be. We ought always
to take this thought into view, when we are judging upon ourselves, and
endeavoring to find the light in which we stand, with respect to our Maker.

III. A third argument, in support of our doctrine, is drawn from the plain,
and positive declarations of the word of God.

The whole scope of revelation appears to be, to lead us to a view of this
truth; and to show us the great and astonishing difference, which there is, in
this world, and which there will be in the next, between those who are subjects
of the grace of God, and those who remain in their sins and iniquities. And
declarations to this purpose, are interspersed in every part of the scriptures.

We shall begin with that remarkable declaration of our Lord, concerning the
man who betrayed him, Mark xiv. 21. Good were it for that man, if he had never
been born. The plain meaning of which is, that it would have been far better
for Judas never to have had existence at all, than* by his own folly and
wickedness, to have exposed himself to everlasting ruin and destruction.

Now, if the time will come, be it after ever so many ages, wherein Judas shall
be happy and glorious, this declaration cannot be true. The felicity of heaven
is so exquisitely great, as to counterbalance every pain, which we can, in this
world, or in the Limbus patrum of the pious church of Rome, undergo. Surely,
infinite glory, which can never know an end; which eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive of; this
glory, enjoyed eternally, will render it far better for Judas to have been
born, than not to have been so. He must bless God, to all eternity, for his
existence in such glory, let him before have endured ever so much anguish, and
distress; and it will be better for him to have been born, in exact proportion,
between a finite, and infinite duration.

But, surely, that doctrine, which admits Judas Iscariot, the covetous
defrauder of his master in life, and the base, treacherous betrayer of him to
death; whom Jesus Christ himself calls, the son of perdition; and who was so
filled with horror and despair, at his own vileness and guilt, as to put an end
to his life, with his own hands: this doctrine, I say, must be friendly to
abandoned characters; and must serve to make every man's conscience easy, let
him live and die ever so wickedly.

If it is declared, in the word of God, that there is one sin, which never
shall be forgiven to a man: then it follows, that any one, nay, all, who are
guilty of this sin, shall fall short of eternal life, and of consequence be
eternally miserable: for no one will be so absurd as to say, that men shall be
saved, and glorified, without having their sins forgiven them: but our Lord
himself has said, Matt. xii. 31, 32. Wherefore I say unto you, all manner of
sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men: but the blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men. And whosoever speaks a word
against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but whosoever speaks
against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world,
nor in the world to come. This is the plain language of scripture; and there
are other parts of it consentaneous to this. Now, we cannot suppose, that such
a denunciation should be made against a sin, of which mankind never can be
guilty; because this would be trifling with the most important concerns of
mankind, and would serve only to excite useless terrors. Could no man then, had
no man before, and should no one after, be guilty of this offense, we have
every reason to think, that nothing would have been said concerning it. But if
there is a sin, which never shall be forgiven, either in this world, or the
other; and any one man, either heretofore has, or hereafter shall, be guilty
of it; then there is one man who shall not be saved, and of consequence the
parade made by our adversaries, with their universal appellations, appears to
be groundless. Thus much, at least, is demonstrable, that the fear of being
utterly denied forgiveness, either in time or eternity, is held up as a motive
to restrain us from sin; which would not have been done, had this motive no
existence in reality. Divine revelation deals not in fictitious terrors.

SERMON II.
IN order to prove the eternal duration of the punishment of the wicked, or
that all men are not finally saved, we proceed to observe,

That eternal misery is set against eternal happiness, is the word of God: and
the one is said to be commensurate with the other.

None pretend to dispute the eternal duration of the happiness of the saints --
all agree, that they shall be glorious and blessed for ever: -- indeed, the
strongest terms are made use of, to point out this duration. But terms equally
strong are used, to represent the everlasting punishment of the wicked: -- the
misery of the one, is set in contrast with the happiness of the other.

In Romans vi. last, the apostle Paul makes this declaration, The wages of sin is
death, but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ, our Lord.
Here the misery and ruin, consequent upon sin, are evidently contrasted with
the life and happiness, which will be the reward of the saints of God. The one
is set over against the other.

But this contrast, and the eternal duration of the saint's glory, and the
sinner's punishment, are most strikingly displayed, in the account given of the
general judgment, by our Lord himself, Matt. xxv. He there describes the
character of the saint and the sinner: he declares what evidence shall be
produced, to prove this character: he relates the sentence which shall be
passed upon both, according to their character and deserts. The righteous shall
receive a plaudit from their Judge, and shall inherit the kingdom prepared for
them from the foundation of the world. The sentence of the wicked is to be
pronounced in these terms -- (tremble, our souls, when ye hear it, lest it
should be your fate!) -- Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
prepared for the devil and his angels. The whole account is closed thus; And
these (i. e. the wicked) shall go away into everlasting punishment, but the
righteous into life eternal.

And with respect to the last sentence quoted, it is necessary to observe, that
the very same word is used in the Greek, to express everlasting and eternal,
(the word aioonios) and our translators altered the phrases, probably, to avoid
a too frequent repetition of the same term. Here then, without dispute, the
misery of the wicked is put in contrast with the happiness of the righteous.
The same term, precisely, expresses the duration of the happiness of one, and
the misery of the other: so that, according to this declaration of our Lord,
those who die impenitent, and unbelieving, shall be miserable as long as those,
who obey the gospel, shall be happy. These, our opponents themselves allow,
shall be blessed and glorious as long as God exists: and does it not follow,
then, that the impenitent shall be miserable as long?

The fire, into which the finally impenitent are to be cast, is called here,
everlasting fire, (to pur to aioonion); and their punishment is styled, an
everlasting punishment. This argument would carry demonstration with it, were
it not true, that the word is sometimes used in a limited sense, in the
scriptures of divine revelation.

That it is not always used in a limited sense (as some have had the hardiness
to assert) will be evident to you, when I assure you (from a careful
examination of the Septuagint translation, and the Greek testament) that the
word is often, nay, by far oftener (perhaps as much as nine times in ten) used
to signify an unlimited duration. Thus is the word (aioonios) used to represent
the eternity of God, Genesis xxi. 33. Isai. xl. 28. Romans vi. 26. It is used,
likewise, to represent his attributes, which are surely everlasting, as Psalm.
c. 5. His mercy is everlasting. Psalm. cxix. 142. Thy righteousness is an
everlasting righteousness. It is used to represent the duration of the divine
government, Dan. iv. 3. His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom.

This phrase is almost universally made use of, to represent the duration of
the saint's happiness, as well as of the sinner's misery. Isai. xxxv. 10. And
the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion, with songs, and
everlasting joy upon their heads. Dan. xii. 2. And many of them that sleep in
the dust of the earth, shall awake; some to everlasting life, and some to
shame, and everlasting contempt. John iii. 16. For God so loved the world, as
to give his only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish, but have everlasting life. Isai. xxxiii. 14. The sinners in Zion are
afraid, fearfulness has surprised the hypocrites. Who among us shall dwell
with devouring fire? Who amongst us shall dwell with everlasting burning? 2 Thessalonians. i. 9. Who (speaking of them that know not God, and obey not the gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ) shall be punished with everlasting destruction, from
the presence of the Lord, and the glory of his power.

We have proved, that the word (aioonios) refers, often, to an unlimited
duration; and in order to prove that it does so in this xxvth Matt. we observe,
that it is here used to express the everlasting happiness of the saints, which,
say our opponents, is proved by other phrases in scripture. But if this
duration is unlimited, and appears so beyond dispute, then the duration of the
punishment of the wicked is so, for the same phrase is used to represent the
one, as the other: and the happiness of the one, is not only here, but in many
other parts of scripture, contrasted with the misery of the other. It is by no
means probable, that a phrase, signifying a limited duration, in the beginning
of a short verse, would be used, before the conclusion of it, to point out an
unlimited one.

It has been said, by some asserters of universal salvation, that those
represented as standing on the left hand, are the sins of mankind, which are to
be punished, while the men themselves escape: that men's sins are the tares,
but they are the wheat.

This is a supposition almost too ridiculous to need any notice; but weak minds
have been affected by it: it is proper, therefore, to say, that it is
impossible, in the nature of things, to separate the sin from the sinner,
because no action can possibly exist, separate from, or independent of, the
agent. Is it possible that there should be murder without a murderer? Can the
murder be punished, without the punishment of him who committed it? Is there
any personality, any consciousness, any praise, or blame, in mere simple
actions, separate from their agent? Let us only think a single moment, and we
shall see the fallacy of this idea. Our thoughts, our volitions, our actions,
are a part of ourselves; they depend upon us, and cannot be separated from us.

Shifting their position, the universalists have again said, that by the goats
on the left hand, in this xxv Matthew. are intended, the devils; but that the
sheep, on the right hand, point out mankind.

But we shall find, if we look into the account, that both the sheep, and the
goats, are addressed as persons of the same nature, under the same obligations
to the same duties, in consequence of the relations they sustain. The goats are
condemned, for the omission of the same duties, on account of the performance
of which, the sheep are rewarded. But the devils are not bound to these duties;
they are not placed in such a relation to mankind; nor are they so conversant
among them, as to render it suitable for them to perform these duties. What man
wishes the devils to feed, or give him drink? Who does not deprecate their
taking him in? Who desires such clothing, as these malevolent spirits would
bestow upon him? Who desires their company, or wishes the devils to visit him,
when he is sick, and in prison? And who, according to the account given of
them, in holy writ, can suppose these duties to be incumbent upon them? And
will, we ask once more, the righteous, and holy Judge of the world, condemn any
of his creatures, bad as they may be in themselves, for not doing that which
they are under no obligation to do?

In prosecution of the argument, drawn from the scriptures, to prove the
eternal duration of the punishment of the wicked, we proceed to quote Matt.
xviii. 8. Wherefore, if thy hand, or the foot offend thee, cut them off, and
cast them from thee. It is better for thee to enter into life halt, or maimed,
rather than having two hands, or two feet, to be cast into everlasting fire. In
the next verse, this is styled hell fire; which proves plainly, that it refers
to that state of punishment, upon which the wicked enter after death.

But this is still more plainly discovered, and the truth of our doctrine
proved, by the parallel place, Mark ix. 43. Here it is styled; the fire that
never shall be quenched; (eis to pur to asbeston). This adjective expresses the
perpetuity of the punishment of the wicked, from its very nature. It has a
principle of subsistence within itself, which can be destroyed by no
continuance, or perpetuity of distress. Thus the phrase, (asbestos,) is made
use of, by naturalists, to express a kind of mineral, which was well known to
the ancients, and is to us in these days. It is easily inflammable; but it
never consumes in the fire. It does not suffer the least diminution, nor
separation of its parts, from the fire. Nor does it decrease in its weight,
from being burnt ever so long. This is a fact well known. And perhaps no one
body in nature, can be produced, which more plainly points out, the
unquenchable fire of the bottomless pit; which is continually burning, but
still never exhausts its fuel; which preys upon the heart strings of those who
endure it, without putting an end to their existence, or diminishing their
capacity to endure it.

Our Lord goes on, in verse 44, to speak of hell, as the place where their worm
dies not, and the fire is not quenched. The time shall never come, when the
agony and distress, which is represented by the worm, and the fire, shall come
to a period. It is plain our Lord meant, to point out the punishment of the
wicked; of those who followed the dictates of their own corrupt hearts, and who
would not deny themselves for his sake. It follows, therefore, that the time
shall never come, when the punishment of these men (be it what it may) shall
have a period.

In order to evade the force of this text, the advocates for universal
salvation, explain it thus: The worm shall not die, and the fire shall not be
quenched, while the wicked continue in purgatory, or a state of punishment.
But, surely, this is to render the text perfectly nugatory: for the language of
this interpretation is, as long as the worm lives, it shall not die: and as
long as the fire burns, it shall not be quenched: the wicked shall be punished
as long as they are punished! This is mere trifling with language: and
interpretations of this kind, can make the bible mean any thing, or nothing. If
these persons will examine the Septuagint translation of our text, they will
find, that it expresses the sentiment thus: Where their worm shall never die,
and their fire shall never be quenched: -- which militates, entirely, with the
interpretation they give, as well as with their sentiments at large.

Those who hold to universal salvation, in order to evade the force of the
argument against them, drawn from the happiness of heaven being represented by
a term, signifying an equal duration with the torments of hell, have observed,
that the scriptures speak of the happiness of heaven, as to its duration, in
other terms, besides that of everlasting: that they speak of it, as
incorruptible, etc. but they forget, that the same argument may be brought to
prove, the eternal duration of the punishment of the wicked. In our text, in
Mark ix. the torments of hell are pointed out, by an unquenchable fire; a fire
durable, and lasting in its own nature; and by a worm which knows no period to
its existence; but always lives, and lives to gnaw. Surely these phrases convey
an idea, of an inheritance for the finally impenitent, equally incorruptible,
though far different, in its nature, from that which is laid up for the saints
in glory. We may remark, also, that the punishment of the wicked, is
represented to us, as an everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord,
and the glory of his power.

The nature, the exquisite nature of the punishment of those who die in their
sins, may be gathered from the metaphors, by which they are pointed out in the
word of God. There is none of these more terrible, than that of fire burning,
and consuming continually, without putting an end to our existence. Perhaps
nothing causes keener anguish to the body, than the application of fire. That
must, then, be a torment inconceivably great, which can, in any sense, answer
to this metaphor.

The eternity of the torments of hell, is like vise conveyed by this metaphor,
Rev. xiv. 11. And the smoke of their torment ascends up FOR EVER and EVER;
and they have no rest, day nor night, who worship the beast, and his image, and
whosoever receives the mark of his name. The design of this text cannot be
mistaken; we know that it refers to future punishment; and it is peculiarly
observable on this account: the phrase, by which the duration of this
punishment is expressed, (eis aioonas aioonoon) is universally applied, both in
the old, and new testament, to an unlimited duration. It is not, in a single
instance, used to express any other. It is never applied, to point out a
limited term. And we would ask our opponents, whether they know of any Greek
phrase, used in the bible, in the writings of the fathers of the church, or
profane authors, which conveys a stronger idea of eternity? This phrase is made
use of, in scripture, to signify the duration of that Being, who lives for
ever and ever; as also the everlasting misery of the grand enemy of mankind. It
is used, also, Rev. xix. 3. as well as in this place, to point out, the
duration of the punishment of such, as die in their sins; and can mean nothing
short of an eternal one.

In addition to the texts, already quoted, to prove the eternity of hell
torments, we will now suggest to your consideration, two or three, in which it
is, in so many words, said, that all men shall not be saved.

And the first, is the declaration of our Lord himself, Matt. xxii. 14. For
many are called, but few are chosen. This is a moral, drawn from the parable of
the marriage feast; and of the man, who had not on the wedding garment. The
expression is plain, and without limitation; and must mean, at least, as much
as this: that every one, saint and sinner, with the wedding garment, and
without it, shall not finally inherit the kingdom of heaven. If it means not as
much as this, it means nothing: and this is all the use, which we purpose, at
present, to make of it.

More express, if possible, is that assertion of our Lord, in his sermon upon
the mount, Matt. vii. 13, 14. Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide is the
gate, and broad is the way, that leads to destruction; and many there be,
which go in thereat: because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which
leads unto life; and few there be that find it. Here Christ himself says,
that there are but few, comparatively, who find the way to eternal life. How
diametrically contrary to this, is the proposition, that all shall at last find
it, and be happy!

In one of the journeys, made by our Lord, when upon earth, a certain person
came to him, and asked a question, highly important: Lord, are there few that
be saved? To this, Christ replies, in a manner similar to his declaration upon
the mount: Luke xiii. 24. Strive to enter in at the strait gate; for many, I
say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able. He then goes on, in
a parabolical manner, to point out, the miserable fate of those professors of
religion, who delay their preparation for death, till it comes upon them; the
addition which it will make to their sufferings, to behold the happiness of
others, and the numbers of Gentiles who shall obtain the kingdom of heaven;
while the Jews, who thought, they alone should possess it, are cast out. Now,
if there are any, who shall seek to enter into the kingdom of heaven at the
last day, (for to this, Christ evidently refers,) and shall not be able, then
there will be some excluded thence, and of consequence, all will not be finally
saved.

These plain, and positive assertions of our Savior, seem as if they demanded
our assent, and must lead us to be very careful how we indulge to an hope,
totally inconsistent with them.

We argue our doctrine,

IV. From the limitation, with which all the promises of the gospel are
attended.

These promises are not made, universally, to all men: or, it is not engaged to
all men, let their character be what it may, that they shall share in the
blessings, which this gospel promises. It is only to persons of a certain
character, pointed out in the gospel; to such as believe, repent, are born
again, hope, trust, overcome, are obedient, or hold out to the end, that
salvation is absolutely promised, and engaged. Men of a different character;
such as disbelieve, and reject the gospel; such as live, and die in sin,
unrepented of, and unforsaken, are the objects of gospel threatenings. Thus,
when it is promised, he that believes, shall be saved; it is, at the same
time, threatened, he that believes not, shall be damned. But it is needless to
quote texts to this purpose; your own constant observation must furnish you
with them.

I ask, now, what man has any right, to take any encouragement, from any one
of these promises, unless he possess the character, to which the promise is
made? I ask the asserters of universal salvation, whether they can produce a
single promise of the gospel, made to an unbeliever, a rejecter of gospel
grace, a constant, and allowed violater of every command of God? And if they
could, whether this would not, at once, render every distinction of character,
totally unnecessary? If the gospel promises salvation only to men of a certain
character, have any a right to expect it, but such as sustain this character?
Or, can a dispensation, which confines its benefits, in all its declarations,
and proposals, to such as submit to it, be extended to all men, without
exception? Must not the plan of mediation, be essentially altered, in its
nature, before this can be the case? What minister of religion will stand up,
and tell his people, "whether you accept of the gospel we preach to you, or no:
whether you submit yourselves to its directions, or not: whether you are good,
or bad: righteous, or wicked; yet you shall share in gospel benefits, and be
happy at last?"

The eternal duration of the punishment of the wicked, is argued,

V. From the nature of vicious habits.

These are strong, and immovable by any power, short of omnipotence itself.
When a man has contracted an habit of thinking, and acting in a particular
way: when he has imbibed a love, and strong inclination to it; and thus
prefers acting, in this way, to any other, he cannot, without an extraneous
power exerted, fall into a different way; because this would be to suppose,
that he could choose a thing, and refuse it, at the same time.

The word of God constantly represents vicious habits in this light, and points
out the necessity of an exertion of divine power, in order to overcome them.
The strongest metaphorical expressions, as well as plain, and express
declarations, are used to convey to us this truth. Can the Ethiopian change his
skin, asks the prophet, Jer. xiii. 23. or the leopard his spots? then may ye
also do good, that are accustomed to do evil. Our Savior, in so many words,
asserts, John vi. 44. No man can come to me, except the Father, who has sent
me, draw him. Thus do the scriptures speak of the inveteracy of vicious habits.

If they are thus inveterate, and the impenitent die under the influence of
such habits, or inclinations, (as, according to the supposition, they do,) they
must remain, for ever, under the influence of them, unless a divine power or is
exerted upon them. But in the word of God, (whence all our knowledge of this
matter arises,) we are not told, that any such power shall be exerted: but, on
the contrary, are led to conclude, that they will be given over to the
influence of their own corrupt, and vicious hearts. Thus is it solemnly
asserted, Rev. xxii. 11. He that is unjust, let him be unjust still: and he
which is filthy, let him be filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him he
righteous still: and he that is holy, let him be holy still. This text plainly
declares, that in whatsoever situation, with respect to their moral character,
men are found, at the time of which it speaks; in the same situation, they
shall remain. That this time is the day of judgment, is evident, from the verse
which follows: And behold, I come quickly; and my reward is with me, to give
every man according as his work shall be. Whence it follows conclusively, that
in the same situation as we are found, at the time of judgment; whether holy,
or not holy; believing, or unbelieving; in that same situation shall we remain,
throughout eternity.

It is most certain, that vicious habits strengthen by indulgence. The longer
we give way to, and are under the influence of them, the more we are attached
to them; the less willing we are to be divested of them, and the more forcible
they grow; like a river, small at its source, but increasing as it flows, till
its torrent becomes irresistible. If the wicked, then, die under the influence
of such habits; if their souls are filled with malevolence to the God who made,
and the beings who surround them; if, as we have seen, no alteration will be
made upon them beyond the grave; then they must increase in this malevolence,
and the expressions of it, to all eternity. Their souls will not be at all more
reconciled to God, or one another, by the torments they undergo; but they will
be continually increasing in their rage and enmity.

We are led to this idea, by an expression used by our Lord, in an exposition
of a parable of his, Matt. xiii. 49, 50. So shall it be at the end of the
world; the angels shall come forth, and sever the wicked from among the just;
and shall cast them into the furnace of fire: there shall be wailing, and
gnashing of teeth. This latter expression is always used, in scripture, to
convey to us, an idea of the highest degree of rage, and malevolence; the
utmost exacerbation of anger. Thus says Job, xvi. 9. He teareth me in his
wrath, who hates me; he gnasheth upon me with his teeth. The same expression
is used, to express the rage, and cruel passion, which filled the breasts of
the Jews against Stephen, when he had faithfully reproved them for their sins,
Acts vii. 54. When they heard these things, they were cut to the heart; and
they gnashed on him with their teeth.

When, therefore, hell is described as the place of gnashing of teeth, we are
led to conceive of the rage, and impotent resentment, which fills the breasts
of the miserable inhabitants, against God, and goodness. From the indulgence,
and unlimited expression of this rage, according to their ability, it will
increase, and gain strength, instead of being diminished, or abolished; and of
consequence, they will, to eternity, remain under the influence, and punishment
of it. We argue,

VI. That the doctrine of universal salvation, is not true, because it has a
tendency to diminish, and enervate the motives, by which men are urged to
embrace the gospel.

No doctrine can come from God, which has a tendency to introduce
licentiousness, or lead men to despise the law, or gospel of God: for this
would contradict his nature, which is pure, and holy; and would be totally
inconsistent with, and opposite to, the other doctrines of the gospel of
Christ: for he came into the world, not to destroy, but to fulfill, the law of
morality.

We know that one of the most strong, and powerful arguments, used in the
scriptures, to quicken men to embrace the gospel, and submit to its precepts,
is drawn from the fatal consequences, with which a rejection of them, and
disobedience to it, will be attended. We are warned to flee from the wrath to
come. Knowing the terrors of the Lord, the ministers of religion persuade men.
Sensible that the wrath of God is revealed from heaven, against all
ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men, they beseech men, in Christ's stead,
to become reconciled unto God. And they use the terrors of the law, as the most
powerful inducement, to awaken sinners from their stupid lethargy, and rouse
them to attend to their most interesting concerns.

And, in the present melancholy state of human nature, these are the most
energetic motives, which can be used with men; and they are the most likely to
influence their minds. We know that mankind are not governed by a sense of
rectitude: They have not such a respect to the Deity, as to cause them to
follow a course of conduct inconsistent with their passions, in order to
please, or to honor him. We know, on the contrary, that they are universally
attached to sinful indulgences: They love iniquity of every kind, and follow it
with greediness; Nothing, therefore, but the terror of heavy punishment, the
apprehension of endless ruin, will excite them to forsake their sinful courses,
and take up with a new course of thinking, and acting. Mankind are not affected
with a sense of gratitude, for benefits received: neither are they ingenuous
enough, to be broken off from vice, and excited to virtue, by any motive, short
of ruin and destruction.

That doctrine, then, which has a tendency to enervate the force of this
argument, has a tendency, likewise, to prevent the effect of the gospel upon
the minds of men, and of consequence to introduce licentiousness. But the
doctrine of universal restitution, has this tendency, because it assures men,
that, let them act as they will, be they good or bad, righteous or wicked;
although they live and die with the most confirmed inveteracy to Jesus Christ,
to his gospel, to his people, and his ways; yet the time will come, when they
shall get to heaven. Bring men to believe this, and in vain shall we urge upon
them the deformity of vice, and the excellency of virtue: -- in vain shall we
declare to them, the plain and positive commands of God: -- in vain shall we
address their reason, their gratitude, their ingenuity. The voice of criminal
inclination will sound still louder, and will be obeyed. Divested of these
friendly terrors, they will gratify every vicious propensity, without a check;
and will mount to the highest pitch of wickedness.

This we know to be the case; because even the apprehension of everlasting
punishment, is insufficient to restrain depraved man, from criminal
indulgences. Though he believes, and knows, that everlasting misery, and
anguish, will be the consequence of sin, allowed, and persisted in; yet, with
all his apprehensions about him, he rushes on the thick bosses of the divine
buckler, and dares almighty vengeance. Though he may feel himself singed with
the flames of the bottomless pit; yet, still he sins, and sins again. So strong
is the force of natural corruption!

And if apprehensions of everlasting punishment, are insufficient to restrain
the sinner, how much less will the fear of a few ages of purgatory, to be
succeeded by endless bliss? With how keen a relish, will he follow the dictates
of every sinful propensity? His purgatory will be short; it will be but a
point, when compared with eternity; and heaven will make amends for all! Thus
will the sinner reason; and indeed, were this doctrine true, his reasoning
would be just.

Does not this thought prove, to every man's feeling, and conviction, the
pernicious consequences of a doctrine, so pleasing to human nature? Have we any
need to diminish the force of those motives, by which men are, in any degree,
restrained from the practice of sin? Shall we, in this age of licentiousness,
throw down any barriers, by which men are kept from sinful indulgence? Let the
friends of the doctrine of restitution, reason as they may; yet we do know,
that men will indulge themselves more freely in sin, if they believe it to be
punished only for a limited time, than if they thought it would be followed
with everlasting misery. It is not acting a friendly part to mankind, then, to
take away the force of this restraint.

Were men to act, universally, under the belief of the doctrine of restitution,
and indulge, without fear, to every propensity within them, which was not
prevented by the force of human laws, in what a state would society soon be?
Every thing that could escape the censure of the judge, would be acted without
control; and this would would be a constant scene of murder, rapine, and
theft! Every moral, every religious tie, which interfered with their passions,
would be burst asunder, with equal case as Sampson's flaxen cords; and riot,
anarchy, and confusion, would universally prevail! -- Blessed consequences of
this gentle, lulling doctrine!

However contemptibly religion, and its considerations, may be viewed by some,
in the present day; yet we have every reason to believe, that the fear of
everlasting misery, in the world to come, restrains very many, from indulging
to courses, which they would otherwise strenuously pursue! The apprehension of
this ruin, keeps hold of many a man's conscience, which nothing else could
bind; and makes him shudder at the thought of crimes, which he would otherwise
freely commit! Take away this restraint; make him believe, that whatever he
does, or says, yet he shall be happy at last; and he will become the most
abandoned of men! Now he does much wickedness, with eternal destruction before
his eyes: -- to how much more would he indulge, if this restraint was taken
away!

SERMON III.
HAVING adduced a number of arguments, by which we suppose it to be proved,
that the duration of the punishment, of such as die in their sins, shall be
eternal; we come now to answer the objections, which are produced against this
doctrine.

OBJ. 1. And the first, to which we shall attend, is, That this doctrine is
inconsistent with the divine mercy.

Men are very apt to judge of the divine character, and dispensations, from
their own limited and contracted views. They bring the Almighty down to their
standard, and pronounce, that he can consistently do this thing, and cannot do
the other, with as much confidence, as if they had known the mind of the Lord,
and been his counselors.

But it is to be remembered, that God is in heaven, and we upon earth; and
therefore we cannot form adequate conceptions of him, or his ways. Our
knowledge is exceedingly limited -- we have no precise ideas of the world about
us -- we have not adequate conceptions of ourselves, of our own existence, and
properties. We dare defy all the philosophers upon earth, to describe, with
precision and truth, the manner in which their minds influence their bodies,
when they will to move a single finger! And shall such creatures, who are of
yesterday, and know nothing, set themselves up to determine, what is consistent
with the divine mercy, and what is not? Shall they bring the infinite Jehovah
to their standard, and presume to say, that one thing is right for him to do,
and another is not? -- Surely, this is a knowledge too wonderful us. Let us
remember, too, that we are parties, interested in this case; that we are
determining, what mercy and favor shall be shown to ourselves: and this
circumstance alone, is sufficient to disqualify us, from judging rightly in the
case.

Let us search the word of God: -- if this reveals the doctrine of eternal
punishment, it is sufficient to demand our assent, and prove to us, also, that
it is perfectly consistent with his mercy. When we have once established in our
minds, that the scriptures are a revelation from God, we are bound, if we would
act rationally, to believe every thing they say, how much soever it may surpass
our reason. We know that the Almighty will not impose upon us -- we know, too,
that he cannot be imposed upon, or reveal that for truth, which is falsehood --
we are assured, that he knows what is consistent with his mercy, and will do
nothing but what is perfectly right. If, then, the doctrine we have been
supporting, is founded upon scripture, (of which, judge ye!) it must stand
firm, and established; and this objection does not, in the least, affect it.

But even, on the views of the objectors, we are not sure, that such a
punishment, as we have been speaking of, is inconsistent with the mercy and
goodness of God. What should we think of a legislator, who guarded his laws
with a sanction inadequate to their importance; and who suffered his lenient
disposition, so to influence him, as to forbid any capital punishment to be
inflicted, in any case whatever? What should we think of a judge, who was to
acquit, and pardon all who were brought before him, were they innocent or
guilty? Should we esteem his character complete, because his tenderness of
disposition, would not permit him to cause any misery, or unhappiness, to the
most abandoned criminal, that was judged by him? What consequences would this
soon have upon society; and what crimes would it not occasion? The answer, and
the application, is easy.

The welfare of society, requires the punishment of those, who violate its
laws, in order that they may be regarded; and that the end, for which
government was instituted, may be answered. And this punishment must be adapted
to the nature of the offense, in order to its answering the purpose: if it is
not, the law, and the lawmakers, will be both of them contemptible. The laws
of God are guarded with such a sanction, as we have endeavored to show, in the
past subject. If, then, it is not executed, will it not be dishonorary to God?
If he denounces threatenings, which he means not to execute; if he declares
absolutely, that he will do that, which, it afterward appears, he never
designed, nor thought of doing; will it not give us the idea of weakness, and
want of veracity, in him? And must not his government be contemptible, in the
sight of all beings?

We know not of what importance the eternal punishment of the wicked may be, to
promote the happiness, and maintain the order of universal being. We know not
but that the inhabitants of innumerable worlds, may be restrained from sin and
folly, by beholding the miseries of this. We know not what effect the sight of
the misery of the wicked, may have upon the saints and angels in heaven, to
preserve them in their integrity: for though we are assured, that they shall
preserve it, yet we know not but that it may be in the way of means and
motives. So much as this we know, that the punishment of the wicked will
display, to all persons, and all worlds, the glory of the divine justice and
holiness.

If God has declared to sinners, that the consequences of their crimes shall
be eternal death; and they, with this consequence before their eyes, freely and
voluntarily do that, to which this punishment is annexed, can they charge God
with injustice, and want of mercy, if he inflicts it upon them? Are they not
paying the price, which they knew they should have to pay, for their vicious
indulgence? What plea will they have to make, to excuse them from suffering it?
Will not their mouths be stopped, and their souls become guilty before God?
They knew, when they committed sin, that this would be the consequence of it;
and who, but themselves, can they blame, if they feel this consequence?

We are always to remember, that God is just, as well as merciful.
Indiscriminate mercy, in a judge, is injustice. God owes something to his
rectitude and holiness, to his aversion from sin, as well as to his mercy. One
perfection is not to swallow up another, or crowd it out from exercise.

"A God all mercy, is a God unjust." Strict, inflexible justice, requires the
everlasting punishment of the sinner, who here refuses and rejects offered
salvation. This, our antagonists will not deny. And is it right, that mercy
should overcome the dictates of justice, in every instance whatever? The answer
is easy.

Our antagonists ask, whether we wish, or desire, the worst enemy we have in
the world, to be eternally miserable? We answer, with truth, in the negative!
-- They ask again, is not God more compassionate than you? We reply, without
doubt; but he is more just too. A man of true humanity, never beheld a criminal
executed, without wishing to reprieve him, if it could be done with safety to
society. But his compassion would be weakness, if he wished to spare him, and
let him loose again, to murder, rob, and destroy. It may be said, that the
comparison does not hold: but we ask, who first introduced it?

Upon the whole, if we consider our utter incapacity to judge, with precision,
upon the divine nature and will; the certainty with which we may depend upon
what revelation declares; if we realize, again, what, even in our view, belongs
to the character of a just judge; and remember, that the divine justice is as
truly amiable as his mercy; we shall see the objection to have no weight.

OBJ. 2. It is objected again, that no punishment can be just, but that which
is calculated for the good of the offender.

This is not true; for capital punishments, for certain offenses, are
prescribed by the law of God, and adopted by every nation. Such capital
punishments, reaching to the life of the offender, cannot be calculated to
promote his good. Let men (if they will be governed by their own ideas) only
reason upon the doctrine before us, as they do in other cases, and many
difficulties will vanish, which now obstruct the truth from their view.

We reject, with horror, the idea, that the Almighty punishes any, from the
same principle, which, in man, is revenge, or resentment -- we know, that he
has no malevolence in his nature; and we may be assured, that, if he punishes
any of his creatures with an infinite punishment, it is because he sees it
necessary, fit and right, that he should do so. God will do no wrong, nor
injury, to any of his creatures; but will manifest himself to be just, and
merciful in his conduct, toward them.

OBJ. 3. We will now proceed to consider those texts of scripture, which are
produced to prove, that all men shall be saved.

And here we must remark, that no scripture is of private interpretation --
that we are not to form our ideas of a doctrine, from a single text of
scripture, or from several such, how plausible soever they may appear, if that
doctrine contradicts the general run of scripture, and is inconsistent with the
universal ideas held out by the word of God. The Holy Ghost is the best
interpreter of his own meaning -- he best knows what he intended by his own
declarations -- for what man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of a
man which is in him? Even so, the things of God knows no man, but the spirit
of God. 1. Cor ii. 11.

The first text produced by the universalists, which we shall mention, is, 1 Timothy ii. 4. Who will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge
of the truth. This, our antagonists say, proves, that God is willing that all
men shall enjoy eternal life; and that they shall actually do so.

We agree with them, that there is salvation for all men: that this is freely
offered to the chief of sinners in the gospel: that it is God's will, that they
should accept of it; nay, his positive commandment.

It is the will of God, that all men should both now, and hereafter, obey his
commands, and be perfectly holy. Who will say, that God does not will all men
to do as, he requires them? But we know, that they do not comply with his will;
neither does he exert his almighty power, to make them do so. All men are not
holy, and yet the apostle says, 1 Thessalonians. iv. 3. This is the will of God, even
your sanctification. God never wills men to be any otherwise than holy, for he
commands them all to be so: but we see he leaves them to their own choice; and
if they will not obey his commandments, he will punish them accordingly. There
is nothing in the text produced, which proves more than this, that God
commands, and therefore wills, all men to believe, to be holy, and (...)
salvation. This is agreeable to him; and he (...) agreeableness, by the pains
which he (...), in every age of the world.

Besides, this text has a direct connection with the exhortation of the
apostle, v. 1, 2, ^. I exhort therefore, that first of all, supplications,
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all men; for kings,
and for all in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all
godliness and honesty: for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our
savior, who will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of
the truth. As a motive to quicken the Christian minister, to whom he wrote, to
pray for the progress of the gospel, and the happiness of mankind in
consequence, the apostle declares, that such prayers would be acceptable in the
sight of God; it was grateful to him, to have prayers made for the progress of
the gospel, because God willed, and commanded all men to submit to it, and be
saved. He was not to confine his good wishes and prayers to one nation, or part
of the world only, because God did not mean thus to confine the blessings of
it; but willed all men to believe, and obey it. The subsequent context proves
this interpretation to be right -- for there is one God, and one mediator
between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all,
to be testified in due time. Men ought not to worship idols, when there is but
one God -- they ought not to despair of pardon and acceptance, because there is
one mediator between God and man -- they may be assured, that, let their nation
or character be what they may, they are still welcome to his mediation, for he
died a ransom for all; and he shall be testified as a savior to all, in due
time -- the period shall arrive, when the gospel shall be preached to every
creature, and have an universal spread.

Coming to the knowledge of the truth, is mentioned, in this text, as necessary
to salvation: but if all men shall enjoy it at last, let them be ever so
ignorant, or ever so wicked, then how can this knowledge be necessary to
salvation?

When it is said, 1 Timothy iv. 10. that God is the savior of all men, especially
of those that believe, it evidently refers to a temporal salvation; to support
under, and deliverance from, outward affliction; because it is thus introduced
-- for therefore, we both labor and suffer reproach, because we trust in the
living God, who, etc. All men, in every age, and every country, experience a
greater or less degree of this salvation: but those who believe; and are thus
savingly interested in gospel blessings, may depend upon special, and peculiar
supports, under troubles of every kind.

The latter part of the 5th Romans is quoted by our opposers, to support their
sentiments: but if we consider it attentively, and compare it with the
connection in which it stands, and other declarations of the same apostle, we
shall find, that the general truths, meant to be conveyed by St. Paul, are
these -- that, although one sin involved the whole world of mankind in misery,
yet, under the gospel, many and aggravated offenses, should not prevent any
man's salvation: -- that we are placed, by the grace of God, in a state of
probation, far preferable to that of Adam, because one fall ruined him, but we
may be pardoned many offenses: -- that believers, under the gospel, are
entitled to greater privileges here, and greater glory hereafter, than Adam
was, in innocence; and therefore the grace and goodness of Christ has abounded
far above the sin of Adam: -- we were lost in one, we may be saved in one, if
our own folly and perverseness prevent not. -- If every ill consequence of the
fall of Adam, is removed from every man, and he is in a better situation than
he would have been if Adam had retained his innocence, (as the declaration of
the apostle must prove, as it is interpreted by the universalists); then why do
so many troubles and distresses remain among men; and why is any punishment
inflicted upon them even here -- why is not this world a paradise -- and what
right has death to deprive us of existence here? It may be said, with truth,
that these are necessary; that the happiness of the whole, is promoted by the
sufferings of a part. But if it is necessary, that punishment and suffering
should take place now, who can say, it will not be equally necessary to
eternity? For, the same reasons, which make it right and fit for God to inflict
temporary punishment, will make it equally right and fit, for ought we, or the
universalists know, to inflict eternal punishment.

The assertion of the apostle, 1 Cor. xv. 22. For as in Adam all die, even so
in Christ shall all be made alive, is another text, upon which some unthinking
asserters of universal redemption, found their belief: -- but if we examine the
chapter, from beginning to end, we shall find, that it is addressed only to,
and speaks only of, saints, or believers in Jesus Christ; such as believed, as
were not yet in their sins, as should be the first fruits of Christ at his
coming. But was not this the case, the apostle is speaking, for ought that
appears, of nothing more, nor less, than a resurrection from temporal death.
The idea, conveyed by his words, is simply this: -- As all men are subject to
temporal death, in consequence of the fall of the first Adam, so all men shall
be raised to natural life again, at the resurrection, in consequence of the
sufferings of the second Adam. Of the resurrection of the body, and of that
only, is the apostle discoursing, in this chapter; and to make the text quoted,
refer to eternal salvation, is neither more, nor less, than wresting its sense.

The declaration of the apostle, with respect to the time when Christ shall
deliver up the mediatorial kingdom to the Father, is another text, quoted by
our opposers, to prove their sentiments: Then comes the end, when he shall
have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the father; when he shall have put
down all rule, and all authority, and power: for he must reign, till he has
put all enemies under his feet: -- the last enemy, that shall be destroyed, is
death. If we examine these texts, in the connection wherein they stand, we shall
find, that the apostle is still speaking of the day of the resurrection, when a
final period shall be put to all the opposition to his designs, which Christ
has met with, from men and devils: that death, which now reigns over all, both
good and bad, shall then be subdued: he shall accomplish all that he had in
design, when he took upon him the human nature: he shall appear to have
glorified his Father's mercy, and his justice, and shall give up the office of
a mediator, so as that he will plead no more for the pardon of the sins of any,
who then remain without an interest in him; but will leave them to the
consequences of their perverse rejections of him. These things shall take place
at the day of judgment; for then, which introduces the text we are considering,
immediately succeeds, and of consequence has reference to, the time of
Christ's coming: by which phrase, the day of judgment is frequently pointed out
in the new testament; and therefore has respect unto it. Now, if there are
any, who are declared to be rejected of Christ, in the judgment day (and that
there are, Matthew. xxv. and other places of scripture, assure us), then they
will be for ever rejected of him, for he will act no longer in the character of
a mediator -- there will be none to save them. This declaration, then, instead
of proving the contrary, asserts, implicitly, the eternal duration of the
punishment of the wicked.

In 1 John iii. 8. it is said, He that commits sin, is of the devil; for the
devil sins from the beginning: for this purpose, the Son of God was
manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil. This, strange as it
may appear, is declared to be a strong proof, that all men shall be finally
saved. But who, without a favorite system to support, would have thought of
putting any other interpretation upon the words, than simply this? -- All who
live in sin, and will not forsake it, are of the devil: Christ came into the
world, to destroy sin, to bring men off from it: no man is, therefore, subject
to Christ, or can be entitled to his blessings, who lives in sin. -- View it in
its connection, and in its plain, obvious meaning, you will find it to be
parallel to those -- No man can serve two masters. -- Do we, then, make void
the law, through faith? God forbid: yea, we establish the law. -- But, even in
the sense of our opposers, it proves nothing in their favor: if we suppose
sinners to be meant, by the works of the devil, we know that they shall be
punished with an everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and
the glory of his power. Their punishment is pointed out in the word of God, by
the term, destruction: and the text will, in this sense, prove no more nor less
than this, that Christ came to punish, and destroy the finally impenitent.

It is said, that if the devil punishes men to all eternity, then so many as
are subject to it, are suffered to live in rebellion against God; and he is
deprived of their service to all eternity. But this is surely begging the
question, because we suppose, and believe, that God's justice is honored, and
his glory promoted, by the punishment of the wicked, as truly, as by the
rewards of the righteous. No one imagines, that the devil holds a sovereignty
independent of the divine permission: he is no more than the executioner of the
divine justice, upon those who merit punishment. Let his enmity be ever so
great, against God and goodness, he may still be made use of, contrary to his
will, or purpose, to answer the ends of both. Sin is now permitted, to fulfill
wise and good purposes. Without doubt, Omnipotence could prevent its existence
-- it does not -- he has sufficient reasons for this permission now; and who
can tell, but that these reasons may exist for eternity?

It is most certain, that God will procure his tribute of praise, from all
created beings, in one way or another: if they will not glorify his mercy, they
shall glorify his justice. He will be defrauded of his praise by none of them;
but they shall all answer, one or other valuable purpose, to this end. In this
sense, shall every creature, that is in heaven, and upon earth, and under the
earth, worship and praise God.

We ought, when we go about to examine the scriptures, to do it with a mind
open to conviction. The misfortune and the sin of many, is, that they first
embrace a doctrine, and then go thither to find proof and support for it;
whereas, we ought to go, with minds open, and unprejudiced, to this fountain of
instruction, and gather thence, what is truth or falsehood.

Again, we repeat, that one scripture is to be compared with another; and we
are not to take detached parts of it, or single phrases, and thence raise our
sentiments; but we are to examine into the general run of its declarations, and
form a judgment according to them. Thus, as to the subject concerning which we
have been treating, when we find, that there is such a striking difference made
between the characters of the righteous and wicked; when we see so many plain
assertions, that the wicked shall be everlastingly punished; when we know, that
the blessings of the gospel are promised to those only, who submit to, and obey
it; when we find it also expressly declared, that many are called, but few
chosen; or, in other words, that there are few who are saved; we should not,
because some single, detached expressions seem to favor a contrary
supposition, give up so important a truth. We know, that all men, without
exception, reap some benefit from the sufferings of Christ; that all men are
offered an interest in them; and that it will be their own fault, if any reject
such an interest, and fall short of eternal life. We should therefore, to keep
up the analogy of faith, understand the general expressions of all, etc. in
some such sense as this.

We ought always to examine the connection, in which any text of scripture
stands; for this must be taken into view, in order to determine its true
meaning. We may prove any thing from the bible, or any other book, if we take
only detached sentences, without respect to their connection.

The sentiments and opinions of some of the fathers, and others in later times,
who are styled eminent, distinguished characters, are brought to prove, that
there shall be a restitution of all things, (in the sense of the
universalists). But this does not appear to be a very cogent argument. Had we
made use of it; had we (as we might) have produced the universal testimony of
all those, who were styled the orthodox part of the church, we should have
heard a loud outcry, about a bigoted, superstitious attachment to long received
notions: we should have been directed to examine, and judge for ourselves, and
informed, that the sentiments of no man influenced the judgments of our
opposers. But thus it is, when a reflection suits one side of the question, it
is adopted with eagerness, and it is very right: but if it is, with equal
propriety, used on the other, it is matter of scorn and ridicule.

Some divines of England -- men, indeed, of a very wandering, unsettled turn of
mind -- with two of the fathers, who wrote in the early ages of Christianity,
have been cited, as holding the doctrine which we have combated. Origin, and
Clemens of Alexandria, are these two fathers; both of them persons deeply
immersed in the Platonic philosophy, and subject to strange whims and conceits.
Those who are acquainted with ecclesiastical history, know, that neither of
them were esteemed right, by the contemporary church, in this, and in other
particulars. Origin held to the recovery of all the devils, as well as all
fallen men; and perhaps he had as much reason for the one sentiment, as the
other.

No one means to dispute the antiquity of this doctrine; some believe it to
have been one of the first which was preached to Adam: -- he heard, and,
unhappily for us, he believed it. Satan, many think, delivered it to our common
parents in this language, Ye shall not surely die. He tempted them to think,
that God could not, with justice, or that he did not design to execute his
threatenings upon them. He persuaded them to believe, that they should not
suffer the death denounced against them. The artifice succeeded, and Adam was
undone.

Let us not be lulled to sleep in the same manner. We must not flatter
ourselves, that, let us live as we list, all will be well at last. We must not
flatter ourselves that God will not execute his threatenings. He is just; he is
true; he is upright, as well as merciful. Let who will tell us, that, though we
live in sin, and die impenitent, yet we shall be happy at last, we may be
assured, that it is the siren song, which beguiled Adam to his ruin; and that,
if we heed it, it will issue in the same manner, as to us.

You will extend your patience a little longer, while we make a few
observations upon the purgatory, to which some universalists have had recourse,
in order to avoid the disagreeable consequences, which may be drawn from their
doctrine.

Perhaps the phrase, purgatory, may be deemed invidious; but there can be no
word which will express the idea of a state of purgation more concisely. It is
a phrase, adopted by the church of Rome, to point out a situation similar to
that upon which wicked men (according to our opponents) enter at death. "It
is," says cardinal Bellarmine, "a certain place, in which, as in a prison,
those souls are purged, after this life, which were not fully purged in it;
that being so purged, they may be able to enter into heaven, into which no
unclean thing can enter." Locus quidam, in quo, tanquam in carcere, post hanc
vitam, purgantur animae, quae, in hac, non plene purgatae fuerunt; ut nimirum
sic purgatae, in coelum ingredi valiant, quo nihil intrabit conquinotum.
Pellarm. de purgator. Lib. 1. cap. 1.
Whether this definition agrees with the ideas of the universalists, they, and
we, must judge for ourselves.

This purgatory must be a new state of probation, or only a state of temporary
punishment. If it is considered as another state of probation, the consequence
will immediately follow, that, let a man live as he may; let him neglect every
religious and moral duty; let him live and die ever so abandoned; it will have
no effect upon his eternal happiness, because he is to enter upon another
state, in which he shall have opportunity to rectify the mistakes committed in
this, and secure his eternal felicity. This strikes at the root of society, and
has a tendency to deprive men of some of the most salutary restraints, which
deter them from acts of outrage and wickedness. It is a consequence, which our
opponents themselves, do not love should follow.

But whatever consequences might follow from it, yet, if it was a scripture
doctrine, we ought to embrace it, and leave consequences with him, who is able
to take care of them. But this is not the case: the scriptures, on the
contrary, lead us to consider the present, as a state of existence, in which
our characters are to be formed for eternity: that the present, is the only
time, in which we can secure an interest in the gospel salvation: that if we
let slip this opportunity, the door will be shut upon us, and we shall be
finally excluded from all title to gospel benefits. The same scriptures
represent death, as putting an end to our opportunities of doing, and getting
good: we are charged, whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might;
for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave,
whither thou go. Eccl. ix. 10. Our state of existence beyond the grave, is
represented as a state of inactivity, with respect to the salvation of our
souls; as the place where no man can work. One of the principal arguments, to
excite us to exertion in the concerns of our souls, urged in the word of God,
is that drawn from the present's being the only time for us to do so, and our
immediate entrance, at death, upon a state of fixed happiness, or misery. We
are no where told, that we shall have opportunity to repent, believe, and
perform good works, after death: it is no where said, that, let us mistake as
we may now, we shall have opportunity to rectify it hereafter: but it is
positively said, It is appointed unto all men once to die, and after death is
the judgment.

We all agree, that it is lawful to pray for those who are in a state of
probation: but if souls are so after death; if they are not finally fixed in
weal or woe, why may not we fall to praying for the dead; praying, either that
they may be preserved through the next state of probation, or speedily
delivered from the pains and penalties of purgatory? But this would smell too
strongly of old mother church.

If we view this purgatory as a state of temporary punishment, to be certainly
succeeded by an eternity of glory and happiness, we shall consider the damned
in hell, as in the same situation with good men here upon earth: they are
enduring affliction and distress, in order to qualify them the better for glory
and happiness: they may, with the highest propriety, adopt the language of the
apostle, and say, 2 Cor. iv. 17, 18. For our light affliction, which is but for
a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory;
while we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not
seen: for the things which are seen, are temporal, (or temporary); but the
things which are not seen, are eternal. They must view their present
punishment, as necessary to their future happiness: they may submit to it with
great patience, because they know it to be temporary; and may look beyond it,
with ineffable transport, to an eternity of happiness and glory. These same
motives support good men, under the sufferings of human life; so that saints in
this world, and sinners in hell, in the next, will be in the same situation:
the latter, indeed, will have one great advantage -- they are sure of heaven at
last: they may pass their state of suffering with great content, because they
have a full assurance of eternal life; while many precious saints of God, upon
earth, go mourning, all the day long, under doubts and uncertainties, as to
their future state.

These absurdities follow, upon the doctrine of a purgatory. And, indeed, when
we once take up our foot from the doctrine of eternal punishment, we know not
where to set it down; we know not of what nature, or duration, the punishment
of the wicked will be: indeed, we know not that they will have any at all; for
much more may be said, with probability, to prove, that they shall be
annihilated, than that they shall be subject only to a temporary punishment.

IMPROVEMENT.
1. We are led, by the past subject, to admire and adore the holiness and
sovereignty of the great God.

The holiness of God is manifested, in his excluding, for over, from his
presence, all such as resolutely persist in sin. This discovers, how
incompatible it is with his nature: he cannot endure the society, nor will he
permit the happiness, of such as love darkness rather than light. He gives them
all a space for repentance: but if they will not make use of it; if they will
despise free and rich mercy; if they will cleave to their own iniquity; he has
sworn, that they shall never enter into his rest.

God, my brethren, is a sovereign agent: he does his pleasure in heaven above,
and upon earth beneath: we are all entirely in his hands: we cannot, with
effect, resist his will, nor set aside his purposes. We may here reason as we
please. We may, in the fullness of our pride, and our ignorance, declare, that
one thing is right for God to do, and another wrong: we may say, that one thing
is consistent with his mercy, and another is inconsistent: but when we have
done all, he will dispose of us as he sees to be right and best. Poor,
contemptible worms of the dust, as we are, we cannot alter a single purpose of
his, relating to us; nor prevent it from being carried into execution, a single
moment. If he sees it right, to sentence us to eternal misery, neither angels,
men, nor devils, can prevent the execution. We may feel rage, and enmity,
against the God that made us; but the expressions of it will return upon
ourselves, and increase, instead of alleviating, our misery. Let us always
remember, that God is in heaven, and we upon earth; and therefore it becomes
us, that our words should be few.

2. We discern the reason we have to be thankful for Jesus Christ.

It is certain, that we cannot entertain too exalted ideas of the obligations
we are under to Christ, our redeemer. But perhaps nothing has a more natural
tendency to enlarge these, than a reflection upon our ruined, deplorable state,
without him. It is said, that we cannot have complete ideas of happiness,
without viewing its opposite misery: surely, then, our past subject will
represent the happiness enjoyed by the saints, and purchased by Christ, in the
strongest point of light, as it paints the misery of sinners in such vivid
colors. Glory be to God in the highest; on earth, peace and good will to man.

3. Let the past subject make us afraid of sin.

It is to be lamented, that mankind are no more under the influence of
ingenuous principles; that a sense of kindness and obligation has no more
effect upon them. But it is the fact, that we are not thankful as we should be;
and that our conduct is not governed by gratitude, and affection, so much as it
is by hope or fear.

But, as this is the case, we have reason to be thankful, that these latter
motives are set before us, in such a strong and powerful light, in the word of
God. Sin is our bane: -- it is our misery in this world, and, unrepented of,
will be our ruin in the next. It is well for us, therefore, that such terrors,
as the past subject presents, are brandished before our eyes. We are warned,
and cautioned, to flee from the wrath to come; assured that we may escape it,
if we will apply to the only Savior.

Let us, then, fear sin. Let us dread those principles and practices, which
will provoke God to anger here, and expose us to eternal vengeance hereafter.
Nothing is so truly pernicious to us, or ought so much to be dreaded by us, as
offending the great God, and thus ruining our own souls. And it is truly
amazing, that we have no more sense of the evil of sin now, and the
consequences of it hereafter, that we can play, as it were, upon the brink of
ruin, and sport ourselves with that misery, which is shortly to overtake the
impenitent. Had we but a realizing sense of that punishment, which sin will
meet with, in the world to come; did we but feel the worth of our souls, and
the weight of an eternity, we should not dare to trifle, as we do now, with our
dearest interests: we should flee from sin, as from our utmost destruction; we
should turn a deaf ear to the siren song of sinful pleasure, and should give
our first and principal diligence, to make our calling and election sure.

Brethren, beware of indulging to any reflections, or embracing any sentiments,
which have a tendency to diminish your fear of sin. We are too insensible, too
little cautious of it now; we need not be less fearful of it. Those who
endeavor to make us view sin as an evil less pernicious than it really is,
will not do us any good. Their opinions are not friendly (to say no more) to
the interests of real religion, and the welfare of society.

4. Let us be cautioned against those errors, which the past subject has been
designed to refute.

The doctrine of universal salvation is, in the highest degree, grateful to
corrupt human nature; it flatters our pride; it favors our indolence; it takes
off a restraint from our gratifications; it calms our consciences; and has a
tendency to diminish, yea, to destroy, our most lively fears, as to futurity.
This doctrine sinks into our hearts insensibly; and is so grateful to us, as
that it will make a greater or less impression upon us.

This is a ground of caution to us; we are always ready to believe what we
wish; we try to find it true; we give every thing, advanced in its favor, a
partial hearing; while we turn a deaf ear to the arguments suggested against
it. We know this to be the case, not only in matters of religion, but also in
things pertaining to this life.

But we are to remember, that our wishing things to be true, will not make them
so; nor if they are false in their nature, will their convenience to us, make
them true: yet our wishes and desires may, and will, have a great tendency to
warp our judgment -- to make us shut our eyes against the light, and expose us
to embrace error, instead of truth. When we have something within us, which
whispers, that its being true, will make us happy; and its being false, will
render us miserable; we shall, in almost every case, believe, let it be ever so
glaringly absurd.

Let us apply this reflection to the subject before us. Let us be afraid of
embracing such a lulling, flesh-pleasing doctrine. We wish it to be true, and
this will be apt to make us believe it: we are partial in favor of what is
said for it: we are prejudiced against what is produced to controvert it: we
are liable, therefore, very liable to error; to fall in with it, though it be
ever so contrary to scripture and reason.

It is to be wished, that those who have embraced this doctrine, would look
into their hearts, and seriously examine, whether their desires, or their
needs, that it may be true, have not led them to fall in with it, and blinded
their eyes to the plain dictates of their understanding and conscience. Let
them remember, that it is for their souls, and eternity; and that a mistake may
be fatal to them.

And let those of us, who are searching for the truth, in this matter, always
take this thought with us, and let it make us jealous over ourselves, with a
godly jealousy, lest we be drawn away, and enticed, by our eager wishes and
desires, to embrace an error, which may be fatal to us. Our hearts are
deceitful, and wicked; they are apt to put sweet for bitter, and bitter for
sweet; and to lead us into such errors, as flatter our pride, our avarice, and
our sensuality.

Let us remember, again, that to believe, and act under the fear of eternal
punishment, or assenting to this doctrine, and acting under the influence of
it, is much safer than the other way. If the sentiments of our opposers are
true, we are perfectly safe, because all will be happy at last: but what will
become of them, if our sentiments are true? What if, when they come into the
eternal world, they should find, that they are to be placed in weal or woe for
ever, according as their character here has been; and they have conducted as
carelessly as their doctrine leads them to conduct? What a disappointment! What
horror and dismay, what inexpressible anguish, will the reflection, that it is
too late to rectify the mistake, occasion to them! We could heartily with, that
all the friends, favorers, and preachers of this doctrine, would seriously
reflect upon this consideration.

Religious controversies are not friendly to the interests of real piety.
Perhaps they injure it in no way more, than by introducing a spirit of
bitterness and rancour, of censure and rash judging. Let us be careful against
this spirit, in the subject we have been upon. We may condemn, and reprobate
the doctrine; but we have no right to condemn the men who hold it. Their hearts
may be better than their heads; nay, we know they are so; for not one of them
lives, and conducts, so wickedly as his religious tenets will admit him to do.
Their consciences are too tender to be affected with their theories; and they
live as well, perhaps, and some of them better, than their neighbors, who hold
to the truth. Let this make us careful of judging, or censuring them: -- to
their own master, they stand or fall! It is the command of Christ, judge not,
that ye be not judged.

Lastly. Let us all be exhorted to strive, that we may avoid everlasting misery.

You will not, my brethren, view the past subject as a mere question of
speculation, controverted with a design to gratify an inquisitive mind, or gain
a victory over its opposers. Let us, on the contrary, bring home to our bosoms,
a sense of our personal interest in it. Let us realize, that you and I must be
eternally miserable, if we die with the weight of our sins upon us, without
pardoning grace and mercy.

We can have no adequate conception of the misery, which the finally impenitent
endure in hell: they are punished to the utmost extent of their capacities:
they experience the utmost exacerbation of anguish. All is darkness, misery,
and despair around them! Hope, the last, the best companion of the miserable,
has now forsaken them! They have nothing before them but accumulated anguish;
for the iron gates of a long eternity are shut upon them, never to be opened!

Shudder, O my soul, at the tremendous idea, and be quickened to flee from the
wrath to come! Realize, that this is the first, and most important concern!
What are all the fascinating pleasures of time and sense; of what consequence
are the most exquisite guilty enjoyments, when compared with the one thing that
is needful! Away, then, with delays, and designs, that interfere with this! Now
may a blissful eternity be secured; -- by and by it will be for ever too late!
Now are proposals of peace and pardon made; -- by and by they will be offered
no more! Hesitate not, then, a single moment; tarry no longer, my spirit, in a
situation so dangerous; but turn to the strong hold, as a prisoner of hope!

Offers of deliverance from the misery we have been describing, and of an
entrance upon an eternity of felicity, are made to every one of us, in the
gospel of Jesus Christ! No one is excluded from it; we are all invited to
partake of it. The will, the command of God to us, is, to repent, and believe
the gospel; and we are assured of the heartiest welcome to every benefit of the
Redeemer's purchase; for the proclamation of the gospel, to every one that
thirsts, is, to come and buy wine and milk, without money, and without price.

Let us then, every one, renounce our sins, and submit ourselves to the
teachings and guidings of the divine spirit; that thus we may be made partakers
of the divine nature; that our feet may take hold upon eternal life, and our
souls be for ever happy, in the presence of God -- where is fullness of joys;
and at his right hand, where are pleasures for ever more.

AMEN.

