SOME ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE AND GOSPEL LABORS, OF WILLIAM RECKITT, Late of
LINCOLNSHIRE in GREAT BRITAIN. ALSO, MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE, RELIGIOUS
EXPERIENCES, AND GOSPEL LABORS, OF JAMES GOUGH, LATE OF DUBLIN, DECEASED.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, IN MARKET STREET, BETWEEN
SECOND AND THIRD-STREETS, 1783.

SOME ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE AND GOSPEL LABORS OF WILLIAM RECKITT.

LONDON, PRINTED: PHILADELPHIA: REPRINTED BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, IN MARKET
STREET, BETWEEN SECOND AND THIRD STREETS. 1783.

A TESTIMONY from our Monthly Meeting at Wainfleet, in the County of Lincoln,
concerning our deceased Friend WILLIAM RECKITT.
THIS our worthy friend was born in the year 1706, within the compass of
Gainsborough monthly meeting, of parents professing truth, who died when he was
young. His friends put him apprentice to a weaver belonging to the same monthly
meeting, with whom we believe he served his time faithfully, and then came to
live near Partney Mills, within the compass of our monthly meeting. After some
time, about the year 1742, it pleased the Lord to call him into the work of the
ministry: his appearance from the first was in the life and wisdom of Truth,
which nearly united him to his friends. Soon after he removed to Wainfleet
particular meeting; and some time after he visited friends in the West of
England, and Wales, etc, and at different times many other counties; also
Ireland once with our friend Samuel Stott. He was twice in America: the first
time he set forward in the year 1756, and, it being in the time of war, was
taken prisoner into France, and confined about six months, which he bore with
Christian fortitude (as some of us have heard him say) and got well home to his
family in the beginning of the year 1757, where he slaid about four weeks, and
then again set forward for his intended visit. He afterward found a weighty
concern to visit his friends in some part of America again; all which visits,
by sundry accounts received, were much to friends satisfaction, as well as his
own: and indeed it may be truly said, he was deep in the ministry, and powerful
in prayer, his testimony found, and edifying, which rendered him very near, and
valuable to many. He was grave in conversation, yet innocently cheerful amongst
his friends; an affectionate husband, and a tender parent. We think it needless
to enlarge concerning him, as he was well known to many friends; only we may,
with sincerity of heart, say, his removal is much regretted in general. In the
latter end of 1768, he had drawings in his mind to visit London, and parts
adjacent; in which he told some of his near friends, he thought it might be the
last time.

He returned home in the first month, in the year 1769, but poorly in health,
and continued so; but mostly attended his own meeting, where he had several
weighty testimonies (which had more than usual influence over the hearers,
leaving lasting impressions on their minds) as well as at times in private
conversation, wherein he signified he was willing to leave all these transitory
and fading enjoyments, whenever it might please the Lord to call him from works
to rewards.

His illness was very short; he was taken with a fit of the ague the day before
his departure, and next morning, about four o'clock, exchanged this life, we
make no doubt, for a better, the sixth of the fourth month 1769, and was buried
the 9th of the same in friends burying ground at Wainfleet, after a solemn
meeting, where a living testimony was borne to ^^e truth, and to the
satisfaction of many present.

Signed in and on behalf of the said meeting, held the 16th of the third month
1770, by John Robbins, John Copeland, Thomas Reckitt, David Hopkins, Jonathan
Nainby, George Kitching, Pearson Smith, John Pearson, Joseph Burton, John
Wright, jun.

The foregoing testimony concerning our dear friend William Reckitt, deceased,
was read and approved in our quarterly meeting held at Lincoln the fourth of
the fourth month 1770, and signed in and on behalf thereof, by,

JOHN MASSEY, jun. Clerk.



INTRODUCTION.
OUR late worthy friend WILLIAM RECKITT, whose journal follows, was one whom
the Lord was pleased to prepare for his service; and having in a good degree
experienced the work of righteousness to be peace, he was engaged, under the
influence of divine love, to call to others to come, taste, and see that the
Lord is good.

His life and conversation were innocent, and consistent with his profession,
and, in the exercise of his ministry, he was attended with that love which
seeks the good of all.

As the following journal commences only with his voyage to America, a short
account of him, of the work of truth on his mind, and of his services before he
embarked for America, seems not improper.

He was born at Lea, near Gainsborough, in Lincolnshire, about the year 1706,
of parents professing truth; his mother died when he was young, and his father
being through infirmities rendered incapable of supporting his children, he was
bound by friends at nine years of age, until he arrived at twenty-one, as an
apprentice to a weaver; which proved a laborious servitude, his master being in
low circumstances. In the course of his service his master let him out to
harvest work, in which employment his industry gained him the confidence of the
farmer that employed him, who thought it unnecessary to look alter him, saying,
William was a faithful servant; as he was to his master to the end of his
apprenticeship. During which time he was reached by a divine visitation,
through the ministry of a friend on a religious visit, whole testimony (as he
has been heard to relate) clearly answered the witness of truth in his own
heart, and fully confirmed him, that the principles of friends were consonant
with the Holy Scriptures; and he then thought there would be none so void of
understanding, as not to be convinced by the same powerful declaration of the
true Christian faith. ^^ left a lasting impression on his mind; an hunger and
thirst after righteousness were begotten in his soul; and by a diligent
attention to the dicta^es thereof, he experienced preservation from the many
temptations, which unguarded youth are exposed to. About the eighteenth year of
his age, the death of an only sister, a virtuous young woman, who had been
particularly kind to him, nearly affected him; and an only brother, by giving
way to the vanities of the world, was drawn aside, and left the society. These
events impressed his mind with deep sorrow and humiliation; but feeling the
preserving hand of divine goodness manifested for his support, he was engaged
to live near thereto, by which he was mercifully preserved.

Soon after the expiration of his apprenticeship, he removed into the compass
of Wainfleet monthly meeting in Lincolnshire, where he followed the business of
a weaver, and increased in the esteem of of his friends; being a man who
labored to be in reality what he professed. In the year 1731, he entered into
the marriage state with Ellin Maw, a sober and virtuous young woman, who was an
affectionate wife to him, and tender mother to their children: he survived her,
she dying during his absence on his second visit to America.

About the thirty-sixth year of his age, he first appeared in the ministry to
the satisfaction of friends, and labored diligently in his own and some
neighboring meetings for the advancement of truth; and after some time, in
company with Robert Kinsley, he visited the churches in Essex; and about the
latter end of 1745, in company with the same friend, also visited the city of
London; and his service in this visit is still remembered by some with
brotherly regard and affection.

In 1746, he visited the West of England, and part of Wales; and in 1752, in
company with Samuel Stott of Edmundsbury, he visited Ireland, to his own and
friends comfort and satisfaction, and returned home with peace of mind. In
1756, he visited Yorkshire; soon after which, in the course of his religious
labors, he found himself engaged to visit the churches in the American
plantations, the ensuing account whereof will best inform the reader of his
prog^ess therein.

It is not intended to magnify the creature, by any thing which may be said
concerning this our deceased friend; but to show the reader, that such as
believe in, and live near to, the divine principle of truth in their own
hearts, convey an evidence to the minds of those who behold them: for he being
taken in his passage by a privateer (England being then at war with France) and
carried into Morlaix, was there detained in a painful state of captivity, yet
was preserved in great quietness and resignation, to the admiration of some of
the French inhabitants; one of whom, in a letter to a person residing in
London, mentioned his innoffensive lamb-like behavior, in terms of great
respect, and when he was removed to Carhaix, recommended him to a person of
account, a member of the parliament of Brittany, who likewise testified his
regard to him. The kindness he received from these persons moderated his
captivity, though he had many exercises there, which often brought him very
low; yet, he found support and preservation, as he acknowledged in his letters,
in one of which, after having noted how he had been helped, and expressing his
care for his future preservation, he says: My fears have all been concerning
myself, for surely I never saw more of my own weakness, it has indeed been a
searching time to me; and yet it springs in my heart to say, If the Lord has
any delight in me, he will bring me safe through all; he knows the integrity of
my heart: I did not set out in a forward spirit, but in his counsel, and in it
at this time I stand; he knows best what will be most for his own honor. And
as to what will become of this earthly tabernacle, it seems to be the least of
my care, so that I may finish my course with joy.

After being detained about five months, he was released through the kindness
of a person in England, who, having received very favorable impressions of him
through the French merchant before mentioned, recommended him to the secretary
of the sick and wounded office (they having the care of such as were
prisoners,) and after a short stay at home, finding the engagement remain, he
returned to London, attended the yearly meeting, and, with the concurrence of
friends, proceeded on his voyage, of which the following is his own relation.

SOME ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE AND TRAVELS OF WILLIAM RECKITT.
Some ACCOUNT of what befell me in my first VOYAGE toward AMERICA.
HAVING parted with several friends who accompanied me to Gravesend, the
fifteenth of the tenth month 1756, I went on board the ship Lydia, Joseph
Riddell master. We had three passengers besides myself, who seemed to be very
sober men, and carried themselves very loving to me, as likewise did all our
common men; though I often reproved them for swearing, and their bad language
to one another. The 20th we came into the Downs, but the wind not being fair,
we lay there till the 22d, when the wind coming more favorable, we weighed
anchor.

It may not be amiss to mention the great exercise and weight that rested upon
my spirit while we lay here, I then not seeing the cause of it. When I looked
forward, I could see little further than the Land's End, and I cried in my mind
that we might be carried, or driven to Ireland; for then I thought I should get
safe to my journey's end: but not seeing it would be so then, I only desired we
might put into Plymouth, which I mentioned to the captain, and he told me, he
thought he would. But the wind coming fair, and a strong gale, he was willing
to make the best of it. We outsailed two ships which came from the Downs with
us, one a privateer called the St. Olive, from London; the other a Guineaman.
The 24th, about ten in the morning, we came abreast of Plymouth, with a very
fine wind. In the evening, as I sat in the cabin, something opened in my mind
concerning my own preservation, which I thought somewhat strange; but soon saw
a cause for it. For about eight o'clock next morning, the mate came down and
told his master, there was a French snow just astern of us, which, to our
sorrow, was too true, for she was then within reach of us with her guns. I
thought it was a great neglect of our master, and the sailors, that they did
not keep a strict look-out; for they acknowledged, if they had but had a few
hours more, they should not have been taken. But then it was too late, they
could not get their sails all properly bent, as they would have done, if due
precaution had been taken. The shot coming over us, I was afraid for our men.

During the little time we were chased, the chief care our captain seemed to
take, was to save what he had, so he kept pretty much in the cabin, till his
men called very earnestly for him to come upon deck. Then he ordered them to
strike, and in a little time the Frenchmen came and boarded us with great fury.
I was in the cabin, and stood still, some of them looking at me very sour and
fierce, but like so many hungry animals, they fell to hunting and searching for
what they could find, till they durst not stay much longer. One of them coming
to me, in a fawning manner, said, Sir, I desire you would give me your money,
and watch, and I will give you them again. I told him I had not much, and did
not choose to part with it. But he growing very earnest to have it, I turned
myself about, and took three guineas out of my purse, two of which I carried on
shore, and gave him the remainder. He looked at it, and seemed not satisfied;
but the officers being in haste to get us all into the boat, I was had upon
deck. When I looked at the sea, I thought it seemed as though I should not
escape with my life; therefore resolved to stay on board our vessel, if I
might, and went down again into the cabin; but in a little time was fetched
out, and commanded to get into the boat. The fear of death was then taken away,
and I was resolved to do the best I could to get in. One of our sailors handed
me a rope, but it was so short, I was forced to let go, not knowing whether I
should fall into the sea, or boat; for the sea ran very high, and two of our
men were lost during the short time I had been below. They were getting into
the boat when I was seized with fear, and I saw it was not groundless; for had
I then proceeded to get in, I should in all probability have been drowned. For
as soon as I had turned my back to go down into the cabin, the gunwale of the
ship took the boat side, and had like to have sunk her, and the two poor men
were cast out, the loss of whom sorrowfully affected my mind; and the imminent
danger I had been in, with a sense of the Lord's goodness and mercy in
preserving me at that time, brought me very low, in humble thankfulness for so
great a deliverance, looking upon it as a mark of his tender care and fatherly
regard for so poor a creature as I am.

When we came up to the French ship, our men assisted me in getting on board,
and led me through a crowd of such creatures, as I thought were more like
brutes than men; but they offered me no violence. When I came into the cabin, I
was placed behind a large chest of arms, which was their table; where I sat for
several hours, very still, and labored to get to such a right and true
composure of mind, that I might be enabled to undergo, with patience, what was
then befallen me.

The hurry about the booty being pretty much over, toward night they came to
settle in the cabin; and seeing me take little notice of what they either said
or did, they looked earnestly at me, and asked our captain who I was. He told
them I was a Quaker minister, and in^^^d for Pennsylvania. They made many fine
speeches, and told me, I was welcome to any thing they had, and would have me
call for what I wanted. When meat came to table, they invited me to eat; but I
told them I was not for eating, my appetite being quite gone. When they thought
it was time for us to go to bed, I was had down into the hold, which was so
close, and the hammocks hung so near to one another, I was forced to creep on
my hands and knees, till I came to that I was to lodge in. The young man that
conducted me was one of the officers, and I unsterstood he put me in his own
hammock. As he was making it fit, I thought he seemed to do it with a very good
will; but the place being strait, and I lying in all my clothes, made it hard
work for me to get in. However, he staid and helped me what he could, till I
was settled in my new lodging. A few hours after I had plenty of company. As
they crept under me they lifted me up, and when they were all placed in their
respective lodgings, I perceived some lay upon the boards under me. However,
the closeness of the place, and the disagreeable smell, with a fear which then
seized my mind, that these creatures would do me some mischief, had like to
have quite overset me, so that I was nigh fainting away, and ready to query,
whether I should live till morning. In this great strait the Lord appeared for
my help. I sensibly felt strength administered, and it arose in my mind, that
those I was afraid of would not hurt me. I believed it was the truth, and in a
little time, being much wearied, I fell into a sound sleep till morning. When I
came upon deck, our poor men came to me, and complained of their hard lodgings,
and what was worse, the thoughts of a close imprisonment when they should come
on shore. It made me sorrowful to hear their complaints, for they had heard the
prisoners fared very poorly. I spoke as comfortably as I could, and exhorted
them to live in the fear of the Lord. This day we came up with a vessel bound
for Plymouth, taken from the French by one of our ships of war. The French soon
brought her too, boarded her, and brought all the men to us but one. The two
officers were had into the cabin where we were. The captain being a man of very
strong passions, to be taken prisoner was almost more than he could bear: When
they were sa^e down, I saw he was almost overcome with grief, which I a little
wondered at. After some time I went and sat by him, and said I would not have
him too much cast down; trouble and disappointment happened to all men, and
this was what such men as he might reasonably expect. He said nothing as I
remember, but soon went out, and after a while came again with a Frenchman
along with him, who could speak English, and pretended great friendship to me,
and requested that I would go along with him and the captain into a private
place, for he was desirous to have some discourse with me. It did not seem to
suit my inclination, but through their much importuning me, I went. When we
were settled, the Englishman told me, he had been attended with misfortunes
even from his childhood, and thought he had been in a fair way of making his
fortune, but he had met with this disappointment, which was like to be a great
loss to him. He then began to talk about religion, and expressed a great desire
in his heart to ^^ve in the fear of the Lord. He spoke highly of the ceremonies
used amongst them, mentioning baptism with water, and bread and wine, which
they call the sacrament. I told him we were not in the practice of using them,
believing such ceremonies not to be essential to salvation. He said I was a
strange man, but finding myself not at all disposed to have any farther
discourse at that time, I desired to withdraw.

I was much favored with stillness, and a sweet composure of mind, which to my
great comfort, I found did strengthen and fortify me against the assaults of
the enemy, which I met with both inwardly and outwardly. When I looked at my
present situation, and what was likely to be the consequence, fearing I might
be a stumbling block in the way of many, and bring dishonor to Truth, I was
much cast down, and did often cry, Lord, if I had been worthy, thou would
have preserved me out of the hands of such unreasonable men. But the good
Shepherd of Israel did cast his mantle of love over me and stilled my crying,
so that I was in a good degree made willing to submit to what he should see
meet to suffer to come upon me. Whilst I was here, servent and strong desires
were in my heart for those I had left behind me, in many places, that they
might be preserved in the fear of the Lord. As to outward food, I eat very
little several days. Many said, I should be sick, and often entreated me to
eat; but I did not eat much, till I found I could take it both with freedom of
mind, and a good appetite, which had been quite gone. The Frehchmen, as I
frequently walked upon deck amongst them, were become milder, and never offered
to do me any harm, except one at the first, and he was prevented from hurting
me. I also sat, and walked often upon quarter deck, the officers all looking on
me with a pleasant countenance, except the captain, who, I suppose, took
offense at my not conforming to them when they went to prayers, which was twice
a day,

One evening, as we were sitting in the cabin, a young Frenchman asked the man
of war's captain before mentioned (pointing at me) concerning our principles.
He told him, we were a strange people; we both disowned baptism and the Lord's
supper. The Frenchman looked at me with disdain, and then began to speak much
in behalf of both, laying great stress, especially upon the latter; for he
seemed a very zealous young man far their way. Then both joining, they came to
a conclusion, that those who were not in the practice of them, could not be
saved. Their discourse was in Latin, and though I am not a Latin scholar, I
understood so much, that I gathered the purport of their discourse. When they
had done, I (...) the captain he had done very wrong, ^^ misrepresenting the
people called Quakers to that man. He asked in what? I told him, I understood
he had been telling him we disowned baptism, and the supper. He said, he
understood by me, that we did not own the sacraments. I told him, there was no
such word made use of in scripture, that I knew of; but baptism and the supper
were, and we owned and believed both to be essential to salvation. My mind was
then opened concerning baptism, in the several passages of scripture, which
strengthen and confirm it, that the baptism, which is saving, must needs be
spiritual; and if so, then no need of water: for the apostle says, One Lord,
one faith, one baptism, Ephesians. iv. 5. and that themselves owned water to be but
an outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace. I was led on,
till I came to that last supper or passover, which our Lord did partake of with
his disciples; and told them what our Lord then said to his disciples, was, As
often as ye do this, do it in remembrance of me, to show forth my death until I
come. This was no commandment to perpetuate that outward supper, or passover;
that being a Jewish ordinance, which he then had nigh finished, when he nailed
the handwriting of ordinances to his cross. But I told them, they might see in
the Revelations of John, what he said concerning his coming, where he faith,
Behold I stand at the door, and knock; and if any man hear my voice, and open
the door, I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he with me. Rev. iii.
20. It is this supper and coming we own, and in our measure partake of; for
this was the communion of the saints. Several texts of scripture opening in my
mind to confirm that baptism and supper, which are saving, to be spiritual; and
as bodily exercise profits little, so that which is only outward and
elementary, could not profit the soul. They heard me very patiently, and did
not make any objections. Being pretty easy, I left them to have their discourse
to themselves, that the officer might have opportunity to inform the man what I
had said.

Now our confinement at sea was nigh over, but as we came nigh in with the
shore, we were chased by an English man of war, who came fast up with us, and
gave our men great expectations of being released; and indeed the Frenchmen
expected no other than to be taken. Every man prepared himself for removing,
and was in great fear; but we were so near the rocks, the man of war durst
follow us no farther, only gave us one shot, which came over us, and then
sheered off. The great expectation our men were in of being retaken being
disappointed, made them more sorrowful than before; but it did not much affect
me, for I was now more reconciled in my mind, to bear with patience what the
Lord should see meet to try me with. I had strongly desired before not to go to
France, but in a few hours we came into a small harbor, with a fort at the
entrance, and in it one ship of war. We did not land till next morning. This
night I met with something that was very unpleasant to me, for the captain
going on shore, and the men thinking all secure, when night came on, most of
them went to rest; but the man of war's captain, and some of his men, as it
afterward appeared, had consulted about cutting the vessel out of the harbor.
We had more liberty ^iven this night than we had before. The two man of war's
men, our captain, and myself, were ordered to lie in the cabin. Riddel had lain
in it before, but now he was to lie in the captain's hammock, being a
favorite, and I in his bed; but he not accepting of it, I got in. This I
perceived gave great offense, therefore, to prevent further trouble, I soon
quitted it, and sat me down by the man of war's captain, who had got to writing

I had by this time contracted such an intimacy with him, that I could make
bold to see what he was writing, without giving him any offense; and when I
came to see what he was writing, and found it was only to spend time* it gave
me some uneasiness, for it then began to be late. I did not suddenly say any
thing to him, but took notice of his motions and looks, and saw his countenance
was very much discomposed. All began now to be very still. None were up in the
cabin but him and myself, and the young Frenchman beforementioned, who kept
guard, and he had no weapon in his hand. I asked the captain if he was not for
bed. He said, he could not go to bed. I then told him, I would not have him
think of making any attempts to take the vessel out of the harbor. He said, he
should make no difficulty of it, if he had any body to stand by him. I
signified, I thought it could not be done without much bloodshedding, if at
all; and I should be very sorry to see any thing of that kind, though my
liberty was as dear to me as any of theirs. He said, I need not be afraid; no
body would hurt me. I told him, that was more than he knew; for as I had been
with them all the evening, they would think I had a hand in the plot, and so I
might lose my life undeservedly.

I laid before him all the difficulties I was capable of, as that of lying
under the fort, and their man of war a little distance off, with a very rocky
harbor to get out of; all which seemed to have but little effect on him. ^o I
thought it was best to consult my own safety; for if there was a skirmish, I
should, if I staid there, be in the midst of it. So I went down to my old
lodgings; but could find no rest for my body, my mind being very uneasy. I
therefore crept out again, all being still in the ship, and but few upon deck.
I went into the cabin, where I found them as I left them; but having a little
more courage than before, I told the captain I was resolved to hinder any
disturbance, if I could; adding he surely was not in his right senses to think
of any such thing, as his men, I supposed, knew nothing of it. He said I was
mistaken, for he had told one or two of them in the evening, and they would
acquaint all the rest, and he could have them all up in a few minutes.

It was now about midnight, and his men, I suppose, thinking it high time to
get to work, came upon deck without calling, and seemed to be in high spirits,
for they talked cheerful^y, and, I thought, gave several signals to their
master, that they were ready. I was in a great strait how to act, but thought
it would be best to endeavor to keep peace if I could, having said as much as
was necessary. I therefore sat me down close by him, with an intent to lay hold
of him if he offered to take up a weapon, which was very nigh at hand. Great
strugglings were in his mind, as he himself afterward confessed. He often was
just upon the point; but the Lord, in his great mercy, did interpose, and my
mind began to be calm and still, and all fear was taken away. I then looking at
him, saw his countenance became more composed and solid. I asked him if he
would not go to bed. He threw down his pen, and said he would. The young
Frenchman sat by all this time, but perceived nothing of their design.

The night was pretty far spent, and the men, who had walked the deck a
considerable time, thinking nothing would be done, went down to their beds; and
when I had seen the master settled in his, I lay me down upon a bulk head of
the ship, which was so narrow, I could only lie upon my side: there being
nothing better in the cabin that I could find. But my mind being easy, after
the pain it had been in, I fell asleep. It was a very cold night, and the
partition of our cabin was but canvass. When I awaked I was stiff, but I did
not take cold. The Lord was pleased to preserve me, though I often said in my
mind, I did not think myself worthy, and more especially because he had
suffered this great exercise to come upon me; which, I several times was made
sensible, would have been a light matter with him to have hindered, if he had
seen meet. I often cried to him in the secret of my heart, that if there was
any iniquity lodging in me, he would be pleased to take it away; and if this my
going was not consistent with his will, that he would be pleased to show me
how, and wherein I had missed my way; that I might not bring a reproach upon
the Truth, and a trouble and exercise upon his people. It was not long we had
to stay amongst this sort of company, for by that time the sun was up, the
captain, with several more such as himself, came aboard; also two of their
friars in their odd sort of dress; I suppose to see what they could get in the
scramble.

When breakfast was over, as several of us were to be searched before they took
their leave of us, those appointed to do that business staid in the cabin. The
captain and several others went out, and I amongst the rest, but was soon
called in again, for they searched me one of the first. When I came in, they
told me, they wanted my money. I said not much to them, but thought if they had
it they should take it from me; so they began to search me, and took what they
could find (which was but one guinea in money) and all other things they found
about me of any value; but my wearing clothes they gave me again. When they had
searched me as long as they thought fit, they let me go, but they were not
contented, for they had got it into their minds that I had a considerable sum
of money, and a gold watch; therefore I was no sooner gone out, but they
ordered me in again, and I was searched in every part where they thought any
money could be concealed. I was so grieved with them, I could not hold my
peace, but said, they pretended to be gentlemen, and men of honor, but now
they did not appear to be such; for it was good works which made men truly
honorable; and as to what they could do to me, I said, I was not afraid of.
Indeed, all fear was taken away from me: I did not seem afraid of my life, but
whether I did well in telling them so, I afterward queried; for I thought that
courage was only given me for my own support, and not to lavish away at that
rate. However, I came off pretty well, for they let me put on and carry away as
many clothes as served to keep me warm.

We were on board eleven days, and then were landed near a town called Roscone.
When we came to it, many people were gathered to see us, amongst whom was a
mixture of black coats: two of them came to me, and one taking hold of my
sleeve, asked me, as I supposed, what religion I was of, and whether I could
speak Latin. I told them, as I was a prisoner, they had no business with me,
and i did not incline to have any discourse with them; therefore desired they
would not ask me any more questions. They turned off, saying, He is for no
controversy. If I had been asked an honest question concerning the hope that is
in me, I believe I should have had an answer according to Truth; but pearls
ought not to be cast before swine.

As soon as I had got quit of the two priests, there came a man to me, who
seemed to be of some considerable account in the world, and said, he was sorry
to see me there; but it was the fortune of war He wished me safe in England
again. He went to one of his acquaintance who lived in the town, and after some
discourse, he came and invited me and Riddel, with the other two, to his house,
and set before us such as they had, and desired us to eat and drink. There was
also a woman in the house, much concerned about our having to walk to Morlaix
that night, which was twelve miles, and sent to hire horses, but none were to
be had. She therefore gave strict charge to the soldiers that conducted us, to
hire horses at the next place, and she would pay the charge. I wish many may
follow her example in being kind to strangers; for what she did I thought was
of great service to me. The soldiers hired horses for four of us when we came
to the next town, which was four miles. This town was pretty large, and there
were many spectators. That they might have a full view of us, the soldiers had
us into a convenient place, and stood round us at a little distance. The people
gathered so thick, they could scarce stand one by another; and in this posture
they kept us about half an hour. Then they had us to an inn, where we were put
into a large chamber, and meat and drink were set before us. But before we were
well sat down, several men and women of the upper rank came in; the rabble
stayed mostly below.

Whilst we were at meat, some of them turned up my coat laps, and examined what
my clothes were made of as well as they could, and commended them for being
good. They seemed not to take so much notice of any as they did of me; often
pointing at me, saying, I was a minister, a priest. Several gay women sat
behind the table, where they had opportunity to look at me as much as they
pleased. They were very light and airy, which I showed some dislike to, and
told them I had heard the French used good manners, and knew how to behave
well; but it could not be said so of them, for it was not good manners to come
into our room without leave, and when they were in, not to behave soberly and
well. I soon perceived I had an interpreter, for some among them understood
English, and informed the rest; upon which they left the room, and it was soon
pretty clear. After them came in several young men, who both looked and behaved
well. I had nothing in my mind against being free, and looking pleasantly on
them; for this, when seasonable, has a good effect.

The next place we came to of any account was Morlaix; it was night when we got
in, and we were obliged to stand and sit in the street, till they got orders
from the commissary what to do with us. I thought the time very long, more on
account of our poor men than myself; for they had walked till they sweated, and
some of them were ill. To sit in the street an hour or more, in a cold night, I
thought was almost enough to give them their death. When orders came, they were
to take us to prison; but a merchant, one Forney, who was agent of the prizes,
met us in the street, and took Riddel, the two man of war's men, and myself, to
a tavern, where we had what we pleased to call for, but not at the cheapest
rate. Our landlord was an Irishman, and I perceived had a very good opinion of
himself.

After we had supped, and he had informed himself what I was, he entertained us
with a dish of as unfavoury discourse about religion as I thought I had ever
heard, and what made it more irksome, he held it very long. He brou^ht a book,
out of which he said he taught his children, and as he read, some of our people
were so weak as to commend it, which made him more eager. I do not remember
that I either answered any of his questions, or made any objections to what he
said; but when he told me, he intended to bring some of my brethren to see me,
meaning the priests, for he said they would like to have some discourse with
me; I told him he need not bring any there upon my account, for I did not want
any of their company: so that was put an end to, for they never came to me
while I staid in Morlaix. Whilst I was here, the young man came to see me, who
took care of me the first night I lodged aboard the privateer, and saluted me
in a very friendly manner. This young man took more notice of me than any other
all the time I was aboard, and when they were stripping and searching me, he
stamped upon the deck, and showed great resentment, as Riddel told me, and
knowing he had not wronged me, could cheerfully come to see me; but the others,
who had, did not care to see me, and though I often met them in the street,
they endeavored to shun me, and would not look (...) in the face if they could
avoid it. I thought it was a brave thing to have a conscience void of offense
both toward God and men.

We were brought before one of their chief officers, called the commissary, to
have our names entered, and such as could not find bail, must go to prison.
This man and his wise took great offense at my hat being in its place, as
likewise did the commissary at Roscone, who was an old man, and ill of the
gout, upon his bed. But several capital people of the town being present, he
was much displeased, because I did not give them that honor which was none of
their due. When I had given in my name, I soon quitted the room This commissary
was a young man, and several were in the room with him I had not asked any body
to be bail for me, for I was easy, and the thoughts of the prison did not
terrify me, though we had heard a very dismal account of it; however Forney,
whom I mentioned before, after he had called Riddel aside, and asked him
concerning me* ventured to be bail for me. I staid a little while in the room
after our people were withdrawn, and looked at the great man as he sat in his
chair, and thought his countenance was somewhat milder, and he spoke pretty
kindly to me when we parted. It was said, he was very bitter against all the
English, and had uttered many harsh expressions against them; but his glass was
then almost run, for he lived but a little while after this.

Forney, who had passed his word for me, being agent, had my papers and
letters, which I found he did not choose to part with, except my certificate and
letter of credit, and another paper or two, which he did not think worth while
to keep. I perceived he was a selfish man, for after he understood my little
money that I should want was not to come through his hands, he came to me, and
with an unpleasant tone told me, he would not stand bound for me any longer. I
said, I did not intend to give him any offense in employing another to do my
business: viz. Charles Sermanson, a merchant, who was of great service to me
afterward, when I came to be acquainted with him. When he heard Forney would
not be bound for me any longer, he said, he would be bound for me, as freely as
he would for his own brother. So I was still kept out of prison. Whilst we were
here we were examined at the admiralty office, where they asked many questions,
and I thought, it I had been enough aware of them, I should have come better
off than I did. Before they had us into the room where we were examined, they
had something of the form of an oath, I told them I could not take it, being
against our principles. After some discourse about it, they, not being willing
to let me pass without examining, had me into their room, and asked me my name
and place of abode, whether I was married, and what children; to which I
answered. They asked what preparations were making in England for war? To which
I answered, as I did not concern myself about such things, I should say nothing
about them. He asked other questions about the manner of our being taken, and
what was taken from me, and about our ship and cargo. Then after a pretty long
pause, he said, now I have some close questions to ask you, but you must, not
be angry. I was silent, not knowing how I should come off. He then asked me,
whether I was a minister? I said, I did not choose to be put under that
denomination, He said, what then? I told him, my business, when at home, was to
look after and seed cattle, and such in our country were called graziers. He
asked me what I was going to do in Pennsylvania? I said, to visit my friends.
Whether I knew any body there? I said I was acquainted with but a few. Whether
I was sent by the Quakers? I told him, I was not; though I had their
approbation therein. He then asked me, whether or no the Quakers would fight if
they were attack^d by an enemy? I said, it was not my business then to tell him
whether they would or not; it was enough for me to answer for myself. Then said
he, If you were smitten on one cheek, would not you turn the other? Or, if they
took away your coat, would not you give them your cloak also? I said, it was so
in Scripture, but I had not freedom at that time to answer those questions. He
asked me no more questions at that time, that I remember.

About this time I suffered much in my spirit; the reason is best known to the
Lord. I was heavy and sorrowful in my mind both night and day for some time,
and much afraid, left I should bring dishonor to Truth by my unfaithfulness,
or some slip or other that I had made or mig^t make, for want of care and
watchfulness, in that strange land, separated from my brethren, and deprived of
all outward help and comfort. But this to me was a profitable season, for I
found the fear of the Lord, which was then in my heart, did preserve me from
evil, and falling into temptation. Though such company as I had was very
unpleasant to me, and I thought myself unfit for conversation; yet, when by
honest inquirers, I was asked questions concerning our faith and principles, I
was helped, in the openings of Truth, to give them an answer concerning the
hope that was in me: scriptures freely opening, and all things brought to my
remembrance, sufficient to put to silence, and stop the mouths of gainsayers.

Whilst I staid in Morlaix, Charles Sermanson (before mentioned) who often
invited me to his house, one evening, as we were in discourse, asked me, why I
went abroad in such troublesome times? I told him, I believed it to be my duty;
for nothing else would have induced me to leave all that were near to me in
this world, as wife and children, but a sense of duty to God, and obedience to
what I believed he required of me; for as to outward gain or advantage, I had
nothing of that in my view, for such as have freely received, must freely give.

Thus setting forth the nature, call, and qualification of the true ministry, I
saw it had some reach upon him and his wife, who sat by, and desired that he
would interpret to her what I said. When she under^tood I had left a wife and
children behind me, she said that could not be consistent with the will of God.
I signified, she did not consider Christ faith, He that loves father or
mother, wife or children, houses or lands, more than me, is not worthy of me. I
took the liberty to reprove her husband, for taking the great and sacred name
in vain, which I suppose made some alteration in his countenance. She then
asked him what I said. When he told her, she said, I had done well, for that
was his great weakness, and she hoped he would take notice of it. I said, by
turning our minds to the light of Christ in our hearts, which reproves for
sin, as we came to yield obedience to it, we should be helped to overcome our
weaknesses. She said I was a saint, and had overcome the temptations of the
world. I said, what I am, it is by Grace. I have nothing to boast of, and by
Grace I am saved out of many temptations of the world; yet was a man of like
passions, and liable to many weaknesses, as they were; and was no longer safe
than whilst I kept upon my watch. My mind was opened to point out to them the
way of salvation, scripture being brought to confirm the sufficiency, work, and
operation of the Grace of God, upon the hearts of the children of men; with the
saving help there is in it, as it is yielded obedience unto. It was a
seasonable opportunity. Finding freedom, I let him see the certificate I had
from my friends. When he had read it, he said, he liked it very well. I told
him something of the good order we had amongst us, which he seemed to approve
well of; but said, he could but admire that I should take so much pains,
without any view of outward advantage. I told him, what I had said was the
truth. He said, he did believe it was. But, said he, our priests would not go
across that room without being paid.

Perceiving that what had already passed had some good effect, for the man was
very loving, and his understanding measurably opened, to distinguish between
the true and false ministers, I took my leave for that time, and went to my
quarters, which were at a tavern, where I was for several days, and had much
company of diverse sorts. As I appeared to them somewhat singular, they wanted
to know what I was, and such as could speak English would ask me questions; and
as I found freedom I answered them. One came as I was sittin^ in a room, there
being a pretty dea^ of company, and asked why the Quake^^ would not fight? I
told him, the weapons of the primitive Believers were not carnal, but
spiritual, and mighty, through faith, to the pulling down sin, and the strong
holds of Satan; and such as ar^ now come under the peaceable government of the
great King of Kings (who said, if his kingdom had been of this world, then his
servants would have fought) cannot fight with carnal weapons, though there
should seem as great a necessity, as there was when our Lord was like to be
delivered to the Jews. I had to open several passages of Scripture, which set
forth the peaceable government of Christ, who came not to destroy men's lives,
but to save them; and that it was not the lamb's nature to tear and devour, but
the wolf's. This opportunity was seasonable, the people were very still and
attentive. He that asked me this question had often been with me, and had asked
many questions, but was now silent, and seemed to ^o away satisfied; for the
power of God was over them at that time.

After some time. I was, with some others who were prisoners at large, ordered
into the country about thirty miles, to a town called Carh^ix. Charles
Sermanson supplied me with what money I wanted, and also recommended me to a
friend of his there, one John Grace, a counselor at law, who, during my stay,
showed several tokens of his regard and hearty friendship, after he and I came
to be acquainted; though I may say with safety, I never sought his, nor any
other's favor, by any indirect means, or in a way Truth did not admit of. When
I went to his house, it was in the evening, and he taking the letter with his
hat off, made a bow, but I not returning it as he expected, he with an earned
look, and somewhat of an unpleasant tone, said, I might go to the tavern, and
he would come to me in the morning. He did so, and told me, as I had been
recommended to his care by his good friend Charles Sermanson, he would do the
best he could in providing me a private lodging; and any other service he could
do me, which lay in his power, should not be wanting. I told him, I was obliged
to him, and was glad to find him, and some others of his countrymen, so well
disposed as to be kind to strangers; and as I as a stranger, and also a
prisoner, I should be glad of his assistance. He said, he was glad he had the
opportunity of assisting his fellow creatures, for he looked upon it to be no
more than his duty. Then we walked into the town, where he provided me a
chamber, and I had every thing found me that was necessary. My new landlord
took great notice of my behavior, and, I suppose, at first did not know how to
behave himself toward me, that I might not be offended; for being poor, he was
glad of a little money. He could speak no English, and I but little French, so
we could have no conversation; but he told one of the Englishmen, who spoke
French, that I did him good, though he could not understand me. He was a
peruke-maker by trade, and when he had left work in the evenings, he and his
wife would come and sit with me a considerable time in silence; which was not
disagreeable to me: for sometimes, I believe, we were favored with good, when
we sat in silence. His wife was a religious woman, and of a solid sober
behavior, so far as I ever saw. I staid in their house three months, and then
took lodgings in another place; three young men in like circumstances with my
self, desiring very much to be with me, and they not having room for us all, I
left them. As the young men behaved well, their company was agreeable; two of
them being friends sons, though they did not in many things take up the cross
as they ought to have done, yet their behavior to me was such, as gained my
love and affection. One of them soon after died in the French prison, being,
when taken, upon his passage to Rhode Island, where his parents lived, at whose
house I afterward was, and found them very sorrowful, for they had lost three
of their sons, two at sea, and one in prison. As these things affected and made
some impressions upon my mind, I made a few remarks.

John Grace, the counselor, after a little while, became very loving, and had
me often to his house, it not being far from my lodgings, and I found myself
very free to converse with him, and told him in freedom at one time, if he had
any thing in his mind to ask concerning our society or principles, I would have
him be quite free, for I should be willing to answer honestly according to the
best of my understanding. He said, he understood we did not baptize with water.
I told him, the apostle Paul says, There is one Lord, one faith, one baptism;
and water, how or by whomsoever administered, is only sufficient to put away
the filth of the flesh, but not able to warn away the sin of the soul. The same
apostle said, He was not sent to baptize, (he there must be understood with
water) but to preach the gospel, which is the power that baptiseth into the one
Spirit. He further says concerning himself, that he was not aw hit behind the
chiefest of the apostles; yet he thanks God, he had baptized no more than the
few he recites, which he would not have done, if baptism with water had been
the one baptism essential to salvation. He said, he thought there our ought to
be something done to children by the minister, to initiate them into the
church. I said, as to our not being in the practice of sprinkling children with
water, or signing them with the sign of the cross, as it was not scriptural, we
could not be justly blamed for being in the disuse of it. He then said, if he
at first had put on the priest's gown, instead of that he then wore, he should
have thought it his business to have searched more into the Scriptures. I told
him, I took him to be a man of that understanding, as very well to know, it
ought to be every one's business to search into the things that belong to their
own peace. He said it was true, but they had men who were learned, whom they
paid, and he looked upon these to be his teachers, and as for him, he was but a
hearer and if they deceived him, it would be the worse for themselves; they
could not deceive God. I said, it was true, they could not; but as the
salvation of the soul is a thing of so great moment, we should not have our
dependence upon others, and as to teachers, we might know them by their fruits;
for, according to Christ's own words, men do not gather grapes of thorns, nor
figs of thistles. He further says to his ministers, freely you have received,
freely give. As to those of polluted lips. I thought they could not profit the
people at all. He said, there was no Scripture that forbad marrying, and he
thought their priests wrong in that; for they did not keep themselves chaste,
but deluded and deceived many poor young women. I said, it was great pity any
should be deprived of the benefit of the Scriptures, for all ought to have
liberty to try all things, that they may hold fast that which is good; for it
is dangerous pinning their faith upon other men's sleeves: if the blind lead
the blind, they will both fall into the ditch. He then said, he should be glad
to read some of our authors, which I gave him some expectations of sending, if
I lived to return home.

Some time after this, he sent for me to dine with him, when I expected he
would have had some priests with him, but he had not; though he told me he had
invited one of their clergymen to dine with him, and acquainted him I was to be
there, but he desired to be excused, ^^ledging, he thought I should be offended
with his company. I said I should not, if he was a religious sober man. I was
not had before the commissary or chief magistrate, at my first coming here,
with the rest of the prisoners, but this counselor gave in my name, and when
they went to receive the government's allowance, I went, not having enough to
support me without. But hearing the commissary had uttered some very bitter
expressions against the Quakers, and me in particular, for not putting off my
hat, as he had observed, when I met him in the street, I had an inclination to
pay him a visit, which I acquainted a young man with, who could interpret for
me. We found the commissary in the street. The young man told him, I was come
to see him, or pay him a visit. He looking earnestly at me, after a pause, took
us into a room, and before I could say any thing to him, asked me, why I did
not put off my hat? I told him, uncovering our heads was what we did when we
prayed and addressed the Almighty; but to do it to our fellow creatures was
against our consciences.

The answer, though short, I perceived satisfied him, for his haughty
countenance fell, and he then spoke mildly, and said, he had heard we did not
baptize our children. I said, we did not use water baptism. What do you then,
said he, instead of water? I said, the one baptism, which we believe to be
saving and essential to salvation, is spiritual, that of fire and the Holy
Ghost; and as to little children, they are heirs of the kingdom of heaven
without water, or the help of any mortal man. I told him, I had heard he said
something against me, but I came in good will to pay him a friendly visit, for
I had a mind to speak with him myself. He then took me by the hand, saying, he
would not do me any hurt, but all the service that lay in his power. I took my
leave of him with thankfulness; that truth had thus far prevailed, and the
young man was well satisfied; for he was somewhat in fear before we went,
having heard what the commissary had said concerning me. Ever after, when I met
with him, he looked pleasantly, and I believe never any more took offense at my
hat.

Charles Sermanson, whilst I was here, wrote me several kind letters; and mine,
which I wrote to England, he took care to send to his correspondent in London;
by whom also my letters from home were safely conveyed to me, which made my
confinement much the easier. as I could often hear from my wife and family, and
they from me. After I had been confined about five months, I was released; my
passport coming to hand, I showed it to John Grace, and he went with me to the
commissary, who readily signed it, expressing his gladness that I had got my
liberty, and was going to my family, He also gave leave to several of my fellow
prisoners, who were desirous to accompany me to Morlaix. The 23d of the 4th
month I took my leave of the counselor and his family, with diverse others,
both French and English, who came to see me in a very affectionate manner. When
I came to Morlaix, I found a Dutch vessel bound to Ostend. Charles Sermanson
agreed with the master to set me upon the English coast, if the wind would
permit, which happened well the 28th of the 4th month 1757.

When I came to London, I found several friends very glad to see me, having had
a near sympathy with me in my exercises; and I saw the Lord had been my helper
and deliverer, in that he had been pleased to bring me safe to my native and;
and not only so, but I found friends as nearly united to me as ever; which was
a great comfort. For I had been afraid, left they should stand at a distance
from me; but magnified be the Great Name for evermore, I found all well in that
respect, and likewise when I came to my own habitation, which was en the 11th
of the 5th month 1757.

I soon set out again for the yearly meeting in London, which began the 28th of
the 5th month this year. My brother Maw, and two other friends, accompanied me.
It was believed I was intending to proceed again to America; but I could say
little to it when asked, till the yearly meeting was over, and friends mostly
gone out of town. I was then made sensible, it was my duty again to make
preparation to set forward; a ship being near ready to fail for Philadelphia. I
then acquainted friends with it, who left me to my liberty, expressed their
unity with it, and made all things as easy for me as they could. For which my
spirit was bowed in thankfulness, to the great, good, and wise Disposer of all
things, who can dispose the minds of his people as he sees meet; and who ever
will, I believe, make way for all that put their trust in him, that his
requirings may be in all things duly answered. I took my leave of my wife and
family in a solemn manner, not knowing I should see them again in mutability. I
also settled my outward affairs in such order as I thought might be for the
best.

The 19th of the 6th month 1757, I left London, several friends accompanying me
to Gravesend. The vessel being just ready to sail, I took leave of friends, and
followed her in a small vessel as far as the Nore, two of my kind friends still
accompanying me, viz. John Sherwin and Thomas Wagstaffe. I went on board the
ship, and they returned to London. We arrived in the Downs the 21st, and waited
for a convoy, it being a time when much shipping were taken by the French. The
people were not willing to go without men of war.

I went on more while here, and found a small family of very sensible friends,
of which I was glad. The 23d we weighed anchor, being in all about sixty sail.
We lost sight of land the 8th of the 7th month, had a good passage, and in
weeks from London we got safe to Philadelphia. Here I found several friends
from Europe in the service of Truth. We were truly glad to see each other, and
had comfortable meetings together: blessed be the name of the Lord! I have
great cause to be truly thankful, and in humble reverence, to praise his great
and everlasting name, for many deliverances both by sea and land. I may in
truth say, his name has been to me a strong tower, and thither I have run and
found safety. For though he suffers his to be tried, as in the furnace of
affliction, he will not leave nor forsake them; but his arm has been made bare
for their deliverance, and he has granted them the petition of their souls.
Glory and honor be given to him, and that for evermore! I staid in and about
Philadelphia till the yearly meeting was over.

The 5th of the 9th month 1757, I went in^o New Jersey, John Pemberton
accompanying me. We had a meeting at Haddonfield; thence to Chester, and had a
meeting there also, both to good satisfaction We lodged at Edmund Holinhead's
and on first day were at Evesham meeting, which was attended with the seasoning
virtue and power of Truth. We went that night to Burlington, and attended the
monthly meeting on second day, which I thought was to general satisfaction. I
lodged at John Smith's, a substantial friend, and a very serviceable man in the
society. Here John Pemberton left me.

I went next day to Ancocas, it being the fourth of the tenth month, and third
of the week. We had a meeting there, which was hard in the beginning, and dull;
but that spirit of earthly mindedness, which had too much prevailed, was
testified against, and truth, I think, did in a good degree spring up over all:
praised be the great name for ever! The fourth of the week, accompanied by
another friend, had two meetings at Mount Holly, both to pretty good
satisfaction: we lodged at Josiah Foster's. Fifth day we had a meeting at a
school-house, which was large, and though it held long, the people were very
quiet: we lodged at William Smith's. Sixth day we had a meeting at Old
Springfield; first day at Mansfield. It was a large meeting, but the minds of
the people hankering much after words, the spring of life, that had run through
me, being in a great measure stopped, a cloud came and covered my tabernacle. I
saw it was safest to stand still. We lodged at Peter Harvey's, a kind and
steady friend.

Next day, the second of the week, and tenth of the month, we had a meeting at
a school-house in the neighborhood, which was small, but in some degree
satisfactory: we lodged at William Smith's: had a meeting at Upper Springfield
on third day; at Freehold on fourth; Croswick's on fifth; Bordentown on sixth;
and Trenton on first day: we lodged here at William Morris's. From thence to
Stony Brook, and had a meeting on the second day of the week, and 17th of the
month. We lodged at James Clark's. In this place they had been hurt, and
scattered in their minds; as also in several other places, where there had been
a striving, and a dividing spirit got in. From thence we went to Robins's
meeting on third day, which was not so satisfactory as could have been desired;
some being restless, the meeting holding long.

We went from thence to Squan, and had a meeting there on fifth day amongst a
company of poor dark people Then to Shrewsbury the twenty-second of the tenth
month, where was a meeting for ministers and elders. The meeting on first day
was very large, and, considering the great numbers of people of all ranks, was
quiet. Second day it was a good solid meeting, Truth prevailing over all:
praises be given to the Great Name for ever. The Son of Righteousness did arise
with healing in his wings, and my soul was delivered, as out of the pit; for I
had been ready to despair, and thought I should have been overcome by the
enemy. Great horror and darkness was over my understanding for a time; but the
Lord did send his light, and his truth, and caused it to shine upon my
tabernacle; and I had to declare of his mercy and goodness toward the children
of men, and to invite them to come and see for themselves, what great things
the Lord will do for them that trust in him. This great meeting ended well, and
I was truly thankful to the great Master of our assemblies. We lodged at Joseph
Wardel's, a worthy friend.

On third day we came back to Croswicks, and lodged at Thomas Middleton's. Next
day to widow Andrews's, where my companion was taken ill. Here I left him,
after staying one night, and went to Haddonfield with Isaac Andrews, and lodged
at his house one night, and so to Philadelphia, where I staid till their
quarterly meeting. We had several comfortable opportunities together. John Hunt
and Christopher Wilson from England were here, and had good service. I staid
about Philadelphia, attending meetings as they came in course, both for worship
and discipline, until the fifteenth of the eleventh month, when I set out
toward the southern provinces, Thomas Lightfoot accompanying me. We went to
Chester, and were at their youth's quarterly meeting, which was a time to be
remembered by many of us.

We visited the meetings through Chester county, till we came to Nottingham,
and were at the monthly meeting, John Hunt also being there. It was a suffering
time to me, I being sensible many were worshipping only in the outward court,
whose dwelling was in the form without the power, such cause suffering to the
true seed. I staid meeting with them on first day, and was led to speak closely
to several states, and left them pretty easy in my own mind. I lodged at John
Churchman's, and had a meeting at West-Nottingham on third day; at Little
Britain on fourth day, here several Presbyterians came in, with their priest,
who took down in writing what I said; though I perceived not that he was
writing, till I had nigh done speaking. When I sat down, most of them went out,
but he staid; and, after a short space, I had to say, The time shall come, when
the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God (or they that are dead in
forms;) and they that hear and obey shall live; and that Christ is the
resurrection, and the life, and he that lives and believes in him, though he
is dead, yet shall he live. I did not enlarge much upon it; but the meeting
broke up in a good degree of life, and the priest went off with his company.
Friends thought there was no danger of any ill coming of it, but I was afraid,
left Truth should suffer.

I rode that evening after meeting to William Downing's, who had a large
family, with whom we had a good opportunity. Thence we came to Sadsbury, where
I had a meeting, and in the openings of truth, had closely to speak to the
states of many. From thence I went to Lampiter, where I had two mee^ings; and
so to Lancaster, and had a meeting with the few friends that lived there. We
lodged at Isaac Whitelock's; and after having a meeting at James Wright's, we
crossed the river Susquehannah, and went to York, where a few friends dwelt,
and had a meeting among them. We quartered at Nathan Hussey's.

Our next meeting was at Newberry; it was silent, but to my satisfaction. We
passed through Warrington, but had no meetings it being the youth's quarterly
meeting, at Huntington, where we had an edifying time together. We had also
meetings at Moynallan, John Evans's, Pipe-Creek, Bush-Creek, and Monoquesy.
Then crossing Potomack, we came into Virginia, to Fairfax; where we had a
meeting on the second day of the week, and twelfth of the twelfth month. It was
a good meeting, Truth having the dominion: magnified be the great name of
Israel's God, and that for evermore! We lodged at Mary Janey's, a discreet
orderly woman, who had several sober well-inclined children. From hence we went
to Goose Creek, and had a meeting on third day: it was well. On fourth day we
had a meeting at David Pole's, several friends accompanying us. I had a travail
in spirit, that Truth might not lose ground; finding a spirit of ease had
greatly prevailed in many of the professors of Truth, to the sorrow of the
honest hearted. We left David Pole's house on fifth day, and rode over the Blue
Ridge, or Blue Mountains, where the Indians had done much mischief, by burning
houses, killing, destroying, and carrying many people away captives; but
friends had not hitherto been hurt: yet several had left their plantations, and
fled back again over the Blue Mountains, where the lands had been rightly
purchased of the Indians.

Things seemed dreadful, and several hearts ready to fail. We proceeded on our
journey, and came within six miles of Winchester, where the English had a fort.
On sixth day we had a meeting at Hopewell, which was an open time. I found my
mind much engaged for the poor suffering people, but had to tell them, their
greatest enemies were those of their own houses. The meeting ended well. We
lodged at Joseph Lupton's, an ancient friend, who with his wife were very
loving to us. The Indians had killed and carried away several within a few
miles of their habitation; yet they did not seem much afraid; for they said,
they did not so much as pull in their sneek-string of the door when they went
to bed, and had neither lock nor bar. We had a meeting at Crooked-run on first
day, the eighteenth of the twelfth month. It was a good meeting, the Lord
favoring with his living presence. Glory be to his great Name for ever!

On second day we set forward through the woods, and over the hills and rocks,
crossing several large creeks. We came in the evening to a man's house, called
Moses Mackoy, and had a meeting there next day. They were an unsettled people,
yet assented to Truth; but were not fully convinced in their minds, concerning
the sufficiency of it, having an eye to outward shadows: I left them in good
will. On fourth day we rode about thirty miles to Smith's Creek, where we had a
meeting on fifth day, at the house of William Caroll. It was silent, though
they had sent notice several miles, and many came. I told them, though I had
nothing to communicate by way of preaching, or declaration, yet I found freedom
to have another opportunity at a proper time and place: which I had next day at
the house of John Mills, about ten miles off, somewhat on our way. The meeting
was to good satisfaction. The Indians had killed and taken away people within
two or three miles of this place, not many weeks before; but the Lord preserved
us in our journey Thanksgiving and praise be to him, and that for ever!

Seventh day we set out toward the south parts, and lodged that night at the
foot of the Blue Mountains, at a friendly man's house, having two friends to
conduct us. Next day, being the first of the week, we crossed the mountains,
and toward evening came to Douglass's, and had a meeting with the family. The
twenty-seventh, and third of the week, we had a meeting at Camp Creek. It was a
pretty open meeting, though the sense of good is almost lost amongst them in
that place, and their states much to be lamented. We lodged at Charles Moman's.
Next day we rode fifteen miles, and lodged at Francis Clark's, and had a
meeting at Fork Creek. Many people came, and sat with great attention, and the
meeting was solid.

From thence we went to Jenito, where we had a meeting, and many people came,
but it being silent, they seemed dissatisfied. As I had nothing to say, I was
glad I could be made willing to be what the Lord saw meet to allot me. We
lodged at Jane Watkins's, a widow woman, She received us kindly, and had
several loving and well-inclined children. We had a meeting at Cedar Creek on
seventh day, the thirty-first of the twelfth month 1757. It was a satisfactory
and good meeting. Truth had the dominion, praises be to the great Giver of
every good and perfect gift! -- I lodged at William Stanley's.

From thence we went to Caroline, where the meeting was on first day, the first
of the first month 1758. It was a large and good meeting. The states of the
people were so spoken to, that through the Lord's goodness and condescension, I
hope may tend to his honor, and to the help of his poor creatures. We lodged
at Morner Chigles's, and also at John Chigles's, one night. Next meeting we
were at the Swamp. It seemed to me, as I traveled along through these parts,
true religion was much wanting among many of the professors of it. I lodged at
William Johnson's. The next meeting was at the Black Creek. It was a good time
to me, and hope also to some others: praises be to the great Name! I lodged at
an old man's house that night. On the seventh of the week, and seventh of the
month, the meeting was at White Oak Swamp, being monthly meeting, and then rode
to Curls, and lodged at John Pleasant's, a very kind friend. We were at their
meeting on first day. The third of the week, and tenth of the month, had a
meeting at Wion Oak, fourteen miles from Curls, which was satisfactory. We
lodged at John Crew's, and on fourth day came back to John Pleasant's. On fifth
day we rode to Robert Langley's nigh Petersburgh, and on sixth day had a
meeting at the house of a friend called Butter.

It was an acceptable time to some.

After meeting we went to Robert Langley's, where we were kindly entertained.
On first day we were at Pattison's meeting, which was a low time with me; yet
truth in some good degree did prevail. On second day we came to Burleigh, and
lodged at John Honeycut's, and had a meeting at Burleigh on third day, which
was to some acceptable. We lodged at Wike Honeycut's, and were at the monthly
meeting at Surry-black Water, where we had good service for Truth. They being
in the mixture, suffered people of other societies to sit with them in their
meetings of business. I was grieved, and could not be easy till I had desired
them to withdraw, that did not make profession with us, both from the men's,
and women's meeting. I had to recommend to the oneness is and simplicity Truth
led into, and to keep their meetings ^or discipline, in that wisdom, power, and
authority that they were at first set up in; that they might not join with the
world's spirit, but keep themselves separate, and in the wisdom and power of
God, keep the authority, and bear rule over those that were got into the
mixture, and were for having those that did not profess with us to sit with
them, when they transacted the affairs of the church. For some that professed
Truth had encouraged this practice, which tended to weaken the hands of the
honest-hearted, they not having found that liberty and freedom to speak so
closely to their brethren, as need required. Joseph could not use that freedom,
and unbosom himself to his brethren, in such a manner as the case required,
till the Egyptians were gone out. I was glad I was there, for Truth had the
dominion in the end. We lodged at Anselm Baly's. I visited all the little
handfuls scattered up and down in these parts, and often had service in
families. I met with Samuel Spavold, who likewise was much engaged in the
service of Truth. His labor of love in the work of the gospel was indeed great
in this part of the world; those of other societies being much reached by his
ministry. We were truly glad to see each other; for as iron sharpeneth iron, so
does a man the countenance of his friend. We had several comfortable and
confirming seasons together, especially at the quarterly meeting held at Black
Creek for that part of Virginia; many friends from diverse places being there. I
was glad to see them, but what made us more glad, and brought us nearer to one
another, was, because the Lord favored us with his presence, and filled our
hearts with his pure love.

Having nigh visited all the meetings in this province, was taking my leave of
many of them in time, so far as I could see them. Taking a few meetings in my
way, in company with Samuel Spavold, I proceeded toward North Carolina, but
left him to visit some meetings he had not been at. I went to Pinywoods, nigh
Perquimon's River, in North Carolina; and had a meeting at Pinywoods the ninth
of the second month. It was large, and attended with the overshadowings of
divine goodness. To me it was an edifying strengthening time, as I trust it was
to many more. We took up our quarters at Thomas Newby's: the next day we had a
meeting at Wells, which was the sixth of the week. On seventh day we were at
the Old Neck; and on first day at Little River. This meeting was very large,
there being a considerable body of friends in this part; and people of other
societies attend friends meetings when there are strangers, I was helped
through those large assemblies far beyond my expectation. I thought myself so
unfit, weak, and unworthy, that I was almost cast down in my mind before I came
there; but praises and thanksgivings to him that helped me, I left them
rejoicing in a sense of the Lord's goodness and mercy to my soul. I lodged two
nights at Thomas Nicholson's, who mostly favored me with his company whilst I
was amongst them. Here my companion Thomas Lightfoot left me, and returned to
Philadelphia. The last meeting I was at here, was appointed or Samuel Spavold.
At Pinywoods we had a solid opportunity together, many minds being truly bowed
to the root of life in themselves, and finding myself clear, may truly say, I
parted with a remnant in pure love, and the unity of the one spirit.

I then set forward toward a wilderness country, where the inhabitants were
very thin two young men accompanying me Our first meeting after we left
Perquimons, was at John Coupeland's. There were but few friends, but people of
other societies came in, who had notice; amongst whom was an officer in the
army. He came to our quarters in the morning, and rode about six miles on the
road toward the meeting, then turned off, and said he would go and fetch his
wife. He also brought with him a company of young people, who were learning to
dance at his house, which I did not know till the meeting was over, and then he
came and told me, he had invited them to come to the meeting, and also their
master, but he would not come. I said, it was so far well, but it was a pity he
should encourage such vanity, as to keep a dancing-school at his house. He
excused it, saying, the man owed him money, and he knew not how otherways to
get it, but by letting him teach his family. I signified, he had better lose
it, than have his family taught that which would be unprofitable to them; for
there was a woe pronounced against such as did chant to the sound of the viol,
and invented to themselves instruments of music, like David. He said, it was
the truth that they had heard spoken today, but acknowledged they did not walk
answerable to it. I said, it was their own fault; for if they would take heed
to the teachings of Truth in themselves it would lead them into all truth, and
consequently out of all error, and every bye-path and way that lead to
destruction

After we had refreshed ourselves, we passed his house, and he seeing us, came
and invited us in, saying, he had entertainment for us, and should be glad of
our company, and we should have a room to ourselves I acknowledged his
kindness, but as time would not permit, we must proceed on our journey. We took
our leave of him, and I thought he was so reached, as to be measureably
convinced of the sufficiency of the blessed Truth; though his appearance, and
likewise his mind being lofty, he was not willing to submit to the low
appearance of it.

Our next meeting was at Thomas Knox's, a man lately convinced: it was in a
good degree satisfactory. We had very difficult roads, through great swamps and
across many creeks, all through the woods: and in many places but little path
to be seen. We came to Fort-River, where there is a meeting settled, of such as
had been lately convinced. Many came to meeting, which was held at Henry
Horn's. Some of them were unsettled in their minds, not being founded upon the
sure rock; but such as seek shall find, and they that dig deep enough will come
to the sure foundation, that the righteous have built upon in all ages of the
world. Henry Horn and been a teacher among the Baptists. He seemed to be a
steady well-disposed man, and had a few words in meetings. After I left his
house, I had a meeting at Joseph Pitman's, who, with several others, was under
convincement. It was an edifying season, many being sensibly touched with the
love of Truth. I staid with them one night, and then went to a small meeting
nigh a place called Nues* It was two days journey, a very difficult road to
find, and none of our companions had been there before.

After this meeting, we went to Core Sound, an inlet of the sea. We had ninety
miles to ride, and were altogether unacquainted with the way, having rivers,
and many swamps to cross. The two young men were still my companions, Joshua
Fletcher, and Francis Nixon, who were very serviceable to me through this
almost uninhabited part of the world. We got to Henry Stanton's in the night,
who took us in, and entertained us very kindly. When we had staid two days, had
a meeting, and rested ouselves, we set forward toward the next meeting among
friends, which was o^e hundred and fifty miles. But in our way we had two
meetings among people of other societies. I had still no guide but the young
men, who knew no more of the way than myself. But such as are used to the woods
can find the way through them much better than such as are not.

The first meeting we had after we left Core-Sound, was at Permeanus Hauton's,
who gave us an invitation to his house, and sent to give notice to his
neighbors, though some lived several miles distant. We got to his house about
the time the meeting was appointed, where we found seats placed, and every
thing in such convenient order for a meeting, as I thought I had seldom seen.
His rooms being little, he had placed seats in his courtyard, and under the
windows, that I believe a^l could sit and hear without the least troubling one
another; and indeed I thought his labor and good inclination were blessed, for
a solid time it was, and I found openness to declare the Truth amongst them* I
would that all our friends, upon the like occasion, would take this man for
their example, in being diligent to invite their neighbors, and to make room
and accommodate them in the best manner they are capable of. It certainly has
a good favor, and is often attended with a blessing.

A steady friend, who had been a member among the Presbyterians, told me, that
the care and pains that some friends took to invite him, and some others, was
one moving cause toward his convincement. He said, he once told a young man,
who had frequently invited him to our meetings when strangers came, that as he,
nor any of his friends came to their meetings, he thought he would go no more.
The young man answered very calmly, saying. We must not come to you, but we
want you to come to us. "This," said he, with the diligence friends had used
without view of outward gain, affected my mind, that I concluded, it must be
the love of God in their hearts, that induced them to call and invite us to
come to them. This I mention more particularly, because I have seen some that
profess truth (to my grief) very deficient in this respect. We had another
comfortable opportunity in the evening with this man and his family, and some
others, that staid all night.

Next morning I, with the two young men, and one more, who had a mind to go a
day or two along with us through the wilderness, set forward, well refreshed
both in body and mind; hard things being made easy, and rough and untrodden
paths being made smooth to my mind. We had a meeting also at George Cowper's,
whose wife was educated among friends. We staid one night at Wilmington, the
capital town in North Carolina; but it being their general court time, and the
privateers having brought in prizes, the people's minds were in great
commotions, so that I could find no room nor freedom to have a meeting, though
several called Quakers lived there, but held no meeting, except when strangers
came.

We crossed a branch of Cape-Fear River, and landed upon a great swamp, which
was very rotten, and dangerous, by reason of the overflowing of the river; but
the two young men, and a negro, whom we hired to help us, carrying boards from
one place to another for the horses to tread upon, in time, and with much
difficulty, we got well over. We then came again into the woods, where little
path was to be seen; it likewise being rainy dark weather, we could not tell
which way to go, but rode many miles, hoping we might be steering right; and
just at the close of the evening, before it was quite dark, we came to ^^i^tle
house, the sight of which was satisfactory, being weary, and very wet. When we
called, the man said he kept an ordinary, which we found to be true. However,
we were contented with such as we found, and thankful we fared so well. We were
in our direct road for the place we intended, which was Carver's-Creek, where
we got next day, the sixth of the week, and tenth of the third month. Here was
a small gathering of friends. We staid their first day meeting over, and then
went to Dan's-Creek, where we found another gathering of such as call
themselves friends, but had been much hurt, and scattered in their minds from
the true shepherd, by an enemy that had sown tares.

Here I parted with my two good companions, who had traveled with me more than
five hundred miles. Being nearly united together, we parted in true love. This
I mention, because the Lord loves a cheerful giver, and those did, I thought,
what they did, with great freedom and cheerfulness, not begrudging a little
time, nor a little outward substance, for the sake of the good cause of Truth.
Those will not lose their reward, for it is helping forward the work, as that
of opening a door, and kindling a fire, is doing part of the business of the
master's house; and he does look upon it as done to himself, if it is but that
of handing a cup of cold water, as it is done in a right spirit, it will have
his blessed approbation and reward. I had another companion, providentially, I
thought, provided here for me.

William Ferril, a public friend, having heard of my being in the country, had
got himself ready against I came, and had freedom in the truth to travel with
me, till I should fall in with another suitable companion; which made my
travels through those lonely places much the easier. When we left his house, we
set our faces toward South Carolina, having but one meeting of friends to take
in the way, which was settled upon a river called Pee-Dee, about an hundred
miles from the said friend's house. This we accomplished in about two days. In
the night we lodged in the woods. The few friends were truly glad to see us,
they being seldom visited. We had comfortable and refreshing seasons together,
the Lord owning and favoring with his good presence, strengthened not only the
inward, but the outward man also. Here I was sensibly affected with such a seal
and evidence of peace in my own mind, that I was fully pursuaded, I was in the
way of my duty: it made me go on again very cheerfully. No one can tell how
good the Lord is, but such as have tasted, and seen his mavelous ways of
working, and how he can spread a table for those, that in faithful obedience
give up to his requiring, in a very wilderness; for he neither lets them want
for inward, nor outward food. There is now, as well as formerly, a little
remnant, that, with my soul, can set their seals to the truth of this; and can
say unto him, We have lacked nothing, Lord!

Francis Clark, with whom we had quartered, bore us company one day and night
in the woods. We thought sometimes, we traveled near sixty miles in a day; for
when we had to lodge in the woods, we rose early, and lay down late. Our friend
Clark returned home, leaving us to shift for ourselves; but my companion,
having some knowledge of the way, steered, I believe, a pretty straight course.
When night came, we pitched our tent in a valley, where there was some grass,
and a little brook of water. So when we had eaten such as our bags afforded,
and given our horses provender, and taken care of them, with what little we
had, we lay ourselves down, and slept very sound and comfortably, being wearied
with riding.

Next morning we were stirring by the time it was well light, and soon being
ready, mounted our horses; and it was well we did so, for there came such a
rain that day, that it raised the creeks and rivers so high, that if we had ^ot
got over them that night, we might have been stopped for some days. We
traveled ^il^ late in the night, and coming to a house, desired we might have
lodgings; but the master of it told us, we could not. We asked him, how far it
was to another house, He said, it was but a mile, but there was a deep creek in
the way, and he would not go with us, if we would give him a great deal of
money. I then very earnestly desired, that he would let us stay in his house
all night, and we would pay him for his trouble, and for what we had; for we
had rode almost all the day in the rain, and it was a very cold rainy night. He
told us, he would not let us stay there, and so left us standing without his
gate. But a young man standing by, seeing and hearing what had passed, took
pity on us, and said, though it was dangerous crossing the waters, he would
take his horse, and go with us which he did, and we got w^^^^ rough, to the
place the man had told us of. After refreshing ourselves with such as the house
afforded, we took up our lodgings in a very cold room, such as I had never lain
in before. But, bad as it was, I was glad and thankful we had not to lie out
all night in the rain. I rested well, and in the morning was well both in body
and mind.

The fourth of the week we got to the Wateree, where several friends from
Ireland had been settled about six or seven years. We had a meeting with them,
and then, with S^^^^^ Milhouse and my companion, I set out ^owards Charlestown.
This took us most of three days, it being one hundred and thirty miles. When we
came there, we found but few steady friends, yet we had some good opportunities
togeth^r; several of the town's people also coming in. I trust our visit was of
service, and tended to edification, and strengthening the two or three that
dwell in that remote part of the world. However, I thought I should not be easy
without paying them a visit, though I had to ride so far on purpose.

When I felt myself clear, I returned with my friends to the Wateree, and was
with them at their first day meeting, and meeting for business. We had good
opportunities likewise in their several families, which I thought would not
easily be forgotten. Then taking our leave of them in gospel-love, in which we
had paid them that visit, we returned to Pee-Dee, Samuel Milhouse still
accompanying us. The friends there, though their circumstances in the world
were but low, treated us very kindly. Their love to truth, and diligence in
attending meetings, are worthy of notice; for they had nigh one hundred miles
to go to the monthly meeting they belonged to, and I was informed very seldom
missed attending it.

Here my companion and I parted, he returning home, and I, with Francis Clark,
went toward Cane-Creek. His company was so agreeable, that time did not seem
long. When night came, we took up our lodgings in the woods, and got next day
to a place called Deep-River, there being several families newly settled there,
but they had not yet built a meeting house. We had a meeting at a friend's
house, and then proceeded to Cane-Creek, where there is a large body of friends
gathered thither in a few years from the several provinces. They told me they
had not been settled there above ten years, but had found occasion to build
five meeting houses, and then wanted one or two more. I had good and seasonable
opportunities among them, being freely opened in the love of the gospel, to
declare the truth.

When I found myself easy to leave them, having had diverse meetings, at Eno,
and several other places, which, for brevity sake, I forbear to mention; I with
Jeremiah Pickitt then set out toward Virginia, having nigh two hundred miles
to travel, and had but one meeting in the way. We got to Robert Langley's on
first day evening, where I staid to rest and refresh myself, after so long and
tedious a journey. I then passed to Curls, and traveled through Virginia,
having visited most of the meetings before, and came into Maryland. I was at
their yearly meeting held at West-River. It was very large, and in the several
sittings thereof overshadowed with the wing of divine power, which tended to
nourish the good part, and to the gathering and settling the minds of many upon
the sure foundation, and kept down that spirit which would divide in Jacob, and
scatter in Israel.

We parted on fourth day in great love, some of us being nearly united in
spirit. For though many, by balking their testimony against that antichristian
yoke of tithes, and trading in negroes, have caused the way of Truth to be evil
spoken of; yet I was sensible that the regard of heaven was toward them, and
the merciful hand was still stretched out, even toward the unfaithful, and
backsliders, that they might be gathered. I had a travel and exercise upon my
spirit for the cause of Truth, and that the great blessed and everlasting Name,
which I with many more make a profession of, might not be dishonored: the
faithful are indeed as stakes in Sion, but they are but as one of a family, or
two of a tribe.

I then took the meetings in my way to Pennsylvania, as Elk-Ridge, Patapsco,
and Patapsco-Forest, Little-Falls, Gunpowder, and so to Deer-Creek, where our
worthy friends John Churchman and his wife met me. We crossed the river
Susquehannah into Pennsylvania, and so to their house. Having had many precious
meetings in this journey, and well cleared myself of those provinces, I was
easy in my spirit, and much comforted in the Lord, that he had been pleased
thus far to help me through. I tarried one night at John Churchman's; and next
day, being the seventh of the week, was at New-Garden monthly meeting; on first
day at London-Grove, where there is a large gathering of friends. It was a good
opportunity, truth favoring us, we were comforted together in the Lord. On the
second day, the twenty-ninth of the fifth month, I got to Philadelphia, having
in this journey traveled upwards of two thousand eight hundred miles.

After my return from the southern provinces, I staid some weeks visiting
meetings, and some friends families, in and about Philadelphia; and was also in
the Jerseys visiting several meetings, and attended their quarterly meeting at
Salem, which held three days for worship and discipline. It was an edifying
time, things being conducted in a degree of the pure wisdom, and the
overshadowing of divine power was witnessed by many. Then, having duly waited
for the moving and putting forth of the good Shepherd, who said, I put forth my
sheep, and go before them, I thought I felt a draft, and not only so, but
likewise true liberty, to visit New England, which I had not done before. If I
had, I should have proceeded, in order to shorten my journey, for it was
against mine own inclination to stay so long in and about one place. Therefore
I set out the twenty-sixth of the seventh month, Isaac Greenleaf accompanying
me.

My first step was to Wright's Town, where was held a general meeting for the
county of Bucks. Then we crossed Delaware into New Jersey, and took meetings in
our way to New York, then to Flushing upon Long Island, and were at their
monthly meeting. Then crossing the Bay went to their quarterly meeting at
Purchase. After this, we took several meetings, as they fell in our way toward
Rhode Island. I then had Robert Willis for my companion, (a friend from the
Jerseys,) who had drawings in his mind that way. Many people came to our
meetings in those parts, which are not closely joined in outward fellowship
with us; yet are under the operation of the good hand, and in degree convinced
of our principles. This, I thought, made our meetings more lively, and the
spring of the gospel to flow more plentifully, to the watering the thirsty
ground.

When we had visited the meetings hereabouts, and taken our leave of friends,
we traveled through Connecticut government, having but one or two meetings in
the way. The Presbyterians, who formerly in those parts were very rigid and
bitter against friends, are now become more loving, and treated us very kindly.
I had great drawings of the Father's love toward them, believing his secret
hand was at work to bring them from the barren mountains of their lifeless
profession, to serve the living God in newness of life. We came to Leicester,
where there is a little handful that go under our name. We had a meeting with
them on first day, the twentieth of the eighth month. We were refreshed
together, being strengthened in the God of our salvation. Then we had a meeting
at Bolton, about thirty miles from thence, where we met with Samuel Spavold, in
his return toward Pennsylvania, he having visited most of the meetings in
New England. We had a good season together. Then saluting one another in that
unity and fellowship which brethren and fellow laborers ought to dwell in, we
parted; and my companion and I went to Uxbridge, and had a meeting. Then to
Mendam, where we tarried all night at Moses Aldrige's, and had a meeting next
day; so on to Wainsockit, where we had a meeting. The weather being very hot,
many people were nigh fainting; but praises be to the great Name, the meeting
concluded well.

On first day we were at Providence yearly meeting, which is only for worship.
It was very large, and tended to the gathering and staying people's minds on
Christ, the chief corner stone, and rock of ages; for Truth had the dominion,
and the Lord's power was felt. We had our outward entertainment at Stephen
Hopkins's, then Governor of Rhode Island. He and his wife treated us with
hearty kindness. We had meetings at Cranston, Warwick, and East-Greenwich, then
upon Conanicut-Island. We then crossed the river, and came to Newport; and
attended both their meetings on first day, which were large; a great number
residing thereabouts, who go under our name. But, with sorrow of heart may it
be said, in the time of ease and plenty, many have taken their flight.

We left Newport on third day, and had a meeting at Portsmouth, in which we had
good service for Truth. Then crossing the Bay, had a meeting at Freetown upon
the main, in which we were favored with the openings of Truth, and left them
in peace. I took notice of a negro man, who was with us at several meetings,
and by his own industry, with the help of some friends, had purchased his
freedom, that he might attend meetings; having, for some time, been convinced
of the blessed Truth, which he much prized, and told me, as he had been
obedient to the operation of it, which works by love, he found himself
engaged in his mind to exhort his fellow creatures to come to the good
principle in themselves; that they, by yielding obedience, might know a being
saved by it; or to that effect. This I could not gainsay, nor discourage; but
desired him to be faithful to the manifestation of Truth in his own heart, and
the measure of Grace he had received. We parted in love and good will, being
brethren of one Father.

Our next meeting was at Little Cranston, after which I parte^ with several
friends, in the unity of the one Spirit, which had brought us into nearness and
fellowship with each other; they returning to their places of abode, and I with
my companion, and a young man who accompanied us several weeks, still kept
forward. I was enabled to labor through these parts beyond all outward
expectation; for though the meetings were large, by reason of great comings in
of other people, I found that gracious promise fulfilled; As the day is, so
shall thy strength be. We were at Accoakeset. New-Town, and Dartmouth or
Aponiganset, and had a meeting at each place. The last meeting, I thought, did
not consist of less than eight hundred people. We had at Cushnett, Rochester,
Taunton, and Freetown, many living and good opportunities to declare Truth in
the free extendings of Gospel-love; also at Swansey, on a first day, had a
satisfactory opportunity. Whilst we were visiting those places, we took up our
quarters at Paul Osbourn's, who often accompanied us from one meeting to
another, his heart being free and open toward his friends, and to serve Truth.

Having well cleared ourselves, we went tow^rds the yearly meetings at Boston,
Lynn, and Salem, the twenty-second of the ninth month. They began at Boston. I
do not remember I had seen so much stillness and gravity in so great an
assembly, as I observed there. It consisted of people of different persuasions.
We have great cause to bow, in humble thankfulness, to the God of all our
mercies, that he has been pleased to make way for his people, to enjoy their
religious meetings without the least molestation, in this and many other
places, where our worthy friends formerly suffered sore persecution, by long
imprisonment, grievous whippings, spoiling of goods, and some of them laid down
their lives for the testimony of a good conscience: and though our God be a
gracious, merciful, and long-suffering God, yet he will take vengeance on all
the workers of iniquity, and the day of his wrath will break forth like a
consuming fire, in a time when it is not looked for. As he said, so he will do;
"For," said he, I am a jealous God, visiting the sins of the fathers upon the
children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me; and
showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my commandments. So
it is plain the Lord is equal in all his ways: for, concerning those that are
the offspring of that hard-hearted, wicked, and perverse generation, that
persecuted and shed the blood of the innocent servants of the Lord, if they do
but turn to him with their whole hearts, so as to love him, and keep his
commandments, they will surely ^^^d mercy: but, if they continue in a state of
rebellion, and hardness of heart, and sin against his light and good spirit in
their hearts, as did their forefathers, he will visit them with his judgments
for their iniquities; and for the sins which they and their forefathers have
committed, he will pour forth the cup of his indignation without mixture.

After those yearly meetings, we, with several friends, went toward the yearly
meeting at Dover, and Cachecy, taking several meetings in the way, as at
Ipswich, where no friends lived; but we got leave to have a meeting in their
courthouse. It was disturbed by a man standing up, when I was in testimony who
said, that I struck at the foundation of their principles. He was a very hot
man, and held the doctrine of absolute predestination. I told him, Truth struck
at the unsound foundation; but, as he was in heat and anger, not fit to dispute
about religious matters, he sat down, and a woman sharply reproved him for his
rude behavior, she being grieved that the meeting should be disturbed; for it
was in a good frame. Several of the people, I believe, were ashamed of his
conduct. After a little silence, a friend stood up, and had a good opportunity.
Then I had to clear myself of what was upon my mind, and the people being still
and attentive, the meeting concluded well. The man who had opposed me shrunk
away, and I saw him no more, though I looked for him, and in coolness thought
to have had a little further discourse with him. That night we went to
Newberry, where we had a meeting, much to my comfort and satisfaction. We had
meetings also at Amesbury, Hampton, and Dover. Friends had been sorely wounded
and scattered in their minds hereaway, by an unstable spirit. Those yearly
gatherings were large, and I hope tended to the honor of Truth. We went next
to Barwick, and had several meetings there; traveled through the woods to
Casco, where we had an opportunity with friends, and such as attend their
meetings.

We crossed the Bay to Small Point, and in our return had a meeting upon a neck
of land called Meryconeague. The meeting at Small Point was the northermost
settlement of friends upon the continent. We returned by Boston, having several
meetings in our way; and from thence to Pembroke, Sandwich, Yarmouth upon Cape
Cod, Suckanessit, Wood's Hole, and thence took passage to Nantucket. We staid
upon that island about a week, visiting friends in their families, and had
several public meetings with them. It was an exercising time to me, finding the
true seed, or life of religion suffering much, by reason of strife and
divisions. I left them sorrowfully, because I thought the root of bitterness
was not removed, though I was comforted in several meetings among them with the
shedding abroad of divine favor, which strengthened me in the discharge of my
duty; and indeed there is a living remnant still among them, which I charitably
hoped would be preserved in the innocence and simplicity of the un^hangable
Truth. Several Indians were there, natives of the island. I had a desire to
have a meeting among them, and acquainted them with it, which they freely
consented to; and at the time appointed their priest was waiting for us, with
his meeting house doors open, and said, he would have me go up into the place
where he used to preach. I told him, I chose to fit below with my friends. I
had a living open time among them, to set forth the necessity there was for
them to turn their minds to the grace of God in their own hearts, a measure
whereof they, as well as others, had received, according to the apostle's
doctrine; which, if they gave good heed unto, and yielded obedience, according
to the manifestation thereof, would bring salvation. The meeting ended in
prayer and praises to Almighty God for his great mercy and loving kindness to
mankind, in sending his Son to be a light to enlighten the Gentiles, and for
his salvation to the ends of the earth. Solidity appeared in their
countenances, and they behaved with sobriety, very becoming the occasion of our
assembling together. I should be glad there was more of it to be seen. among
those that profess Christianity.

We parted with them in the love of the Gospel, which I felt in my heart
toward them. The wind coming fair* we took our leave of friends, and went on
board a vessel, a friend named William Hussy being master. In the evening of
the same day we landed upon an island called Marthas Vineyard. We quartered at
a man's house that called himself by our name, and I thought he had some zeal
for Truth, and the promotion of it; for after he understood we had a desire to
have a meeting, he hastened and called in his neighbors, and a solid good time
we had together.

The next morning, being favored with a fair wind, we crossed the Sound to
Dartmouth, and landed nigh the meeting house, where we met with several
friends, who had attended the quarterly meeting. The meeting ended that day, we
had a confirming sweet opportunity together, in waiting upon the Lord before we
parted with them, and those that came from Nantucket. Next day we got to
Freetown and in the evening had a good opportunity at the house of Abraham
Barker with the friends that lived thereabouts. To this meeting came the negro
man I mentioned before. He told me he had been visiting; some of his own
color, and was returning to Newport, where he lived; but in his way he said,
he thought he must go by Abraham Barker's, though out of his way, not knowing
we were come from Nantucket. When he saw us, he seemed to be almost overcome
with joy, and was of service to us; for we wanted to send somebody over the
Bay, either that night, or early next morning, to appoint a meeting for us at
Portsmouth upon the island; and none readier and more willing than poor Caesar;
for he was stirring so soon in the morning, that he gave full notice up and
down the island. So we had a large gathering collected in due time, though the
time to give notice in was so short, and seasonable advice was handed forth.
From thence we went to Newport with our friend Thomas Richardson, with whom we
had lodged when there before, and were at their monthly meeting; we staid with
them also on first day. Our meetings were richly favored with the free
extendings of divine power and wisdom; so that I was truly thankful I had been
helped to get through the various difficult paths I had to tread in this
unstable part of the world.

On second day we left Newport, and crossed the river to Conannicut Island,
where a meeting was appointed for us; wherein we were well refreshed together,
and the conclusion was in prayer and supplication for each other's growth,
preservation, and establishment in the blessed Truth. We here parted with some
friends of Rhode Island, under a sense of divine favor, and in the uniting
love of the Gospel, which had caused us to be near one unto another. Then
crossing the river upon the main land, we had meetings at Kingwood, Peries,
Richmond, and Hopkinton, and so passed through Naraganset, till we came to
Westerby Lower, the last meeting in those parts we had to visit. We took our
leave of those friends that accompanied us in great good will; then traveled
through the lower part of Connecticut government, crossing many rivers, and the
weather extreme cold. It was hard for me to bear; but praises be to the great
Name, I was preserved in health, and my natural strength did not at all fail.

When we had traveled hard about three days, we came again among friends; and
on sixth day had a meeting at Inomarance. It was to me a good time; for the
bread that refreshes the hungry soul was broken. We then crossed over to
Long Island, and were at the meeting at Flushing on first day, the twentieth of
the eleventh month. On third day we had a meeting at Cow-neck; on fourth day at
Westbury. Lukewarmness and indifference had much prevailed in many places among
the professors of Truth. I had often to bear my testimony for the blessed Truth
against earthly-mindedness, and all the deceitful and false coverings of the
flesh, which had been the cause of it. I returned back to Flushing, in order to
be at their quarterly meeting, which began on seventh day for ministers and
elders. It was attended with a degree of divine favor, to the comforting of
our souls. Those meetings were measurably blessed with the presence of the
great and good Master of our assemblies, and his voice was heard by some, to
speak as never man spoke; and we had to conclude in humble supplication to him
for his help, and the continuation of his mercy, in visiting and turning the
hearts of his people to himself. I then visited the meetings upon the island,
which I had not yet been at, and had meetings at Rockway, and again at Westbury
monthly meeting, where I was closely exercised on Truth's account; but was
helped to clear myself of what lay upon my mind, and came away easy.

I then went to Bethphage, and had meetings also at Sickatauge and Oysterbay,
where there had been a large meeting, but now much declined; yet we had a large
meeting, accompanied with Divine Power, to my great comfort. On first day I was
at Jericho. The meeting consisted of several hundreds of people, who heard the
Truth declared with great attention, the power of it being over all, to the
praise of Israel's God. Passing through New York, I staid their meeting; then
crossed over by way of Staten-Island, to Rahway in East-Jersey, where I had a
meeting with friends, and some others, that came in, to the edification and
comfort of several, myself in particular; being therein strengthened and
encouraged to go forward in the future service I might be engaged in. We lodged
at Joseph Shotwell's, and on sixth day had a meeting at Plainfield. It was but
small, by reason of short notice, yet favored with the overshadowings of
divine favor; for which our souls were inwardly bowed to the Father of all our
mercies.

I rode to Whitpiny on seventh day to the quarterly meeting, which began on
first day. It was a good satisfactory time with us. I staid there on second
day, and was at the preparative meeting, which was satisfactory, diverse things
being opened and delivered in the pure wisdom concerning the things of God, and
the good order established in his church. I had some good seasonable
opportunities in some friends families; and on third day had a meeting at
Rahway appointed for those of other societies; which was to good satisfaction.
On fourth day we went to the Great Meadows, where we had a meeting with the
friends there, amongst whom is a living remnant. We were made to rejoice
together, in a true sense of the shedding abroad of Divine Love in our hearts.
On fifth day I went to Kingwood monthly meeting. I had some service there for
Truth, in recommending to the good order of the Gospel in each branch of our
Christian discipline; which I observed to be much wanting among them. On sixth
day I had a meeting at Amwell, at the house of Gershom Motts. It was an open
time, Truth in a good degree prevailing. On first day had a meeting at
Croswick's; a close searching t^^e it was, many states being opened in the love
of the Gospel. On second day I was at a meeting at Freehold, in which I was
largely opened in the free extendings of divine favor. On third day, the
nineteenth of the twelfth month, I had a meeting at Upper-Springfield. I was
led to the states of the people in a close manner, and the meeting ended well.
On fourth day I had a meeting at Old-Springfield. It was an edifying and good
meeting, Truth having the dominion, to the praise of Israel's God. On fifth day
I went to Little Egg-Harbour, and had a meeting there next day, in which I was
enabled to clear myself in a good degree, and came away easy.

We crossed the river in the evening to Great Egg-Harbour. The weather being
very cold, and having much ice, our journey was attended with some difficulty;
but we got well over the river, though in the night, to Great Egg-Harbour, and
lodged at Robert Smith's, an ancient friend, who, with his wife, entertained us
very kindly. We had a meeting there on seventh day, held at a friend's house,
by reason of the extreme cold season. We had a solemn comfortable time
together, and after meeting rode to the other meeting, along the Bay shore,
toward Cape-May, which was on first day, the twenty-fourth of the twelfth
month 1758. It was a close exercising time with me. The frost was so sharp, we
could not cross the Bay to Cape-May, but were obliged to ride round to a
bridge, where we crossed the river; which was about forty miles out of the way,
and being strangers to the road, we met with much difficulty through the woods,
and there was no beaten path to be seen for some miles. I saw that the friend,
who pretended to be our guide, was going wrong, and told him, if we took that
course, it would lead us much out of the way; for I was very uneasy, Upon which
he took out his compass, and finding it so, altered his course to that which I
thought lay toward the road. I then found my mind quite easy, and said, I
thought we should soon find it, which so happened. I said not much to the
friends, but was thankful to the Lord, to find he was pleased to draw my mind
toward the way we wanted to go.

Night coming on, with much rain, we lodged at a tavern, and next morning got
to William Townsend's, where we had two meetings to pretty good satisfaction.
On seventh day we rode about forty miles to John Reeves at Greenwich, were at
the meeting on first day, the thirty-first of the twelfth month, and had good
service for Truth. In that place there is a promising appearance, among the
youth, of the prosperity of Truth. Second day, the first of the first month, we
had a meeting at Alloway's Creek, which was attended with good; I being helped
beyond my own expectation. On third day I had a meeting at the head of
Alloway's Creek, where I was led to several states in a close manner, and came
away much refreshed in the Lord: praises be to his great Name for evermore! I
had a meeting at Salem on fourth day, there being a marriage, and the new wine
was handed forth, which made several rejoice under a seem of divine favor
communicated unto our souls. On fifth day I had a meeting at Pile's Grove. It
was large, several of other societies being there, I was opened in the free
extendings of Gospel love to their souls. It was a good time to many, magnified
be the God of our salvation! On sixth day I had a meeting at Woodbury, which
was a solid good time.

The sixth of the first month I went to Haddonfield, and lodged at the widow
Eastaugh's, where I was very kindly entertained. On first day I went to Evesham
meeting, where I had been before, and had service for Truth in the love of the
Gospel. Haddonfield monthly meeting being on second day, I staid there, and had
an exercise on my mind for the honor, promotion, and prosperity of the blessed
Truth, and that all might act in the wisdom, power, and life, and might know
self kept down by the power. I rejoiced I was at this meeting, Truth favoring,
and the Lord's power being over all. I was made thankful in my heart to the
great Author from whence all our blessings flow.

I want to Philadelphia on third day, but finding my mind drawn toward the
Eastern shore of Maryland, I set out again on fifth day, the eleventh of the
first month, and reached Wilmington that night. I lodged at William Shipley's,
when at Wilmington, and having seen his wife Elizabeth, when in Old England, in
the service of Truth, the remembrance of which had often been revived upon my
mind, as believing her to be a mother in Israel, and a sanctified vessel fitted
for the master's use, I could not but rejoice to see her again, and find her
alive in the Truth, now in her declining years. Our next meeting was at the
head of Sassafrass. It was a hard time with me the fore part of the meeting;
yet I came away well satisfied, Truth favoring toward the conclusion, to the
honor and praise of Israel's God. After meeting I went home with Joshua
Vansant's, where I lodged.

The next meeting was at Cecil. I was was exceeding poor and low, and deeply
exercised in my mind, but was helped over all, and beyond all thought and
expection of my own; for I think, I may say in sincerity, I had no trust nor
confidence, save in the Lord alone, who hitherto has been my rock, and my
strong tower, my sure helper in every needful time. May I, with all mine, put
our trust in him, has often been the earnest prayer and supplication of my
soul. I had a meeting at Queen Ann's, which ended well, the Lord's power being
felt among us, to our comfort. I lodged at -- Furner's, where we had a meeting
with the family, and several others who came in* I hope it might tend in some
degree to stir up the careless, and warn the unfaithful. The twenty-first of
the first month I had a meeting at Tuckahoa. It was small, but attended with
good, the Lord favoring us with his presence, according to his gracious
promise.

On first day I crossed Choptank-River over to Marshy Creek, and was at their
meeting. I was much comforted, and had peace in the discharge of what I
believed to be my duty; though I traveled in great fear, and much weakness at
times. I was at Choptank meeting on second day, which was silent; yet I came
away easy, with sweetness upon my mind, having been strenthened in my silent
waiting. I had a meeting on third day at the Third-Haven, where I was sensibly
affected with the states of those that were not willing to take up the cross to
their corrupt wills and inclinations; and had to bear testimony against
unfaithfulness, disobedience, truth-breakers, and such as brought dishonor
upon the Truth, and our holy profession. I felt the love of the Gospel flow
freely, even toward the backsliders; and in it warning them, I came away
sweetly comforted in my spirit. Fourth day I went to the Bay side, where we had
a meeting on fifth day, with a few lukewarm professors. I had to exhort them to
more diligence in keeping up their meetings, and waiting therein, that they
might know the renewing of strength in the Lord, and be enabled to worship him
(as he is a Spirit) in Spirit and in Truth. On seventh day I was at the
quarterly meeting of ministers and elders at Third Haven, where I had some
service for Truth. On first day I was again at Tuckahoa meeting, Truth
favoring, in the love of the Gospel, many divine truths were opened to the
edification and comfort of our souls; and ended in humble supplication and
prayer to Almighty God for his help, strength, and preservation in the way of
truth and righteousness. On third day I was at Third-Haven, at the quarterly
meeting, where several friends had good service for the Truth, in the love of
which we were comforted together in the Lord, and helped to bear testimony
against those things which are crept in by reason of unfaithfulness among the
professors of Truth. On fourth day, the thirty-first of the first month, I,
with several friends, went toward Lewis-Town. On sixth day had a meeting at
Cold-Spring, where is a poor company of indifferent lukewarm professors. On
seventh day I had a meeting at Motherkiln, which was pretty large, and attended
with the shedding abroad of divine love to the people.

I was at Little-Creek on first day, where we were comforted together in the
Lord. Here is a promising prospect among the young people of the prosperity of
Truth. I was at Duck-Creek meeting on second day, which was small, yet a living
open time to several. Thence I passed to George's Creek, where I had a meeting;
and so to Wilmington, where I met with Samuel Spavold, who embarked for England
on fifth day, the eighth of the second month 1759. I staid the monthly meeting,
which was that day, in which I was largely opened to the states of several,
things being much out of order, by reason of a difference which had happened
among them. I came away I thought clear, and easy in my mind. On seventh day,
the tenth of the second month, I was at Concord quarterly meeting for ministers
and elders, which was solid, and much good advice was handed forth. On first
day I was at Kennet, and had large openings to the people, in the free
extendings of the line of Truth's way. On second day was again at Concord
quarterly meeting for worship and discipline, in which Truth's testimony went
forth against disorderly gainsayers, and libertine spirits. I had a word of
comfort and consolation also to the weak feeble mourners in Zion. Things closed
well, and we parted refreshed in the Lord. On third day I was at a meeting at
Providence, held for young people chiefly; it was to good satisfaction, and
ended well. On fourth day, the fourteenth of the second month, I had a meeting
at Birmingham. I felt the Lord was with us, helping and making way by his own
power; praises be to his great Name for ever!

After meeting, we crossed the river called Brandywine, and went to my kind
friend William Harvey's, where I was kindly entertained. On fifth day, the
fifteenth of the second month, I had a meeting at Center, in New castle county.
I was glad and thankful in my mind, to feel myself fully given up to what the
good hand was pleased to give forth, either to speak, or be silent. On sixth
day I had a meeting at Hockesson, which was pretty large, and in degree
favored; yet could not say I rejoiced, for in that place I felt the seed
suffered, as well as in many other places, where my lot has been cast of late;
especially among the elders, and those that should be the foremost rank in
religion. I could not help mourning in secret, at times, under a sense of the
relapsed state of the church of Christ in many places. How departed from the
innocence and simplicity, and decking herself with her own ornaments of
self-righteousness, and also stained and spotted with the world, and the filth
of the flesh! On seventh day I was at the meeting for ministers and elders,
held at London Grove for that quarter, and also at their meeting on first day,
which was blessed with the company of him that dwelt in the bush; for his
sacred fire was kindled in our hearts, with living desires, that the mount of
Esau might be consumed. On second day (after a solemn humbling season together,
in true spiritual worship, which ended with thankfulness and living praises to
Almighty God) the affairs of the church were carried on, and transacted in
brotherly love, and condescension toward one another. We had also a
comfortable and confirming time together on third day, at our farewell meeting,
which being a fresh seal of the Father's love, and continued regard for his
church and people, in uniting and making us to rejoice together in him, it will
remain, I hope, upon many minds, with gratitude to the great Giver of every
good gift.

Whilst I was here I lodged one night at John Smith's, an ancient friend, who
had kept his place well in the Truth, and also at Joshua Pusey's, a good solid
friend, who had a hopeful offspring. Hence I went to West-Caln, and lodged at
George Singular's, and was at the meeting on fourth day, the twenty-first of
the second month. It was an exercising time with me, yet I could not say but I
thought Truth had the dominion. After meeting I crossed Brandywine, and went to
East-Caln, and was at the meeting on fifth day, the twenty-second of the second
month, which proved an helpful edifying season to many. I went after meeting to
Downing's Town, and had an evening meeting at a friend's house, which was
thought by some to good service. On sixth day I had a meeting at Nantmil, after
which I felt easy in my spirit, notwithstanding I had close and hard labor. On
seventh day I had a meeting at Pikeland, which was a watering time, for the
Lord has a living seed in that place, which in his own time he will raise up
to the praise of his own great Name!

On first day I was at Uwchlan meeting. It was large, and attended with a good
degree of divine favor, which made it satisfactory to many, though not so open
to me as at some other times. Our next was at the Forest, or Robinson's. I was
much exercised to recommend to an inward waiting, which by many professors is
much neglected. Our next meeting was at Exeter. On fifth day we had a meeting
at Reading, and afterward went to Maiden-Creek. At Reading our meeting was in
the townhouse, or courthouse, where several soldiers came, and many of the
town's people, who behaved very soberly; the good power of Truth coming over
all, and prevailing, many minds were humbled and brought low. It was a good
time, especially to some of the soldiers, who were reached by the invisible
power of Truth. The meeting ended in praises and thankfulness to the Almighty,
for his unspeakable favors; who is over all, worthy for evermore!

After meeting we went to Maiden-Creek, where we had a meeting on sixth day. It
was large, and to tolerable good satisfaction. We lodged at Moses Star's. On
first day we had a meeting at the Great Swamp. It was a living satisfactory
time to several; and, in general, an edifying season. I dined, after meeting,
at Morris Morris's, the husband of the worthy Susanna Morris, and then rode to
Plumstead, where we had a meeting on second day, the fifth of the third month.
The good power of Truth was also felt among us in this meeting, to the
edification and comfort of our souls. On third day I was at Buckingham monthly
meeting, in which I was favored with the pure life and fresh spring of the
Gospel, which ran freely in the love of it.

Here is a large body of people in this province of Pennsylvania, the elders of
which are too much in the outward court, which is only trodden by the Gentiles,
or such as are in the spirit of the world; yet a young and rising generation is
here, as well as in several other places where my lot has been cast, since I
came into this land, whom the Lord has visited by his power and good Spirit in
their hearts, which, as they take good heed in yielding obedience to, and bring
all things into the obedience of Christ, will crucify all their inordinate
desires, evil thoughts, and imaginations, and enable them to bring forth the
fruits of the Spirit, which are love, joy, peace, gentleness, meekness,
long-suffering, and goodness: against these there is no law. I have often
travailed for them since I have been among them, lest the labors of love,
which have long been bestowed on thee, Oh America! thou favored of the Lord!
lest they should be bestowed on thee in vain; and thou, instead of bringing
forth fruits to the praise of the great Husbandman, should bring forth wild
grapes, fruits of the flesh, such as he can in no wise take delight in; and
instead of a blessing, draw down a curse, and provoke him to take away the
hedge of his protection, and thou be trodden down and laid waste by the
devourer; and for thy ingratitude, disobedience, and unfaithfulness to him,
even command his clouds not to rain upon thee any more. But may thou never
harden thine heart, and stiffen thy neck against so tender a Father, who has
so long nursed and fed thee; so merciful a God, who has oft^^ pardoned thine
iniquities, though they have been as a thick cloud. He has so visited thee, in
mercy sparing, and waiting thy return, that if thou return not with thy whole
heart, his anger and indignation certainly will break forth against thee, and
so as not to be quenched; no, though thou may make many prayers, and spread
forth thine hands, he will not hear nor regard; inasmuch as thou have hated
instruction, and did not choose the fear of the Lord, but have set at naught
all his counsel, and would not take heed to, nor regard the secret reproofs of
instruction in thine own heart. He will also laugh at thy calamity, and even
mock when thy fear comes; when thy desolation is unavoidable, and thy
destruction as swift as the whirlwind. I humbly beg this may never be thy doom;
but in order that the days of his mercy, and thy tranquillity, may be
lengthened out, let Truth take place, that equity, justice, and true judgment,
may run down in the streets of thine heart like a mighty stream: then shall thy
peace be as a river, or as the waves of the sea, that never can be dried up.

I was at Wright's Town on fourth day. It was an exercising and low time with
me, but I trust Truth did not suffer on my account. On fifth day I was at
Make^^^d. It was a living and precious time with us in the meeting, Truth's
power prevailing to the dividing the word aright. The sense of which is cause
of true thankfulness to the humble-hearted. I had a meeting at the Falls on
sixth day, to solid satisfaction; and afterward rode to Bristol, and had a
meeting on seventh day, the 10th of the third month. I was glad Truth in some
good degree had the dominion. I staid the meeting on first day, the eleventh of
the third month. This was a good time to us; the Lord's power was over all, to
the praise of his own great Name!

On second day I had a meeting at Abington, in which I was favored with the
openings of Truth, in the spring of the Gospel, to the exhorting all to
faithfulness, even the rebellious, and gainsayers; that they might come to know
salvation to their souls through Christ. My next meeting was at Horsham, which
was large; in which Truth favoring, it was made a precious time to many, as I
then felt. On fourth day I had a meeting at Gwynedd or North Wales, where there
is a pretty large body of friends; the fight of whom, in many places, and the
sense of divine favor still extended toward them, was cause of hun^^^
thankfulness. On fifth day, the fifteenth of the third month, I got to
Philadelphia, having in this visit been absent from thence about nine weeks. I
made my home, whilst there, with the widow Rachel Pemberton and her son John,
worthy friends; she a mother in Israel, and a great care-taker of the poor
servants who have been sent, not only in opening the door, and kindling the
fire, but in ministering every thing that she thought might be a help and
service to them in their journey; for which, I am fully persuaded in my mind,
she, with many others, will not lose their reward. Inasmuch as ye did it unto
one of those little ones (says our dear Lord) that believe in my Name, ye did
it unto me.

The thirty-first of the third month I left Philadelphia again, in order to
visit a few meetings in Chester county which I had not yet been at. On first
day I was at Providence meeting, which was a good and satisfactory opportunity,
the state of things much opened, and our minds in a good degree humbled, under
a lively sense of divine favor. I was at Concord on second day. John Churchman
also being there, was very helpful to settle the minds of some, who had gone
into jangling about some things which had happened among them. This being their
monthly meeting, we left them to appearance in a pretty quiet frame of mind,
and things ended well. After meeting I rode toward Haverford, and on third day
was at Haverford meeting, which was well. On fourth day I was at Darby meeting.
It was an exercising time to me, things being much out of order, some differing
in their judgment concerning what was, and what was not, consistent with our
religious principles in regard to military service, in which several who go
under our name, had been meddling and concerning themselves. This brought great
exercise and trouble on the faithful. A grievous refractory libertine spirit I
saw appeared; yet it was in a good degree kept down, and Truth, in some good
measure, had the dominion.

On fifth day, the fifth of the fourth month, I was at Springfield. It was a
large good seasonable opportunity to many. On sixth day I was at Newtown
meeting; in which Truth's way was largely opened, and livingly set forth in the
power of it, to the humbling, and solid satisfaction of many: a day to be
remembered by the sensible. After meeting I went to George Miller's, where I
had been before; a very kind friend. On first day I was at Middletown meeting.
It was a large gathering, and Truth had the dominion over all; though many dry
professors were listening and longing after words, which sometimes has caused
the living stream to be withheld for a season; yet the great goodness and
condescension of a merciful God is wonderful, in that he is pleased to cause
the living stream of the gospel ministry to issue and break forth in a
wonderful manner, to the refreshing of his own heritage. The glory and honor,
with living praises, be given to him, and that for evermore!

I had an evening meeting at the school-house; it also was an opportunity of
good to our souls, which were refreshed together in the Lord. Isaac Greenleaf
of Philadelphia being with me, on second day, we were at Goshen meeting, which
was attended with good; Truth in some good degree favoring. We lodged at Aaron
Ashbridge's, and on third day had a meeting at Bradford. We were much hindered
in our way by the waters being much out, and a friend was in great danger of
being carried away, but was preserved. We got to meeting, though friends had
been gathered an hour, or more. It proved a good season; the Lord had companion
on us, and caused his Gospel rain to descend on the thirsty ground, to the
refreshing of that which was of his own right hand planting, and also to the
placing judgment upon the unrighteous part, and all the fruits thereof. I came
away thankful in my spirit to the Lord, for his great goodness to his poor
people; because I saw his mercy and loving kindness endure for ever.

On fourth day we had a meeting at the Great Valley, in which I perceived the
extendings of good was offered, even to the gainsayers and rebellious: a mercy
unspeakable! After meeting we went to a friend's house, with whom Margaret
Ellis abides, and were at Radnor meeting on fifth day, the twelfth of the
fourth month; in which, though I was attended with much weakness, I thought I
had some service for Truth. On sixth day I had a meeting at Merrion, which was
not an unprofitable season, I trust, to several. I returned that day to
Philadelphia, and on seventh day, with John Pemberton, I rode to Plymouth, and
was at that meeting. On first and second day at New-Providence. On third day
returned again to Philadelphia, with some degree of satisfaction, and attended
their weekday meeting, there being a marriage. Several did rejoice under a
renewed sense of the ancient power and loving kindness of our heavenly Father's
tender regard, in that he was pleased to cause his love and life-giving
presence to be felt amongst us, to the refreshing the sincere and upright
hearted. Glory and praise be to his great Name; for he is worthy for ever!

I staid in and about Philadelphia betwixt three and four weeks, in which time
I attended meetings as they came in course, and also paid several religious
visits to families, as I fo^nd my mind drawn in the movings of Truth: in all
which service, though but small in comparison of some others, I found my spirit
favored with sweetness, and a degree of peace. Whilst I waited here, supposing
my service to be mostly over upon the continent, having paid a general visit, I
unexpectedly, and pretty suddenly, felt a strong draught toward Barbados, or
the West India Islands. I acquainted friends therewith, and made some essay for
a passage, yet saw not my way quite clear; but in waiting felt my way open
toward the Jerseys, and on the twelfth of the fifth month I, with John
Pemberton, went to Mount-Holly, and was at the two-weeks meeting on first day:
and on second day at More's-Town, where a meeting was appointed for two
friends, who were on their way toward Salem yearly meeting, where I was also
with them. On third day John Pemberton left me at Ancocas, which meeting was in
a good degree satisfactory, and also to the honor of Truth, the edification of
the Lord's people, and the praise of his great Name! On third day evening I
came to my worthy and well-esteemed friend Elizabeth Eastaugh's, where I
lodged. On fourth day I was at a meeting at Haddonfield; on fifth day at
Woodbury; sixth day at Solomon Lippincot's; seventh day at Piles-Grove. All
these meetings, I thought, had a good tendency to the edification of the
churches, and ended well. Thanksgiving and praise be to him that lives and
abides for evermore!

The nineteenth of the fifth month 1759, the yearly meeting for worship at
Salem began, where we were much comforted together, in the enjoyment of divine
goodness. The free extendings of the Gospel-spring flowed plentifully, to the
watering the heritage of God; the sense whereof bowed many with humble
reverence, in praises to his great and everlasting Name, who is worthy for
ever! The twenty-fifth we had a meeting at Evesham, and went next day to
Mount-Holly, where also we had a meeting; on seventh day to Croswicks, where
their quarterly meeting began for ministers and elders. On first day I was at
Bordentown in the fore part of the day, and at Tren^on in the evening; at which
meetings we were measurably comforted. On second day I was at Croswicks again,
at the meetings for worship and discipline, wherein Truth favored us in a good
degree. On third day the meeting was very large, and I was deeply engaged for
the honor of Truth's cause, there being a loose libertine spirit amongst some
who go under the name of friends, yet never came under the yoke of Christ, to
know the deeds of the body to be mortified; but live at ease in the
gratification of their heart's lusts, and cause the way of Truth to be evil
spoken of. My concern was chiefly to such as live at ease in Zion, and to the
backsliders in Israel, yet I had a word of comfort to the mourners in Zion, and
the heavy-hearted in Jerusalem, that they might hold on their way. I was glad
of so seasonable an opportunity, wherein I was led to speak so closely to the
states of many, in true Gospel-love, which was as a seal of divine favor.

Upon our taking leave of each other, we committed one another to the Lord, and
parted in great love, and true Gospel-fellowship. I then crossed Delaware at
the Falls, in order to see my friends once more in Bucks county, where there is
a large body, and got to my worthy friend John Scarborough's on fourth day,
with whom I had traveled several weeks both in the Jerseys and Maryland. I had
great satisfaction in his company, he being a man of a good understanding, a
tender spirit, and very serviceable in the church. The quarterly meeting for
ministers and elders began at Buckingham on fourth day, the thirtieth of the
fifth month, which I attended, and also on fifth day a meeting for worship and
discipline, and I thought different sentiments were getting in amongst them. It
great care is not taken to keep to Truth's teachings, and the une^ring guidance
of it, which will subdue and keep down all unruly spirits, there will be great
trouble and uneasiness, if not separation, in many places: for I saw an evil
spirit of dissension was got into the church, and in the ways of its workings,
it appeared in diverse shapes, in order to draw after it the hearts of the
simple, and such as, like itself, are unstable; for it is an unstable spirit,
and by this it may be known, and such as are led into its ways, and own its
workings. For they will be restless, not easy, under the cross; but will cast
off the yoke of Christ, and go from his teachings, meekness, and humility, into
a haughty proud spirit* which is rough, full of hatred and envy, despises
counsel, and will not bear reproof. This spirit, I thought, I perceived working
in the mystery of iniquity; but its time is not yet fully come to bring forth
its monstrous birth. The Lord's mercy is very great to his people, for this
seed of the serpent has hitherto been crushed, and put by, in its puttings
forth; and the true seed, though through hard labor and travail, has been
brought forth into dominion, to the praise of Israel's God.

This quarterly meeting consisted of several hundreds, mostly a young
generation. The gracious extendings of divine goodness was felt, and Truth's
power did prevail over all the powers and spirits of darkness. I was glad I was
here, and my spirit did rejoice in the Lord, the God of my salvation. After
meeting on sixth day I went home with Samuel Wilson. On first day I was at
Plumstead meeting, which was attended with good, the power of Truth prevailing.
In the evening I was at a meeting nigh Buckingham, at a school-house. It was a
large gathering, and we were much comforted and refreshed together in the Lord.
I was at their monthly meeting at Buckingham on second day, the fourth of the
sixth month, in which, through the prevalence and owning of Truth, which came
over the minds of the people, things were carried on well, both in the time of
divine worship, and in transacting of the affairs of the church; for the power
of Truth kept down all restless and unruly spirits, which at times are putting
up their heads in opposition to the testimony thereof, and are for trampling
all discipline under foo^ I was deeply exercised in my spirit before the Lord
at times, that I might be kept in the innocence, meekness, and pure wisdom.
Some being as I thought, righteous overmuch, I was afraid lest they should
destroy themselves, and so dishonor the cause of Truth, which they at times
had so zealously contended for.

After this meeting was over, I went to Wright's-Town monthly meeting, which
was next day. In this meeting I had hard labor and exercise; yet things ended
well, I came away satisfied, and thankful in my heart to the Lord, for hi^
unspeakable mercies. The Falls monthly meeting being on fourth day, I was there
also, had some service for Truth, and parted with several friends in much love
and tenderness, we not expecting to see each other again in mutability. On
fifth day I was at Middletown monthly meeting, in which I was drawn forth, in
the living sprin^ of the Gospel, both in the men's and women's meeting. Then
feeling my spirit easy and clear, I left them in love, and the unity of the one
spirit, which had united us together in a near manner.

On first day I was again at North Wales, and had good satisfaction at their
two meetings. On second day I returned again to Philadelphia, having been about
a month from the town. On third day, the twelfth of the sixth month, I was at
the Bank meeting, in which we were comforted together, it being an edifying
season to many. I staid in and about Philadelphia about four weeks, visiting
some families, and attending meetings as they came in course, though, in
meetings, I had little to say, being shut up, and much bound in my spirit to
keep silence in that city. The cause is best known to the great overseer of his
people, who can do with them as seems to him good: and I saw it was good for
his servants to be resigned and contented with all the openings and shuttings
of his hand; with the various dispensations he is pleased to lead through, that
there may not be any confusion throughout the camp of God's Israel. I could not
but rejoice, in thankfulness of heart, that I was quite silent, and still in my
spirit; being made sensible it was the Lord's own doings, and indeed it is
mavelous in our eyes, that he who is the captain of our salvation, should
call for such a cessation of arms, for a season, that his soldiers might take a
little rest under his royal pavilion and canopy of pure love.

I was at Darby weekday meeting the fourth of the week; on fifth day at
Chester weekday meeting; and on sixth day at Chichester, where a meeting was
appointed for me; which was large, and accompanied with the free extendings of
divine mercy to our soul's refreshment. On seventh day I was at London-Grove
monthly meeting and also at their meeting on first day. It was a contriting and
bowing time with many, and we parted in the true unity, fellowship, and
heart-tendering love of the Gospel of Peace. On second day I was at Concord
monthly meeting, which was a hard, laborious, exercising season, both in time
of worship and discipline; things being much out of Gospel order, by reason of
strife and discord, as opposite to the pure and peaceable government of the
church of Christ, as darkness is to light. The evil spirit was kept down in a
good degree, and that which was out of order much helped by the power of Truth.

The tenth of the seventh month 1759, I got to Philadelphia; the eighteenth,
several friends accompanying me, we went to Chester, and the nineteenth on
board a vessel, which was bound for Barbados. Sometime after we were got to
sea, I was closely exercised in my mind, which brought me very low, in humble
supplication before the Lord, that he would be pleased to enable me to go
through whatsoever he, in the course of his infinite wisdom, might suffer to
come upon me, whether for a trial of my faith, or any other of his wise and
good ends. For I could appeal to him in great sincerity, it was in obedience to
his requirings, that I had undertaken that voyage; and not in my own will. This
was indeed with me as a time of renewing of my covenant, and coming under a
close engagement, that if he would but be with me, to deliver and preserve me
in the way that I had to go, so that I might return again to his house in true
peace; then he should be my God, and I would serve him. May I therefore, with
all the Lord's servants every where, not only make covenants, when under close
and deep exercise of soul; but, Oh! let us be concerned strictly to observe and
keep them; for I am a living witness for him, that he is a covenant-keeping God
with his people.

Whilst I was under this ^v^ng and fresh baptism, those, to whom I am the most
nearly united in the closest ties of nature, were brought nigh to me in spirit
(though far separated in body) with strong desires and fervent supplications,
that they might be preserved in the Truth, and that the Lord, in his infinite
mercy, would be pleased to visit their souls with a fresh visitation of his
pure love. The churches also of the Lord (especially those people I had so
lately visited, and had at times been so closely engaged for, in the love of
the Father) were spread before me in the nearest manner, with fervent prayer,
that they might abide in his love, stand in his counsel, and live in his holy
fear; that so we might still be a people to his praise, and bring honor to his
great and holy Name, and the profession we are making of the blessed Truth;
that the blessings which he has reserved, and laid up in store, might not be
withheld, but plentifully showered down upon his heritage.

My mind now was much eased, and that which had been as a load upon my spirit
was taken away, and I was freely resigned to the will of God. At that time, if
I rightly knew my own heart, the fear of death was also removed, and, I trust,
the occasion of it, which is sin; for I did not find that my conscience
condemned me, though I well know, I have nothing to trust in but divine mercy,
through my dear Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in whom, and by whom, all our
sins are taken away, and we are redeemed unto God, and that by his most
precious blood. It is by him we also have access to the Father, his spirit
bearing witness with our spirits, that we are his children, often crying, Abba,
Father, through the eternal Spirit, which helps our infirmities, and makes
intercession for us; enabling us to ask aright, and pray in an acceptable
manner.

I may not omit remarking at this time, when the French were nigh taking us, my
spirit was so at liberty, and over them, and all the powers of darkness in the
Lord, that I did not see it would be so; and having had great freedom and
liberty in my mind to go in this same vessel, could not reflect upon myself for
missing of it in any respect, except it was in making mention of it sometimes
too freely, which it is likely some might lay hold of, and that not to their
own advantage. When we were taken, the Frenchmen (considering all their views
are for plunder) did not use me ill. They took my little money, some of my
linen, and part of my other wearing apparel; but my bed and chest, with many
other necessaries, they let me keep; which was of great service to me
afterward. For I was now in a part of the world where I was a stranger, and no
money of my own left; yet I do not remember I either murmured or repined at
what had befallen me; or that any distrustful thoughts rose in my heart, so as
to trouble and oppress my spirit; which I esteemed as one of the most singular
favors amongst the many I have received from the great and merciful hand.

The privateer belonging to Martinico, we landed at a town called St. Peter's*
great part of which was laid in ashes about two weeks after we were set at at
liberty, as I was afterward informed. We were all had to prison; but our
captain, myself, the mate, and a passenger, were put into a little room, which
opened into the prison-yard. I think it was about twelve feet square, and we
upwards of twenty (if I remember right) to lie in it. Before we left the place,
my fellow prisoners behaved courteously and civilly, none of them offering me
any abuse, though I had often to reprove, and exhort them to amend their lives.
It was extreme hot weather, and our yard, where we had liberty to walk, as well
as our lodging room, was exposed to the sun most of the day. They let me have
my bed in the night next to the door and window for the benefit of the air,
which was an advantage; but, alas! I had a great disadvantage along with it,
for the tub in which we eased ourselves, stood very nigh me, and the wash and
filth of the courtyard came through a hole in the wall, very nigh the window
where I lay, so that often in the night I was nigh fainting with stink, which the
heat of the weather made very nauseous. The bread allowed us was pretty good,
but almost every kind of victuals was loathsome to my stomach in this stinking
unwholesome place. There were salt beef and pork for those that could eat them;
but it being neither soaked, nor half boiled, I perceived there was but little
of it eaten by any. My chief living, whilst there, was bread and water,
sometimes a little coffee, but that was seldom, for we could not always get it
boiled. Oatmeal mixed in water was what I often drank, it serving also for
food. The water they let the prisoners have, I believe, is very unwholesome, it
being taken up below, where the negroes wash their clothes, and also where the
filth of the town is cast in. Most of the prisoners, I perceived, were troubled
with a lax; and I had not been there above two or three days, before I was
taken with it; which, with the extreme heat, and unwholsomeness of the place,
brought me so low and weak, that it was hard work for me to walk about a little
in the prison-yard; but I strove, and was helped indeed beyond my own
expectation; for after we were set at liberty from the prison, we were six days
on board the vessel that set us upon the English island, in which time I think
I suffered more hardship than whilst I was in prison; for being very weak, and
the weather still hot, close, and sultry, I could not abide in the cabin among
the people, but was forced to lie upon the deck, where I could get air, though
I was exposed to the night-dews, and gusts of rain, which we sometimes had; all
which tended to increase my disorder. The French captain gave me the liberty of
the cabin, and showed me kindness in other respects. We were becalmed under the
island of Guadaloupe, and came to an anchor in a cove, where we took in fresh
water; but I went not on shore. I was informed there was a great mortality
among the English soldiers; and many others, who went about business, were
taken off very suddenly at this place.

The seventh of the ninth month they landed us at the island called St.
Christopher's, where I found some kind friendly people; though the generality
were very gay, light, and airy. After I had been there a little time, my
disorder abating, I began to gather strength, so as to walk about; and I found
a few here, who had some knowledge of friends, and their principles, by reason
of their education. One Joshua Lawson, a sail-maker by trade, a man of good
report among his neighbors, was willing I should have meetings at his house,
he having a large room very suitable for that purpose. So I had several
meetings, the town's people coming pretty generally, and several were reached,
I believe, by the heart-searching power of Truth, which opened unto them their
states and conditions, especially some of the younger sort, who were tender,
and very desirous to have meetings. But, alas! their eye and expectation began
to be so upon the poor weak instrument that I queried in my own mind, whether I
should have any more meetings with them; for that spirit, which hungers after
words, sometimes shuts up the spring of the true ministry; or it is withheld
for a time on that account.

However, now about, it revived in my mind, that I had felt a draught of the
Father's love toward the island of Nevis, when we sailed past it, in our
passage from Martinico; though I was told by one that knew the place (such was
the conduct of many of the inhabitants) there were little hopes of getting a
meeting, or being received there; but that did not discourage me, I finding
something in my mind that removed that obstacle out of the way. Therefore I,
with Caleb Copeland, a young man from North America, took boat, and in a few
hours arrived at Charlestown, the chief place on the island. We took up our
quarters at a tavern. The day following, being their general court, many of
their inhabitants came to town, and the place where we were being nigh the
courthouse, and the grand jury doing their business, and dining there, drew a
pretty deal of company. Most of them, at their first seeing me, seemed as
though they could hardly be satisfied with gazing; but I endeavored to keep my
eye to the Lord, whose presence I felt to be nigh me in a good degree, to keep
me still and quiet. So they had their full view of me, till their curiosity was
pretty well satisfied. They offered no other incivility, than fleering, Ishmael
like. However, the grand jury, either out of kindness, or further to satisfy
their curiosity, sent us an invitation to dine with them; but it being late
before they went to dinner, our landlady ordered ours sooner. I did not find
any thing in my mind against eating with them; though many of them be a light,
vain, airy people, and their company not desirable to a solid mind.

They sent a messenger for us when they sat down, by whom I sent word we had
dined. But they sent again, so I went in, and told them we took their
invitation kindly, but we had dined, and therefore desired to be excused from
sitting down with them. They did not seem so light and airy now, as they did
before; but said, they should have been glad to have had our company. I
observed, they are very much in the custom of drinking of healths, as well as
in using many other vain compliments, which I had to show my dislike to, not
only by not using them, but in letting them also know they were against our
principles, and the apostle's advice to the believers, where he says, Be not
conformable to this world; but be ye transformed, by the renewing of your
minds. I much desire my children may take notice of these little remarks, and
put in practice that excellent advice of the apostle, not to be conformable to
the world's language, vain customs, and fashions, which deface that beautiful
image and likeness man was first created in: for every thing was good that God
made, and had an excellency and beauty in it; man, the greatest of all, as long
as he keeps his commandments; but he loses that likeness and image of
innocence, by hearkening to the voice of the serpent, who is called the prince
of the power of the air, that now bears rule in the hearts of the children of
disobedience. I would therefore, my dear children, that you may come to know a
being transformed by the renewings of the grace and good spirit of Truth, upon
your minds and understandings, into the nature, image, and innocence of the
children of God, and stand in it, by keeping his commandments; for herein is
man's perfection.

A meeting had been proposed to be held in the courthouse, several seeming to
forward it, especially an old priest, who bestirred himself pretty much; which
I thought somewhat strange. When it was nigh time for the meeting, he went
along with me to the courthouse, where the justices and several others had
dined, and had not yet broke up; but that was more than I knew before I went
in. However, the priest told them there was a gentleman, as he was pleased to
call me, wanted to give them a sermon, and requested that they would give
liberty of the hall for a meeting to be held; but one whom they called their
chief judge started up in a heat, and said they had not done: and besides, they
wanted no sermons; as for his part, he never loved to hear one in his life. A
vulgar and unsavory expression to come out of the month of one in his station;
and it made me, that I could hardly tell what to say about having a meeting
that night, only as several of the people from diverse parts of the island were
there, it seemed a very suitable opportunity. However, the old priest was not
at all discouraged with the repulse he had met with; he being resolved I should
have a meeting, went over to the tavern where we lodged, and got the liberty of
a chamber, and then came and told me there was a convenient room, and several
already waiting. I went, and found every thing in good order for a meeting,
except the people's minds: I was also in great poverty, but I think quiet and
much resigned. I sat in silence a considerable space, in which time they were
very restless, and rude in their behavior, such as I had seldom seen or heard
before: at length I had something rose in my mind to say, which reached, I
believe, the witness of Truth in them; for they became very quiet and still,
and sat like another sort of people; and many after meeting confessed to the
Truth of what had been spoken.

I had another meeting at that place, and many came. It was a solemn baptizing
time. The Lord's power had the dominion over all the rough and unruly spirits:
praises be to his all powerful name for ever! There stood (...) a man at the
close of this meeting, and said, he hoped what had been delivered would have a
good effect; for it was very suitable advice. More he said, which is not
needful to pen; and I thought it was in a good degree of sincerity. Then
turning to me, he gave me a friendly invitation to his house. I told him I took
it Kindly, and should come it opportunity would serve. The company being pretty
much gone, he entered into a little discourse with me, and told me, he himself
was also a fellow labourer in the Lord; but he had as little the look of a
priest, as any I had ever seen, us I thought. He told me also, he perceived
that we had the advantage of them, in that we did not tie ourselves up to one
text of scripture, as they did, and so could speak to the several states of the
people; for he said, it could not be supposed that one remedy could be suitable
to every disease. I made some remarks on his just observation, with something
concerning the true ministry, the operation of the spirit, and that it was not
to be limited; against which he made no objection, but freely assented to the
Truth. We parted in a kind and friendly manner. I found he was a man of good
understanding, bore a very good character among the people, and was well
beloved.

This evening, after he was gone, there came a messenger from one Burnet, a man
of note in the island, to desire me to pay him a visit before I left the place;
which I did the next morning. He received us very respectfully, without making
much ceremony. He asked me some questions concerning my travels and usage
amongst the French, which I gave him some account of. He did not seem to want
to enter into any discourse about religious matters, but desired I would stay
longer with them upon the island; for he said there were several who were the
descendants of Quakers, and undoubtedly would be glad to see me. But that did
not at all induce me to stay, I finding myself pretty easy to leave them;
hoping the Lord in his own time will send his servants and faithful laborers
into not only this island, but many others in this part of the world, where the
Gospel rain has not been so plentifully bestowed. Oh, Old England, and North
America! Though these people are too much in the churlish dog's nature, yet
many of them would be glad to partake of the crumbs that fall from your tables.
Your dainty full stomachs have often loathed the honeycomb, and their poor
souls are wandering about upon the barren mountains of a lifeless profession,
seeking the living amongst the dead. May we therefore, that have received the
knowledge of the Truth, and been so often watered, be faithful, and bring forth
fruits, answerable to the blessings received! Then will the Lord, I am fully
persuaded, send forth from amongst us such as shall I ring them to Christ the
good Shepherd and ford of true rest and peace.

But to return. After I had staid as long as time would permit, and was taking
my leave of the man, he put a parcel of money into my hand, which I returned,
and told him that we did not receive any money for preaching. He said, we could
not travel without expenses, and I had been taken by the French, and had
suffered some loss, and as he gave it me freely, I might receive it. I told
him, I was not then in necesity, therefore was not free to take it: but
acknowledged it was his good will, and so took my leave of him. After I had
been a little time at our inn, we understood he had sent his servant to the
landlady, to charge her to take nothing of us, for he would pay all our
expenses; but it was already paid; and I saw it to be highly expedient for us,
to remove all cause from them that might take occasion, that the ministry might
not be justly blamed. I left them in a loving good disposition of mind toward
friends, and am fully persuaded there are hungerings begotten in the hearts of
some of them after the true bread.

Afrer I returned to the island called St Christopher's, where I had taken
lodgings, not knowing how long I might stay, I was not easy to omit having
meetings, especiaily on first days. Several people coming out of the country* I
had freedom to sit with them, most of them behaving in a becoming and solid
manner. Truth ssometimes favored us in time of silence; and though I had
thought I should have been shut up, I found the spring of the Gospel was still
opened toward the people, at times, in the free extendings of God's love. And
it came into my mind, in the opening of Truth, that the Lord has a seed sown
in those islands, which lies under the clods of the earth; but its rising and
coming into dominion must be left to his time; he being able to dethrone
antichrist, bring down his kingdom, with all his strong holds, and in the room
thereof, to establish his own everlasting righteousness; that so in the very
place where it was said, they are no people, there shall they be called the
children of the living God.

I found some of them desirous that I would visit them in their families, which
I complied with, as I found freedom; often having to set before them their
unchristian practice, in keeping their fellow creatures in slavery for term of
life, and the cruelty they used toward them, which exceeded all that I had
ever seen before; and it raised such a just ^^dignation in my heart, that I
used great freedom of speech sometimes in conversation. Yet I trust I did not
exceed the bounds of Truth, for I perceived it always had some good tendency,
either to silence, or bring some acknowledgment from them, that the practice
was unchristian, and not to be justified; that they had no right to plead for
keeping them, but that of force, and they were a daily plague, and caused them
to run into a great deal of sin. Thus I have heard some of them complain,
wishing they had never had them, or had some other way to get their bread. So
we may perceive the Lord is rising, by his pure witness, in judgment in the
hearts of those negro-keepers, showing them the practice is evil, and they
cannot justify it, because the light condemns it, and makes it manifest to
them to be evil. I tarried at this place longer than I expected; but hope it
was not time spent altogether unprofitably. And although I have been hindered
from going to the place, I at first set out for, I have had evident tokens of
God's love and fatherly care over me, in the various steps I have had to tread;
yet notwithstandiug this evidence of divine approbation, I have not been
^^^^^sible, that mouths would be opened not only against me, in saying I was
wrong led, or under a deception, but also against the Truth; for the Truth has
many enemies, and none greater and readier to judge others, than those that are
making a profession or it, but dwell not in the life and power. But it is not a
new thing to be counted deceivers, and yet be true.

However, whilst I tarried here, I often enquired for a passage to the winward
islands, that such occasion might be taken away, and I be clear of the blood of
all men. I thought by way of Antigua might be proper; but when I made some
attempts toward it, I was always stopped in my mind, not being free to leave
the place where I was. But when I had tarried some time longer, and had diverse
good opportunities among the people, I felt myself quite easy to leave the
island; and not only so, but likewise a strong desire to be gone; also that
view, and those drawings I had before, to visit the other islands, were
entirely removed, and I was easy to return in a vessel which was then ^ou^^ for
Philadelphia. Therefore, taking leave of those I was pretty nearly acquainted
with in Basseterre, the chief town on the island, I went by land to Sandy
Point, where the vessel lay to take in part of her cargo. Here I had a meeting
with the town's people the day before we set sail, which was the second of the
eleventh month 1759, having been upon this island, and Nevis, eight weeks.

Whilst I tarried in those islands, there was a great mortality among the
people, bur it did not bring that awfulness and humility upon their minds,
which it ought to have done; and therefore the divine hand undoubtedly will be
stretehed out still. The captain and men behaved very civilly to me in this
passage. I had several meetings with the ship's company, which had some good
effect, I believe, upon the seamen. We arrived at Philadelphia the twenty-ninth
of the eleventh month, where I was very kindly received by my friends, who had,
I believe, nearly sympathized with me in my late exercises. I staid in the city
a little more than two weeks, except a short visit to Wilmington friends. A
conferrence was held with the Indians whilst I tarried here, which I was at;
and Daniel Stanton and myself, with a few other friends, had a meeting with
them at Philadelphia in the state-house.

After some time of waiting in silence, I had something to say, and one Isaac
Still, an Indian, who could speak English, delivered the substance of what I
said in the Indian language. He appeared tender and well satisfied, being a
sensible sober young man. Tedeuscung, and several of the Delaware chiefs were
present, and a few of the Jersey Indians. They were solid, attentive, and
behaved in a becoming manner. The meeting ended in humble prayer and
supplication to Almighty God. My stay being but short here, after I returned
from the West Indies, I endeavored to take my leave of friends in as general a
manner as time would permit, and the sixteenth of the twelfth month 1759, being
the first of the week, after a good and satisfactory season with friends at
Pine-street meeting house, I took my farewell of them in the uniting love and
pure fellowship of the Gospel of peace.

I went on board the ship Carolina, at the wharf; the master's name was James
Friend, a kind, courteous man. We had a very difficult passage, by reason of
high winds, and a leaky vessel; yet, through the mercy and goodness of kind
Providence, we arrived safe at London the twenty-ninth of the first month 1760,
where I staid but a few days before I took leave of friends there, and returned
home to my dear wife and children, who, in my absence, with all that I had, had
been kept, blessed, and preserved, far beyond my own expectation, or indeed my
deserving as a creature. I desire I ever may be thankful for such unspeakable
favors and mercies, and give him the praise, who is worthy for ever!

W. RECKITT.

SUPPLEMENT.
IN the course of these travels the author often had his wife and children in
his remembrance, and wrote to them, to encourage them to trust in that hand
which had drawn him into service.

By a note, dated the eighth of the eighth month 1768, on one of his letters,
he desires that they might be preserved for the sake, of his children: "When"
(says he) my head is laid in the silent grave, and my soul at rest with the
Lord: and also that my journal may be transcribed for their perusal; adding,
that the very fragments should be gathered up, that nothing may be lost. For
the benefit of his surviving relations, and of mankind in general, the
following extracts are inserted. They show the care he had for their welfare,
when far absent, and bespeak the fervency of his love. The first was from
France, while he was a prisoner there, and is as follows.

Carhaix in France, the twenty-third of the twelfth month, 1756. Dear wife and
children,
This comes to inform you of my welfare, and though outwardly confined, not
having that liberty to proceed on my journey at present, yet I dare not
complain, nor say, the Lord is an hard master; for he, in his great mercy and
matchless loving kindness, has been a present help in every needful time, as
mine eye has been single to him, he has supported me under the exceeding
great exercises I have in this journey already met with. Glory and honor be to
his great Name for ever!

I would that none of you might be cast down about me, but still trust in the
name of the Lord; I am fully satisfied you will find it to be a strong tower,
and as the shadow of a mighty rock in a weary land. And there is one thing I do
greatly desire of you, that is, live in true love and unity one with another,
and, as much as in you lies, with all men every where, and then the God of love
and peace will be with you to the end of your time. I wrote about the seventh
or eighth of last month, in which I informed you how I fared, and was in
health; since which I am removed to this place, a tolerable situation, and
provisions pretty cheap. I have a chamber to myself, and a good bed, being
under no restraint, but have the liberty of the town and fields to walk in when
I please. I hope to receive a letter from you in a little time. I most dearly
and tenderly salute you, and bid you farewell.

W. R.


Philadelphia, the twenty-ninth of the fifth month, 1758. Dear wife and
children,
I came here this day, having been something more than six months in the
southern provinces; in which visit, though the journey has been attended with
some difficulties and dangers, yet I have no cause to complain. I lacked for
nothing, it having at times been made easy, pleasant, and comfortable unto me
in Christ, for whose sake, and the Gospel's, I have endeavored to be given up,
according to the dispensation of his grace given to me, in obedience to his
will, in which I desire I may stand faithful to the end; and the same desire,
at times, is strong in my heart for all of you that I have left behind, that
you may be faithful to the measure and manifestation of grace given unto you. I
am not without fear, left some of my dear children, which are grown to years of
understanding, should be, through unwatchfulness and carelessness, drawn away
into hurtful things. It drops as a watchword for you to take notice of, which,
if you do, and walk agreeable unto the blessed principle of Truth, which you
have heard, and, I trust, believed in, the Lord has blessings in store for
you, will make you truly rich, and add no sorrow with it. I should have no
greater comfort at my return, than to see it was your care and chiefest concern
to be faithful to the Lord, according to the best of your understandings. This
would be more to my comfort and solid satisfaction, than for you to have
abundance of this world; for they that first seek the kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, the promise is, that all other things shall be added. I often
breathe to the Lord, that he, above all things, may be pleased to sanctify and
cleanse your hearts from all sin, that so he, who has hitherto been the help,
strength, preservation, and deliverance of your poor father in his exercises
and troubles, may in mercy bless you all, and take delight in you, so as to
tender your hearts, and favor you often with his power and living presence, is
the sincere prayer of yours, in that love, that neither distance or length of
time can separate.

W. R.


Newport in Rhode Island, the fifth of the eleventh month, 1758. My dear wife,
These may inform thee and children, I have hitherto been favored in a good
degree of health and strength to go through the exercises and travels, both
inward and outward, which have laid before me, for the sake of the gospel; in
the discharge whereof, at times, I find great peace and inward consolation.

My time of stay in this land, at present. seems uncertain; yet I am ready to
conclude it will be until another year; if sooner, I believe it will be
acceptable both to you and me: if we be willing to wait in patience the Lord's
time, he will be well pleased with us, and undoubtedly his blessing will
follow, which will make truly rich, and add no sorrow with it.

I have received two letters from you, in which I had an account of your
welfare, in a good degree, for which I am truly thankful to him that has
hitherto helped us, and preserved us. May he have the praise, who is worthy!
His ways are all ways of pleasantness, and his paths are indeed paths of true
peace, and his mercies and loving kindness are toward all them that daily live
and dwell in his holy fear.

May all my children learn the fear of the Lord, is often my earned cry and
prayer to the Lord for them. Then would they be preserved out of the evils that
are in the world, for they are many, and lie close to their youthful
inclinations, and if they give way to them, will draw their hearts from the
Lord, and out of his holy fear, into a loose, wanton, and libertine spirit,
which I caution and warn them to watch against and beware of, left they lose
the blessing, as Esau did, and the time come they may carefully seek it with
tears, and cannot obtain it; for time is very precious, and ought to be prized
by all. Some very young in years, when on a dying bed, have bemoaned
themselves, and lamented th^^ misspent time, the sense of which causes me almost
to tremble, lest it should be the state of any that see or hear these lines
read. Therefore I entreat there may be a turning to the Lord with the whole
heart; and make no reserves or excuses, but yield obedience to his holy will in
all things, according to the best of your understandings, though through a
great cross to your inclinations; it is the way to obtain mercy with God, and
admittance into his everlasting kingdom of rest and peace, when time in this
world of troubles shall terminate.

I dearly salute thee and our children in the love of the Father of all our
mercies, desiring you may all dwell in his love, that so you may feel me to be
near you in spirit though outwardly far separated. The dead cannot praise the
Lord, but the living; the sense of it at this time for his unspeakable favors
to us, with many more of his dear children, whom he has begotten into a lively
hope, bows my spirit. May we all be preserved under a living sense of this
life, that when under a degree of divine favor, may be enabled to draw nigh to
him, who knows all our wants, and put up our prayers and supplications for each
other, in a ^anner that will find acceptance, is the pathetic breathing of
thine in that love that changes not, including our dear children.

W. R.


Philadelphia, the twelfth of the first month, 1759. Dear love,
I have received several letters from home, which intimate thine and our
children's welfare, as to health, which gives me great satisfaction, with
desires, if it be the will of Divine Providence, such blessings may be
continued, and we truly thankful.

I returned yesterday from New England, and the eastern country, having been
somewhat more than five months in that journey. Health of body is in a good
degree still continued, and true peace of mind; for which I am made, at times,
to bless that great and everlasting Name, who is over all, worthy for ever! I
see I cannot enlarge, only recommend thee to that which has hitherto kept and
preserved, and still will, I am sensible, as we put our trust and dependence
upon it. I desire thou, or any of you, will not think me long. I shall, as soon
as I am clear, hasten home; shall not conclude for myself, for I am not at my
own disposal; yet seem to think I shall look homeward in a little time. My dear
love to thee and children, sympathizing with you in great nearness, I dearly
salute thee and them, in that which never changes. Thine in the Lord.

W. R.


Philadelphia, the fifteenth of the sixth months 1759. My dear wife and
children,
I am in the perfect enjoyment of health, excep^ some pain in my breast, which
is now such better. It has been a long time since I had a letter from England,
but here have been but few ships from London this summer. I cannot conclude of
fixing my return, I having had drawings in my mind to visit Barbados, and
purpose taking the first suitable opportunity to embark for that place. There
are only a few meetings in Barbados, so that my stay is not like to be long,
except I have to visit any other islands. I may thus conclude at present, but
leave it to that great and good Disposer of all things, that has been my
support. I may with gratitude and thankfulness say, he has been my present
helper in every needful time. Oh! may our eye be single to him, he is good
indeed unto all that put their trust in him; though great storms may rise, and
clouds of thick darkness may appear, I am strong in the faith, the Lord still
will be on our side, as we are concerned to be faithful unto him; and if he be
on our side, who can be against us? I cannot enlarge much, but desire that you
and I may be enabled to commit ourselves to his care and protection; for
assuredly, a sparrow cannot fall to the ground without his permission, and if
we be faithful to him, we are of more value than many sparrows; for, says he,
the hairs of your heads are all numbered. My earnest cries and supplications
have often been for your souls welfare; I would not have any of you think too
much about me, though I trust we love one another by the nearest bonds and ties
of nature; yet when the love of Truth prevails, we should give up one another
for the sake thereof; then in this world shall we be entitled to the hundred
sold, which is true peace, and in that which is to come life everlasting. As a
most affectionate husband, and tender father, I dearly salute you, and bid you
farewell.

W. R.
P. S. I desire my children would not give way to accompany themselves with
those that are not friends, for that has been the ruin of many of our youth.
Endeavor, at all times, to attend religious meetings, and also to learn and
improve in reading and writing. I am afraid, left you should not do well; then
I shall be grieved and sorrowful if I should live to see you again, instead of
being comforted, and rejoicing in you.




Christopher's, the ninth of the tenth month, 1759. Dear wife and children,
These are to inform you, and all enquiring friends and relations, that I have
great and good satisfaction since I arrived at this part of the world, in the
discharge of what I have thought to be my duty, notwithstanding I have been
exposed to some hardships, and have likewise been out of health about four
weeks, but am now as well as usual, can travel, and have a good appetite.
Yesterday I came from an island called Nevis, where I have had several
meetings; and though I have thoughts of visiting another island or two, I shall
not, I trust, stay long in these parts, except I am detained longer than I
expect.

I have you all nearly and dearly in my remembrance, though I have been already
longer from you, or am like to be longer than I expected; yet I trust we shall
find it has all been the Lord's doings, and as we patiently wait on him, shall
find his ways to be ways of pleasantness, and his paths to be paths of true
peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, and that his time is always the best time. I
would that none might be too anxious and thoughtful concerning me, seeing the
same hand that drew me forth, is as able, if he sees meet, to return with me,
and bring again to you in safety; and if not, let us not murmur nor repine, if
it may but be with us, as it was with the apostle, who said, To me to live is
Christ, but to die is gain. I cannot write much for want of time; the ship is
nigh failing, as I am informed, but commend you to the Lord, as into the hand
of a merciful Creator and tender Father, tender in mercy to all that faithfully
serve, worship, and obey him.

My spirit salutes thee and dear children, etc.

W. R.


Our friend having left no further account of his travels after this voyage,
until his second embarkation for America, there is reason to suppose he
traveled but little, except attending the yearly meeting in London, or same
short distances near home. But about the year 1764, he again found a concern to
visit friends in America. For this purpose he embarked, in company with Thomas
Goodwin, and William Horn who were returning home from a religious visit to
this nation, and arrived safe at Philadelphia, and proceeded through most of
the provinces; but his wife dying during his absence, he, on account of his
family, rather hastened his return, and embarked in a vessel bound for Ireland;
from whence he came to London about the fourth month, 1766, and soon after
returned to Wainsleet, the place of his residence.

Of this voyage, he kept only minutes of the meetings he visited; so that we
are deprived of a particular account thereof.

After his return, he visited diverse parts of this nation, and in particular
the city of London, which he often hinted he thought might be the last time;
but his love to the cause of Truth continued, and it was evident the fervency
of his mind was as strong as ever.

He was a man of great integrity of heart, a lover of peace, and sought the
promotion thereof, and had often a word of counsel to drop tending to
edification. Not only at particular opportunities, but often, when absent, has
he imparted of the goodness and mercy of the Lord to his soul, and also been
helpful in counsel by letters. In one of the last I had from him, he expressed
himself thus: The sap of life lies very deep in the root, and that must be
waited for in those pinching times I have met with; and yet I have a
comfortable hope raised in me of late, that all would be well in the end, the
prospect of which to me has seemed exceeding pleasant, and, if safe, should
much desire it might be hastened; but that is not my proper business to look
for, or to desire the reward before the day's work is finished. I have served a
good master, but have ever looked on myself as one of the weakest of his
servants; yet have endeavored to come up in faithful obedience to his will
made manifest in me, and in this now I have great peace, and an assurance of an
inheritance that will never fade away, if I continue in the way of well-doing
to the end of the race.

His illness was very short; he was taken with a fit of the ague at night, and
next morning, about four, departed this life, the sixth of the fourth month,
1769, and was interred in friends burial-ground the 9th of the same, at
Wainfleet, aged about; sixty-three years.

The long and intimate acquaintance I had with our deceased friend, has
induced me to prepare these accounts for more general service, in which I have
had real satisfaction and comfort; and if they afford the same to the reader,
my end is answered.

Tho. Wagstaffe.
London, 29th of the 7th month, 1776.
FINIS.
MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE, RELIGIOUS EXPERIENCES, AND LABORS IN THE GOSPEL, OF
JAMES GOUGH, Late of the City of DUBLIN, deceased.

Compiled from his original MANUSCRIPTS, by his BROTHER JOHN GOUGH.

DUBLIN, PRINTED IN I782. PHILADELPHIA: REPRINTED BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, IN
MARKET STREET, BETWEEN SECOND AND THIRD STREETS 1783.

PREFACE. BY THE EDITOR.
IN reviewing the papers my late brother left behind him, I met with the
manuscripts from whence the following compilation is extracted: but rather in a
loose and undigested state; being only a rough copy of what he seemed to have a
design to digest, and, probably, to continue further, if his life had been
prolonged: yet even in this unfinished state, finding them to contain much
useful matter, many pertinent, judicious and instructive reflections, worthy
of, and, as I imagined, designed for a more general service than to lie locked
up in a scrutoir, or be confined to his own private family; I willingly devoted
a portion of my leisure time, to the revising, collating and digesting thereof.
And I find no reason to repent of my labor, or think this portion of my time
misspent, having received much satisfaction and profitable impression therefrom,
as I hope the candid reader will also, in the serious and unprejudiced perusal
thereof.

Of literary subjects, history has been ranked amongst the most improving and
interesting: and, I think, it may be allowed this rank of precedence, so far as
it leads by illustrious or pious examples, to virtue or good conduct in life;
or by a detection of vicious characters, exposes the deformity of vice, and
the ill consequences thereof, as lessons of caution, against the evils we are
to avoid.

Yet the general scope of history; being mostly relative to the actions of the
great and the powerful, unfolding the violent, or the crafty measures, whereby
worldly power has been acquired, and the policy whereby it is supported and
maintained; does not, in general, abound with patterns for the private man, to
form himself by; and too seldom exhibits such, as the good man could copy
after, without departing from his character.

Every man cannot rise to conspicuous stations in life, or attain the abilities
requisite to fill them with reputation to himself, and advantage to the
community: but every man may attain to (that which is infinitely beyond them)
the favor of his Creator; by yielding obedience to his revealed will, and his
divine commands. It is not every man's business to copy the Statesman, the
Hero, or the Philosopher; but it is every man's most interesting concern, to
live so in this world, as to obtain everlasting happiness in the next.

That history therefore or biography, which describes the lives of such, as
have steadily directed their course through this world to a better, in the right
line of piety toward God, and goodness of heart and life among men, seems in an
especial manner to claim our serious and attentive perusal; particularly, where
these good men themselves, from a view of being still helpful, and serviceable
to mankind, when they shall be no more among them in this state of mutability,
leave behind them lively monuments of their experience of the work of
sanctification, and saving grace in them: reciting not only the actions and
occurrences of their lives; but the internal motives of those actions, and the
effect of those occurrences, on the state of their minds: unfolding the gradual
operation of the grace of God, for their redemption from evil, and showing
forth the fruits of the spirit, out of a good conversation: Herein leaving the
evident prints of their footsteps to lasting felicity, for their survivors, to
trace the path to the like glorious inheritance. Of this kind of Biography, we
have had several tracts published, in our soo^ty, diverse of which, having
perused with much satisfaction and advantage, as being thereby animated to an
ardent desire, of treading the same path to blessedness, and tracing the
footsteps of the flock, to the shepherd's tent, I am induced the more readily
to forward the publication of the following sheets, and the more earnestly to
recommend them, (with other compositions of the like nature) to the solid
attention of my friends, and particularly to the youth of this generation.

Whom I could wish to be well apprized, that our reading and study, as well as
every other occupation of our lives, is most properly and most profitably
employed in the pursuit and acquisition of those virtuous dispositions, whereby
we may please our Maker, fill up our stations in life with propriety, and be
good examples in our generation, and that it is a matter of important
consequence to all, but especially to this age of inexperience, to be very
careful, and well directed, in the choic^ of the books they read, as well as
the company they familiarly associate with, that they be such as may make
profitable impressions upon them: these silent companions of the closet
communicate a good or evil influence, according to the subjects they treat of,
and the manner in which they are treated, with a secret but powerful effect
upon the tender mind, and the apostle's observation that Evil communications
corrupt good manners I Cor. xv. 33.
is, in my opinion, applicable to corrupting books, as well as corrupting
companions.

From the clear sense they had of the pernicious tendency of such compositions,
our friends both in a private and collective capacity, have been frequently
concerned to recommend a care in parents and guardians to prevent, and caution
youth and others to restrain their inclination to the reading of Such books as
tend to leaven the mind into vanity, profaneness and infidelity, See Yearly
Meeting's Epistle, 1723, 1762 etc
under which description are comprised, Plays, novels and romances, and all
those which have a tendency to lead the mind from piety, and to oppose or
reject the divine authority of the Holy Scriptures: and this licentious age,
which has produced an inundation of fictitious compositions of the former
kind, romances and novels in abundance, presents an occasion to reinforce the
caution to our young friends, to beware of touching the unclean thing, lest
their minds be imperceptibly defiled thereby.

For such writings being adapted to the depraved taste of an indolent and
luxurious generation, they seem more calculated for a diverting entertainment,
or the amusement of an idle hour, than for profitable instruction, or real
improvement in morals, in understanding, or in the temper of the mind: and the
time employed therein, I judge, is in general misspent, or spent to a bad
purpose, and There Is but little need to drive away that by foolish
divertisements, which flies away so swiftly of itself; and when once gone is
never to be recalled. Plays, Balls, Treats, Romances, Music, Lovesonnets, and
the like, will be a very invalid plea, for any other purpose than their
Condemnation, who are taken and delighted therewith, at the revelation of the
righteous Judgment of God. William Penn's No Cross no Crown, Chap. 15. Sec. 7.
Few, I believe, are much the better or wiser, for the hours they pass in
perusing such productions. The greater part, being the invention of corrupt
minds, have a very corrupting influence. And those which appear most plausible,
are too generally formed to fill the head with romantic ideas, and airy
imaginations; to flatter our pride, infuse a taste for sensual pleasures,
nourish our propensity to worldly grandeur, and the desire of great
possessions, and to bring the mind into a dissipated state: operating in a
direction diametrically opposite to the grace of God, which brings salvation;
and teaches us to deny all ungodliness, and worldly lusts; and to live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world.

For these reasons I am induced on this occasion to cast in my mite, and give
my suffrage to this concern of the society I am connected with in religious
fellowship, for the preservation of their members from hurtful pursuits:
desiring they may receive the word of exhortation to refrain from unprofitable
or prejudicial compositions, as well as to peruse with seriousness, such as
tend to impress the mind with religious considerations, and influence it to the
practice of piety and virtue.

From sundry papers which have formerly come into my hands, I have reason to
believe, it was a practice with the author of the ensuing pages, to take down
in manuscript frequent reviews of his life, by way of keeping an account
thereof, in order to take a more minute retrospection: and to form a more
precise judgment how he was prepared and preparing for the final account; a
profitable, rational, and religious exercise! which it might be advantageous
for all to employ themselves in every day of their lives. These seem to have
been designed merely for his own private use: but at three different periods he
commenced a review of the whole, I imagine, with a more extensive view, the
first in the 35th year of his age; the second in the 54th, and the third in the
66th, but had proceeded only a little way in the last, when he was removed from
this life. I have traced the last, as far as it was carried forward, and the
second to the end: and from that period, having collected what authentic
memorials I could, I have in a supplement continued the narration to the end of
his life, which, with the memoirs to which it is annexed, is submitted to the
candor of the judicious reader.

I have also annexed an epistle to friends in Ireland, which I found amongst
the papers from whence the following memoirs are compiled, which seems designed
for publication, and in which there are many observations well worthy the
attention of those in particular to whom it is addressed, and of others into
whose hands it may fall.

A TESTIMONY, from the MEN's Meeting of DUBLIN, concerning JAMES GOUGH,
deceased.
IT having pleased divine providence, to remove from us by death our worthy
friend James Gough, we feel our minds impressed to give forth the following
testimony concerning him.

By authentic accounts we find he was born at Kendal in Westmoreland in the
year 1712. And, in his young years, was made sensible of an inward monitor to
reprove his propensity to evil, and convince him of the error of his ways,
which made, at times, profitable impressions on his mind for a season; b^^,
through the instability of youth, these impressions proved not deep enough to
be lasting, till about the twenty-first year of his age, when he removed from
the North of England to Bristol, i^ pleased divine goodness to favor him with
a fresh and prevailing visitation of his love, whereby he was made willing to
give up, in self-denial and circumspection of life, to yield obedience to his
requiring^, who in his fatherly loving kindness had thus visited his soul: and,
by the gradual operation of the divine power therein, he experienced a growth
in the work of sanctification, and was thereby formed into a vessel prepared
for the Master's use.

About the year 1738, he removed from Bristol, and settled in Cork, and soon
after he came forth in a public testimony, to the virtue and efficacy of that
truth, which himself had experienced the beneficial effects of, and growing in
his gift, he became an able minister of the gospel, and an instrument of
service in the church.

His first journey, in the work of the ministry, was in the year 1740, to the
counties of Cumberland, Westmoreland, Lancashire, and part of Yorkshire: His
next to Leinster province: and in the summer 1743, he visited the meetings of
friends through the principality of Wales, and many parts of England; in the
course of which visit, he attended the yearly meeting of Wales, with those of
Bristol and London. Soon after his return he thought it his duty to remove into
Leinster province, and fixed his residence in Mountmelick, where his service
became extensive, being in the center of a large body of friends. He almost
constantly attended our province, quarterly and national meetings, where he was
often drawn forth in the pure streams of gospel love, to the refreshment, and
edification of friends: In the year 1774, he settled in this city, where he was
well received, and well beloved, his innocent life and conversation adorning
his gospel labors amongst us, being filled with love to mankind in general,
and in particular to the flock and family, with whom he was joined in religious
fellowship.

He followed his occupation of schoolmaster, for some time in this city, but,
in his advanced years, not being sufficiently able to bear the fatigue and
confinement attendant on that employment, and being desirous to be more at
liberty for the exercise of his gift, he gave it up: and for the three last
years of his being a member of this meeting, traveled much abroad in the
different quarters of this nation, visiting the meetings, and, in many places,
the families of friends, to stir up the pure mind by way of remembrance, and to
provoke to love and good works.

And finally, being on a religious visit to friends in the province of Munster,
and having proceeded to the city of Cork, (where he was engaged in a visit to
the families of friends, and had with much diligence nearly finished the same,)
it pleased the Sovereign Ruler of the universe, in whose hands our lives are,
there to fix a period to his labors, and to remove him from works to rewards:
for being seized with indisposition, and following the service before him too
closely (as was apprehended) it increased upon him to such a degree as brought
on his dissolution, and he quietly departed this life, at the house of our
friend Joseph Garratt, in said city, (where he was affectionately and tenderly
attended and taken care of during his illness) we believe in peace with the
Lord, and much regretted by friends here and elsewhere, amongst whom his
zealous labors will be much missed.

We desire that the removal of faithful laborers, may be so laid to heart by
their survivors, as that they may be incited to copy their examples, tread the
same steps to blessedness, and thereby be qualified to fill their vacant places
with propriety. -- Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of
that man is peace.

He departed this life the 6th of the 10th month, 1780, and was buried in the
burying-ground belonging to friends of said city, the 9th of the same. Aged 67,
a Minister 41 years.

Signed in and on behalf of our Men's-meeting held in Dublin, the 10th of the
4th month, 1781.

John Bancroft, Robert Clibborn, Benjamin Byrne, Henry Astick, Robert Freeman,
Thomas Fail, Thomas Thacker, Benjamin Glorney, William North, John Smithson,
David Newland, John Robinson, Joshua Forbes, Thomas Bewley, John Dawson Coats,
Joseph Williams, Joshua Clibborn, John Robinson, Jonathan Hill, Joseph Pike,
Joseph Sandwith, William Jackson, William Knott, Thomas Bewley, ju. Samuel
Russel, Thomas Barrington.


INTRODUCTION.
FOR my own future benefit, and for theirs too into whose hands it may fall, I
am induced to commit to writing the following review of my days, now in the
66th year of my age: for since we are launched on the ocean of life, our
principal care ought to be to steer our course through it to the port of rest,
and unmixed felicity, though it were through all kinds of hardship and
self-denial; since, if we fail of this at last, it is then too late to amend it.

Could all the pleasures and advantages of this life be attained and enjoyed
perfect and unmixed to it is period, even so they would be no compensation for
the loss of happiness in a future and immortal state. But those pleasures and
advantages never can he so enjoyed by any one, unless his passions and
inclinations are subject to the government of God, who alone ought to govern
his creatures, and who discovers his will, to the humble attentive mind.

Indeed the temporary enjoyers of the good things of this life, may show a face
of pleasure to ignorant spectators, while they seem to float, without
interruption, in the midst of gratifications and amusements: yet a secret worm
is often felt by them, as it were gnawing at the latent root of their
exaltation and grandeur.

It is the universal and impartial regard of Omnipotence, which rebukes them
for letting loose the reigns of their lusts or eager inclinations, designing
thereby their timely reformation for their everlasting good.

It often opposes the ambitious and proud, in their career, with the unwelcome
discoveries, that they are roving in other pursuits than those that heaven
designed for them: and not applying their precious time and talents to the
great and good purpose for which they were given. Sometimes it displays the
beauties and benefits of rectitude, deserted by them; and sometimes the horror
and sad consequence of persisting in the neglect or violation of duty, thus
discovered on the one hand, and counteracted by them on the other.

Hence too generally, disliking the check to present ease and pleasure, such as
are entrusted with the means of doing good, and helping others on their way,
turn their attention from this omnipresent monitor, this faithful bosom friend.
They fly to tempting varieties, to soothing deceptions, to amusing recreations;
they bear their heads aloft among the envying multitudes, and seek to drown his
salutary admonitions in splendour, noise, flutter, intemperance and dissipation.

Many such I have known, who are now gone to their long homes, whom in my
younger years I envied.

I have been so foolish as to transfer my envy from them, after they
disappeared, to their vain and short-lived successors; many of whom are also
gone, and so will the rest ere long. And then what follows those that have left
their heaven behind them, who assuming to themselves the direction that was due
to God, have refused the reverence and obedience of his laws? Ah then the
enviers and envied, like the blind led by the blind, fall into one abyss. Unfit
for the regions of pure love to God and each other, of perfect peace, of joy
unspeakable and full of glory 1 Peter
, they are debarred from admission into them. Separated in the course of
justice, plunged with the vast and innumerable hosts of rebellious and
execrable spirits, all their bitterness, envy, resentment, eager desires
ungratified, unceasing vexation and anguish descend with them, with infinite
increase in an unbodied state.

A sensual earthly mind is too much vitiated to relish the pure joys, or to
suit the society of the spirits of the just made perfect. Goodness is painful
to the wicked, being so contrary to the depravity of their nature. Heaven would
be no heaven to them.

A change of heart is necessary to be experienced by every man, from a state of
nature to a state of grace; from earthly and sensual dispositions and
affections, to holy and heavenly, in order to be fitted for the fruition of, as
well as the admission into the kingdom of heaven. It is then the greatest
wisdom, while time and opportunity are afforded, to use all diligence to attain
that state of mind, whereby we may be prepared when all the transitory
delights, amusements and desirable objects of this world fail, to be received
into everlasting habitations: and how ought our hearts to be filled with
thankfulness to God, who in his universal love to mankind, has provided for
them a physician, able and willing to heal all nations, to create clean hearts,
and renew right spirits in all, who submit to him, and follow his directions.

But in order to attain this desirable state, we must make a total surrender of
ourselves to the divine will revealed to us, in daily self denial and fidelity;
persevering therein to the end of our days, ardent in desire to do good, and to
be conformed to the mind of our creator.

The less we look out unnecessarily into the world, or covet its honors,
favors, friendship and greatness, and the more we look to God with a single
eye, and covet his honor, favor, friendship and riches, the more shall we
experience a growth in the very root, and in all the branches of the divine
life, that we may be as a chaste spouse to Christ in every desire and aim, in
every motion of the mind, and its companion the body too, and surely he ever
merits it from us, even he who has graciously visited, and from day to day
invited, and called us out of the spirit and ways of the world, to join
himself, in order to partake with him and his, of pure peace and joy in the
present, and more infinitely in a future state. His call is Come out from among
them, and be ye separate, touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you, and I
will be a father to you, etc. 2 Cor. vi. 17, 18.


By this call were our honorable predecessors in the beginning, separated from
the spirit and ways of the world, and incited to refuse touching the unclean
thing or whatever sprang from an impure source, what persecution soever that
refusal might cost them, knowing that he whom they obeyed and in whom they
trusted, would carry them through all opposition, which they experienced (to
their unspeakable joy) to be fulfilled, and livelily testified to the world,
many of them, both living and dying.

Those happy men and women left the Lord's vineyard (through their faithful
labors with the divine blessing upon them) well fenced and clean (having
gathered out the stones thereof) and abounding with the excellent fruits of the
holy spirit of Christ.

After this, degeneracy stole in, revolting to the world, reimbibing it is
spirit, resuming its customs, language and manners: which has since widely
spread and overflowed like a deluge, broken down the fence, and introduced an
unhappy change in the state of our society.

Yet there is no change in God or his laws. Oh! then that we may speedily
return back to him and them, and to that state from whence we have fallen, else
great it is to be feared, will be our condemnation.

Having premised these brief and most important observations, I now proceed to
the narrative of my own life.

MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE, OF JAMES GOUGH.
I WAS born at Kendal in Westmoreland on the 27th of 12th month, 1712, and my
parents John and Mary Gough, professing the Truth as held by the people called
Quakers, I received my education in the same profession. My mother, who was an
industrious, careful, well-minded woman, taught me to read; and when I was a
little turned of five years of age I commenced a scholar in friends' school in
my native town, under the tuition of Thomas Rebanks, at which school I
continued till my fifteenth year. Having a good genius and a propensity to
learning I attained with facility and readiness the Latin and Greek languages;
and my quick proficiency therein, (I being of little stature for my age)
excited admiration, procured me the fame of a great scholar, vastly magnified
my little stock of seize; and also introduced me to the notice of several
persons of eminence in the town, who would frequently question me in respect to
my learning, and were generally pleased with my ready answers.

In particular a distinguished justice of peace, with his wife, took a singular
notice of me, admitting me (young as I was) to free conversation with them, and
introducing me at times into grand company which frequented their house. The
said justice would say, that if my parents would give me up to him, he would
send me to the university to receive a proper education. This flattered my
ambition, as it was what at that time I heartily wished for.

By these means the seeds of wild nature, the noxious weeds of pride and vain
conceit (the produce of every soil) received strength and nourishment in my
early minority, and shot up high for my present childish age.

But in some sort to counterbalance these incentives to pride and airy notions,
I had the advantage of receiving my education in a place, in and about which
there lived many worthy friends, whose exemplary lives, and religious care and
labors, often in my early years made good impressions on my mind, which
(though my own propensities soon effaced them) left fixed upon my breast an
honorable esteem for those truly good men and women, with painful reflections
under the sense of my own infidelity, and secret wishes for that happy
condition, which, I really believed them to be established in, by Christ their
Redeemer and Sovereign.

My understanding was enlightened when very young, to see both my own
deficiencies in duty, and those of many others more advanced in years; and I
thought, if I lived to be a man, their harms should be my warnings.

I remember a worthy minister, Joseph Jordan from Virginia, having had the
smallpox at a friend's house in Kendal, and being raised up again; at the
first meeting which he got to after it, was drawn out in such a moving manner
in his ministry, that the meeting in general seemed to be impressed with great
tenderness under it: and I then (though but very young) had a share therein.
The desirableness of living so, as to obtain divine favor seemed to be very
clearly and strongly set before our view. And the opportunity had some good
effect upon my mind for a short season.

Here we may remark the advantage that accrues to religious society and to
meetings, where they are favored with a number of faithful elders, living
ministers, and spiritually-minded friends; men of truth, "fearing God and
hating covetousness." Exodus xviii. 21.
The liveliness of their spirits; the clearness of their sight, and the
uniformity of their conduct and conversation, qualify them to show the people
how they should walk in the pursuit of peace, both by precept and example;
precepts drawn from the living spring of experience, and examples formed by a
watchful attention to the pointings and limitations of truth. I remember some
whose very countenances seemed to command awe, and impress observers with
serious consideration. As the salt of the earth, seasoning those amongst whom
they walked, with a sense of the truth which lived and predominated in them;
under the powerful influence thereof these kept up meetings both for worship
and discipline, and were enabled thereby to keep things in good order, as
themselves were a good savor in their allotments. On the other hand we may
observe that where the elders and active friends are not under this
qualification; but under the form, are suffering their hearts to go after their
covetousness, secretly departing from under the influence of this divine
principle, the cause and prevalence of Truth too often decline amongst the
different ranks of the people, as in the day when a standard bearer faints.

My mother made it her maxim in h^^ plan of education to accustom her children
to useful employment, frugal fare, and to have our wills crossed, in order
hereby to render us better fitted to undergo any suture hardships in life, that
might be allotted to befall us. And I have reason to think that her cares and
endeavors, with the examples and labors of good friends, were to me as "bread
cast upon the waters," Eccl. ^1.1
which appeared after many days. In the intervals of school-hours she would be
for employing me in one useful occupation or other. This I thought a great
hardship; and being much mortified thereby, I exerted my wits to evade it,
often feigning pretenses of school-tasks and exercises, set me by my master,
and such like groundless excuses.

The great duty of education, to discharge it rightly, needs divine instruction
and assistance, as much as any duty in life, and therefore parents have need
fervently to pray for it, and faithfully to follow it when received. Otherwise
they may be in danger of falling short, and the deviations and miscarriages of
the children (at least in part) may lie at their doors.

But if my mother might seem to err on the one hand, viz. that of severity, it
is to be feared that the far greater number err on the other hand, viz. that of
indulgence and connivance: and that though the former be more painful for the
present, yet the latter generally proves more pernicious in its effects and
future consequences. I verily believe, I have enjoyed a better state of health,
from being brought up in a hardy way, as my constitution was but weak and
tender.

Upon a review of my state at this age, my recollection represents it as a
complication of ambition, envy, craft and deceit; but that even then, a divine
monitor was near me, to manifest and reprove the corruption of my heart, and
the evil of my ways. I was sensible of my mother's anxious care for my
preservation from evil, and attainment of good: but I eluded as much as I
could, the confinement which she thought conducive thereto, in keeping me under
her own eye, and out of the way of corrupting company. I loved liberty; I
fought it with eagerness, frequently got it by craft, and abused it to my hurt,
as unexperienced young people are too apt to do.

In this state, I well remember, I was afraid and ashamed to meet with good
friends, such as I yet loved and honored, being inwardly convicted from the
consciousness of my own vile and unguarded conduct. Sometimes I received from
some of them the reproof I deserved; and sometimes I thought their very silence
rebuked me. At other times in their company the love and desire of goodness
re-entered with a strong force. But being withdrawn therefrom, temptation too
often reinstated vice in its wonted seat in my heart, and in the direction of
my conduct.

I easily and clearly saw the wide difference betwixt good and bad company, and
how much the former was preferable; yet the powerful allurements of the latter
forcibly drew me into, and held me fast in a wretched captivity thereto,
manifestly contrary to my better judgment, which, I fear is the case of many
others.

There being a large body of friends in the county of Westmoreland and the
adjacent parts, our general meetings were many of them very largely attended;
and as it was the care of the elders, and other friends concerned for the
welfare of the youth, to encourage them very early to attend the meetings of
discipline for their improvement in virtue and sobriety; I attended many of
these large meetings, but too frequently without reaping any share of the real
benefit intended by them, or receiving any other impressions than those of
vanity and airy ambition: so that however such meetings were favored with
divine virtue and power, the dissipation and absence of my foolish roving mind
rendered it like the barren heath, not profiting by the fruitful shower, or
chearing beams of the sun.

And there is reason to fear, that this may be the case of too many young
people, who are pleased to go to these large meetings from other motives than
those of piety, who, forgetful of the intent and design of them, indulge their
corrupt inclinations in very unseasonable gaiety and What the faithful
laborers in the church endeavor to build up, these in their unguarded conduct
pull down, and sometimes bring reproach and disagreeable reflections on their
religious profession.

Whereas had these meetings been constantly beautified with an uniformity in
the conduct of professors, consistent with the divine principle of Truth and
the doctrines of its faithful ministers, they would have proved of much greater
service. For as the Truth is in itself unspotted, and its excellency
unchangeable, the glory and dignity thereof would have shined forth very
amiably and attractively in the eyes of the nations, had not the misconduct of
its professors too frequently and extensively eclipsed its genuine luster;
which merits the solid consideration of all, who have been educated, or have
joined in profession with us; both when they attend such meetings, and at all
other times.

(1727.) Being arrived at my fifteenth year, my mother was anxious to have me
put to some business. Through her persuasion my father in the course of his
travels, spoke to David Hall (the memoirs of whose life are extant, and for
whom my mother had an honorable esteem) and agreed with him to take me as
usher to his school, desiring no other terms for me but my board, and such
instruction as he might see I yet needed: which gave my mother great
satisfaction.

She accompanied me to his house at Skipton in Yorkshire. And here I
experienced the advantage of the education she had given me, for thereby I was
prepared to submit more willingly to continual employ and hardship. And though
many of the boys coming from full houses and plentiful tables, thought their
fare here mean (as indeed the price for both boarding and tuition, was but
eight pounds per annum) yet to me it was in general otherwise.

There happened to be in the family at this time two youths, whose cases or
events in life, I think not improper to mention by way of caution: but their
names I would wish to be buried in oblivion, unless they may yet be favored
with repentance to salvation.

The one was a lodger in the house. He was a valuable pattern and very helpful
in the family. I esteemed him to be in a happy condition, and still believe he
was so at that time. He had a few words in the ministry and grew in his gift;
but afterward becoming exalted, and too fond of applause, he fell into the
snares of the grand enemy, and brought a reproach on the Truth, and on the
ministry. What need has he that stands, or thinks he stands to take heed
lest lie fall!

The other was at that time an apprentice to David Hall. He was afterward a
minister well esteemed among many friends; but alas! he also shamefully fell.
And what renders the case of these my formerly well-beloved friends still more
melancholy, is, that though there is balm in Gilead, yet they and others, whom
the enemy has thus wounded, and poisoned, will not turn to the physician there,
but rather endeavor to have their wounds deceitfully healed.

I remember to have heard one, who had basely fallen in an unguarded hour,
boasting a few years after, that he had been washed in the bottom of Jordan,
and had brought up stones of memorial; and this in an affected ministerial way,
when it appeared not to be the case to any but himself: but rather that the
poor man was still under the deception of the crafty enemy, willing to deceive
himself, and wanting to deceive others, while he was at best but very
superficially washed from deep defilements. Judgment had not had its perfect
work, though he was very willing to think and to have it thought by others that
it had. And to evade that awful consideration, that the most pure and righteous
God is jealous of his honor, and requires our going clean through all that
humiliation, labor and patience, which his light in the conscience discovers
to be necessary for repairing the dishonor incurred. All palliations or
softening excuses; all arts to conciliate human compassion and favor, are but
like fig-leaf coverings, through which the nakedness of transgressors is
manifest to such as are endued with true sight, and like dawbing over
destructive breaches with untempered mortar. -- But enough of this digression,
wishing it may prove useful where needed.

(1728.) When I had stayed in my service at Skipton a little more than a year,
my master gave me leave to return to Kendal to see my relations. He made me the
bearer also of a letter to my father, wherein he signified, that considering my
years, he approved of my qualifications and conduct, and offered wages for my
future service. My mother took little notice of the offer; but was exceedingly
rejoiced at the other part of the letter as giving her better hopes on my
behalf than she hitherto had.

In the course of the succeeding year, by agreement between my father and my
master, I spent three months with Richard Kennedy writing master in Liverpool,
to improve myself in writing, and learn some branches of the mathematics. One
seventh day while here, I (having always a great propensity to see towns and
places that were new to me) went to see the city of Chester, and lodged two
nights at Peter Leadbetter's; in my return by Fastham Ferry, which is five
miles athwart to Liverpool, an elderly gentlewoman having got some play-books
in the boat, I offered to read for her: as I was reading, some horses in the
boat grew unruly, which terrified her very much; so that she put by her
play-books, and would no more (while we were in the boat) touch them herself,
nor suffer me to touch one of them.

Many remarkable preservations I had in my younger days: but the most
remarkable was during this my residence at Liverpool which happened as follows.
One first day in the afternoon I went with some other boys a boating in the
dock, which by means of floodgates was kept so full of water as to keep the
ships afloat, when the tide was out. We rowed several times from one end of the
dock to the other At length some rude boys, that were stronger than we took
from us our oar, or oars, and this in all probability proved the means of our
preservation. For now we found ourselves obliged to work our way with our hands
by the ships to the upper end of the dock. Which just as we reached, we heard a
noise as of the loudest thunder: climbing up from the boat unto the quay, we
soon found that the dock gates being grown old were broken down. The water
rushing out in a rapid torrent, bore down all before it, oversetting and
greatly damaging several vessels that lay near them. The frightful nearness of
such a danger, and narrow escape from it so affected my mind, as to invade my
sleep that night, and repeat itself again to my imagination with aggravations
of horror.

At the expiration of my three months here, I went to Kendal yearly meeting,
where my father, being just arrived from a journey, in which he had made his
way through Skipton, informed me that he had agreed with David Hall to bind me
to him for four years longer; this was no agreeable intelligence to me, for
although I honored my worthy master, yet every thing else was not as I could
wish it. I thought I could foresee much hardship to be unavoidably my lot: yet
as my father had so agreed, I thought it my duty to comply. I endeavored to
put a good heart and face upon it, and so entered upon my part. During these
four years my master was frequently abroad at meetings. He did not often miss
the quarterly meetings at York, and sometimes attended the yearly meeting at
London, and then the care of the scholars in and out of school lay heavy on me.

Both before my coming to Skipton, and while I was there, I often had fresh
desires kindled in my heart after redemption, I was shown clearly the necessity
of it, and the danger of delays in a matter of such consequence; so that I left
off playing for a time, thinking it great infatuation to squander my precious
hours in play, when in danger of my life, and that too for ever. But the most
particular reach I had, was at a meeting in our school-house under the
baptizing ministry of John Fothergill, whereby I was awakened to vigilance for
a season, rising early, and carefully attending to every step in my business,
and the duties of my station. But soon, too soon, the fervor of this sacred
flame abated, and I gradually fell back, and became just what I was before: yet
I did not forget or wholly lose the sense of this day of my visitation; but
often privately lamented my revolt, and I continued still to maintain a good
character amongst friends.

I do not remember much more than what I have already intimated in general of
these four years, save that one time, when my master was abroad, I thought
myself hardly and unreasonably used, and thereupon conceived a design to run
away by night (it being moonlight:) but that kind Providence whose fatherly
care was over me, when I was too little careful for my own well-doing,
withheld me. For when the time proposed for putting my design in execution
arrived, the pernicious consequences of such a procedure, were so clearly
manifested to my mind, that I was discouraged from the attempt; and therefore
concluded patiently to endure what might be permitted to befall me, till the
termination of the time contracted for, might bring me my release in a
reputable and conscientious way.

Near the expiration of my time I writ to some of my friends, acquainting them,
that I intended to try some new place, and received a letter from my good
friend John Wilson of Kendal, signifying that Alexander Arscott of Bristol
wanted an usher, and offered twenty pounds per ann. Which offer I readily
embraced.

(1733.) So leaving Skipton, and the yearly meeting at Kendal approaching, I
went thither, staid a few days with my mother, and then set forward for
Bristol. In my way at Wolverhampton, standing at the door of the inn where I
alighted, I saw a crowd of people passing by, and heard it was a Quaker's
funeral; whereupon I went to it, and our friend Joshua Toft (whom I do not
remember to have seen before) attended it, and was raised up in a large and
living testimony, whereby I was afresh reached, and considerably tendered, and
thence proceeded on my way, under revived impressions of good upon my mind, to
Worcester; there I met with William Beesly going to Bristol yearly meeting,
with whom I went in company to Gloucester, but my horse being tired I was
forced to leave him behind, and walk the greatest part of the remainder of the
way in my boots. In a few weeks after, that worthy minister and elder John
Richandson of Yorkshire landed, in company with Robert Jordan from
Pennsylvania, who bought my horse for the same price it cost me.

My good master Alexander Arscott was like a kind and tender father to me. He
was the eldest son of the parson of Southmolton in Devonshire, and himself
educated at the university of Oxford, with intention to sit him for the same
function. But when he was just ripe for preferment, and might have had a fair
prospect that way, his father being well beloved and respected among the great
men in that country; he turned his back on all prospects of this kind, being
convinced of the blessed truth. This was a great mortification to his father
and mother, who would both sit weeping by him in the bitterness of their
hearts, as I have heard him relate. This, he added pierced him deeply, as he
sincerely desired to be a dutiful son to tender and indulgent parents. A cloud
came over his understanding, and the enemy in his own breast suggested that he
was acting quite wrong. But as he humbled himself before the Most High,
imploring his direction, he received a fresh sight that he must forsake father
and mother for Christ, and be faithful to the manifestation of his will,
through all events. His parents became afterward better reconciled to his
change, when he was settled in good business in Bristol, where he kept school
for the children of friends and others, from that time till his decease, being
about thirty-five years, and proved helpful to the rest of his father's family,
in procuring them by his interest, places for getting a livelihood.

I came up to Bristol quite plain in my garb (as David Hall would not suffer
any other in his family) and it being the time of the yearly meeting, at a
friend's house I fell in company with some well-minded friends, one or more of
whom observed to me, that sundry young people had come up the same way from the
north of England to the southern parts, particularly to London and Bristol; yet
after being there a while they ran into the fashions of those places, till they
even outstripped the native inhabitants.

Now I had not only been educated in plainness; but had been inwardly convinced
of the foundation on which it stood; wherefore upon hearing this account of the
ridiculous folly and instability of my country folks, I was sorry that they
gave occasion of such remarks to their dishonor, and took up a resolution to
continue steady in my old plain way. And I do not know that I suffered any
external disadvantage by it: and if I had, the cause of truth is worth
suffering for, and the Almighty rewards patient suffering in a good cause. But
I found that good friends seemed to love me the more on this account; and even
others, who were conscious of their degeneracy seemed to respect me, as
apprehending me to be better than themselves: And I had most peace of mind in
continuing in my wonted plainness, though I was like a speckled bird, there
being even then very few plain-drest young people or others in the meeting of
Bristol. But I have observed that deviating from this path of plainness, which
Truth leads into, and making excursions in dress, opens the way to intimate
connection with young people out of our society, or libertines in it; and so
leads further and further from a due subjection to Christ's kingdom and
government, often making them forget and lose the good which they have formerly
possessed, and consequently draws them along into the utmost danger. Whereas
adhering to the truth and its plain path, opens the way for safer and more
profitable and edifying connexions as I often found here, to my solid inward
satisfaction, which I hope I shall never forget.

Being now removed far from all my connexions, my parents, relations and the
place of my nativity; and being here as a stranger in a strange land, having at
first little or no acquaintance in my new residence; in this my solitary
situation it pleased divine Goodness to take notice of me, and to favor me
afresh with a merciful and reaching visitation of his love to my soul, and more
clearly to reveal his Son in me, whereby I was given plainly to see, that my
safety here and happiness hereafter, depended upon my yielding faithful
obedience to his requirings by his light in my heart, and that his requirings
would be only what tended to my real good, and lasting welfare.

This was a day of my soul's espousal to Christ Jesus. I was overcome with his
love, and with admiration of his condescending goodness to such an unworthy
creature; it being the day of the Lord's power, I was ready and willing to do
any thing that I saw I should or ought to do.

Having a strong inclination to poetry, I had sometimes at Skipton indulged my
fancy therein. But now when the Lord's power took hold of me, I sacrificed all
my idols and burned all my collection of poems, even though some of them were
on what would be called good subjects; yet they had too much attracted my mind,
and engrossed my thoughts. I was made sensible that these poems were not my
proper business, yet they took the place of what was really so, and therefore I
gave them up. For I now saw that I must shut out and leave behind me what
others generally crave and pursue, viz. The vain desires and delights, which
lead away the mind from that great Being, who wooes us to true happiness.

And indeed my whole delight was in the company of Christ my dear Lord and
master. I was directed by him to do all things well, and bear all things with
meekness. And as I on my part carefully regarded and practiced his directions,
my soul enjoyed the sweet sense of his approbation. And I preferred it before
all the world, which I saw to be of little value compared with the favor of
its Almighty Creator. To please him I thought well worth all the toil and
suffering of the day; and the desire of doing it, whetted my industry and
strengthened my patience. Thus I enjoyed a good time, and was often overcome
with the love and kindness of my dear Redeemer.

For in him I had now a father, a guardian, and a friend, and an excellent one
indeed, who embraced me with the most engaging affection, when I applied myself
to do every thing rightly. All friends and relations, with all kinds of
enjoyments seemed to center in him alone, for he alone amply supplied all, and
having him was having every thing that was good. In his presence there could be
no want. It was then no hard matter for me to deny every natural and corrupt
desire, as for his sake; and to renounce the objects which had formerly pleased
me too well, and which I had been foolishly fond of: and yet for the rejection
of these things, which had done me no good, but harm, I ever found him a rich
rewarder.

In his presence I could envy no man, however rich, eminent or seemingly happy;
but I loved all men as his workmanship, and wished that all would come to him,
and in and with him be truly happy for ever.

Then bidding farewell to the world and its vanities, whose beauty and alluring
luster were tarnished and eclipsed in my eyes, through the superior brightness
of the Sun of Righteousness shining in my heart, I loved solitude that I might
seek him, who was now become the life of my life, and wait for his fresh
appearing to me, who brought with him not only light to show me my blemishes
and defects, but animating fortitude, fervent desire, and divine help to
withstand and surmount corrupt habits and propensities, and vigilantly in the
secret of the soul to guard against the first rising of any imagination, or
inclination, that was not consistent with the pure holy discoveries of his
blessed spirit. Thus with the royal Psalmist, Psalm. xvi. 11. "In his presence I
found fullness of joy." My mind was molded into a divine frame, a new creation
of pure love to God and to men, wherein the heavens and the earth in a sweet
harmony, seemed to show forth the power, wisdom and goodness of the one good
Father and preserver of the whole. I rejoiced that I had lived to see such a
day, wherein I had a sure evidence in my own bosom of being translated to a
better world, to live for ever united to him and his, if I should then be
snatched from this.

Happy had it been for me, had I still thus continued steady in my progress
toward perfection, through following his guidance toward it: but being in a
great city, I sometimes looked out, and thereby again catched sensual desires,
which demanded to be gratified, and were too often obeyed, when in my power, by
which I again did harm to myself, and gave away my inward strength and
fortitude for walking faithfully, as Sampson gave away his to Delilah; yet I
still bore a good character, and many looked upon me as a young man of steady
conduct; but by a painful feeling of my own instability I knew myself better.

A good condition is easily lost, for want of duly observing our blessed Lord's
direction to watch and pray, lest we enter into temptation. -- While I observed
it, I daily and hourly found the benefit of it, in my rising up and laying
down, and on my bed in the night season, having my heart and affections wholly
set on Christ, and the great end of his having given me existence, blessing his
name for so revealing his goodness to me, renewing covenant with him, and
watching against every thought that had a tendency to carry off my mind, and
separate it from him.

I rose early, implored him to direct me how to spend every part of the day,
most to the honor of his name; and to aid me to exert myself in the full
discharge of my duty every way, and oh! many times in the day, great peace and
solid satisfaction flowed in my soul for attending to and following his
internal directions. -- Every thing went well and in proper order, through this
constant care to walk exemplarily, and act faithfully in the duties of my place
and station in life. And many times in the evening of a well-spent day, my soul
overflowed with the sweet earnests of the heavenly and everlasting reward,
reserved for perseverance in well-doing.

Sometimes to every body that I saw, I felt great love to rise in my heart, and
a tender well-wishing desire for them, that their souls might partake with mine
of the hidden treasures of the unutterable love of Christ, and the joy of his
salvation.

May I never forget the day of this his most engaging kindness, and of my
espousals to him. I may say truth is truth, unchangeably excellent, holy, pure
and perfectly good. It leads to every thing that is ^est, and ^pholds in it,
and rewards for every act and instance of self-denial in obedience to its
dictates. Ever worthy to be admired, adored, reverenced, loved and served by
all the nations in the world, as that which alone would make all happy in true
love, and preserve all in pure and spotless order every where. So would earth
resemble heaven, and its inhabitants be linked in a holy, blessed society with
Christ, with angels and the spirits of the just made perfect, in enjoying
together the brightness of his presence, in whose presence is joy and at whose
right hand are rivers of pleasure for evermore. For this our Lord prayed to his
father on behalf of his disciples; sanctify them through thy truth, thy word is
truth.

I continued in Bristol upwards of four years, living with my worthy master,
for whom I had a great and deserved esteem, as assistant or usher in his school
to the time of his death, which happened the latter end of my fourth year
there, he being seized with a diabetes, which gradually weakened him, till at
last in a sweet frame of mind he departed this life, generally regretted by
friends and others, having been a man remarkably serviceable, not only as a
member of religious, but also of civil society. His character for integrity
being so universal, that he was very much employed in determining differences
between his fellow citizens either as arbitrator or umpire. So that to the
blessing of the peacemaker he might seem to have a title above most. His
funeral from the Friars Meeting House was attended by a very great number of
friends and others. Four friends appeared publicly to a very crowded audience,
viz. James Tylee, Daniel Badger, Isaac Sharpless and Thomas Gawthrop. The next
day the men's meeting elected Jonathan Nelson schoolmaster of Reading to
succeed him, and desired me to keep up the school till it might be convenient
for said Jonathan to come, which I did, and at his coming resigned it to him.

(1737.) Being informed that friends at Cork in Ireland wanted a schoolmaster,
I agreed to go thither to serve them in that capacity; so calling to see and
take leave of my brother, who lived with Thomas Bennet at Pickwick in Wiltshire
in the station of usher to his school, I went from thence to Gloucester and was
at the two meetings there on first day, which were poor small meetings. On
second day I rid to Worcester, and stayed there at my kind friend William
Beesley's over third day. The weekday meeting there, was to me a tendering
season both in silence, and under the lively ministry of old John Corbyn;
toward the week's end I reached Kendal, where I stayed two or three weeks;
during which stay, my father took a fever and died. A day or two after his
funeral, I left Kendal and returned to Bristol, from whence, after waiting
sometime for a wind, I took shipping for Cork, in company with doctor Rutty of
Dublin, who had been at the yearly meeting in London, and amongst his relations
in Wiltshire and was also waiting for a passage to Cork.

I was affected with an awful impression on my first embarking; it put me on
considering on what foundation I ventured my life upon the water. On that head
I was soon favored with inward satisfaction, and resignation to divine
Providence.

The wind being unfavourable we had a very tedious passage, being ten days on
the water from Pill to the Cove of Cork. It was late at night when we landed at
Cove, and next morning went up in a boat to Cork, where I lodged about two
weeks at Jonas Devonsher's, (a friend of a large estate) his two sons being
under my tuition, and afterward boarded in a friend's family till I married.

The meetings of friends in Ireland, and particularly in the province of
Munster, not lying so contiguous as in many parts of England, could not so
conveniently be joined several together, to constitute monthly or men's
meetings of discipline for transacting the affairs of the church, but in these
parts particularly, each particular meeting was a men's meeting in itself, and
some of the meetings both hereaway and in other parts, being greatly reduced in
number, it became the concern of friends in Ireland to recommend, to the larger
meetings nearest to them, the care of visiting these little meetings
frequently, to inspect their state, and help them by advice and counsel as
occasion might require. Two of these meetings, viz. these of Bandon and Youghal
were under the care of Cork men's meeting, which was regular and constant in
appointing visits to them at the stated times.

I being now become a member of Cork men's meeting, (being recommended by
certificate from Bristol) it fell to my lot in company with other friends to go
upon a visit to the meeting of Youghal: here seeing Mary the daughter of John
and Martha Dobbs of said town, a plain and orderly young woman, I found my
affections closely engaged toward her, and having proposed to her parents my
desire to address her in order to marriage, and obtained their consent, after
some time we were married there according to the good order used in our society.

The said John Dobbs her father being convinced of the truth, while he was a
student at the university of Oxford, was for his fidelity to conviction
disinherited by his father Richard Dobbs of Castle. Dobbs near Carrickfergus
Esquire of an estate worth several hundreds per ann. being his eldest son.

His father left it to a younger son, who was to pay my father-in-law ten
pounds per ann. out of it, which during the lifetime of that son was but
indifferently paid, and by his prodigality the estate was involved. But his son
Arthur Dobbs, late governor of North Carolina, succeeding to the inheritance
thereof, voluntarily doubled the said annual sum, and paid it punctually. My
father-in-law having studied physic at the college, practiced it with good
success, and great Christian charity to the poor, so as to save little from his
income that way.

He had been the favorite of the family, but upon his joining in society with
friends, and giving up his whole heart to follow the discoveries of the light
of Christ in his own conscience, he was treated by his father with the utmost
severity as a rebel, and then cast out as an alien. So that he might well be
said to have forsaken for Christ's sake, father and brethren, and sisters, and
houses, and lands; and like faithful Abraham to have offered up to the Lord
whatever was dearest to him in this world, and to have trusted in God, which
was doubtless counted to him for righteousness.

Being beloved by friends, he was urged by some to have recourse to the law for
the recovery of the family estate as his birthright, which he had done nothing
to forfeit, and assistance offered him for doing it. Whereupon he was prevailed
with at length to make a beginning; but not having that inward peace with
Christ which he preferred before all the world, in the first step of
contention, he put a stop to all further proceedings, and rather chose to
confide in God without it.

For a more particular account of him, see the collection of friends'
sufferings in folio, vol. 2, and doctor Ratty's History of the Rise and
Progress of Truth in Ireland. Of him I have only to add, that he made a joyful
and happy exit, in an exceeding thankful and triumphant state, out of this
world, with a full assurance of going to live for ever in a better. He died
about seven or eight months after our marriage.

His wife Martha Dobbs was convinced of truth before their marriage, by the
dying expressions of a handmaid of the Lord, viz. Deborah Sandham. She had a
few words of public testimony in meetings, survived her husband some years, and
died in a good old age, having been a heavenly-minded woman.

Previous to my marriage, a small lot of ground offering for building on, which
was very convenient to my school, and the carpenter reckoning he could run up a
neat small house for a sum I could then spare, (having in my employment in
Bristol and here saved so much) I adventured in conjunction with a friend, to
take the ground and build upon it, and the house was finished a few weeks after
our marriage; but the cost of it came to double the sum the carpenter had
proposed it might be built for. This and some other things filled me with
gloomy apprehensions, and I became very dull and dejected in my mind in
consideration of my circumstances, finding I had gone too far, and owed what I
was not able to pay. However, as my intentions were honest, and my anxiety
great that I might not by any misconduct blemish the truth, which I had been
instructed so highly to prize, by exerted endeavors, with industry and
frugality, and through divine assistance, in some time I got over this
difficulty, and paid every farthing.

It may perhaps appear to some, that the recording of such transactions, is of
little importance or edification to uninterested readers; but it has not
appeared so to me. The account of these difficulties which for want of due care
and foresight, and a constant, steady and deep attention to the unerring guide,
we fall into, though more humiliating, may perhaps be no less useful for
caution, than those experiences, which we can review with more heartfelt
satisfaction, are for encouragement and imitation. Truth has ever led to
integrity, punctuality and upright dealing in our outward affairs, and to limit
ourselves to few exigencies, and an humble condition in life, rather than
invade or risque the properties of other men. We cannot all get a deal of the
treasures of this world (nor is a deal necessary to our well being. A man's
life consists not in the abundance of the things he possesses) but we may
all live on a little, if our minds be kept humble, and the sensual appetites be
subjected to the cross of Christ. Now my view in relating how I was
(undesignedly indeed) involved in embarrassed circumstances, is for a caution
to unexperienced young persons, to be very considerate and careful in their
expenses, that they be neither lavished on things needless or superfluous, nor
in things otherwise convenient and lawful, in a measure disproportionate to
their ability to support clearly out of their own, with honor, reputation and
a good conscience; (for in this circumstance things lawful in themselves are
not lawful or expedient for them) that so the profession of truth may not
suffer reproach by their miscarriage, as it has done by that of too many
others, to the great regret of the honest and right-minded of our religious
society.

Furthermore, the narrative of these difficulties and anxieties, that attended
my first setting out in the married state, seems to me to convey this
instructive intelligence to all single young persons, who have not good
patrimonies, or are not yet well settled in some business, proper to maintain a
family, that if they would do well in the world, they should not be hasty in
this weighty affair; but consider wisely before they proceed toward it. While
single they have only themselves to care for, and if they keep their hearts
staid upon the Lord (which is far easier for them to do, than when weighed down
under a load of care and encumbrances) and come up faithfully in the way of
their duty, they will be happy. And by all means let them beware of entering
into this most interesting engagement, which is for life, on which the
happiness or unhappiness of this life very principally depends, and by which
that of the next may be very materially promoted or retarded, till they see
that in the due season the Lord opens their way, and conducts them in it. Then
the marriage will be honorable, the married will be like minded, standing in
the counsel of best wisdom, will be truly helpmeets to each other both in their
temporal and spiritual concerns; joining together with united and prepared
hearts in religious and family duties, and strengthening each others hands for
every good word and work; minding the in-speaking word, more than the attention
or opinions, the approbation or censures of the world. Such if they have but
little of earthly treasure are happily married. But on any other terms, whether
married or unmarried, people are not in a good way. And it is infinitely better
to be married to Christ, than to be married ever so grandly in the world out of
the divine counsel and covenant.

As I had a religious desire in my choice, and that I might be rightly directed
therein, I had reason on the whole (notwithstanding these outward
discouragements aforementioned) to hope that I was so. For my wife was the
child of good parents, from whom she had received a religious education, of
orderly conversation, innocent and well inclined, and we were in a good degree
favored together of the Lord, she being free to give me up to every service I
thought it my duty to engage in. Upon my first visit to her* the sense of truth
and the solid edifying conversation of her worthy parents deeply fixed the best
impressions on my spirit, so that in my return home to Cork (twenty computed
miles) my thankful heart was like a cup filled, the tears of divine joy
overflowed, and ran down my cheeks the greatest part of the way. -- In this
thankful frame I reached Cork, and my friends there, who generally had a love
for me, were pleased to see me, and to hear such account as I had to give. But
then this good went off, and the instability of nature succeeded in a great
degree, though still mixed, with a reverent view to the better part.

(1739.) About four months after our marriage, being at a meeting at Youghal,
my heart was bowed in reverent fear, and filled with the sweet influence of
God's universal love, it then appeared to be my duty, in the clearness of that
light and strength of that love, to call to, and invite those present to come
to Christ, and yield grateful obedience to his laws. I had been for several
years before, fully persuaded that this would be required of me as a duty, and
had desired never to dare to venture upon it till it should be so required.

Upon this duty being clearly presented to me in this meeting, discouragements
and obstacles poured into my mind in abundance, such as that if I should
deliver the words impressed, I should then be exposed to much speculation, and
become the immediate subject of conversation among such as love to catch and
propagate matter of amusement; that perhaps the like duty might never be
required of me again, and in that case I should be likely to be remarked, and
talked of for many years, as one who had begun and not gone on. Instances
occurred of such as had preached amongst us for a time, and had either dropped
it and fallen away, or had on one account or another, incurred a public and
general dislike or disgrace, and that therefore it might be safer and better
for me to rest quiet with good wishes for the people, and to exhort in a more
private way, as I might have opportunity, and a fresh concern on my mind. These
grounds of hesitation detained me till a friend kneeled down to conclude the
meeting in prayer.

I then saw clearly that if the meeting should break up without my uttering the
exhortation, which was fixed with so much weight upon my mind, I should
unavoidably incur the stings of conscious guilt, and the crime of disobedience.

Therefore not attending to the friend's public prayer, my mind was earnestly
and closely exercised in mental supplication to the Almighty, that he would
abilitate me to be faithful. I had a hard struggle and conflict on this
occasion: but at length the power of divine faith prevailed, to the shutting
out and putting to silence all manner of discouraging apprehensions. And when
the prayer was ended I durst not sit down, fearing I should not have power to
rise again in time; but turning about to the meeting, and seeing some of the
people staring me in the face, such was my weakness, that I raised up my hat,
and holding it before my face, I spoke the words, which had lain with weight on
my mind and sat down. A flood of divine joy poured into my heart, and filled it
all the day: I went in this frame of mind into several friends' families, and
my heart being still melted with divine love, the tears of joy and thankfulness
slowed down my cheeks, which some ignorantly mistook for trouble of mind,
saying one to another, they pitied me.

It was indeed a memorable day to me: for I seemed to myself to be raised above
the sordid and sinful inhabitants of this world, and to be admitted a partner
of the blessed society of saints and angels, and spirits of just men made
perfect through entire obedience rendered to their God.

I had a full assurance in myself that if then sudden death should seize me, I
should immediately go to that blessed society, to live in a holy and happy
communion with them for ever, to adore that God and Sovereign, who had so
infinitely favored us. And this is the very nature of that truly excellent
religion, which our dear Redeemer came to bless mankind with.

I might give some small account of services, and good effects, arising from my
thus obeying the divine manifestation; but accounts of that kind I leave to
those, who have steered more steadily than I have done, and think it more
proper for me to look to the other side of my case, and that with shame and
confusion of heart, mixed with humble admiration of divine Goodness, which has
hitherto indeed been great, and blessed me with a few heavenly and good days,
wherein I should not have been afraid of death, or of the awful and tremendous
judgment which is to follow it. Oh! that I may (through faithfulness on my
part) attain the like again, and that my last day may be my best day! But alas,
a consciousness of infidelity in diverse respects is my present

(...) It is lamentable to reflect how many in our age, even of the anointed
sons, and servants of the Lord, have by these means gradually declined and
dwindled, and at length totally fallen off, as Judas did from Christ, and Demas
from his faithful apostle, and made shipwreck of faith and of a good
conscience, and brought lasting disgrace on themselves, and that good cause, in
which they had been humbly and honestly engaged. Yet truth changes not; it is
the same still, and still able to preserve from falling, to build up, and give
an inheritance among the sanctified.

I remember that the above considerations made me earnestly pray, that since I
had given up, and put my hand to the plough, I might never look back to Sodom
again, like Lot's wife; but rather suffer any thing in this world, than
disgrace the cause of truth and righteousness.

Encouraged as above, I proceeded to minister in public meetings when I had
something given for that end, through which exercise my gift became gradually
enlarged. But alas! I too often made false steps in my public ministry, as well
as in my thoughts, words and actions in private conduct, for want of self-love
being more mortified, and subjected to the spirit of Christ, which teaches
divine wisdom.

Being of an active natural disposition, it became a cross to me to be silent,
when it was best to be so. And sometimes after I stood up I continued too long,
till the testimony as to the life of it, flattened and grew tedious to the
hearers. I wanted too to imitate some others, who, I thought, preached finely.
Thus the enemy of man's happiness continually seeks to tempt every class in the
church militant. As the eye is kept single to the holy Head, and the body full
of light, in the light he is discovered in all his approaches and
transformations; but I was not constantly enough on my guard against his
stratagems, and therefore was sometimes seduced even to think I did well, when
I was zealous, though not according to true knowledge, nor to the honor of the
great name of Christ our Lord: for he is most honored by the subjection of
self; and by divine love, coupled with humility and patience.

Among the many good institutions which the discoveries of celestial wisdom
have established in our society, that of faithful elders appointed to watch
over the flock, and over the ministry, has been found to be very useful. And
though the love of self-honour made me sometimes bear hardly the reproof of a
friend; yet I have afterward, as in the cool of the day, discerned the
expediency of it, and been induced to desire to be more careful in future, and
to be willing to receive advice, as well as to give it.

O ye, whom Christ calls into the work of the ministry, or any other office,
give up your lives to him and it, both to do and to suffer what he may order or
permit: for the vessels of the Lord's house are to be of beaten gold. Every son
whom he loves he rebukes and chastens. Then ever receive with a good mind the
counsel or the reproof of a friend.

If others revile and taunt in bitterness and wrath; in haughtiness and insult,
as whoever will live godlily in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution; yet all
things will work together for good to them that steadily abide under Christ's
government. -- Our nature having in it much dross, and by long habit
contracting an increase of it, cannot be refined from it, but by fiery trials,
nor have its evil humors purged out, but by drinking the bitter cup. --
Applause pleases the creature, but greatly endangers it. Suffering in spirit,
though more painful, is more safe.

O then ye! who have rightly begun, and favorably advanced in the work of
truth or of the ministry, look well to your standing, and guard against the
transformations of your unwearied enemy.

When we first began, our single view and desire was to obtain divine
approbation, and that peace of soul, which results from it; to die to ourselves
and all the world; to know no man after the flesh, nor be known by them; but
only to know the Lord, and to walk and act under his immediate notice and
approving favor. -- But afterward there has mingled herewith, the desire of
human notice, of popular applause, of worldly advantages and indulgences.

Thus too many ministers, as well as others, who have given up their names to
follow the Lamb, have slipped into a mixed state. In them the spring once pure,
has become muddy, and the sacred fervor has dwindled. Though they have
retained the form of godliness, yet its conquering power and fortitude have
gradually died away, and left them as weak, and unable to resist temptations,
as those who have never assumed that form.

This has been the case of too many dry worldlings and sensualists in our
society, who, far from helping the cause, which they professed a value for, have
greatly hurt it, and given a handle to libertines to make both it and them, the
subject of their derision.

When the humble regard and love of God singly presided in my heart, then I
have been disposed to receive the advice or the rebuke of a friend in the love
in which it was given, and to bear with Christian meekness, the taunts and
insults of insensible hearts and unguarded lips undisturbed thereby: but when I
have slid off this foundation, then they have discomposed my mind, and agitated
it with selfish and uneasy resentments.

I have not so often met with this kind of returns to my ministry, as applause,
which indeed is an intoxicating and pernicious cup for any to drink without
great fear. It ferments the spirits with a false alacrity; elevates the mind
with self-conceit, and an imagined superiority to others, leads into an evil
emulation, and even to slight those who are in a much better state, by dwelling
in the valley of humility, subject to Christ the beloved of their souls.

How hard for the creature not to be pleased with praise, and to offer it to
him, to whom alone it is due! or after being at any time signally honored, to
return like Mordecai dismounted, stripped of the royal robes, and to sit in a
silent, abject condition at the king's gate, waiting on him in poverty of
spirit.

As applause is dangerous, so the affections of the people, if not kept under
proper government, both by the minister and his hearers, have a snare in them,
as indeed has every object of our senses, without maintaining an inward
watchfulness; these things not being the proper mark or prize of a minister or
a christian. It is base to play the harlot with corrupt self, and deck it with
the Lord's jewels. For if we take these rewards of our labors, we are in
danger of losing that which he gives to the faithful, which is the one true and
durable reward.

The spirit of the gospel directs us, to submit ourselves, or give way, one to
another, to be abased, and prefer others; the strong to take the weak by the
hand, and all to imitate the holy pattern of Christ, who was meek and lowly in
heart, and stooped to wash the feet even of his disciples and servants.

It was he by his spirit, that not only raised up a living ministry in our
society, but by the same spirit animated our faithful predecessors to establish
a salutary discipline therein, upon the same foundation; and raised up and
gifted men and women for valuable services, conducing to the edification and
strengthening of one another in piety. Often have I sat in meetings of
discipline greatly humbled, tendered and revived in my spirit, with fresh
resolution to renew diligence in my journey heavenward.

One branch of this discipline, viz. the institution of meetings of ministers
and elders, I highly regarded. For when we have (in a sense of our entire
inability without his help) prostrated ourselves together before the most high
God, he has graciously vouchsafed to open the living springs of counsel,
suitable to the several states and stations present, tending to stir up to
diligence and devotedness in his service, and pointing out livelily in the
opening of gospel light, the snares and dangers waylaying the spiritual
traveller in his journey.

Often have these meetings, when we have been thus prepared for them, cemented
us together in an humble engagement of soul toward God. Tender love has
abounded, which has made us dear one to another, as children of one family,
and fellow laborers in the highest and best cause. Christ our Lord has
favored us with his presence, and sovereign power, and made us partakers
together of his heart-tendering goodness, and of a near communion, and divine
fellowship with him through his spirit, and with each other therein, to the
renewing our ardent concern for the honor of his name, and the promotion of
his truth.

But when this preparation has been wanting, and inattention and absence of
mind have taken place, then we have been barren as the dry heath; and like the
earth, covered with darkness, without form and void, when the spirit of the
Lord moved not on the face of the waters. Both the immediate and instrumental
springs of lively and clear counsel and consolation have been closed up, and
the edification and watering of the flock withheld. This has caused living
zeal, and even the attendance of them to decay, and to yield to temporal
affairs and temptations, to the hurt and loss of many.

May these considerations move both ministers and elders more particularly, to
seek after the preparations requisite for their assembling in the name and
power of Christ, and under a renewed concern for their individual preservation,
as well as for that of their brethren and sisters, that they may thereby be
comfortably enlivened, and enliven one another to all goodness, as men and
women redeemed from the world, and fellow-citizens of the New Jerusalem. Then,
of great and valuable benefit indeed, would these solemn meetings be, as
heretofore, when faithful laborers in the Lord's service, dignified, adorned
and upheld them.

When I had resided about three years in Ireland, my brother John, whom I left
in the service of Thomas Bennett, at Pick wick, Wilts, as noticed before, being
desirous to fix his residence in the same nation at least with me, at the
expiration of his fourth year there, resigned his place of usher to that
school, in order to remove to Ireland, and going first to see our mother (and
relations) at Kendal, she concluded to accompany him in order to pay us a visit
of a few weeks, and about the middle of the summer 1740, they both arrived at
Cork. After about five weeks abode with us, my mother inclined to return home;
and I having a concern on my mind to visit my native country in the service of
Truth, and my brother's arrival opening the way to set me at liberty; he
willingly taking charge of my school in my absence, I concluded to accompany my
mother in her return: and having laid my concern before the men's meeting and
obtained their certificate, and soon meeting with a vessel bound to Whitehaven,
we embarked therein, and had a favorable passage, being only about forty-eight
hours from port to port.

This journey took me up about five weeks, in which time I visited the meetings
of friends p^^tty generally through the counties of Cumberland, Westmoreland
and Lancashire, and part of the north of Yorkshire, being frequently much
favored by the master of our assemblies, and often enlarged in the love of the
gospel amongst my former relations, friends and neighbors, who were many of
them glad to see me, and with many of whom I was nearly united in the unity of
the one spirit, the bond of peace.

Here a sheet of the original is lost, which I have not been able to recover; I
regret the loss not only as it occasions a chasm in the narration; but by the
recollection I have of my brother's epistolary and verbal relations of this
journey, I apprehend, we are deprived of sundry occurrences, worthy of
preserving. One in particular I have heard him on his return (and at other
times) relate in terms so lively and affecting, as indicated it had fixed a
deep impression on his mind: so that, I think he would not pass it unnoticed,
and that we have lost it in this missing sheet. When he came to Pardshaw
meeting in Cumberland; he received intelligence that our ancient valuable
friend, that faithful minister of the gospel in his day, James Dickenson, was
then confined by sickness, and apparently near his conclusion, whereupon he
went to pay him a visit, and found him in such an happy, heavenly frame of
mind, as made the opportunity very tenderly affecting and edifying; raised
above the world he was departing from, and well prepared for that celestial
mansion, he was favored with a lively hope of being shortly admitted into; in
this his concluding scene, amongst other affecting expressions he related of
his, I recollect the following, in purport, I have served the Lord and his
truth in my generation, and now I feel the blessed reward thereof: the accuser
of the brethren is cast down as to me, and my peace with God is sealed for
ever. This, he related* was delivered in such a feeling, powerful and affecting
manner as greatly tendered his spirit, and left the best impressions upon ^t,
animating him to fresh and ardent desires, so to fulfill his ministry, and walk
through life, as that he might die the death of the righteous, and that his
last end might be like his. And indeed what scene in this life more dignifies
humanity? What school is more profitably instructive than the deathbed of the
righteous, impressing the understanding with a convincing evidence, that they
have not followed cunningly-^evised fab^es, but solid, substantial truth. That
there is a measure of divine light and grace in man, which if duly minded and
obeyed, is sufficient to preserve through all the vicissitudes in life, to give
him the victory over his spiritual enemies, and i^ the end over death, hell,
and the grave.
In particular I was at a general meeting at Crook, about four miles from
Kendal, which was eminently favored, and after it, went to lodge at Lydia
Lancaster's, a valuable minister, and a mother in Israel. Next morning went to
their meeting at Colthouse near Hawkshead, and after meeting went to William
Rawlinson's to lodge. Next morning in very wet stormy weather, I went to Height
meeting. Most of the friends belonging to this meeting lived at some miles
distance from it; yet they generally attended it, and I believe were generally
thankful that they did so, so much of the cementing virtue and power of the
gospel prevailed therein.

After meeting I went with James Rowlandson's family to his house at Frith. His
daughter Jane had for a little while past appeared at times in the public
ministry in our meetings. So much of tenderness, and of inward fervency toward
Christ the beloved of her soul, prevailed in her, as to make deep and lively
impressions on my mind.

Next day, that family accompanied me over the sands to a meeting at
Swarthmore, and I returned with them, and from thence back to Kendal. The said
Jane Rowlandson afterward married George Crosfield, became a valuable
minister, visited Ireland twice while I lived there, and the continent of
America once.

In the course of this journey I was favored with the company and countenance
of sundry friends, whom in my younger years I had held in estimation, by reason
of the good impressions I received from their exemplary lives and labors, as
before noted in its place. My quondam master, David Hall, treated me with
affectionate respect; he had buried his former wife, who was my mistress, and
married again. He and his wife accompanied me to a meeting at Airton. I lodged
at Thomas Anderson's, a friend in the ministry, who visited Ireland in company
with David Hall; he was blind, but exceeding pleasant and cheerful. Next
morning being a hard frost, I went with said Thomas and other friends over a
great hill to a monthly meeting at Settle. By me in the gallery sat Julian
Frankland, a good old woman, near ninety years of age, and a good meeting it
was.

At and about Kendal also, I had much of the company of that honorable
minister and elder, James Wilson, who as a nursing father encouraged and
strengthened me in the service I was engaged in. His conversation was often
pleasant, instructing and edifying; one remarkable passage he related, I think
worthy of inserting, which was to the following purport.

In his young years (having been educated in the established religion or church
of England so called) he had conceived a very contemptible opinion of the
people called Quakers and their principles, and at a public house or inn,
falling in company with some others of like sentiments, this people became the
subject of their discourse; and as they were expressing their sentiments of
contempt and dislike of them pretty freely, a person of some note, who had been
an officer under Oliver Cromwell, came into the room and over-hearing their
discourse, observed to them in substance, That he upprehended their prejudice
toward this people arose from their want of knowing them: for my part
(continued lie I entertain very different sentiments or them; and perceiving
them struck with admiration to hear him, whom they looked upon as a man of
sense, as well as consequence, express himself after this manner, he proceeded
to the following purpose. You seem to wonder that I express a favorable
opinion of the Quakers, I will inform you the reason. After the battle of
Dunbar, as I was riding in Scotland at the head of my troop, I observed at some
distance from the road, a crowd of people, and one higher than the rest; upon
which I sent one of my men to see, and bring me word what was the meaning of
this gathering and seeing him ride up and stay there, without returning
according to my order, I sent a second, who stayed in like manner, and then I
determined to go myself. When I came thither, I found it was James Naylor
preaching to the people; but with such power and reaching energy, as I had not
till then been witness of. I could not help staying a little, although I was
afraid to stay; for I was made a Quaker, being forced to tremble at the sight
of myself. I was struck with more terror by the preaching of James Naylor, than
I was at the battle of Dunbar, when we had nothing else to expect, but to fall
a prey to the swords of our enemies, without being able to help ourselves. I
clearly saw the cross to be submitted to, so I durst stay no longer, but got
off, and carried condemnation for it in my own breast. The people there, in the
clear and powerful opening of their states, cried out against themselves,
imploring mercy, a thorough change, and the whole work of salvation to be
effected in them. Ever since I have thought myself obliged to acknowledge on
their behalf, as I have now done.

This, James Wilson said, proved the first step toward his convincement of our
principles, inclining him to go to our meetings, which before he had an
aversion to the thoughts of, from the prejudice above hinted. In those days the
meetings of friends were more eminently favored with divine power, as they
lived more devoted to Christ; and consequently more abounding with his love
flowing in their hearts.

I was ready to think that Isaac Alexander had been instrumental to his
convincement. I find it recorded in the third volume of the dying Sayings, that
said Isaac died at his house. Of him he gave me the following account, that
being in himself an illiterate rustic, soon after his convincement, he
appeared in the ministry lively and powerful. A neighbor of his, having heard
of his becoming a preacher, could not tell-how sufficiently to express his
admiration; he made it the subject of his discourse from place to place,
deriding him who had no learning for presuming to preach, and the people for
suffering him.

This man attended the funeral or that great and good woman, Ann Camm. The
meeting proved an exceeding enlightening, tendering opportunity: and even this
derider was contrited and humbled therein. Isaac Alexander was eminently raised
up in his gift, to set forth the goodness, and the justice of God: the glory of
Truth, the happiness of obeying it, and the lasting infelicity of neglecting
and rebelling against it. The man was so thoroughly penetrated with a clear
sight of his own case, that after Isaac had done, he stood up in that very
assembly; acknowledged the crime he had been guilty of, and begged the prayers
of all good Christians, that it might be forgiven him.

I mostly finished my service in England in this journey, with the quarterly
meeting for Lancashire, at Lancaster, and that for Westmoreland, at Kendal,
held in succession. At the former, I met with Abraham Fuller, of Dublin, who
had accompanied Moses Aldridge from New England, in his religious visit to
friends in Scotland, and was now, as well as myself on his return home; our
meeting being quite unexpected, was a very pleasing surprise to us both;
especially, as we were like to be companions to Dublin. Here also, I met with
Samuel Fothergill, then young in the ministry; but even then appearing with
that solemnity, brightness, and gospel authority, as gave friends lively hopes
of his proving, as he did, through the successive stages of his life, a bright
and shining light, a vessel of honor indeed, of eminent service in the church
of Christ. The public service in the said quarterly meeting, fell to the share
of us who were young, (though many weighty experienced ministers present,) and
our good Master being with us, it proved a refreshing, satisfactory, and
edifying meeting.

From Lancaster we went directly to the quarterly meeting at Kendal, which was
also a good meeting, and the beginning of the succeeding week, we proceeded to
Whitehaven, in order to take shipping for Dublin, where we arrived on seventh
day following, and I lodged at Joseph Gill's. I attended the meetings there the
next day, and heavenly help being near, I was furnished with ability and
matter, to minister to the general satisfaction and edification of friends, and
the ease of my own mind. And my being at that time quite a stranger to most
friends in that city, and coming quite unexpected, occasioned pretty much
enquiry among them.

From Dublin I proceeded toward Limerick, by Mountmelick, Mountrath, and
Kilconinmore, where John Ashton was then living, a valuable good man, little
inferior to most I have known in my estimation. Although not eminent for great
and shining parts; yet he was a shining light in the country where he resided,
in love and good works; a man of great humility, and servour of soul for the
promotion of piety; much beloved and esteemed of his neighbors and friends.

When I came to the good old man's house, (being now near eighty years of age)
he was very much indisposed; and it being about the middle of the eighth month
O. S. or October, and the friends in that part being late with some part of
their harvest, he proposed notwithstanding his infirmity, to accompany me to
Limerick: a great day's journey for him when he was well, as the roads were
then: and his relations, apprehending it too hazardous for him to undertake
under his present indisposition, endeavored to dissuade him from it: which
made me desirous that he might not suffer in his health, nor meet with any
dissatisfaction of mind.

It proved a fine day. He grew much better, and his conversation was very
edifying. Our friends at Limerick rejoiced greatly to see him, being the last
time of his being there. Next day being first day, we had two comfortable
meetings there. On second day morning at parting, he told me "He was well paid
for coming." He was well and hearty the winter following, and the next spring
set forward toward the half-year's meeting at Dublin, but having reached Birr,
he found himself unable to go further, returned home, and after a short illness
departed this life, leaving behind him a general testimony all round the
country on his behalf, as of one who had eminently served God, loved mankind,
and was greatly beloved by almost every one that knew him.

He and his wife were both convinced at one meeting at Birr, through the
powerful ministry of that able and eminent minister of the gospel, Thomas
Wilson. Coming out of that meeting, they said to each other, The way of
everlasting happiness had been clearly laid down before them, and they were
resolved to walk in it, come life or come death.

Not long after, John was thrown into prison for his christian testimony
against the oppressive and antichristian yoke of tithes; here, being used to
work without doors, he was at a loss how to employ his time; but soon learned
to make gartering and laces.

When at liberty, he with his wife, constantly twice a week attended the
meeting at Birr, generally walking on foot thither, being about seven English
miles and very bad road, wading through a river in the way both going and
returning. In winter in crossing this river they sometimes had the ice to
break; and John said he had wept to see the blood on his wife's legs in coming
through it. In those days truth was precious to its professors, who also
possessed it, and no difficulties or dangers, could prevent them from getting
to their religious meetings, to enjoy the renewings of divine love and life,
with their brethren.

This good man also took great pains to get traveling friends to appoint
meetings at his house; and then to acquaint people thereof several miles round,
traveling for that purpose by night, as well as by day, in the winter season,
and in severe weather, and underwent much reproach for this labor and
diligence of his.

Yet he was blessed in it, both inwardly and outwardly, many came to the meetings
at his house, several were convinced of the truth, and in process of time a
meeting was settled there, and grew larger than that of Birr, out of which it
had sprung.

He was at the time of his joining our society but in low circumstances: but
through industry and the blessing of heaven he grew rich, and did abundance of
good, being singularly hospitable, liberal, and charitable.

At the abovesaid meeting at Birr, through the ministry of Thomas Wilson, there
was also convinced his wife's daughter Mary, the wife of James Sheppard. This
was a great mortification to her husband, who tried various means to reclaim
her. At length a noted preacher being to preach at the worship-house he
frequented, he proposed to his wife, that if she would go with him to hear him,
he would go with her next Sunday (as he called it) to the meeting at Birr, to
which proposal she assented. She went accordingly, and heard fine words and
eloquence: but that was not what her soul wanted.

Next first day pursuant to his engagement he went with her to Birr. It proved
to be a silent meeting there: yet through the reverent attendance of the souls of
those present upon Christ the best minister, they were favored together with
his life-giving presence, with the sense of which, the said James was reached,
and tendered into contrition in the sight of the self-denying path cast up to
peace with God. Hereupon, what he little expected at his going to that meeting,
he immediately joined in society with friends, and became a serviceable man in
his station.

After parting with John Ashton, I proceeded toward Cork, and reached it next
morning before meeting.

Soon after I visited some parts of Leinster province. After my return I spared
my brother, at the request of Benjamin Wilson near Edenderry, to be tutor to
his children, and those of a neighboring friend. When he had been there about
a year and a half, I writ to him to prepare (after duly apprizing his
employers) to return to Cork, having a desire for once, while I had an
opportunity (of his supplying my place) to be at the Welsh, Bristol, and London
yearly meetings, and though the family was loath to part with him, yet as I
wanted him on this account, he disengaged himself and returned to Cork, in due
time for me to proceed on the service before me.

Accordingly in the beginning of the first month, O. S. (now called the third)
I embarked on a sixth day morning at Cork: On seventh day at night by favor of
the light-houses we got into Milford-haven. On first day morning I walked to
Haverford-west, where I met with Abraham Fuller of Dublin, whom I consulted how
I should steer my course to North Wales, as I understood here, that the Welsh
yearly meeting was to be about a month from this time in this neighborhood,
viz, at Tenby in Peinbrokeshire.

Abraham advised me to order my course so, as to be at John Goodwin's on a
first day, because there was generally a large resort of people there on that
day, and gave me his directions how to accomplish it, which I was pleased with,
having heard before of that good old man, and having a desire to be then at his
house.

On third day after meeting I left Haverford-west, had a meeting next day at
Carmarthen: on fifth day morning went to John Bowen's at Penplace, expecting to
have a meeting there, but he being gone to their monthly meeting at John
Reece's at Penbark, I followed him thither, where I found a considerable number
met: After I had set down, old John Reece stood up and preached to us in Welsh.
On sixth day I went to the widow Evans's at Llandewy-brevy, in Cardiganshire,
and expected next day to reach John Goodwin's, at Escargogh in Monmouthshire.

Next morning the friend who was to have been my guide came into my chamber
long before day, when I was about getting up, having an earnest desire to reach
John Goodwin's that day. He informed me I could not go thither that day without
running the risque of my life, as it showed very hard, and it was a mountainous
road. I presently got up, and found myself obliged to stay there, to the no
small disappointment of my desire.

I then went to their ma^^et-town called Tregarron, and there had two meetings
that day, the latter of which was large. Next day being first day, hearing of a
priest called Daniel Rowland, whose parish worship-house was at Llangeithow,
three miles beyond Llandewy-brevy, who was much flocked after by many people,
even from other parishes, thither I went accompanied by three friends. When we
arrived we found the house full, and many at the outside, who seemed to listen
to the preacher with attention, who was preaching in Welsh. I desired a young
man to endeavor to get in to the Parson, and acquaint him that an Englishman
without, wanted to speak to him, which I suppose he did. For when he had ended
his sermon the congregation broke up, and he came out one of the first.

I went to meet him and told him, I had found my mind drawn in christian love
to visit him and his congregation, and therefore desired then the opportunity
to deliver to him and them what was on my mind. After some enquiries he said It
was not convenient then, as he had himself preached largely to the people.
Finding myself clear of him, I got upon a pretty high tombstone, and the people
generally drew near, being a very large multitude. The opportunity was greatly
favored, I being engaged to invite the people to Christ the free teacher, and
of him to receive wine and milk (strength and nourishment to their souls)
without money and without price: though the people stood close crowded, there
seemed to be as great a stillness, as if scarce any were there. After I had
ended what at that time flowed through my heart to them, I stood a little with my
mind reverently and thankfully affected. At length I looked round to see on
which side I might most easily retire. Some of the people near, who perceived
it, desired that I would pray for them before I left them. I answered that I
did indeed pray for them, but as for doing it vocally, I durst not, unless it
appeared at that time to be my duty so to do. They asked then Whither I
intended to go next, I told them To Llambeter (about five miles off) where I
intended to have a meeting that afternoon. Thither many of them went.

When I had got a little way on the road, I was overtaken by one, who looked
like a gentleman, on horseback, with his wife riding behind a man on another
horse, he told me He had come out of Carmarthenshire fourteen miles over the
hills to hear Daniel Rowland, asking if I should come into that county, that if
I did he would meet me any where in it, if he could know the time and place;
but would be better pleased if I could come and lodge a night with him, which I
afterward did.

As I advanced a little further, a certain woman not of our profession, invited
me and friends with me to dine, and gave us the best entertainment in her
power. She expressed with solidity, She had not understood one word I had said;
but had felt that which had done her heart good, as a friend interpreted her
words to me.

Many people flocking to Llambeter, the meeting was held in the street. After
it I parted with the people in mutual affection, and returned to Llandewy brevy
in company with friends and others. I was at this time much overcome with the
Lord's goodness, and thankful for the aforesaid disappointment of my desire, as
believing it to be in the ordering of best wisdom, for the service of the day,
being filled with a comfortable hope, I was in my proper place, which caused
the tears to run down my cheeks, most of the way I had ^ ride.

When I returned to my quarters, viz. the widow Evans's near Llandewy-brevy, a
great number of the neighboring people were come thither, and an unexpected
meeting ensued, wherein several were broken, and tendered in the time of
silence. I briefly observed that it had been made a good day to several of us,
expressing my desire that it might be duly remembered by us. And in this lively
tenderness we took our leave of one another.

But alas, when I came thither eighteen years after this, I found little sign
left of that servency toward God, which then seemed impressed on their minds.
The enemy had got entrance, and too much stolen it away.

Next day I got to John Goodwin's, and he told me he believed I was come in the
right time, there having been but few at his house the day before, by reason of
the snow that had fallen thereabout. He accompanied me from his house to a
meeting at the edge of Shropshire.

John told me that his father and mother were both convinced of truth about the
same time, and received it in the love of it. At that time his father was clerk
of the parish, and master of the free school thereof; but upon his joining with
friends, and giving up faithfully to divine conviction, he was turned out of
both these places, and obliged to have recourse to hard labor, wherein his
mother heartily joined: But, that himself their eldest child, then well grown
toward the state of a youth, not understanding their case, thought them fools
to turn Quakers, and resolved he would not be like them in that: Nor did they
offer any compulsion to him therein: But their prayers, put up to the Lord for
him, were manifestly answered; and they had in their son the comfort they
desired. At this time friends were grown numerous in Wales; but soon after,
upon the encouragement given by William Penn, most of the friends in some parts
of this principality, removed and settled in Pennsylvania, and amongst the rest
John's father and mother, with most of their children. From inclination he
would have removed with them; but a higher power directed his stay in his
native land, and to that he gave up father and mother and every thing. This
good man recounted, to me the great favors of the Lord to him all along to
that day, to the following purport.

When the Lord pointed out poor Wales as a field of labor for me, he promised
that if I was faithful to him in it, he would be with me and favor me therein:
and now I have in my heart a testimony for him in my old age, that he has
abundantly made good his promise to me, both outwardly and inwardly, far beyond
what at that day, I could have ever expected. Which favors in diverse respects
he related over to me in a very edifying thankful frame of mind: And speaking
of his wife in particular, he related the steps by which the Lord (whom they
loved and served) conducted and joined them together; livelily adding, I think
I may say, if ever man in the world got his right wife, I got mine. He further
told me. that he lived and maintained his family on a farm of four pounds a
year, but at length had purchased it and improved it, so that at that time he
reckoned it worth six pounds a year. The first journey he traveled in the
ministry, being to visit friends through Wales, he had then got of clear money
above forty shillings in all; and he was free to spend it (if there were
occasion) in the Lord's service, knowing that he could give him, or enable him
to get more; that the first time he began to entertain traveling friends (most
of the meeting being then gone off to Pennsylvania) he had but one bed which he
left to them, he and his wife taking up their lodging in the stable. Diverse
have been convinced by his ministry: and one of the principal worthies of our
age I have esteemed him.

The fo^egoing narrative of this worthy elder was edifying and profitable to me
not only at the time, but frequently since in the review and recollection
thereof: and I thought it worthy of recital as conveying profitable instruction
to every class of readers whether of high or low degree: To the former a lesson
of instruction how humbly thankful they ought to be to the gracious giver of
all good things, for his extensive bounty to them, when they consider this
truly good man, in circumstances we should reckon mean indeed, and a manner of
living suitable to his circumstances, bearing a lively and grateful testimony
to the goodness, mercy and truth of the Lord in his gracious dealings with him.
Also when he dedicates his little all (in faith) to his Lord's service, does he
not in the silent and reaching language of example, c^nvey this intelligence to
thy soul, who art blessed with abundance? Go thou and do likewise; Honor the
Lord with thy substance and the first fruits of all thine increase; Prove. iii.
9.
Love mercy, and walk humbly with thy God; Micah vi. 3.
deeply pondering in thy heart "How much owe thou to the Lord?

And those of low circumstances from hence may learn that happiness is confined
to no station in this life; but is the result of observing the law of God in
the inward parts, being (as it prescribes) content with the things which we
have, not minding high things; but reducing our desires to the level of our
station in life, that so we may fill it with propriety and act our parts well:
If we thus walk by the unerring rule of truth, though we be esteemed poor in this
world, we shall be rich in faith, and, with this worthy man enjoy in the
obscurity of the humble cottage what palaces too seldom afford, solid content,
the consolation of a conscience void of offense, and in reward of well-doing,
the peace of God that passes the understandings of men. The most splendid and
extensive earthly possessions, when laid in the balance against durable
possessions like these, are indeed as nothing and lighter than vanity.

Having parted with John Goodwin, I went to Shrewsbury, Colebrooke-dale,
Bewdley, Worcester, Birmingham, Coventry, Warwick, Evesham; then back by
Worcester to Bromyard, Hereford, Amely and into Radnorshire in Wales, to
Brinfloyd and Talcot. To this last place came Mary Rickaby of Yorkshire from
Llandewy-brevy, much tired; but after a little rest and refreshment, she had an
edifying opportunity in the family; and from hence she, with Miriam Bowen, and
her uncle Edward Jones accompanied me to the Welsh yearly meeting, as did also
John Young from Leominster, who met me at Hereford for that purpose, and was an
acceptable companion.

Next morning we set out from Talcot about five o'clock and got to Nathaniel
Anthony's a little after meeting time, a meeting having been appointed
beforehand there, to begin at five in the evening. After meeting John Young
and I went to lodge with that couple, who had before invited menear
Llangeithow, where we met with a kind and cordial reception, and found them
fervent in desire after godliness. Next morning we met Mary Rickaby, and sundry
other friends at John Bowen's. Thence went to an evening meeting at Carmarthen,
which was large. Next day being seventh day, we went to John Lewis's house in
the country; on first day with him to the meeting at Redstone, and in the
afternoon were at a large meeting at Haverford-west: And front hence on third
day we went to the yearly meeting at Tenby.

After the yearly meeting, I went by Swanzey and Trevereeg to Pontipoole, being
accompanied by good old Evan Evans. Thence by Shernuton and Ross to Gloucester,
and from thence round by Oxfordshire, Berkshire and Wiltshire to Bristol yearly
meeting; and from thence by Bath, Bradford, Shaftsbury, Poole, Ringwood and
Southampton and the Isle of Wight, to that of London.

At Shaftsbury the meeting had been pretty much dropped for several years,
there being none of our profession left, but an old friend a tanner and his two
sisters: but at this time several were in part convinced, and thereupon the
meeting revived. I was there on a first day, and had three meetings which were
large. The second day I spent in visiting families, and in the evening had a
conclusive meeting with friends, and those newly convinced. It was a
satisfactory time; and one man's wife who had been in great grief, passion and
bitterness, on account of her husband's joining in our profession, was herself
gained and joined him and friends; and another woman likewise joined us at the
same time: yet the fervency which was then felt, proved but of short duration
with several of them. However the meeting has continued, a new meeting house
was built there since that time, and the quarterly meeting of the county of
Dorset is sometimes held there.

On my return from the Isle of Wight, Thomas Whitehead and Philip Eliot met me
at Portsmouth and accompanied me thence to London, with young Abel Hollis of
the Isle of Wight, who was then hopeful, next day being the fourth of the week
we came to Alton; after meeting there on fifth day we came to an evening
meeting at Godalmin. Sixth day morning were at a meeting at Guilford. After
meeting, being joined by Samuel Bownas and Jeremiah Waring, we came to Esher,
and next morning to London to the yearly meeting.

In this journey Samuel Bownas was particularly kind and fatherly to me. We
were together at Gracious-street meeting on first day morning, which was a good
meeting, and wherein I was favored in a good degree.

Thomas Whitehead and Philip Eliot accompanied me after the yearly meeting was
over to a meeting at Hertford. From Hertford I went to Hitchin, Jordan's,
High-wiccomb, etc. was at the quarterly meeting at Okeham for the counties of
Leicester and Rutland, and at those at Lincoln, York, Lancaster and Kendal.

At this yearly meeting were no representatives from Ireland, but Abraham
Fuller and I. John Pim of Edenderry and his brother Joshua Pim of Mountrath
came as far as Coventry: and there the said Joshua, a valuable friend and
elder, was visited with a distemper, which for a time seemed dangerous. He
recovered, but not till some time after the yearly meeting was over.

The like afterward happened to another good friend and elder Joseph Williams
of Randal's Mills, who reached London, and was there by indisposition prevented
from getting out to any meeting, such trials being sometimes permitted for the
proving and exercising the says and patience of the Lord's servants.

In this journey I often traveled hard, and had two meetings a day wherever I
could. It took me about five months. At Lincoln quarterly meeting friends
lodged at inns: I don't remember that I knew one friend there, but John Scott
from Leeds, and May Drummond. It being now about midsummer, the public meeting
began at twelve o'clock, their men's meeting about two, and ended before four.
In those two meetings I had been shut up. I met with an elderly friend and
asked him, how friends spent the residue of the long evening, he answered In
conversing together or taking a walk or the like. I told him I thought it was a
pity, considering the large number of young people come together from sundry
parts of the county, that I thought the end would be better answered, by some
religious opportunity, or meeting, that might tend to edification, and be of
benefit to some at least. He replied They used to have evening meetings; but
being on one hand much infested with rude people, and on the other too often
weakly conducted, they proved dissatisfactory; and for these reasons friends
had thought it best to discontinue them.

Hereupon we were called in to dinner; but I had little appetite: after dinner
I was called out. Some of the elders had drawn together, and upon my coming to
them, signified if I had a concern for an evening meeting, that they were
willing to appoint one to begin at the sixth hour. I was afraid yet durst not
refuse the proposal, so upon my assenting, the meeting was appointed, it was
much crowded, and the life and power of truth was in dominion, which eased my
mind of its burden and filled it with thankfulness.

From hence John Scott, May Drummond and I, came together with diverse other
friends to a meeting at Gainsborough, and on the first day after, were at the
general meeting at Warnsworth, where we met with Joseph Storr. From thence John
Scott and I came together to the monthly meeting at Leeds, where we met with
our valuable ancient friend William Slater. From Leeds I went in company with
William Hird and his wife to the monthly meeting at Knaresborough, at which was
John Fothergill, and from thence to the quarterly meeting at York, to which
came in particular John Richardson, expected by few, having been thought to be
near death for some time before, but being recovered a little, though still very
feeble in body, but strong in faith, and warm in love to God and the brethren,
in a journey of three days, which he had used to accomplish in one or less, he
reached this city, to have one more solemn opportunity with his friends at this
meeting.

In the meeting of ministers the good old man was enlarged in much weighty and
pertinent counsel in the clear opening of Gospel light, but the public meetings
were much hurt by raw and forward public appearances.

From York I came with Mary Slater to Skipton, and from thence was accompanied
by John Binns to a general meeting at Croshabooth, where I met with Samuel
Fothergill, Margaret Birtwhistle (afterward married to Jonathan Rain) and
Sarah Routh, who afterward married William Tailor: next day in company with
the two last to the quarterly meeting at Lancaster.

Here in the meeting of ministers Margaret Birtwhistle appeared livelily and
very suitably: but a young man and one elder than he, by their public
appearances hurt the meeting.

When I reached Whitehaven, I there met Susanna Morris and Elizabeth Morgan of
Pennsylvania just landed from Dublin having visited Ireland. Susanna Morris was
a good old woman and a sound minister, whose faith was remarkably tried; having
twice suffered shipwreck on the coast of Ireland and once (as I have heard) on
the western coast of Europe; yet was preserved by that power and providence on
which she relied, and her faith not weakened thereby.

One time it happened in the north of Ireland, and the other time off
Dungarvan, when, (as I have been credibly informed) after hanging some hours in
the ship's shrouds, apparently in imminent danger of being swept away by the
waves every minute, and the storm continuing so violent that no boatmen durst
venture out to their relief, a popish priest was made the instrument of her
preservation, who by his influence and authority roused some of the
inhabitants, at the risque of their lives to attempt the relief of her and
others, which they providentially effected, and brought her and Joseph Tailor
particularly, safe ashore.

When I landed from Whitehaven at Dublin, I there received a letter from my
brother, informing me that their next province meeting was to be at Limerick
next first day. Garret Hasten accompanying me, we lest Dublin on fourth day
morning and came that evening to Samuel Neale's at Christian's town, and were
next day at the weekday meeting at Rathangan, and after meeting went to John
Ridgeway's at Ballycarrol; next day we reached Roscrea, and Limerick, the day
following. At this province meeting I was prevailed on to stay and join in a
visit to friends' families, toward which service Garret had before expressed
some concern on his mind. We were accompanied by Joshua Beale of Cork, John
Philips, George Pease and William Richardson of Limerick. It proved a memorable
season: The pure influence of truth having prevaled in the preceding province
meeting, had so prepared friends' minds, that we found in general great
openness and in some families scarce a dry eye. No hardness, that I remember,
appeared, except in one family: and the head of that family, being an eager
pursuer of the world, in some time after failed considerably in debt. From
thence I came straight home to Cork.

On the whole of this long journey, and my third with a certificate, I have
this observation to make. In my two first journeys being much among tender
religious friends, my labor was easy and edifying, and I often had great
consolation, and divine satisfaction among them: but in this last, coming to
many places that were poor and flat, as to the life of religion, and where
other things more prevailed, I often had suffering seasons, and came off but
poorly.

In the next summer after my return, I removed from Cork (leaving my said
brother John Gough there in my place) into Leinster province, and settled near
Mountmelick.

I have good reason to believe that I followed right direction, and the
gracious call of divine goodness, in this removal, on diverse accounts, as in
the good hand of God, the author of all good, it proved a blessing both to my
wife and myself. There lived hereaway at that time diverse valuable
spiritually-minded friends, through whose tender regard, counsel and help we
gained fresh good, and to whom we felt great nearness of heart, and dear
affection, in the pure love of the one eternal spirit.

Here I tried something of the linen-business, but found myself so unfit for
dealing with the common people, that I saw (notwithstanding the kind assistance
of some friends) I was not like to gain any thing by following this business.
And as I had little else at present for a livelihood, it sometimes spread a
dejection over my mind. Such dispensations are humbling, deeply exercising our
faith and patience, and proving our foundation and our confidence in divine
protection, and reliance on heavenly help. They are what we generally call
trials; and so they are: but when we consider that the earth is the Lord's and
the fullness thereof, and that the cattle of a thousand hills are his; are not
his favors trials as well as his chastisements? Affluence appears to me a
trial as well as discouraging outward prospects; but a trial of a different
nature, that is of our fidelity as stewards of the mercies of God, to whom we
are all to be accountable for the discharge of the trust he has invested us
with, that we consume them not upon our lusts, as if that was our own, which
was given us to do good with, and be helpful to others who may stand in need;
and as the sunshine of prosperity is apt to list men up too high into a state
of inconsiderateness and dissipation, I have thought it as a trial, whereby we
are under greater danger and temptation: and have a greater cross to take up to
be what we ought to be, than in humbler stations. It has not fallen to my lot
to be much proved with trials of this kind, and I am led to believe that divine
wisdom, who orders all things well, knew best what was best for me. For when
prospects of things were pleasing I was too prone to be too much elevated, and
therefore needed to be brought and kept low: but in the midst of my
discouragement, a door of hope often opened to me, from the internal evidence
and persuasion of my being in my right place, and of faith that all things
would work together for good, if we were preserved through all to love and fear
the Lord, and so I humbly trust it proved. For my wife under the like
discouragement being brought low in her mind, it proved in the hand of God a
good step to her to the more certain enjoyment of his blessed presence, and the
comforts of his good spirit: She meeting with the like precious visitation
here, as I had done before in Bristol, which made us partakers together, of the
sweet sense of the gracious regard of him that is above all, and closely linked
us together in true unity, and deep thankfulness, which often raised in us (to
our unspeakable joy) the cheering hope of a dewlling place, with the sanctified
of the Lord in the regions of bliss. May I never forget such seasons of
unmerited mercy and goodness.

In the spring of the next year, my mind was again drawn to visit some parts of
Cumberland and Westmoreland. John Pim of Lackah and his wife offered me their
eldest son Moses for a companion, which I accepted. We met at his
brother-in-law Samuel Neale's at Christian's town. Thence we went next day some
miles out of our way to see our dear friend Mary Peisly being at that time in
affliction.

She had been a gay young woman, but in the youthful years of her gaiety, she
was favored with a powerful and prevailing visitation of divine love, and
giving up faithfully to the heavenly vision, she became a vessel of honor in
the master's house, receiving a gift in the ministry, and being reverently,
watchfully and livelily exercised therein to the edification of friends where
her lot was cast. She was indeed an useful member and a shining ornament to the
church.

I am ready to conclude, that none in out day, from the time of this the
effectual visitation of Christ to her soul, adhered with more steadiness to his
guidance, through a variety of probations. She was most part of her time a
member of the same monthly meeting with myself. Often were we together in
public meetings; often on family visits.

She visited friends in England, Ireland and North America pretty generally;
and soon after her return from her last journey married our friend Samuel
Neale, and in a few days after departed this life. I attended both at her
marriage and her funeral, and am satisfied that she is gone to enjoy for ever
the reward of a well-spent life, very much devoted to the service of God, and
the promotion of truth upon earth.

After this visit of friendship, we got to Dublin on seventh day evening, and
there on enquiry I was informed at several places, that the whole fl^et of
Whitehaven ships had gone off that day; but in my return from the quay
(accompanied by my kind landlord Thomas Strangman) met a man, who told us there
was one prevented from getting off. So I stayed the two meetings in Dublin the
next day, and had a satisfactory time with my dear friends there. After dinner
on second day we embarked, and on third day about noon landed at Whitehaven.
That afternoon I went to John Harris's, and next morning set off with him and
his wife, a valuable minister, to the quarterly meeting at Carlisle.

One thing appeared to me pleasingly remarkable at that time. By reason of wet
weather, people there were backward at their country work, and then very busy,
yet several of the men, put forward their wives to go to the quarterly meeting,
as they intended themselves to the northern yearly meeting to be at Kendal
about two weeks from that time. We were that day pretty many in company, but
more women than men, though both the roads and the weather were but indifferent.
Hence I concluded that no other motive, but that of religious desire drew them
from home. It affected my mind, and made me hope for a good meeting. The widow
of our worthy friend Robert Atkinson, then about eighty years of age, with two
other elderly women walked on foot eight miles to it.

On fifth day the quarterly meeting began, and on sixth day ended, and was a
large and good meeting. On seventh day I reached Kendal, and visited meetings
thereaway till the yearly meeting; and after it spent a few days thereabout,
took leave of my poor mother, and never saw either the place of my nativity or
her any more. She lived only about two or three years after this, and was
favored in her latter days with peace and quiet; which was mercifully
continued to her last end.

This journey began well, like all my others; but, alas! it did not so continue
and end, for want of my steadily adhering to the all-wise guide in my whole
conduct. Yet I received instruction from it, and learned to exercise more care
in some things, wherein I saw I had missed my way.

I embarked at Whitehaven for Dublin; but we were driven to the north, and put
into Carlingford about fifty miles from Dublin. The passengers were three men
and three women, and this being a poor place, we could only get two mean
wretched horses, on which we helped the women by turns to Dundalk about eight
or ten miles. From Dundalk we hired three horses, which carried double well to
Drogheda where we lodged. Here were no horses to be met with. So meeting with a
return chaise I agreed for the three women to go in it, and myself setting
forward on foot in company with one of the passengers, I arrived in Dublin in
good time, and was at the half year's meeting there which was a satisfactory
season.

Still seeing little or no prospect of getting any thing by the linen-business,
one morning Thomas Boake schoolmaster of Mountmelick came to acquaint me, that
the doctor had told him he must qui^ the school or lose his life (being then in
a bad state of health,) and to advise with me and others thereupon. He soon
quitted it, and I succeeded him, in a school poor indeed, as I found it, at my
first entering upon it; for except a few friends whose children ^ had, who duly
paid me, most of the rest put me off with promises, few of which were ever
performed; so that a dull prospect still threatened, and looking back in my
mind to both Bristol and Cork, I thought it a strange condition to which I was
now reduced: yet hope in the Lord sometime supported and cheered my mind; and
it was not long till things began to wear a better face; for first some friends
of Dublin, and afterward others from other parts sent their so^^s to board
with us, till we had above twenty boys boarded in our house, for whom we were
well and duly paid.

About ten years after our marriage, my wife was delivered of a son, whom we
named John, and in a few days after, she departed this life. For about two
years before her decease she had been engaged a little in the work of the
ministry; but her principal service was in friends' families and in the women's
meetings (in which her service was much missed, when she was removed.) She died
in a sweet frame of mind, and in near unity with good friends.

My brother had married at Youghal a relation of my wife's, upon whose death,
he and his wise came into my house at my desire, and in the winter following I
visited Ulster province pretty fully and thoroughly, being at sundry meetings
twice over; in this journey I was favored with the company of old Robert
Richardson many miles, and to many meetings, in severe weather, and he about
eighty-four years of age.

I had a particular concern to have a meeting in the town of Belfast: I
consulted Robert upon it; but he did not encourage it, not one of our
profession living in that town: He said he had been at sundry meetings there*
but few of them proved to satisfaction. So I left the matter for some days; but
the concern followed me still. And it opened in my mind, that if I would have
the bread of life to my soul, I must go to the place appointed for me to
receive it, viz. to Belfast.

I thereupon consulted sundry other friends, all of whom approved of it. Upon
application the town hall was obtained for it, and fitted up with seats of
deal-boards. Sundry friends attended from the meetings of Ballinderry, Lisburn,
Hillsborough, and Newtown, particularly from Lisburn several friends
accompanied me, and old Robert could not be easy without coming along in the
rear of the company; he sat next to me on the justices' bench.

The magistrates were so favorable, as to order the constables to stand at the
door to keep out the rabble: The inhabitants of the town of upper rank with
their wives and children came to it in a decent solid manner.

I had had a great weight and fear on my mind respecting the undertaking; but
proceeding on the foundation hinted above; a steady hope and reverent
dependence on the Almighty stayed my mind, and I thought my friends felt for
me, and felt unity of heart with me. The meeting was eminently favored with
the clear light of the gospel, and the sweet sense and enjoyment of divine life
and goodness. After the meeting, Robert in a tender thankful frame of mind
expressed his satisfaction, as did diverse other friends. It proved a good day,
honorable to the cause of truth, and affording solid joy to us, who attended
that meeting, which had been crowned with the divine presence.

After this I had meetings of the like kind at Dungannon, Moira, and Legicurry
or Rich-hill, all of them open, and comfortable. And indeed in this visit to
Ulster province, I was favored often with the supporting evidence of my being
under right direction. It had been on my mind for some years before, and I
thought I had waited till the right time.

I was accompanied in this journey many miles and to many meetings by my
esteemed friend Thomas Greer, whose company was truly acceptable; also by my
dear friend Susanna Hatton to such meetings as she could get out convenietly to
attend.

Sometime after I also visited Munster province, accompanied by my friend John
Pim of Lackah.

About this time the Methodists had got some footing in sundry parts of
Ireland, and in Mountmelick in particular: John Curtis, a friend of Bristol,
who had been one of them about a year, having been afterward convinced of our
principles, and received a gift of the ministry, came over upon a religious
visit to friends in Ireland, amongst whom his service was very acceptable.

I was with him at a large meeting in the court house in Athy, another in the
assembly-room at Athlone, and at several others which were very large. He
appeared in inwardness of mind to attend upon his gift, and follow its leading;
and concluded his service in Ireland with an epistle to friends whom he had
visited, which the national meeting ordered to be printed.

I mention this by reason of what follows.

One afternoon John Wesley made his first entrance into Mountmelick, attended
by a large company on horseback of those who joined him in society. As several
of their ministers had been here before, some of whom had invited me to come,
and bring my family, to hear them preach the gospel, I had not as yet found
freedom to go: but hearing that John Wesley was to preach that evening in the
open marketplace, I was not easy to avoid going. So I went, and standing at a
friend's shop-door, I heard him begin with the following preamble or
introduction:

Before I unfold to you the oracles of God I must first remove a
stumbling block out of the way, which is this; I understand one John Curtis
from Bristol has of late been traveling in these parts, and endeavoring to
lay waste that good work, which it has pleased God to carry on by our hands,
giving out that he was formerly a Methodist and acquainted with me. Now he
never was a Methodist to my knowledge, and I think he could not be one in or
about Bristol without it: And as to any acquaintance with the said John Curtis,
I solemnly declare I never had any; only I remember being twice in his company
occasionally, about eight years ago. I hope no man will account me an offender
for speaking the truth. If George Fox were here he would embrace me for it.

This was the substance of his introduction in the same words, or very nearly
the same, in which he delivered it, for I gave good attention to this part.
Then he proceeded to what he called unfolding the oracles of God, which I
thought was stamping the matter far too high.

That evening I got two friends to accompany me to his lodging to speak to him
hereupon. At the first mentioning of the subject he discovered some warmth. I
tell you John Curtis has done more harm in his journey through these parts, than
ever he will do good as long as he lives. He has gone about scattering poison.
This high charge he undertook to prove thus: What poison is to the body, that
bigotry is to the mind; but John Curtis has been industrious to sow bigotry,
that is to sow disaffection in the hearts of christians toward one another,
barely on account of difference in opinion.

To all this I replied to the following import I was an entire stranger to John
Curtis till he came into these parts, since which I had made use of the
opportunity of contracting an acquaintance with him, and being pretty much in
his company, I have known him to be influenced with the universal love of God,
and that he has endeavored to propagate the same in others. This thou can
never call scattering poison; and if my account differ from thine, so does the
foundation on which it is built. For thine is only upon hearsay, which is too
slender a foundation whereupon publicly to asperse any man's character who is
not present to answer and vindicate himfelf. At this he seemed somewhat
confused, and acknowledged that he had not duly considered that part of the
matter; but thought he might depend on the sundry repeated informations, he had
received from different quarters.

I farther observed to him that he ought to have duly regarded our Lord's
directions not to judge, etc. For if any good is done it is the Lord that does
it, and in what way, and by what instruments he pleases; and therefore all the
glory of it is due to him alone, and no part of that glory or honor to any
instrument, which can do nothing of itself, and that it would be a sin in any
instrument to take to itself what was due to God only: and that if John Curtis
faithfully did what the Lord directed, he would be accepted, though no shining
outward effects should arise from it.

And in regard to what thou have alleged of his sowing disaffection in the
hearts of Christians, toward one another, barely on account of difference in
opinion; something occurs to me on that head, which is that Jon^ (...) be
endued with a sense of the dang^ (...) which some might be in of magnifying and
extolling certain men instead of giving all glory to God; and might apprehend
it to be his duty to caution and guard them against that danger, which might be
misconstrued by some, as seeking to sow disaffection toward those men and their
adherents; or to this effect.

This opportunity concluded peaceably, with John Wesley's acknowledging, that
it had been to his edification, and that he therefore wi^hed he could get the
like opportunities with our friends more frequently; that he saw some things in
a clearer light than he had done before, and that he would never say any thing
against John Curtis publicly again, unless he administered a real foundation
for it. I heard he had the day before made the same preamble, or to the same
purport before his sermon at Edenderry, and would probably have gone on so from
place to place.

I writ to John Curtis hereupon, who answered that he never pretended to, nor
ever spoke of his having any intimate acquaintance with John Wesley; but that
he was regularly a methodist for some time, he sent me a certificate, signed by
several of the same fraternity, and some other testimonials.

Hereupon he writ to John Wesley, and sent me over copies of the letters that
passed between them. I did not see that this paper-war, if continued, would be
likely to serve any good purpose, and so I wrote to him, and it dropped. And
all the use I made of the abovesaid testimonials was occasionally to show them
to some of the methodists and to one of their ministers.

I was glad to see some in that part awakened out of their sleep of darkness,
to a thoughtfulness about their souls, and sincerely wished the increase and
promotion of solid piety: but I had opportunity to observe there that those who
were innocent and well-minded before have continued the most steady and
circumspect in their conduct, that those who had before gone into gross
pollutions, being induced to believe that regeneration was an instantaneous,
not a gradual work, did not sufficiently remain under repentance, to let it
have its perfect work; and that instead of pressing forward after the
perfection of the inward life, denying self, and a conformity to this world in
its corruptions, in language and practice, their zeal too much settled in the
frequency of their meetings, hearing sermons, praying, singing, reading, and
treasuring up scripture texts and passages in their memories, talking them over
too lightly and customarily, in conversation, which rendered these divine
truths like salt without the proper savor, taking from them the awful weight
and dignity due to them.

By these means christian fortitude for standing steadfast in a reverent
simplicity and holy vigilance soon retired; a silent dependence on Christ the
true teacher was irksome, and that dependence which was due to him misplaced on
fallible men. The consequence was a dwindling, a blast on the first buddings of
heavenly desires, a decay of the divine life: and many of them soon returned,
like the sow that was washed, to wallow in the mire and filth of transgression
again; and threw off the affectation, the insipid, and surfeiting talk of
religion; the form of godliness, which they had too much gloried in, for want
of humbly abiding under the purifying power thereof.

Sometime after this a vacancy falling out in the city of Dublin by the death
of John Beetham friends' schoolmaster there, and the return of George Routh
(who had tried the place after him) to England, my brother being encouraged by
friends there to take up the charge of that school, seemed inclined thereto,
and as the prospect seemed promising, I freely assented to his removal, although
thereby I was left singly to undergo the labor and care of a large family of
boarders, in which he and his wife had been useful assistants since the death
of my wife. This induced me to think of marrying again, and accordingly I
married Elizabeth Barnes, daughter of Thomas Barnes, of Waterford. About two
weeks after our marriage we went together to the summer half year's meeting in
Dublin* In our way thither we spent the fir^^ day among our friends at Timahoe,
it being the last meeting there to many of them. For in a few days after,
several of their families came to Dublin to embark for North Carolina, to
settle upon my cousin Arthur Dobbs's lands there, who was their landlord at
Timahoe, and who upon my application, had offered to me for life, and after it
to my son John and his heirs one thousand acres of that land: Robert Millhouse
of Timahoe was to choose land, next to that, which himself should take, but the
captain of the ship in which they went, not being well acquainted with the
coast, ran too far to the southward, landed them at Charlestown in
South Carolina, and thereupon they settled in that Province, so I was
disappointed in my expectation of getting the land taken up by him. Two other
opportunities afterward presented some probability of getting them taken up;
but by various accidents, my hopes were again disappointed: may all
disappointments of this kind incite to a greater diligence in seeking the one
thing needful, that good part, which shall never be taken away.

We resided about ten years after our marriage in Mountmelick; during which
time an increasing private family, and the necessary attendance of my house and
school, prevented my going any great journey, but I attended monthly, province,
and national meetings generally, in which I was often favored with my
brethren, with the fresh arisings of life, and the renewing of inward strength.

My wife being of a very weakly and tender constitution, I apprehended the
fatigue and burdensome care of a boarding school, a load too heavy for her, and
from hence conceived a desire, with submission to the ordering of divine
providence, of a place where the weight might rest more upon my shoulders, and
less on hers: and, having made previous application, I received an invitation
to return to Bristol, and resume the school there.

Hereupon after some time, I threw up my school in Mountmelick, attended the
fifth mo. national meeting at Dublin, after which I embarked there with three
friends more, to attend the yearly meeting at London. We went aboard ship on
fifth day morning, and landed at Park gate next morning, and had an evening
meeting at Liverpool. On seventh day went to Warrington: on first day morning,
to the general meeting at Franley in Cheshire. On second day we reached
Birmingham; after meeting there on third day we went to Coventry. On fourth day
after a meeting at Coventry, we reached Towcester, and London the next day.
After the yearly meeting was over, Isaac Jackson returned home; Joshua Wilson
staid a little time amongst his relations; and Joseph Inman and I (accompanied
by our kind landlord John Elie ^ of London) on third day came to an evening
meeting at Reading, appointed to begin at the sixth hour. Next morning Joseph
Inman and I were at the monthly meeting at Newberry, and that evening at a
small meeting at Marlborough; on fifth day we came to a meeting at Calne, and
after it to John Fry's at Sutton-benjar. Next day after meeting there to Bath,
and on seventh day to Bristol, where we stayed till sixth day morning, when
leaving Bristol, we crossed the new passage into Wales, that night came to
Cardiff, and the next to Swanzey, were we stayed over the first day; and on a
second day were at an evening meeting at Carmarthen. On third day at Llandewy
brevy. On fourth day, by way of Llaneedless we reached John Goodwin's. At
Llaneedless we went to see a friend's widow. We found her spinning in her poor
habitation, and she seemed rejoiced to see us, and as we had no guide, she
readily offered herself for a guide to John Goodwin's, which they called five
miles: but it took us near three hours riding.

On fifth day after meeting at this ancient, worthy friend's house, we went to
his son-in-law Humphry Owen's (on the seaside) who had married John's eldest
daughter: On sixth day after meeting, said Humphry accompanied us to his
brother Lewis Owen's near Dolgelthy in Merionethshire; and next day along a
mountainous road to Carnarvan, where we stayed, and had a meeting by ourselves,
and after dinner came to Holy head on first day evening. On second day morning
about two o'clock our kind friend saw us on board the packet-boat and then took
leave of us. On third day in the evening we landed in Dublin, and next evening
I got safe home to my wife and children, in Mountmelick.

After my return I attended the quarterly meeting for Munster at Clonme^, and
that for Leinster at Enniscorthy, and then I got my large family ready for our
removal, consisting of my wife and her mother in her eightieth year, eight
children, and a nurse to the youngest about eight months old. With the
assistance of sundry kind friends, particularly Thomas Strangman of
Mountmelick, we all got well to Waterford, and from thence (after staying about
ten days with our friends there) to Bristol.

Now leaving Ireland, after having sojourned there about twenty-four years, and
received much affection and kindness from many friends there, of which I hope
to retain the grateful remembrance as long as my memory shall continue, let me
review the state of our society there, during that space of time.

At my first going thither, there were yet living in most parts of the nation,
where meetings were settled, some of the good old stock both ministers and
elders, who loved God and mankind, and were esteemed and beloved by them, being
kind and open-hearted, as well as faithful and circumspect in all the branches
of our christian testimony, closely uniting in tender love one with another, in
supporting it, and keeping things in good order in the church. Their pious care
herein was like a fence about the flock, which kept them together in nearer
unity and greater safety: So that the young people in most parts were generally
trained up in innocence of manners, and in plainness of habit and speech.

Some indeed, chiefly of the young men grown up, had for some time past,
refused submission to the good order established; but I lived there long enough
to see the unhappy consequences thereof, both to themselves, many of them, and
to the body whereof they were members. What though their tables abounded with
elegant dishes, and variety of liquors: though they made a figure, and were
envied or caressed for a time; yet most of them were either cut short by death,
or fell into disgrace. The hand of the Lord seemed to be against these
introducers, and spreaders of corrupt liberty: add they never attained thereby
that true honor and peace, which attended the worthy men and women above
hinted, to whom the first excursion of such was matter of great concern and
anxiety from a clear foresight of the hurtful consequences thereof: and much
labor and pains, they took to put a stop to it, and prevent the spreading
thereof, particularly in the city of Cork, and therefore they were clear of it.

But though some of these were too big for the girdle of truth, to meet about
them, or to be limited by the desires of their best friends; yet I found the
discipline of the church better maintained, during my first years in Cork, than
before them in Bristol, tending to edification, brotherly comfort and love, and
mutual encouragement in piety and virtue, with a joint desire and care to
preserve an uniform regularity, and to revive and maintain a religious fervency
toward God.

Some friends from the several parts attended their province meetings, which
were held regularly once in six weeks, and circulated from one part to another,
yet were most frequently held in Cork. Those meetings were often sweetly
favored, through the coming together of sincere, lively spirited friends: At one
of these meetings, in particular in Cork soon after my coming to it, we had the
company of John Duckett from Leinster, a worthy elder. In the men's meeting he
spoke to us with such divine authority and sweetness, that to me his words
seemed fitly spoken indeed, and like apples of gold in pictures of silver.

Their half year's meetings in Dublin were attended by some friends from most
parts of the nation. Here in their meetings for discipline, as well as for
worship, a zeal for the honor of God, and the good of the church presided, and
friends were excited to keep all things in proper order in the church. The
first time I attended a half year's meeting was in the winter 1742, and it was
indeed a lively good meeting, which I hope never to forget. After I removed
from Cork to Mountmelick I attended the national, and provincial meetings for
Leinster pretty constantly, and often in them was affected with reverent
gratitude to the Almighty, who by the discoveries of the divine wisdom
instituted them for the support and edification of the church, and in them
frequently owned the gatherings of his people in his name, by the evident
manifestation of his divine presence.

In process of time these worthy men and women, in whose hearts the love of God
and his people, had by long growth become deeply rooted, one after another
finished their course honorably, leaving an excellent favor behind them; but
when they were removed, very few of the youth or others, succeeded them in the
right line, to fill up their vacant places with propriety. Of their survivors,
on one hand, a considerable number retained the ancient plainness of language
and habit, and rigidly censorious of any deviation therefrom, valued themselves
thereupon, as if it were the only test and badge of discipleship, while their
hearts were gone after their covetousness in eagerly pursuing, and sordidly
hoarding temporal wealth. On the other hand a large body of youth and others
shooting up in self-indulgence, in conformity to the world, and rushing
headlong into the temptations of the times.

Yet amidst this inundation of negligence and revolt, there remain in most
places a number of sincere-hearted friends, a few worthy ministers and elders:
but within these twenty years past, there has been a great alteration for the
worse.

The proposals, which friends of Bristol made me, appeared sufficiently
encouraging to promise a probable prospect of a pretty easy situation, as to
temporals, and when in Mountmelick, this city was presented to my view for a
residence for me and my family, it was brought to my remembrance, how in my
young years, it was made to me what Bethel was to Jacob in his youthful time,
when all alone with his staff, he traveled obeying the command of his parents,
that is, the place, where the Lord first visited me with his power and light,
and was a father to me, when I was as it were alone, and far from my parents
and all my relations; and how he called Jacob after many years, and a great
increase of family, to go up again to Bethel and dwell there, and erect an
altar to his God: how Jacob thereupon, obliged his household to put away their
strange gods, to be clean, and change their garments: and so they went* Under
this view, I hoped this removal might be attended with beneficial effects to me
and mine, and that I had in degree divine concurrence therein, being divinely
favored among my dear friends in Ireland in my last taking leave of them.

But promised happiness in this life often proves a phantom that flies from us
as we pursue; we often think we have it in prospect, but it still keeps beyond
our reach: They who would attain certain and durable happiness, should extend
their views beyond this life.

For notwithstanding the apparent encouraging prospect, after a while I found
things, both provisions and labor, so much dearer here than in Ireland, that
discouragements and embarrassments crowded upon me to that degree, that I was
often brought very low, under the gloomy prospect: and my faith was put to a
severe trial: yet it pleased kind providence to make way for me, and raise me
relief in his own time, for which I desire to be ever gratefully thankful, and
unreservedly dedicated in heart to his service, whose mercies fail not.

Here also I found a change in another respect not agreeable to the natural
disposition. He, who had visited my soul, and called me into the ministry, had
given me a great place in the particular and near regard, affection and esteem
of friends in Ireland, where I had an open door, and was often much enlarged in
gospel love. Mostly attending the province meetings in Leinster, friends were
rejoiced to see me, and apt to think me much missed, if at any time I did not
get out to any of them. Whenever I did, I met such a welcome reception amongst
friends (being often opened to their edification, and to our mutual endearment
to each other in the sweet streams of divine life) and such ready attendance
and kindness as were very pleasing to nature.

But coming from thence to Bristol, where I was now become a stranger to many,
and where they were full sed as to vocal ministry, I was here very much shut
up, and for a season seemed to have lost the caresses, cordial invitations, and
that place I had amongst friends in Ireland; which, however, though (in my
present trying circumstances) a seemingly additional discouragement, was not an
unprofitable dispensation: for though it was the great favor of the Almighty,
whereby I was opened among my friends to their edification, and their hearts
opened toward me; yet herein the enemy artfully laid his snares, and too much
and too often prevailed over my unwatchful soul to my inward hurt. For what are
all the caresses of mankind? Of small value in themselves, and often injurious
to them whom they please, conveying hidden poison to the unguarded mind; while
that which alone will stand us in real stead, and be of infinite advantage, is
to get and keep the favor of the Almighty: may I therefore want, and even
reject, whatever would please, and nourish, that spirit, which ought to come
under daily mortification!

The inward near unity, sympathy, esteem and affection of friends and brethren
is a very grateful and pleasing enjoyment; but it may be proper and good for us
to be tried and proved with being stripped of every leaning stock, but the only
sure foundation, that we may thereby be driven to have recourse to it, and keep
our only safe habitation there. May this, after a life so tossed up and down,
as mine has been, at length become my case on any terms! and if it be, it will
be more than worth all I have yet suffered, were it many times more: For all
else will be soon over; but this will never end.

SUPPLEMENT TO THE JOURNAL. By JOHN GOUGH.
THUS far my deceased brother proceeded in the narrative of the transactions of
his own life; I find by the papers in my hand, that (as noted in the preface)
he drew up a review thereof at sundry periods, and commenced the last in the
66th year of his age; which, it is propable, had he lived to finish it, would
have exhibited, in a continued narration, the succeeding occurrences of his
life to near the present time; but he proceeded only a little way in the last
review: and the former in his 54th year terminates here; I condole with the
reader the want of this continuation by that hand, which only could give it
with those interesting reflections, resulting from a recollection of the
feelings attending the successive occurrences of his life; this is an advantage
that no other hand can supply, as no other (...) cured him also an open door
for the reception of his labor and service therein.

During this interval, in the year 1769 he met with a close trial in the death
of his deservedly beloved son John; a young man of amiable manners, and
valuable qualities beyond most of his years, being blessed with a good natural
disposition, and good capacity, well improved in his minority by a diligent
application to useful learning, under the tuition of his father and preceptor;
to whom the easy task of instructing him, his assiduity, and ready proficiency
conveyed secret joy, and pleasing hopes of future satisfaction in a son, who
gave such promising omens of making an useful and honorable member of
religious and civil society. Nor were these hopes frustrated in the advancing
stages of his short life. For as he grew up, being favored with solid
religious impressions, he fought after, and attained best wisdom to a degree,
in general, exceeding his age. in this his entrance on the stage of life, a
propriety and steadiness of department, that might adorn advanced years,
attracted the notice and respectful regard of the best friends who had the
opportunity or observing, or being acquainted with him. By a conscientious
discharge of every social and religious duty, as a dutiful son, as an
affectionate brother, as an exemplary pattern of plainness, sobriety and
circumspection of life, he gave evident indications, he was early acquainted
with the grace and truth, which came by Jesus Christ.

I apprehend he was for a season an assistant to his father in his school: but
the weight of care, and exercising embarrassment of this occupation, with the
prospect of increasing care, as the weight thereof should devolve more
immediately on his shoulders, not suiting the present temper of his mind,
discouraged him from continuing in that line of life: and therefore meeting
with an encouraging offer from a friend in London, to assist him in his
business in the capacity of a clerk, he removed thither: and there he laid down
the body in or about the 21st year of his age (as I recollect) having in this
station, as well as every other, conducted himself with fidelity, reputation
and honor: In testimony whereof I have an extract of a letter, from his
employer, to his father, communicated in one from the latter of tenth month
26th, 1769, as follows, viz.

I now doubt of my eldest son John's being any longer in this world: he was
seized with a violent fever last first day week. B. R. in last seventh day's
letter writes For my own part I don't much expect his recovery, which is a
great affliction to me on diverse accounts: yet I hope to be resigned to the
will of providence, being well assured if he be removed it will he to his
eternal gain, although my very great loss as well as thine, and many others, by
whom he is dearly beloved. Oh! that my life, and that of all that know him may
be like his, that at our death we may say as he did to my wife; I have done all
that had to do, and must now go home.

Soon after he died; and in my brother's next letter he writes me the following
account of his funeral. My son's John's funeral was uncommonly remarkable. It
was taken to the new meeting house at Park in Southwalk. The meeting was
excessively crowded, and many without doors It was attended by several public
friends, many friends from several meetings in the city, and many out of the
country from the love they bore him: the opportunity by all accounts was
eminently favored, the service thereof falling to the lot of our worthy well
qualified friend, Samuel For^hergill, to the tendering the hearts of many
present.

Through divine favor and assistance I freely gave him up, thankful for having
such a son, who has left behind him too few like him in pure unmixed goodness,
which diligently exerted itself to do well. He was a most affectionate, dutiful
son, both to me and his present mother, so complete a pattern in every virtue,
that I have heard many in London and Bristol say, that they never saw one of
his years like him. He is happily gone before, safe landed in the port of rest;
and that we may land there is all that we have to desire and be concerned for.

These short testimonies to the memory of my deceased nephew, I thought proper
to insert here; First, because I am of opinion, had his father lived to
continue his own account of the occurrences of his life so far, he would not
have omitted one, so nearly affecting him; and it was my purpose to notice what
I apprehend he would have done for edification, as far as I have materials.
Secondly, I thought the delineation of such a character, might be of service,
to some of the youth of this generation, as an example for them to imitate; as
an evidence that early piety may through divine assistance, be attained, and
that if we seek it in sincerity, and with full purpose of heart, our search
will not be in vain: "I love them," says wisdom, that love me, and they that
seek me early, shall find me. Prove. viii. 17.
As an awakening instance of the uncertain tenure we have of all things in this
transitory life; that all flesh is grass. and the goodliness of man as the
flower or the field; and as a powerful incentive, in consideration thereof, to
extend our views beyond the short-lived glory, and fading enjoyments of this
uncertain world, to the durable riches of righteousness, and everlasting
rewards thereof. May the rising youthhereby be incited, so to number their
days, as that they may apply their hearts unto wisdom, in order to make timely
preparation for their final change: and not suffer themselves, to be so far
deluded, as to put off this necessary work, to some ^uture stage of life, which
they can have no assurance of attaining unto, reasoning with themselves (through
the suggestions of the enemy) that gaiety, festivity, and fleshly liberties,
being agreeable to their present age may be safely indulged for a season, as
they have much time to repent and grow sober in; and that at some more advanced
period, when gravity and seriousness will be more suitable to their years, they
will then apply to those things that belong to peace. Had this virtuous young
man so reasoned, and so acted, how different had the favor he left behind him
been! But oh, how different! how very remotely different his condition in his
immortal state!

If any man will come after me, said our blessed Lord, let him take up his
cross daily, deny himself, and follow me: Luke ix 23.
since then these are the prescribed terms of discipleship, and, if we would be
eternally happy are to be submitted to, at one period of our lives or other;
they have greatly the advantage, who are so wise as to submit thereto, in the
early part of life. It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth,
before his evil propensities be so confirmed by indulgence as to become
habitual: custom has a powerful influence over the human mind, and the cross
to evil habits is hard to endure. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the
leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, who are accustomed to do evil.
Jer. xiii. 23.
On the contrary, as custom also makes hard things easy, is instead of
accustoming ourselves to do evil, and thereby strengthening our natural
propensities thereto, and edging our painful sensations under the cross; we
accustom our tender necks to the yoke of Christ, we shall much sooner feel his
yoke become easy, and his burden light: that early piety is the surest ground
of an easy and peaceful passage through this vale of tears, as well as laying a
good foundation for futurity. Godliness is profitable unto all things, having
the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come, Tim. i.4, 8.
and those have in a general way proved most eminently serviceable, and the
brightest lights in their generation, who have with Jacob, entered early into
covenant with their Maker, and kept the covenant of their youth.

I sincerely desire the youth into whose hands this may fall, may deeply ponder
these interesting reflections, so as seriously to consider their latter end,
and make timely preparation for it; as not knowing at what hour the master may
come, at midnight, at cock-crowing, or the dawning of the day. And then I am
well convinced they would be weaned, not only from the luxury, dissipation, and
gross enormities of the world, but from an affectation of, and conformity unto
the vain amusements, manners and fashions thereof, which too many indulge
themselves in, to their hurt. Let them not satisfy themselves with an
apprehension, that they indulge only in things of an indifferent nature, and in
which religion is not concerned: But instead of unwisely measuring themselves
by themselves, and comparing themselves amongst them selves, bring their deeds
to the true criterion the light, Cor. ii. 10 12.
that they may be made manifest, what source they originate from: and in the
light many of the little things will be seen to draw the mind from its proper
center, and the seats of those that sell doves occupying the temple of the
heart, to unfit it for an house of prayer. It is not sufficient that we are
preserved from gross evils (although this is laudable so far) but if we are
concerned to make our calling and election sure, and to secure an inheritance
amongst them that are sanctified, we are to walk in obedience to the will of
God, (which is our sanctification) revealed by his grace in our hearts, which
teaches to deny ourselves not only of those things that are manifestly evil;
but of those also, that, under the appearance of indifferent, gratify our
carnal desires, and draw the mind into folly and vanity, from that state of
vigilance, on which our safety depends: not only to abstain from those
irregularities in conduct, which injure our reputation with men; but to keep
that guard upon the avenues of the heart, that we suffer no thief to find
entertainment there, to steal away our affections from God, or defile this
temple of the Holy Ghost. Man that is created a little lower than the angels,
is created for higher and nobler pursuits, than the gratifications of sense:
and not to rest satisfied in merely avoiding that conduct which exposes him to
censure; but to follow that which merits praise, and procures divine
approbation, Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things
are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any
virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things. Philippians iv. 8


My brother, having now for several years been principally engaged, in the
necessary care and labor to provide for those of his own household; in the
latter end of the year 1773, felt a religious concern on his mind to visit
friends in some of the counties of England: and also those of Ireland, in
company with Thomas Melhuish, of Taunton in Somersetshire: And in order to set
himself at liberty to accomplish these visits, he resigned his school in
Bristol.

He soon after entered on the service before him, in a visit to friends in some
of the western and southern counties of England, and the city of London, and
its environs: of which visit, I received the following information from him in
the letters he wrote to me at that time; the following extracts whereof will
best supply what is wanting here.

London, 18th 1st Month, 1774.

I have been now near four months closely employed in visiting friends, through
the four counties of Somerset, Devon, Dorset and Hants: and fat with friends at
many of their monthly meetings, and the three quarterly meetings for
Somersetshire, Dorsetshire, and Hampshire, all which were large for the season
of the year, and favored by the master of our assemblies with that power of
love, which unites his true servants every where in a holy concern for the
honor of his name, and for the faithful support of that testimony, he has
called them to bear.

I reached this city last first day morning, having ridden eleven miles before
meeting. I was at Gracious-street that morning, at which were Sarah Tailor and
Tabitha Merriott, the former of whom was favored with a lively opportunity, --
it was a good meeting and ended well. I was thankful for having reached it. In
the afternoon I was at Devonshire-house, the meeting was very large, and fresh
ability was given to treat with the youth and others, in the merciful opening
of the pure spring of the gospel. Yesterday I attended the select morning
meeting, and in the afternoon the two weeks meeting. And in the evening, Thomas
Corbyn with his lodgers, the friends abovementioned, visited at my lodgings,
where we had a consolatory time of retirement, in which our heavenly father was
graciously pleased to break the bread of life amongst us. I shall be likely to
be three or four weeks, in and about London, and when I am clear, I have the
meetings of Berkshire and Wiltshire, to visit in my way home. I desire to be
every day where I ought, and as I ought, that if I can do no good, I may be in
the way of renewedly receiving some fresh supply from the living fountain,
which refreshes, and spiritually unites all the true travelers heavenward, in
daily gratitude to the kind author of all good.

London, 5th 2d Month, 1774.

My dear companion (who has obtained his credentials from their monthly and
quarterly meetings,) writes to me, that he is hastened in his mind, to move
forward: but both he and I must submit to bear the curb, and exercise patience.
I am at times assaulted with earnest longings to make haste home, to get a
little time there, before my coming over to visit friends in Ireland; till I am
favored with the renewing of that gracious help, which raises over all things
and gives the single desire of being both where and what I should be. I entered
with an earnest desire that I might be both guided and guarded aright; and
hitherto with great thankfulness, have to acknowledge that my prayers have been
answered: and that he who has the key of David, has been graciously pleased
many times to open his storehouse, and from thence to unfold doctrine, counsel,
consolation, and reproof, to the differing states of the people.

London, 1st 3d Month, 1774.

I have now been in this city seven first days and seven second days morning
meetings, and through the other parts of those weeks, have besides those of
London, Westminister and Southwark, labored in the sundry meetings around
them. Tomorrow I expect the two last meetings here, that for worship at
Gracious-street, in the morning, and the monthly meeting at Devonshire-house,
in the afternoon; next day to set off for Berkshire, Wiltshire and Bristol. So
that it looks like to be the 4th month before I can set out for Dublin.

I have cause to be humbly thankful to the author of all our mercies, who has
been kind to me through my winter's travels, favoring me with good health, through
all winds and weathers, and with a kind reception every where. At this city
being entered into my proper labor and business, I have found that I could not
retire hence, any sooner than the day abovementioned, and I think I shall not
overstay my time, but rather otherwise, having found an enlargement of heart
beyond expectation, and having contributed to increase the morning meeting of
elders here, with a valuable addition thereto; though I found it hard labor
through the diffidence and reluctance of some; yet the power and love of truth at
length prevailed, to the satisfaction and comfort of many good friends.

I find accordingly that he got home on the 8th 3 mo. and in about a week
afterward took a turn to the quarterly meeting of Somersetshire at Glastonbury,
and that for Wiltshire at Devizes, and was at some other meetings in his way
from one to the other.

The beginning of 4 mo. he left home on his intended visit to Ireland; he came
to the quarterly meeting at Worcester, and thence by Birmingham, Coventry,
Dudley and Stourbridge to Colebrook-dale, where he was at meetings at the
New-dale and Old-dale, and visited sundry families, accompanied by Daniel Rose.

From Colebrook-Dale, by Shrewsbury to Dolobran, where the meeting house was
nearly full, the meeting began at 8 o'clock in the morning, and was very
comfortable. The next day he got to Llewindee to William Howel's, son-in-law to
the late worthy friend John Goodwin, (with whom John's widow was then living,
being 83 years of age,) and had a meeting there, and from thence he went by
Llaneedless to the Welsh yearly meeting at Brecknock, which began on the 26th
of 4th month: The meeting of ministers and elders, began, at 9 o'clock in the
morning, and at three in the afternoon, a meeting of friends only, and after it
the men's meeting, which held till it was almost dark, and then adjourned to
the 7th hour next morning, when friends met again, and the, meeting held till
about nine. At ten the public meeting began in the Town Hall, was excessively
crowded, and a satisfactory meeting. This yearly meeting ended the 27th 4th
month, and the half-year's meeting in Dublin was to begin the 1st 5th mon. So
he writes, William Howel and I came 41 miles after dinner, to Llaneedless,
where on the 28th we had a large meeting in the town hall or session-room,
beginning at 8 o'clock, which was much favored. Margaret Jarman, and Mary
Hunt, accompanied us from thence to Escargoh, where we also had a memorable
opportunity, our hearts being much tendered together. On the 29th being sixth
day of the week, he set off from Llewindee accompanied by Owen Owen son of
Humphrey Owen aforementioned, and grandson to John Goodwin, for Holy head, and
that day, although they were detained some hours for the tide to fall, till they
could cross a river in the way, and in crossing which, they were for a good
while up to the saddle skirts, they reached Carnarvan, being fifty miles, that
night, and Holyhead about eleven o'clock in the forenoon of seventh day; went
aboard the packet-boat, about two o'clock on first day morning; but having
little wind, did not get to Dublin till second day evening being the second day
of the 5th month and of the national meeting.

Of this journey in Ireland, he kept a brief diary; but not so particular, as
of the former through Wales, being only a summary account of the meetings and
places he was at each day, without any remarks on meetings, or occurrences to
diversify the narration, and therefore I shall be obliged to comprize the
relation thereof, in a narrow compass.

He visited the meetings in course; first, by Edenderry, Rathangan and
Ballitore, to the six weeks meeting at Carlow, and thence westward, to
Ballimurry, and returned to the quarterly meeting at Edenderry, in concert with
his companion, Thomas Melhuish. From thence they directed their course toward
the province of Munster, by Tullamore, Birr and Kilconinmore to Limerick, and
from thence through Munster, finishing their visit to that province, at the
province meeting at Waterford: thence through the county of Wexford, and so into
the county of Carlow, where Thomas Melhuish and he separated, (at Castledermot)
Thomas's draft being to Ulster, and my brother's present concern, more to the
adjacent parts of Leinster.

After parting with Thomas Melhuish, he continued visiting friends in those
parts, till the province meeting of Wicklow, after which, and spending some
days in Dublin, he went from thence to the province meeting for Ulster at
Ballenderry, and returned pretty directly back to Dublin, without appointing
any meeting in that province, and continued visiting meetings in different
parts of Leinster province, chiefly till the ensuing quarterly meeting, which
was held at Enniscorthy, and from thence proceeded directly to Waterford, to
take shipping for Bristol.

This visit took him up near four months, (for he embarked for Bristol, on or
about the 24th 8 mo.) the greatest part of which time seems to have been
employed in Leinster province, having visited most parts thereof, at least
twice over.

Having as aforementioned, resigned his school at Bristol, in order to be at
liberty to discharge what was pointed out to him as a duty: Now his service
being finished, he was out of employment there, for the support of himself and
family. The prospect of this in his giving up to this service must, I imagine,
have been a pretty close trial of faith; as he could not at the time of his
resignation have any apprehension of the way which afterward opened, for their
employment and subsistence: but knowing he was faithful who had called him into
the service, he was doubtless strengthened to go forth in faith, and a humble
dependence on him, whom he served for support, inwardly and outwardly; and in
the due time, away opened for him to his satisfaction. For by my removal from
Dublin (where I had resided upwards of twenty-three years) to Lisburn, which
happened during his travels in this nation; the school there became vacant.
Whereupon friends of Dublin made him proposals to undertake the care thereof;
to which he agreed, and soon after his return to Bristol, removed with his
family to settle in that city.

Where again the necessary attendance of his school, confined him pretty much
to the place of his residence, and parts adjacent; for the space of two or
three years; till about the summer 1777, when his family being grown up, and
mostly in a way to provide for themselves; and his youngest son having gotten
an agreeable place of apprenticeship, he found his way open finally to
relinquish the confining and exercising occupation, of his school, in order to
be more at liberty in the evening of his day, to accomplish the remaining part
of his day's work, against the termination thereof: and from this time to his
removal out of this life, he was much engaged to travel and labor amongst
friends in the different quarters of this nation for the promotion of truth and
righteousness.

And as he had not visited Ulster province in his late visit to this nation;
the discharging of that debt was the principal service pointed out to him, in
the following manner, as he himself expresses it in the introduction to his
account of said visit.

Seventh mo. 1st, 1777. A good friend from England lately told us, in a
meeting, that our old copy books were sullied, and too full of blots; that we
should get new books to keep our accounts in, and keep them fair and clean, and
I wished with the Lord's assistance to do so, viz. to have my heart and life
made and kept clean.

I felt a longing desire to undergo a fresh the "warning of regeneration, Titus
iii. 3.
" in order to be favored with the renewing of the Holy Ghost. I thought that
he who said to the blind man, Go wash in the pool of Siloam, John vii. 7.
said unto me, Go to the northern parts of Ireland, to visit what is left there
of the professors of truth; and therewith infused the new covenant, or solemn
engagement on my part, to give up thereto. Oh poor cold North; almost totally
dead as to the divine life! In visiting thy sons and daughters, I foresee great
anxieties, inward conflicts, and trying baptisms; may I duly mind that part of
Christ's counsel to his followers, In your patience possess ye your souls, Luke
xxi. 19.
and indeed his counsel continually conveyed through his holy spirit; as I have
the greatest need closely to attend to it in all things, and practice faithful
obedience thereto.

So may I daily watch and pray, and labor, both to open a new book of
accounts, respecting the Lord's holy covenant, and my walking humbly therein,
and endeavor to keep it carefully without blot or blemish, both within in his
sight, and without toward mankind; in a daily exercise to keep always a
conscience void of offense, toward God and toward men Acts xxiv. 16.
. May I watch and strive against corrupt self, and keep a diary or daily
account thereof, morning and evening, remembering that to live after the flesh
is to die, but through the spirit to mortify the deeds of the body is to live.
Romans viii. 13.
Oh, that in me all self were slain, that Christ might live and ever reign in
my soul, who visited, invited, attracted it, about the 22d year of my age; and
has, through his grace, preserved me through many revolutions, and often opened a
way for me to steer along, when no way, or next to none appeared, till now I am
come to the sixty-fifth year of my life.

Seventh mo. 17th. After I awoke this morning, this text sprang in my mind
Christ gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works: Titus ii. 14.
with a strong desire that whatever it cost me, whatever labor, self-denial,
or seeming hardship; I may obtain the great end, for which I have a being, the
"one thing needful," which Mary made her choice, and thereby pleased her Lord,
viz. that of being more thoroughly redeemed, from every corruption of nature,
or neglect of duty to God; more purified in heart and life; more inflamed with
a holy zeal for his honor, laying aside every weight and burden, and the sin
which does so easily beset, and run with patience the race that is set before
us, looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith, who, for the joy
that was set before him, endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set
down at the right hand of the throne of God. Hebrews xii. 1, 2.
And now I am likely soon to set forward as a poor pilgrim, to the coldest and
remotest parts of the North of this nation, which are rarely visited by any
friends of the ministry, they meet with so much discouragement that way: but I
must go and labor amongst them, according to the ability given, for the
working out our salvation, with fear and trembling.

Seventh mo. 18th. Today we had a silent, but to me and some others I hope an
edifying meeting, under the divine and spiritual ministry of the great minister
of life and salvation, who therein set before me two services, the one to
procure some subscriptions for the relief of a poor family, which after meeting
I set about and succeeded in; the other my journey to the North, with a lively
and fresh encouragement thereto, under the consideration of the uncertainty of
our time here, and that if my duty to God required me to be doing one thing in
one place, and death should arrest me doing something else in another place,
how miserable would my state be! The covenant of my youth was now brought to my
remembrance with a lively and affecting impression, in the language adopted by
the prophet Jeremiah, speaking in the name of the Lord, I remember thee, the
kindness of thy youth; the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after me
in the wilderness, in a land that was not sown. Israel was holiness to the
Lord, and the first fruits of his increase. Jer. ii. 2, 3.
When I first gave up to the heavenly visitation, how was my heart melted into
holy admiration of the love of God, and of his condescension to my low estate:
pure goodness was then all my desire and delight. In the intervals of labor I
loved to retire from all the world, to him my best friend, who was with me in
my labor, instructing and helping me in it, and making hard things easy, so
that "I walked by faith, and not by sight," my mind being in heaven, often
overflowing with the effusion of his grace, and goodness. Under this enlivening
recollection, an ardent desire was rekindled in my heart, to renew my covenant,
to return to my first love; and do my first works, in an unreserved
resignation, to do the will of God. And my heart was influenced with a wish,
that our young people in general, might be induced to love religious retirement
in order therein to become acquainted with the wonderful counselor, who is
mere readily met with therein, than in the crowds, commotions, and tumults of
the world, and in their own experience prove, that It is good for a man that he
bear the yoke in his youth, he sits alone, and keeps silence -- He puts
his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope: Lam. iii. 27, 28, 29.
May our conversation be in heaven, and our language and whole demeanor make
it manifest that we have been with Jesus.

Eighth mo. 4th. I returned from visiting the families of Timahoe meeting, in
company with Joseph Williams, wherein a divine visitation seemed to be
renewedly extended to them: It is much to be desired, that they may duly
embrace it, to come up in their duty, and to persevere in well-doing, to the
end of their days.

Such visits among our friends, under divine influence, are of service, and
worthy of being often performed, as tending to renew the bonds of friendship,
in the truth; to provoke to love and good works, and as they are engaged
steadily to wait upon the Lord, frequently prove seasons of renewing of
strength to the visitors, as well as visited.

Two days after, viz. the 6th of 8 mo. he set forward on his visit to friends
of Ulster province, taking his way by the quarterly meeting for Leinster
province, held at Moate; and after the conclusion thereof proceeded to
Oldcastle, Coothill and Castleshane, in each of which three meetings he did not
only labor amongst his friends in their public assemblies, but also visited
them in their several families* From Castleshane, he crossed over to Lurgan,
and was on first day at the meeting there, it being their men's and women's
meeting. At that meeting I met him, and it was to some an edifying season. From
Lurgan, he went to Rathfriland, and visited the families belonging to that
meeting. From thence he came to Lisburn, and had a meeting there, next day at
Hillsborough. The three succeeding days were the quarterly meeting at
Ballenderry, which he attended, and had acceptable service therein. The
following week, he took the meetings of Moyallen, Lurgan. Ballihagan, and
Charlemount, in succession, visited some families, and was again at the meeting
near Charlemount, on first day following, which he observes, was large like a
province meeting. He continued his course, from thence, to Antrim quarter, and
as the visiting of this quarter, was in a particular manner impressed as a duty
upon his mind, he visited the meetings thereof, thoroughly, and all or most of
the families of friends thereaway. On the first day, he was at Grange, of which
he writ to a friend, We had a kind of general meeting at Grange yesterday,
there being at it fri^^^s from Toberhead, Ballinacre^, Clough, Dallymena and
Antrim, and I think it was a time of renewed visitation of divine favor to
some. That we may dedicate the residue of our days to the service of the Lord
and hi^ people, is my sincere desire for us both, and many more.

He spent about a week among friends, in this quarter. But (as I recollect) his
visit both to said quarter in particular, and the province in general, was in
some degree cut short, by the arrival of our friends Thomas Corbyn, John
Townsend, and Joseph Roe, from London, John Storer from Nottingham, and James
Backhouse from the county of Durham, who came over in consequence of an
appointment of the yearly meeting of London, to visit the sundry meetings of
discipline, in this nation. Which visit they entered upon at the men's and
women's meeting, for that purpose, appointed at Lisburn the 10th day of 9 mo.
this year, while my brother was engaged, in the neighboring part of ^ntrim
quarter. This induced him to (...) over to that meeting, and the said friends
being very desirous, that he should be in Dublin, at the time of their arrival
there, in the course of their visit, he felt easy to accompany them to Antrim,
and from thence to Lurgan; from whence they proceeded to Charlemount, to be at
the men's and women's meeting there on first day, and Ballihagan on second day.
My brother staying first day morning meeting, at Lurgan, had also an evening
meeting at Lisburn, appointed at the fifth hour, and next day at Newtown.
Fourth day following, was with the English friends, at the men's and women's
meeting at Lurgan, and next day came with them to that of Lisburn, held at
Ballenderry. The province meeting at Lurgan, succeeded by appointment, on
sixth, seventh and first days, over which he stayed, and after that, and having
a meeting at Rathfriland, in the market-house, one more at Lurgan, and another
at Moyallen, he returned to Dublin.

When he arrived at Dublin, he found Thomas Dobson, (from near Carlisle, who
had come over under a particular concern for that service) engaged in a visit
to friends' families in that city: upon his arrival, he joined him in the
service, and accompanied him to ninety families, he having visited forty-six,
before my brother's return.

And in about three months after, Matthew Johnson from Cornwood, in
Northumberland, coming to the aforesaid city, under the like concern, (after
discharging himself in the same service to the meetings of Lisburn and
Ballenderry) my brother accompanied him also in his visit to the families of
friends there. Thus he was diligently engaged, most part of his latter days, in
almost a continued series of laborious service in the church, either at home or
abroad.

When we reflect upon the repeated visits of this kind, which diverse other
friends from distant parts, as well as those abovementioned, from the fresh and
lively impressions of duty, have been engaged in to friends, in the different
quarters of this nation; leaving, or submitting to be detained from every near
connection in life, to labor amongst us, in the work of the gospel, not only in
public, but from house to house; and often in the clear opening of our states,
under the influence of truth, even as from man to man, it should affect every
considerate mind, with humbling sensations of thankfulness, to our beneficent
Creator, for his unbounded loving kindness, and mercy to us, as a people, under
the view that although the professors of truth, many of them (one going to his
farm, and another to his merchandise) have slighted repeated calls, and excused
themselves, from the necessary preparation, for admittance to the
marriage-supper, he has not yet given charge to his servants, to go to the
lanes and highways, to call in others; but is still causing us to be striven
with, in close and searching labor. May the serious consideration hereof, so
impress our minds as to produce holy resolution, to turn to him that smites
us, and in reality, to seek the Lord of hosts. Remembering the day of our
visitation has it is assigned period, in the determination of his unsearchable
wisdom, who has declared my spirit, shall not always strive with man, for that
he also is flesh. Genesis vi. 3.


On the 3d day of 9 mon. 1778, he set forward on a journey, to visit his
friends in the province of Munster, making his way pretty directly through the
county of Carlow to Clonmel, where he commenced his visit to said province,
being there on a first day, at their two meetings. On second day he writes, Not
suiting for any public meeting hereaway, being the time of their assizes, we
were at nineteen friends' houses, and had good opportunities in several of
them. So proceeding, he had meetings in course, at the following places, viz.
Cashel, Garryroan, Limerick: Cork on first day, the two public meetings, and a
third, with diverse friends in the evening at Joseph Garratt's, on second day he
went to Bandon, accompanied by several friends, and back to Cork; was at their
meeting on third day, and after it, at the men's meeting; on fourth day to
Youghal, to a meeting appointed at five o'clock that evening, stayed their
weekday meeting next day, and after it returned to Cork, to the quarterly
meeting. From thence by Garryroan, and Clonmel, to Waterford, where his visit
terminated. He fell in with the meetings of Forest, county of Wexford, Carlow
and Rathangan, in his way from Waterford to the quarterly meeting for Leinster
province, held at Edenderry, the 4th of 10th month, and from thence returned
home.

He continued at and about home, for near eleven months, for just at the same
time of the succeeding year, viz. the 2d of 9th month, 1779, he left home, to
go to the quarterly meeting at Edenderry, and thence by Moate and Ballimurry,
he made his way into Ulster province again; being at Oldcastle on first day,
the 10th of 9th month. From thence to a meeting at Coothill, which was a large
crowded meeting, several of the town's people, I suppose coming in. From
Coothill, he came to Castleshane, thence to Moyallen, and attended the weekday
meeting at Lurgan, which, he says, was a large and good meeting. The quarterly
meeting at Lisburn succeeding, he attended it, and after that, was at meetings
at Rathfriland, Moyallen, Ballihagan, and near Charlemount successively. At
this last meeting, he joined in the visit to the families of friends, and in
company with some friends of that meeting, performed the said visit thoroughly,
spending therein near two weeks, although closely engaged day by day. After this
service, he visited the meetings of Antrim quarter, and the rest of the
meetings of the province in course, finishing his service, at the
province-meeting at Lurgan, the 29th and 30th of the 10th month.

The next service I find him engaged in, was a visit to the monthly meetings of
Mountmelick, and Edenderry, in his letter to me dated 1st month, 1780, he
writes, In the very cold weather, which we have had, I visited all the
particular meetings of Mountmelick and Edenderry monthly meetings, and though I
could not but lament the state of many careless professors, yet I had good
satisfaction in discharging my duty therein.

In the summer of the same year, he made another excursion, through some parts of
Leinster province, and as far as Waterford. And about the same season, as the
two past years, viz. on or about the 22d. 8th month, 1780, he set out again, on
a visit to friends, in the province of Munster. In his first day's journey his
guide dropped his saddle-bags, whereby being deprived of necessary change of
linen, etc. for the journey before him, I was told it put him to a stand
whether to proceed or return home; and also upon seriously considering the
grounds he set out on, and the validity of his commission; and upon consulting
the oracle in his own breast, it was intimated to him, that he must go forward,
if his life went for it. And to the grounds, or motive of his journey, the
first meeting he had, was at Mountmelick, from whence he writ We had a good
meeting here to day, which seemed as a fresh seal to my commission, and makes
me strongly desire I may be preserved, to attend singly to my duty, and
faithfully discharge it. From Mountmelick, he went by Roscrea, Birr, and
Kilconinmore, to Limerick to the province meeting for Munster, which, by the
account he gave, was said to have been the largest that was remembered in that
place, many friends from Leinster attending it; -- And further, The kind father
and author of all our mercies, favors my mind with the sweet sense of his
divine love, and a desire to follow and serve him, who is a rich rewarder of
all his faithful servants. Here being requested by friends, to forward the
family visit, he consented, therein following the pointings of duty. On the
fourth day, after the province meeting, in conjunction with diverse friends of
that province, he entered upon this exercising service; his succeeding labors
in this and the following service, may be best understood from extracts, from
his own letters, written to his wife, during his being engaged therein.

Limerick, 1st 9th month, 1780.

On fourth day, we began the family visit here, and that day, we had six solemn
opportunities; visiting so many families, and yesterday we followed the
business closely; having eight solemn meetings, some of which held long, so
that it was near ten at night, when the last of them broke up. We hope that two
days more, will be sufficient to finish the family visit here, so after first
day, expect to be thoroughly clear of this part of Munster, and on second day
to proceed with the friends, who stay with me here, to Cork. To look at the
labor, in a service of this kind, through such a very large increasing extensive
meeting, as that of Cork, would appear very weighty, and almost terrifying,
were it not for the earnest, which the great and good master has already given
us: who has led us along, in the sweet enjoyment of his own pure love, and
therein has united our spirits, and has opened a door of utterance, to the
reaching the witness, and tendering the hearts of many.

Cork, 13th 9th month.

It is now, somewhat hard for me to get a little time to write, we are so
closely employed from early in the morning till late in the evening. We were on
the service yesterday, and to day, at a little past seven in the morning. We
had nine family meetings on second day; yesterday, one before meeting, five
after, and to day has been a day of almost incessant labor, having had nine
family meetings, and some of them pretty long, and some also much favored,
with the sweet flow of the heavenly father's love, to the tendering the hearts
of diverse. Under this divine favor, I have had a strong desire, on the behalf
of our children, that the great author of pure goodness, would incline their
hearts more and more to their principal interest, and clothe their minds with
the heavenly sense of his love, and with the humility becoming depending
creatures, and enamour them with the beauty of truth, which will never wax old,
that through its power, they might freely sacrifice to him, what he calls for;
and not look after the temptations and vanities of the world; but have the eye
single to things infinitely more important, that therein they may be blessed of
the Lord, with his favor, which is better than all things else.

16th, 9th month, 1780.

This has been a day of favor, to me and my friends, employed on the family
visit: a tender visitation from the father of mercies, has been extended to
diverse families; particularly one young man, and his wife, who was not educated
in our society, but this day was reduced to tenderness, both she and her
husband. I wish they may retain it, and come in at the right door to be useful
and exemplary. We have followed the work, with great diligence from early in
the morning till late in ^^e evening, having in the course of this week visited
above fifty families, and two hundred and twenty persons.

In his next letter, and the last he wrote, he gives an account of a current
disorder, viz. the dysentery, with which many had been seized, and that it had
followed him very closely for several days. It seems that, partly from reserve,
but chiefly, from a desire to accomplish the remaining part of the service
before him, so as to get through it in time, to return home, against the
ensuing half-year's meeting; he suffered this disorder to gather strength
before he let it be known, to a degree of obstinacy, beyond the power of
medicine to remove: for although no care of attendance, or suitable
applications, under the direction of skilful physicians were wanting, yet these
proving ineffectual, he departed out of this transitory state of existence, in
much tranquillity of mind, at the house of his kind friend, Joseph Garratt, in
Cork, on the 6th day of the 10th month 1780, and was buried in friend's burying
ground, in the suburbs of that city, the 9th of the same month, his funeral
being largely attended by friends and many others, as I am informed, by some
friends from thence, one of whom writes, We had a solemn opportunity, the wing
of ancient goodness being over the assembly, in the performance of the last
office, due to the worthy deceased.

Thus it pleased the divine Being, in whose hands our lives are, to release him
from further labor, in the church militant, and remove him from works to
rewards, leaving among his surviving friends a good savor; his removal being
generally regretted, and his memory greatly and extensively respected, by most
or all that knew him; being a man of meekness, humility and universal
benevolence; kindly disposed, and affectionate to his friends, and mankind in
general, he in return, possessed their affectionate regard and esteem in a
general way.

In his spirit, he was preserved bright and living, through his conclusive
labor, and to the last period of his life, by the accounts I received, from
some of those who were sharers, and witnesses thereof. My respected friend
Samuel Neale, in sympathy with our sorrow, for the loss of a near and justly
beloved relation, obliged me with an affecting epistle of condolence, in which
he expresses, It is needless to say, he is a great loss, in a society capacity
he was fervent and devoted; his lamp was replenished with oil, and it shined as
bright as ever in my judgment, he finished his course as a faithful soldier; he
finished it, making war in righteousness. I was with him at Limerick, at our
province meeting, and accompanied him, to the families there, pretty generally;
he was like an overflowing spring, and freely diffused what he was made
partaker of, amongst his friends and brethren, and all that came in his way.
After which he came to our city, and the same strength, zeal, and authority
attended him, here in the public meeting, and more select opportunities I was
at with him. He was at the labor, early and late, until forced to submit to
the increasing infirmity of body, I think he had finished all to five families,
when the great orderer of all things, gave him a release from further militant
labor in his church. He was calm and composed in his mind, said, he was
resigned to the divine will and was prepared for the event, relying on the
mercy of God. He was certainly much favored, by a divine qualification, and as
the evening approached, his sun went down bright, which is the crown of all.

And although he had his close trials, and discouraging prospects, in various
seasons of his life, as we may gather from the preceding pages, yet being
through all enabled to stay his mind on the Lord, he was preserved in peaceful
resignation, and safely brought through them all; and was favored to enjoy the
evening of his day, as to secular engagements, in serenity, and calm repose, in
a state of liberty to devote himself more fully, to the service of truth, and
to fulfill his ministry to the edification of the churches in this nation: He
lived to see his children well settled in marriage, to his full satisfaction,
or in a way to support themselves reputably, if favored with the divine
blessing upon their labors, and preserved in the fear of the Lord, which he
desired for them, more than outward riches. Incited through the gracious
visitation of divine goodness to him in his youth, in the first place, to seek
the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, he found the promise verified, that
a sufficiency of other things were added. And having been spared to his family,
till his immediate assistance became less necessary for their support; and to
the church, till his day's work was in a good degree well accomplished; he came
to his grave, in nigh a full age, as a shock of corn, comes in his season,
Job. v. 26.
experiencing the work of righteousness to be peace, and the effect of
righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever. Isa. xxxii. 17.
From hence those who may be tried with the like probations, as this is a world
of vicissitude, may receive encouragement in the cloudy season, in faith and
patience, to cast their care on that divine Being, who cares for his own, and
will bring them safely through all difficulties, and discouragements, provided
their hearts are sincere toward him, and all things will work together for
good, to those that love God.

Now the end of these publications, is not to extol the man, so much as to
recommend righteousness to mankind, by pointing out the beneficial and happy
effects thereof, in real life; and as the desire of happiness, planted deep in
our nature, is an universal affection of the human mind, (although too often
sought in things that cannot give it, or at best, but the shadowy and deceptive
appearance thereof,) to incite them in imitation of the just, to seek it where
only it is to be found, in pure religion and virtue, walking in all the
commandments of the Lord blameless. If we have regarded the deceased with
affectionate esteem, and honored them for their works' sake, let our regard
for their memory, prompt us to the imitation of their good examples. If we
regret their loss, and the vacancy of their places, let us consider that a
measure of the same divine spirit, which wrought powerfully in them for their
redemption, and enlivened them to every good word and work, is also given to us
individually, for the effecting of the same happy experience in us, whereby
through faithful obedience on our parts, we may receive qualification to fill
up some of the vacant seats; be serviceable in our respective allotments;
exemplary in our lives, and blessed in our end.

FINIS.
AN EPISTLE TO FRIENDS, IN ALL PARTS of IRELAND.
DEARLY BELOVED FRIENDS.
UNDER a concern for the welfare of our religious society, yet left in Ireland,
I think it my duty, to stir up the pure mind by way of remembrance.

I. In the first place, I desire that none under our name, may be raw and
ignorant, at a loss, if asked what we profess, or what is our fundamental
principle; but having the heartfelt experience thereof, "be ready always," (as
a good apostle advises) "to give an answer," or a reason of the hope that is in
you, with meekness and fear. 1 Peter iii. 15.


We profess to be a people called out of the corrupt spirit, and customs of the
world, out of all evil words and works, to follow Christ, in a close inward
adherence to the secret discoveries, which he gives us of our duty; that as his
faithful servants, we may enjoy his favor, both while here, and eternally
hereafter.

And our fundamental principle is this, that as God has created us to be for
ever happy, he has bestowed his light, grace, or holy spirit, to fit and
prepare us for it. Hereby he teaches us what to deny, and how to live, to
attain this great and glorious end.

If we adhere to this divine gift, we shall love him above all things, and
other gifts and blessings, as we ought to do. Parents will love their children
in the Lord. Children will be an honor to their parents, by a well-guarded,
and dutiful conduct. The young, and the aged, will be joined as brethren, in
one good concern.

Thus would a holy harmony, be seen and felt, as formerly: And we, in that
peace, order and union, reverencing the Lord our God, should enjoy the sweet
influences of his presence, and the joy of his salvation.

Why are we members of a separate society, but to be more closely connected
with the divine source of all purity and goodness, walking in the light of the
Lord, that it might shine in our lives, as way-marks to neighbors and sober
enquirers, that they, being won by our good conversation, may have cause to
bless God on our behalf? Thus were many convinced of our principles, and drawn
into our society, even at the hazard or loss of all that was dear to them in
the world.

II. I think it necessary, to enter upon some points more particularly, and to
add such exhortations thereupon, as my present concern may engage me to impart.

Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake: 1 Peter ii.
13.
actively, when not contrary to the law of God; passively, when it is opposite
thereto. This is conformable to the example of Christ and his apostles, as well
as of good men, in former ages, and of all the worthy martyrs in later days.

The Jews complained of Christ, for transgressing or breaking their laws: at
last when Pontius Pilate said, repeatedly, "I find no fault in him," they
answered, We have a law, and by our law he ought to die. John xix. 4, 6, 7.


From our fundamental principle, beforementioned, proceeded our well-known
principles, or testimony for Christ our Lord, in its sundry branches, which it
is our incumbent duty to bear, and to show forth to the world; as in the
following instances.

III. Our blessed Lord commands us, "not to swear at all." It is our duty
firmly to obey his command, whenever we are tried herein, and rather to suffer
patiently what human laws may inflict, than to take an oath, on any account
whatsoever. Thus Daniel and the three worthy Hebrews, chose rather to sacrifice
their bodies to the lion's den, and to the fiery furnace, than to comply with
the law of man, when it demanded a revolt from their duty, to their supreme
Sovereign.

IV. The law of man sometimes requires wars and fightings, and actively to
contribute thereto: but Christ commands us to love our enemies, and do to all
men nothing but what is good. As his professed subjects, we cannot therefore,
actively contribute to military affairs. Our Lord said to Pilate, If my kingdom
were of this world, then would my servants fight. John xviii. 36.
Again, whatever injuries or ill usage we receive, we must follow his pattern,
not rendering reviling for reviling, leaving vengeance to the Lord to whom it
belongs. None amongst us, must either fight, or do any violent action, tending
to provoke thereto. We must trust in the Lord, and then he will discover the
best means of helping and healing the evil in others, or animate us innocently
to bear our testimony against it, where hearts are too hard to admit any
offered help. In this case our Lord assures us, that great is our reward in
heaven: for such usage the righteous who were before us, have met with.

V. Our dear Lord commands his own ministers freely to give, as from him they
freely receive; and he changes not: a hireling man-made ministry therefore, is
none of his; nor can we join in supporting it, as such. Though the law of man
has established it, we ought to do as the apostles did, And to obey God rather
than man. Acts v. 29.
The gospel of Christ is free, not subject to worldly traffic. It can neither
be bought nor sold. It is the power of God to salvation. It brings the soul,
which receives and submits to it, into immortal union with the father of
lights, by leavening it into his divine nature. That which selfish priests
purchase and demand money for, is therefore not the gospel; and their
pretending it to be so, is an artful imposition.

This with many other things of like kind, our ancestors discovered in the true
light, and therefore (like holy Daniel and his brethren) passively submitted to
the laws, which required the support of this imposition, and to the rigorous
execution of those laws. By their courage and constancy herein, they made the
way smooth and easy to us, our sufferings being light, in comparison of theirs.
It was nothing but the love of God, that animated them cheerfully to suffer
great spoiling of goods, with long and hard imprisonments: separated from all
that was near and dear to them in the world. It was in the support of their
testimony to the universality of God's love to mankind, who invites them that
are athirst, and them that have no money, to come and buy wine and milk,
without money and without price.

May their descendants and successors, from generation to generation, come up
after them, in the same noble cause. So would they minister joy, to such as
have no other interest in view, but the spiritual health and vigor of the body,
and of every member therein. Some indeed of late years, have degenerated from
that fidelity to God, which those worthies ever firmly manifested. These throw
down what their forefathers labored to build up, and dissolve that spiritual
bond, which should unite us in faith and love. I earnestly desire they would
draw near in spirit to Christ, and to his militant church, to be a help to
faithful friends. When any of you are tried with future demands on such
accounts, I cannot but wish for you, as I look back to the worthies gone, that
like them ye may stand fast, in the freedom of the gospel, without flinching,
or any way evading our testimony for it. I fully believe that your fidelity, in
such trials, would be the means of giving you new life and strength, for the
zealous and upright discharge of other christian duties, and of making you both
useful and honorable members, not only of civil, but also of religious society.

As to that formal worship, which is begun and carried on in the will of man,
our faithful predecessors could have no unity with it, nor actively contribute
to the support of the places or materials appropriated to such worship.

VI. On the other hand, they most conscientiously paid an active obedience to
the laws, which enjoin the payment of customs, duties, and excise, to the King
and government; and were zealous, both by example and precept, to induce all to
be careful and punctual therein, and not on any account to deal in goods
suspected to be clandestinely imported, nor even to buy any of them, for their
own private consumption. So should we still keep ourselves, entirely clear from
this, and every other sort of unrighteous gains or savings.

VII. The law of the land, sets apart one day in seven, for religious
retirement, and the worship of God. This our forefathers approved of, and
religiously observed; though at the same time, they testified that the Jewish
sabbath is ended, by the coming of Christ; and that, there is no inherent
holiness, in any one day more than another. I have long had an earnest desire,
that all our friends would duly observe, and apply that day, to its proper
purpose, to begin each week aright, and so to hold on to the end of it; to
avoid as much as possible, traveling about worldly affairs on that day, and be
constant, while in health, in attending meetings for worship. Deny yourselves
the liberty of walking abroad, at such time, or in such manner, as will not be
of good example to the idle multitudes, who give the loose rein to licentious
inclinations, on that day: but rather choose to have your families collected,
for reading the holy scriptures, or what may make good impressions on their
minds, that when it shall be said, Give an account of thy stewardship, for thou
may be no longer steward, we then may be ready to give our accounts with
joy, and receive the answer of Well done, good and faithful servant. Enter thou
into the joy of thy Lord.

VIII. For want of this care, what harms abound! I am loath to mention them, but
hope ye will bear with me when ye duly consider that, nothing but well-wishing
love, induces me to lay them before you, in order that all might join in
contributing a timely remedy thereto, with the means of doing it, which the
Lord furnishes us with.

It is apparent, that from hence the love of God in many waxes cold. How they
make light of religious duties! What a slender attendance of weekday meetings
for the worship of God, as well as of those which are held for an united care
of the good of the body! So that it may now be said of many, as in sorrowful
days formerly, The ways of Zion mourn, because none come to her solemn feasts.
Lam. i. 4.
Again, what restlessness in meetings, what outward indications of spritual
indolence, of absent and wandering minds, of neglect of the awful duty of
worship, due from us to our great creator, what gazing about, or falling
asleep! Oh it is grievous, and tends to give strangers a dishonorable idea
concerning us, while we profess the pure spiritual worship of God, according to
his own institution; and while our dear Savior has assured us, that where two
or three are gathered together in his name, he is in the midst of them. Again,
from hence what violations of our christian testimony in its sundry branches,
what weakness and inconsistency in conduct with that divine principle, which we
profess! How do many trample upon the precious labors, and sufferings of men,
whose memories are and ever will be blessed, as they were valiant for the
truth, revealed to them by Christ their dearest Lord! And shall we not be
brought to account for these things? And will not our account be heavier, in
the reckoning day, than that of others, who have not been favored in so high a
degree, nor so much driven with, by the spirit of the Lord, who declared to the
old world, before its final ruin, My spirit shall not always strive with man.

IX. Again, how many in these perilous days run back, and draw others with
them, into the vanities of the times, into a conformity with the world, both in
dress and address, into the company of such as indulge the same dispositions,
till the plain honest manners, of sincere and affectionate friends, are falling
into disuse, being such as some are ashamed of. Thus were many ashamed of
Christ, and offended in him, for his plain and humble appearance, when in the
body: but he declared that, he also would be ashamed of them, or would deny
them, before his father and his holy angels.

From these pernicious liberties, have proceeded mixed marriages, running out to
the priests, confusion in families, affliction and anguish of parents, in the
bad returns made to them by disobedient children, painful wounds to our
christian society. Many, by these traps and snares of the common enemy, have
been carried away into the wide world, and quite lost as to the dedication of
their hearts and lives, to the love and fear of God: and but few have stood in
the gap, to prevent their thus running out: Few have joined in repairing the
breaches, made by backsliders, in that wall of defense, which the Lord by his
power and spirit, had erected about us.

In this general decline of the society, there seems to be great cause to fear
the yet farther spreading of these harms, unless the Lord in mercy, turn the
hearts of many, timely to himself, which we ardently pray for, knowing that,
except the Lord build the house, men labor but in vain: yet we must do our
duty; otherwise we shall not be clear in his sight: and he orders (now as he
did formerly) line upon line, and precept upon precept, in order that all may
be timely warned, whether they will hear or forbear!

I believe there are none joined in profession with us, who deviate from our
principle of self-denial, and plainness in habit and speech, who have not been
secretly showed that it is wrong, that it is a compliance with the spirit of
the world, a refusal of the cross of Christ, a denial of him before men: but
they listen to that voice, which beguiled Eve, which tells them that there is
no harm in such deviations, or that they are small matters; though it is
manifest, that such small matters have opened the door gradually wider and
wider, to the gross declension which has overspread. Though many are deceived and
darkened by the enemy, to deem them small matters, yet they have great
consequences, as they tend to debar us of future happiness, and to center us in
justly deserved punishments, for disobeying and disregarding Christ, who leads
into humility and plainness, and preferring that enemy who seduces into pride,
and worldly conformity.

I often look with pity, on the victims to the vanities of the world, who fell
their birthright for a mess of pottage; ^i^en desiring that they may quit the
pursuit of shadows, wisely to seek, and happily possess the most inestimable,
and enduring substance. Hereby they would give solid joy to their well-wishing
friends, and gain an ample share thereof in themselves; a joy not like the
pleasures of sin, which are but for a season, and are followed with a certain
and severe sting; a joy, which will go beyond the grave, to receive an infinite
increase, and an endless duration.

X. In regard to such as have not yet much departed from that plainness, (at
least in dress) in which they were educated, some probably may not be under any
strong temptation, to run into the foolish fashions of a corrupt age. Yet the
enemy seeks to catch them in some other snares: and perhaps some of these may
be as ignorant, and as void of experience of the divine principle we profess,
as some of the more fashionable. Outward plainness, without inward humility,
mercy, justice and charity, is of very little worth. Except we follow after
these virtues, obvious faults in temper and conduct, will appear, to discover
our emptiness, and to serve some for an argument against plainness, or for a
subject of ridicule; and do more harm to the cause of truth, than greater
errors, in the conduct of open and professed libertines.

How grievously disappointing, are they who carry a right appearance, yet when
tried are found to be insipid, and dead, as to the life of righteousness!
Wherefore let none value themselves on a plain outside, as if that of itself
were sufficient. It is as far from it, as the state of those formerly
complained of; who drew nigh to the Lord with their mouths, and with their lips
honored him, but their hearts were far from him.

Be not deceived: God is not mocked by fair appearances, or empty pretenses:
But such as every man sows, he must reap. If under the best appearance, or
strictest form, we sow to the flesh, we shall only reap corruption, and the
miserable fruits of hypocrisy, professing one thing and practicing another;
when they who have sowed to the spirit, shall reap the happy fruits of their
fidelity to God.

If we look over our society in this nation, and take a view, both of them who
are plain in dress, and who are otherwise, how many of both sorts, have their
minds fast rooted in this present world, devoting all their talents to it,
rejecting the counsel of Christ, who directs us to seek first the kingdom of
God, or to live and act, under his government! Hence in some places, what poor
lifeless meetings! How little of the sacred fire of divine love burning! How
little of the light of the glory of God shining! No living minister left
amongst them, and scarce one living member of the body of Christ, to feel for
the others, and take some tender care of them for their good; their lamps gone
out, and scarcely any oil retained in a single vessel; a weekday meeting
hardly kept up, and the one meeting on the first day badly attended. Thus have
some meetings died away, and are lost; and others appear to be in a languid,
sickly condition, seeming scarce likely to live long, except they timely apply
to the great and good physician, who is both able and willing to restore life,
health, soundness and vigor, to raise up and qualify Judges, as at the first,
and counselors as at the beginning. But formerly, when in the body, in some
places, he did none of his mighty works, by reason of their unbelief: so now,
when his ministers visit such places, they find the gospel has not a free
course; they can at best but feebly labor in such hard spots. The word
preached, does not profit, by reason of not meeting with faith in them that
hear.

Great is the mystery of iniquity, in which the subtle serpent works in many,
to their hurt or ruin, unawares to them, for want of their paying due regard
and attention, to that grace of God, which would discover the hidden snare, and
preserve from it. Hence a wrong spirit usurps the government due to God, and
gradually hardens the heart, till the salvation of the immortal soul, becomes a
matter of very little concern, the first and great commandment of loving God
with the whole heart, being much violated: such are in a most dangerous state,
except they turn in haste "to flee from the wrath, that is to come." I often
earnestly desire, that ye who are of this kind, would do it, lest ye be left to
your own courses, in that broad way, which leads to destruction, and the things
which belong to your peace, be hid from your eyes.

XI. The Lord has showed unto thee O man, what is good. But many have suffered
the good impressions they have been favored with, to be like the morning dew,
which soon passes away. They rush into irreligious company, and self-indulging
liberties, which, like the fowls of the air, carry off all the good seed of the
kingdom, which infinite goodness had sowed in their minds.

What need have we then, to prize and pursue Christ's counsel, to watch and
pray, not to enter into these temptations, to abstain from all appearance of
evil, to avoid such company as deadly poison, as there can be no fellowship
betwixt light and darkness, or betwixt Christ and Belial; and as we naturally
become like those, whom we love and with whom we associate?

Never go to places of public diversion, such as Play Houses, Horse-races,
Cockfightings, or to Alehouses, those haunts of the licentious, who fear not
God. Be watchful and clear from intemperance. Live as men accountable to God,
your hearts, and your conversation in heaven, and your moderation appearing in
all things.

All would be glad to escape everlasting misery, the habitation of rebels to
the laws and government of our great Creator. All would be glad to be admitted
into everlasting happiness, the portion of such as obey those laws and that
government. Why then, will any amongst us, be the enemy's instruments, in
promoting apostasy, from the very life of true religion, and godliness? Oh
rather choose to escape misery, and ensure happiness. Break off all
connections, which are obstacles to it. It is Christ's command, "If thy right
hand offend, cut it off." Lay aside every weight, and the sin which most easily
besets. Be obedient to him, and thou will be happy, separated from the
miserable regions of obstinate and obdurate sinners.

XII. Let us call to mind, and not hastily forget it, that Christ has given
himself for us, to redeem us from all iniquity, and to purify unto himself a
peculiar people, zealous of good works. Yet notwithstanding all this, it is
evident that too many among us are induced, and induce one another, to slight
the kindest offers of their best friend. They give ear to the voice of the
stranger, and swayed by his persuasions, put off their embracing a Savior's
offer. Far from being zealous of doing all that is well pleasing to God, they
counteract that profession, to which he by his holy spirit, has called us. To
propose to obey the Almighty at ^ ^he future day, and in that presumptuous
hope, to stifle divine conviction, is a most fatal artifice of the grand
adversary, whereby he insensibly darkens the mind, and hardens the heart, to
render us his vassals, and to secure us to himself as such. -- As delays herein
are infinitely dangerous, as we cannot repent when we will, for repentance is
God's gift, begin then, while it is the day of God's visitation; for when the
night overtakes, none can work out their soul's salvation.

XIII. Wherefore cleave close in heart, to the divine gift, the mystery hid
from ages, but now revealed, even Christ in you the hope of glory, that your
souls may be enamoured with that beauty, which will never fade. Lay hold of all
the helps and means by him provided. Be kind to all, but familiar with few, and
those few, such as fear the Lord. This fear preserved Joseph, in the time of
trial; but for want of it Absalom overset all his personal advantages. Seek to
be clofely linked with good friends: for two are better than one, and a
threefold cord is not easily broken. Great are the benefits and solid
satisfactions, found in truly religious society. Formerly when the proud were
counted happy, they who feared the Lord, spoke often one to another, and the
Lord declared his approbation of the pious ardour, with which they mutually
animated each other. As on one hand, the friendship of the world, is enmity
with God: James iv. 4.
So on the other, Israel the Lord's people, were to dwell alone, and not to be
numbered with the nations; their safety and true peace depending hereupon, they
were enjoined not to contract any alliance or intimacy with them, to prevent
the decay of that servent love to the Lord their God, which he inspired them
with, while they abode in his covenant, and duly observed his laws, his statues
and ordinances; and to preve^^ their children from contracting the manners of
those nations, and running into their fashions and customs. While they kept
together in an united care, and veneration of the Lord, they prospered both
outwardly and inwardly; nothing could harm them, no effort of the common enemy,
could prevail against them. May we thus keep together, strengthening one another
in the love of God, and faithfulness to him, and then we may be sure that our
case will be the very same.

XIV. There are many we believe, orderly and reputable, in their lives, who
need to be more baptized into the ardent love of God, and dedication of heart
to his cause, that they may not be like slothful servants, at ease in Zion, and
indulging themselves, instead of serving the Lord. The harvest is great, and
needs more laborers, to fill up the vacant places of many removed from works
to rewards. What want of ministers, elders, of such whom the Holy Ghost has
made overseers, taking heed to themselves, and to the flock, of helpers of one
another in animating visits, both to families and individuals, in the lively
flow of that love which the Lord gives to them, who devote their hearts to his
service!

A few yet are mercifully preserved, who for Zion's sake cannot be at ease, but
through all discouragements hold on their way, knowing they serve a good master,
and resolving through his grace, never to desert his service, but to keep their
places under his direction, and to hold fast the blessed truth, in the love of
it, to the end of their lives. May he grant an increase of their number and
strength! I desire above all things for myself, that to the end of my days, I
may be one of their number. O my soul, corn thou into their secret adoration
of God; with their assembly herein, may thou ever be united! For indeed the
Lord is good to them, that seek and diligently serve him, nourishing that life,
which is hid with Christ, a life which will never die; well rewarding them, for
all their labors, and for the sacrifices which they offer to him on the altar
of obedience, giving them an hundredfold.

XV. When our Lord told his disciples, that one of them should betray him, the
rest heard it with concern, and enquired, Is it I? Many have contributed to the
great declension, and each of us should enquire, Is it I? Many have need to be
created anew in Christ Jesus, unto good works; but they must first put off the
old man, with his deeds, in deep humiliation before the Lord; which to them,
who patiently abide under his righteous judgments for sin, draws down the gift
of repentance unto salvation, never to be repented of; and that new birth
without which we can have no place in his kingdom. We must give up all our
idols; else we are undone. Our own wills must be subjected to the will of God.
All our own wisdom must be laid at his feet. We must deny ourselves, take up
our cross daily, and follow him. There are no other terms on which life
everlasting is to be had. Our Lord informs us, that they who expect to gain it,
by climbing up any other way, will be treated as thieves and robbers. Oh then,
my dear friends, in every part of Ireland, I earnestly desire that ye may buy
the truth, whatever it cost you, and sell it not. Look upon all things beside,
but as dross or dung, in comparison of it. Let us hold fast the one thing
needful, whatever else leave us or be taken from us. So shall we have lived not
in vain, obtaining the great end for which we had a being given us.

XVI. O ye parents, who have many children, and not much of the world for them,
don't be over anxious on that account, or make it an excuse, for non-attendance
of religious duties. Consider that it may be wisely so ordered, as the means of
their preservation; and if they follow Christ, it may prove of great advantage
to them, beyond what ye and they are aware of. A little satisfies a humble
mind, as we brought nothing into the world, and can carry nothing out. They who
obtain the favor of God, will neither want any thing needful, nor covet any
thing superfluous, but having food and raiment, therewith be content. Wherefore
be anxious for them, only on this account, that they may lay hold on eternal
life, and keep their hold of that; then they will be truly happy, but not
without it, if they had ever so much in the world. They are indeed justly to be
esteemed, who having more, are thereby the more humbled, and more abounding in
useful services and good works.

And O ye young people, often consider, that ye are born into the world, to be
happy for ever, on the terms laid down by Christ, as abovemention^d. With all
your gettings, get the favor of the most high, who invites you to it: before
honor, even true honor with God, is humility; but pride goes before
destruction. Ye need not envy any one, however great in the world, if ye have
the Lord on your side. United with your dear parents, in walking humbly with
him, ye will have the enlarged view of your happy portion. Your servent
gratitude, obedience, vigilance and firmness, will be crowned with the
endearing pledges and encouraging foretastes, of endless bliss. So will ye be
well satisfied with your lots in every condition, and find that godliness
coupled with divine contentment is the greatest, and infinitely the most
valuable gain, being fitted by your blessed Redeemer for life, death, judgment,
and for that eternal joy, which is unspeakable and full of glory.

So will ye be alive to God, and of that number whom he pronounces blessed, who
hanger and thirst after righteousness. So will ye carefully watch against every
thing that is wrong, both in yourselves and others, and endeavor to stop it in
its first beginning: ye will love that which is good, and employ all your
talents, with divine help, to promote it both by example and brotherly counsel.

Then would meetings both for worship and discipline be well attended; for
coming to them under the preparation of heart which is of the Lord, we should
by him be overshadowed with his power and love; the wing of the sun of
righteousness, would be overspread, which illuminates the spiritual mind to
discern its duties, and animates to discharge them, therein to share the good
things which God has in store for them that love him. We should hereby be
edified and built up together in the most holy faith, and concerned to live in
reverent love and subjection to him out of meetings, faithfully maintaining our
testimony for Christ, our holy head in all its branches.

So should we be again, as formerly, a people of one heart and mind, baptized
by one spirit into one body: All the darkness of ignorance and inexperience,
all the coldness of the worldly or carnal mind would be removed; and Zion's
light would yet again go forth with brightness, and the salvation of God be
felt amongst us, as a lamp that burns.

With strong desires on the behalf of all, who, in this nation, join in the
profession of the blessed truth, that they may thus experience the possession
of it, and be partakers of its saving efficacy and lasting peace, I remain your
affectionate and well-wishing friend.

JAMES GOUGH.

CONTENTS.
THE Author's Birth and Education Page. 1 His removal to Skipton Page. 10
Account of two young Men there Page. 10, 11 His residence in Liverpool Page. 13
Removes to Bristol Page. 17 Account of his Master Alexander Arscott Page. 17,
18 His remarkable Visitation there Page. 20, 21 His Master's Death Page. 27
Removes to Cork Page. 29 His first Marriage Page. 30 Account of his Wife's
Parents Page. 30 His Appearance in the Ministry Page. 37 Reflections thereupon
Page. 39 His first Visit to the North of England Page. 51 Visits James
Dickenson on his Deathbed, a Note Page. 52 Account of James Wilson Page. 55 --
Isaac Alexander Page. 57 -- Samuel Fothergill Page. 59 Returns to Dublin Page.
60 Account of John Ashton Page. 60 His second Visit to England and Wales Page.
65 Has Meetings in Places where no Meetings are settled Page. 67 Account of
John Goodwin Page. 70 His Service at Shaftsbury Page. 76 -- Lincoln Page. 78,
79 Account of Susanna Morris Page. 81 Lands in Dublin Page. 82 Visit to Friends
Families at Limerick Page. 83 Remark on the Journey Page. ibid. Removes to
Mountmelick Page. 84 Account of Mary Peisley Page. 87 His Visit to Cumberland
and Westmoreland Page. 88 Death and Character of his Wife Page. 91 His Visit to
Ulster Province, in which he had a Meeting at Belfast, and other Places where
no Meetings are settled Page. 92 Account of John Curtis Page. 94 Conference
with John Wesley Page. 95 Account of the Methodists Page. 99, 100 His second
Marriage Page. 101 Resigns his School Page. 103 Attends the Yearly Meeting, and
visits sundry Parts of England and Wales Page. ibid. Removes with his Family to
settle in Bristol Page. 105 Account of our Society in Ireland during his
residence there Page. 106
SUPPLEMENT.
DEATH and Character of his Son John Page. 116 Reflections on that Event Page.
119 His Visit to the western and southern Counties, and London Page. 125 -- To
Wales Page. 129 -- To Ireland Page. 131 Removes to Dublin Page. 133 His Visit
to the Province of Ulster Page. 134 -- To Munster Page. 144 -- To Ulster again
Page. 145 -- To Mountmelick and Edenderry Page. 146 -- To Leinster Page. 147 --
To Munster Page. ibid. His Death in Cork, etc. Page. 151
Contents of the EPISTLE to Friends in Ireland.
I. OF our Profession and fundamental Principle 157 II. Of active and passive
Submission to the Laws of the Land 159 III. Passive, in regard to Oaths 160 IV.
-- -- in regard to Wars and Fighting 160, 161 V. -- -- in regard to Tithes,
Priests' Demands, etc. ibid. VI. Sct^ve in regard to Customs, Duties and Excise
164 VII -- -- the due Observance of the first Day in the Week ibid. VIII The
Harms which flow from neglect of Duty 165 IX. -- from Conformity to the World
167 X. -- from resting satisfied in outside Plainness 170 XI. -- -- from
irreligious Associates 173 XII. Of the Danger of delaying our Obedience to what
the Lord requires 175 XIII. Benefits of Religious Society 175, 176 XIV Need of
Diligence in serving the Lord 177 XV. Exhortation to buy the Truth 178, 179
XVI. To Parents, Children, etc. 180
FINIS.

