A PRACTICAL ESSAY, ^ESIGNED FOR GENERAL USE, IN THREE PARTS.

PART I. Addressed to HUSBANDS and WIVES: Being an Answer to the two following
Inquiries.

1st. What is the most obvious Meaning of the Word CHURCH in the new Testament?

2d. How does MARRIAGE convey, as in a Mystery, the Union of CHRIST and the
CHURCH?

Improved to illustrate the honorable Relation, endeared Affection, and mutual
Duties, of Husbands and Wives.

WITH A SONG ON MARRIAGE.

To which is added an APPENDIX, with some Thoughts suggested by the Provisions
of the Table.

PART II. Addressed to PARENTS: Being some Thoughts on Education.

PART III. An Inquiry concerning the Case of CHILDREN, with an Exhortation to
them.

BY SHIPPIE TOWNSEND.

"For the grace of God, that brings salvation, has appeared to all men." Or,
as in the former translation, "The grace of God, that brings salvation to all
men, has appeared, and teaches us that we should deny ungodliness and worldly
lusts and that we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present
world."
Titus ^. 11. 12. BOSTON: Printed by ADAMS and NOURSE, for the Author, and sold
by him, at his House in Cross-Street, and at their Office in Marlborough
Street. 1783.

A PRACTICAL ESSAY, etc.
PART I. To HUSBANDS and WIVES.
THE words of the apostle, in Ephesians v. 32. "this is a great mystery, but I
speak concerning Christ and the church," naturally lead to two inquiries.

1st. What is the most obvious meaning of the word church in the scriptures?

2d. How does the marriage union convey, as in a mystery, the union of Christ
and the church?

For the most obvious meaning of the word church in the scriptures, we may look
into the various texts where it is mentioned.

I do not recollect that the word is any where used in the old testament. The
apostle, in Acts vii. 38. uses it for the old testament church, "this is he
that was in the church in the wilderness with the angel," etc. The words that
are used in the old testament are assembly and congregation; Exodus xii. 6.
"the whole assembly shall kill it in the evening," that is, the whole church of
Israel that were bound to keep the passover; Psalm xxii. 22. "In the midst of
the congregation will I praise thee," which the apostle, in Hebrews ii. 12.
calls the church, "in the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee."

In the new testament, the first mentioned place I recollect, is Matthew xvi.
18. "upon this rock will I build my church, and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it." Upon this rock the truth Peter had made confession of,
"thou art the Christ, the son of the living God," is the rock on which the
church is built, against which the gates, the power and policy of hell, shall
not prevail.

Then in the 18th of Matthew, 17. in which, so far as I understand, Jesus
Christ is instructing his disciples their duty in their particular connection,
those believers of of the apostles doctrine collected in the profession of of
the name of Jesus, meeting together in one place, was called the church in that
place. In Acts viii. 1. we read of the church which was at Jerusalem, the first
church gathered by the apostles after the descent of the Holy Ghost; Acts xiii.
1. of the church at Antioch; Acts xx. 7. and Revelations ii. 1. of the church
of Ephesus; Romans xvi. 3 5. and 1st of Corinthians, xvi. 19. we read of the
church in the house of Priscilla and Aquilla; in Collosians iv. 15. of the
church in Nymphas's house, and of the church in Philemon's house, in the 2d
verse of that epistle.

These particular churches, gathered by the apostles doctrine, was governed by
the will of Jesus Christ, as taught by them; and so far as that can be
understood from the scriptures, are the rule by which particular churches of
Christ are to be governed in all ages; but as that would be too lengthy to be
here considered, must be passed over.

We read also of the church of the first born, written in heaven, Hebrews, xii.
23; of the church for which Christ gave himself, "that he might sanctify and
cleanse it, by the washing of water through the word, that he might make it to
himself a glorious church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but
that it might be holy and without blemish." Ephesians v. 26. 27.

Hence I collect, 1st. That Jesus Christ is the foundation on whom the church
is built.

2d. That those that were brought by the apostolic doctrine concerning him, to
believe that Jesus is the Christ. in the first ages of christianity, were by
apostolic authority collected into distinct, particular churches, in such
places where there were a sufficient number of believers for that purpose, and
were called the church in that place. There is little said about the place of
their meeting: I suppose any place that they could obtain, that was convenient
for that purpose: The church of Troas met in an upper chamber; Acts xx. 7. 8.
the church of the Collosians in Philemon's house, as may be seen by comparing
those two epistles.

These churches appeared as a representation of the universal church, in their
holding the one truth, that Jesus Christ is the son of God, by which they were
all gathered together, this being the sole foundation on which the universal
church is built, and in their professed subjection to the authority of Jesus
Christ, the head of the church, and head over all things for its good.

3dly. That there is a universal church, which will consist of all that are
included in that glorious church for whom Jesus Christ gave himself; the full
meaning of which is the general assembly and church of the first born, written
in heaven; Jesus Christ is the first born among the many brethren brought to
glory. Psalm lxxxix. 27. "I will make him my first born, higher than the kings
of the earth;" Romans viii. 29. "the first born among many brethren;"
Collosians i. 15. "who is the first born of every creature," -- verse 18. "the
first born from the dead." It is his church the church of the first born; this
church, this general assembly, called Psalm cvii. 32. "the assembly of the
people, the congregation of the elders," Psalm cxi. 1. "the assembly of the
upright, and the congregation," Psalm clxix. 1. "the congregation of the
saints," that are represented to John, Revelations v. 8. by the four living
creatures and four and twenty elders, and chap. vii. 9. by a great multitude,
which no man could number, of all nations and kindred, and people and tongues,
in addition to the hundred, forty and four thousand, that were sealed in the
former part of the chapter* of all the tribes of Israel. The same sealed number
are represented, in chap. xiv. 1. to 5. "standing with the lamb on the mount
Zion," which did not exclude the preaching of the gospel to every nation and
kindred and tongue and people, verse 6; which gospel or word shall not return
void, but shall accomplish what he pleases, and shall prosper in the thing
where unto he sends it.

Of this church every believer of the apostles testimony, or every one that
believes that Jesus is the Christ, according to Peter's confession, appears*
upon the confession of this faith, to be a visible member. And it is the duty
of every such person, who can find a particular church built on this
foundation, and who in subjection to his authority make the apostolic churches
their rule as to order, to join with them in the profession of his name, with
them observing all things whatsoever he has commanded, walking together in
love, as he has given commandment; for this they are chosen and called to the
faith of the gospel, 1st of Peter, ii. 9. Such are made use of for the
ingathering of others. 1st of Thessalonians, 1. 8. "for from you founded out
the word of the Lord;" Ephesians i. 9. 10. "having made known to us the mystery
of his will, according to his good pleasure, which he has proposed in himself,
that in the dispensation of the fullness of times, he might gather together in
one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven and which are on earth, in
him." But the Ephesian church being chosen in him before the foundation of the
world, to be holy and without blame before him in love, being predestined to
the adoption of children by Jesus Christ, according to the good pleasure of his
will, to the praise of the glory of his grace, was not to the final exclusion
or reprobation of others, but as a means made use of by him, that in the
dispensation of the fullness of times, he might gather together all things in
Christ; chap. ii 7. "that in the ages to come he might show the exceeding
riches of his grace, in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus." The
church then is to hold forth the word of life; the word is to sound out from
them. "As often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, ye do show forth the
Lord's death till he come:" Thus they boldly bear his name, in opposition to
earth and hell; show that he is precious, and hold forth to the world, that
there is no other name under heaven given among men, whereby they must be
saved. Such are the means the great head of the church makes use of, as he
pleases, to the conviction of others: But be the consequences what they will,
it is their duty to testify to his name, truth and ways, looking for the time
when he will gather all the fruit of his purchase into one in himself; for
every one for whom Christ died, shall certainly, in his time and way, come to
the knowledge of him, and to partake in his salvation, as those who have been
or are visible members of his church. -- For does not the scriptures show the
connection of the human race with Jesus Christ, as their head, in as extensive
a view as their connection with the first Adam, see Romans 5, 14, to the end;
Hebrews ii. 9. "we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels, for
the sufferings of death, crowned with glory and honor, that he by the grace of
God, should taste death for every man." 1st. of John, ii. 2. "he is the
propitiation for our sin; and not for ours only, but for the whole world." And
the apostle says, 2d. of Corinthians, v. 14. to the end, "we thus judge, if one
died for all, then all died; and he died for all, that they which live, should
not henceforth live to themselves, but to him that died for them, and rose
again." This appears to be the design of the manifestation of this truth, or of
persons being brought to the knowledge of the truth, and to life in Christ
thereby, that they which live should not henceforth live to themselves, but to
him that died for them, and rose again; The thought of this is enough to croath
wish shame, as a garment, those who have hope of life by Jesus Christ, that
this design has been no more attended to. For myself I can say, to me belongs
shame and confusion of f^ce. Praised be his name, to the Lord our God belongs
mercies and so givness. -- Though we have rebelled against him, may the hope of
forgiveness ever keep us from despair, and be a flesh spring of exci^ement to
live to him that died for us, and rose again.
verse 16. "wherefore henceforth know we no man after the flesh;" before they
knew the Jews after the flesh, as those "to whom pertained the adoption, and
the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of the law, and the service, and
the promises, whose were the fathers and of whom concerning the flesh Christ
came, who is over all, God blessed forever. Amen."

The gospel was first published to them, beginning at Jerusalem; upon their
rejecting it, the apostles are sent to the Gentiles, and are taught to call no
man common or unclean; what God has sanctified, call not thou common, which
the apostle explains, Acts x. 28. "God has showed that I should call no man
common or unclean." Why? Because God has sanctified them; I view them
sanctified, in that Christ died for all, and designs in his time and way to
bring them all to the knowledge of himself, and manifest his sanctifying and
setting them apart for himself. This destroys all distinction between Jew and
Gentile, and not only as the nations of Jews and Gentiles, but of all men in
every age, that on some account or other, besides the atonement, would presume
to be in, or near, or have a claim upon the divine favor before some of their
fellow creatures. Henceforth know we no man after the flesh, "yea, though we
have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more;"
Jesus Christ was a minister of the circumcision, was made under the law,
fulfilled the righteousness of it, came to his own, sent his gospel first to
the Jews; but when his death and resurrection were fully made manifest, and the
premises understood, that all the families of the earth were to be blessed in
him, that the Gentiles were to glorify God for mercy; when these things were
mad, fully manifest, the apostle says, "yea, though we have known Christ after
the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more; therefore if any man be in
Christ a new creature, these old things are passed away, behold all things are
become new." There is not a fragment of the old dispensation or of the
righteousness of our own, can have any admission as recommending us to the
divine favor, "all things are become new. and all of God, who has reconciled
us to himself," us, the apostles and first disciples, with the church of the
Corinthians, to whom he wrote, who were together visibly reconciled to himself
by Jesus Christ, "and has committed to us the word of reconcilation;" that is,
the word of reconciliation committed to the apostles, "that God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself; not imputing their trespasses unto them." Now
then, if God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself; if he be the
propitiation for the whole world; if he tasted death for every man; if Adam was
a full figure of him that was to come, and the connection of the human race
with Jesus Christ as their head as extensive as their connection with the first
Adam, then we must conceive that the church of the first born, the church for
which Christ gave himself, will finally consist of all nations, kindreds,
tongues and people; and in this view, the design of mercy for bids, calling any
man common, and lays a sure foundation of universal love and benevolence to all
the human race, and of faith in prayer for them; while those brought to believe
that Jesus is the Christ, professing their faith in, and subjection to him, and
appearing influenced thereby, are subjects of that gospel charity which the
apostle enjoins, when he says, "have fervent charity among yourselves," and
which I think appears evidently distinguishable from the universal benevolence
due to the whole human race.

Thus from the most obvious meaning of the passages where the word church is
used in scripture, these things have been collected. 1st, That Jesus Christ is
the foundation on which the church is built. 2dly, A collection of believers
professing his name, and in subjection to his authority observing his laws, in
any place, are a visible church there, or a visible representation of the
universal church. 3dly. The universal church will finally have gathered into
it, or be made up of all for whom Christ died.

The second inquiry is, How does marriage convey, as in a mystery, the union of
Christ and the church?

Attention to this inquiry will lead us to compare this passage in Ephesians,
with the beginning of Genesis, and various other passages, one with another. In
Genesis i. 27. we read, "So God created man in his own image, in the image of
God created he him, male and female created he them." There appeared to be male
and female created in the one man: The particular formation of building of the
woman was from man, of which we have the account, Genesis ii. 21. 22. "And the
Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept As Adam was a
figure of him that was to come, may not this deep sleep prefigure the death of
Jesus Christ, from which the church arises.
; and he took one of his ribs and closed up the flesh instead thereof; and the
rib which the Lord God had taken from man, builded See the Hebrew in the bible
margin.
he a woman, and brought her unto the man." Thus the woman "is of the man, and
for the man," 1st of Corinthians, xi. 8. 9. So is the church, in every view, of
and for Jesus Christ. Romans xi. 36. "for of him, and to him, and through him,
are all things." Collosians i. 16. "all things were created by him and for
him." As the woman was created in him, was of him and for him, so they are
called by one name, or she bears his name. Genesis v. 2. "male and female
created he them, and called their name Adam." When she was brought to him, he
says, "she shall be called woman, because she was taken out of man." She shall
be called by a name derived from that of man. So the church is called by the
same name with Jesus Christ; Jeremiah xxiii. 6. and xxxiii. 16. "he and she are
called, the Lord our righteousness." Yet, so as to be denominated from him, "he
shall be called a Nazarene," they "the sect of the Nazarenes;" he is called
Christ, "the disciples were first called Christians at Antioch;" names derived
from him, showing that without him they were nothing; that he is their all, and
that in him they possess and enjoy all good.

We have the reason of this name, "This is now bone of my bone, and flesh of my
flesh; she shall be called woman because she was taken out of man." "So ought
men to love their wives as their own bodies; he that loves his wife loves
himself, for no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes
it, even as the Lord the church, for we are members of his body, of his flesh,
and of his bones." The circumstances of the church with Jesus Christ, are
similar to that of Adam with his wife, bone and flesh. "For this cause shall a
man leave his father and mother, and be joined to his wife, and they two shall
be one flesh: This is a great mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and the
church."

"This is a great mystery;" the mystery, that in marriage conveys the union of
Christ and the church, appears herein: That the woman was created in the man,
was united to him before she was distinctly builded a woman: When she was thus
builded and brought to him, there appeared the visible marriage union; he said,
"this is now bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh." "Therefore shall a man
leave his father and mother and cleave to his wife." Therefore, because of the
previous union that was the ground of it, "but I speak," says the apostle,
"concerning Christ and the church," this holds forth the union between Christ
and the church, prior to the visible marriage union which takes place upon any
of the children of men being brought to Jesus Christ, who says, "for no man can
come to me, except the Father which has sent me, draw him."

In Romans xvi. 7. Andronicus and Junia are spoke of as in Christ before the
apostle, though they were together chosen in Christ before the foundation of
the world. Thus is the whole church in Christ, in the most universal sense: He
stands answering fully to the figure of him that was to come, the head of every
man, a universally as Adam was. In this view there is a union or connection of
head and members, even before the members actually appear. "And for this cause
shall a man leave father and mother and cleave to his wife." Jesus Christ left
father and mother in cleaving to his wife; John xvi 18. "I came forth of the
father, and am come into the world." In Matthew xii. 47. to 50. and Mark iii.
32. to 35. his attention to what he had to do for his church, was not diverted
by his mother. Is he not the true an^et^ p^. o. Levi? Dueteronomy XXXIII. 8. 9.
Jesus Christ took her circumstances as his own; took her debts upon himself;
undertook to look after her when lost; and in pursuance of his undertaking,
gave his life for her. "Even as Christ loved the church and gave himself for
it," she wears his name, is complete in him, "who of God is made unto her
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption." It is visibly so with
respect to those that are brought by the gospel to the knowledge of, faith in,
and subjection to him: It was really so in the purpose and purchase of Jesus
Christ, before they came to the knowledge of him, and is really so respecting
those who yet know him not, live in unbelief and disobedience; for, says the
apostle, Hebrews ii. 8. "then has put all things in subjection under his feet;
for in that he put all in subjection, he left nothing not put under him; but
now we see not yet all things put under him: But we see Jesus for the
sufferings of death crowned with glory and honor, that he, by the grace of God,
should taste death for every man." And the prophet Isaiah gives us the divine
oath for this, chap. xlv. 22. "Look unto me," (the just God and the Savior)
"and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth, for I God and none else; I have
sworn by myself, the word is gone out of my mouth in righteousness, and shall
not return, that to me every knee shall bow, every tongue shall swear, surely
shall say, in the Lord have I righteousness and strength, to him shall come;"
which must make all that are incensed against him ashamed.

The name of the visible church is, "the Lord our righteousness." All that are
brought to him call him so, and are denominated by it, "'it is the name whereby
she shall be called." But we have the divine oath, that "every knee shall bow,
and every tongue shall swear, surely shall say, in the Lord have I
righteousness and strength." The time and manner is with him, who says, "I
will work and who shall let it;" "who will have all men to be saved and come to
the knowledge of the truth; for there is one God, even one mediator, of God and
man, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified
in due time."

In Christ Jesus, God manifest in the flesh, we have the fullness of the divine
nature, as i. e. pressed in Hebrews i. 3. "who being the brightness of glory
and the express image of his person." Collosians ii. 9. "for in him dwells
all the fullness of the Godhead bodily;" who could say, "I and Father are one."

Is there not the fullness of the human nature also in him? The apostle says,
"we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones," Who does he mean?
Doubtless the church, the apostles, the first disciples, the church of the
Ephesians, who were visibly so, and those who should believe through their
word, in every age; yea, all for whom Jesus Christ gave himself. The church, in
the most extensive sense, are in this union, and are represented traveling
together in pun, till the manifestation of it. Romans viii. 22. "for we know
that the whole creation," it is the same word we have in Mark xvi 15. "preach
the gospel to every creature;" therefore every creature that the gospel is to
be preached to, "groaneth and traveleth in pain together; and not only they,
but we ourselves that have the first fruits, even we ourselves groan within
ourselves, waiting for the adoption, the redemption of our body." By the
redemption of our body, I conceive the idea of the body of which Jesus is the
head, as captivated, enslaved, sold, and groaning under this bondage; and those
whose minds have been led to an understanding of redemption by Christ, though
their minds are thereby relieved, yet groaning, waiting for the adoption, the
redemption of the whole body.

Now that in Jesus Christ there is the fullness of the human nature, is it not
evident from the consideration of Genesis v. 2. where we read of our first
parents in their primitive state, "male and female created he them, and blessed
them, and called their name Adam, in the day they were created." Whom he
blesses are blessed; for his gifts are without repentance. So when we have the
account of their being seduced from their allegiance, brought under bondage,
and ^ed captive by satan, the curse is denounced upon the serpent, Genesis iii
4; but the way opened through which the original blessedness. pronounced in the
day they were created, should be accomplished, verse 15, although they could
not sin without smart and sorrow; to the woman. "I will greatly multiply thy
sorrow; in sorrow shall thou bring forth children." etc -- to the man, "cursed
is the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shall thou eat it all the days of thy
life," etc. And as the way in which the original blessing that was forfeited
was to be restored and confirmed, was brought to view in the 15th verse; so it
is repeated and illustrated in Genesis xii. 3. xviii. 18. xxii. 18. and xxvi.
4. "In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed." This the
apostles calls "preaching the gospel to Abraham," Gallations iii. 18. It Is
agreeable to Deuteronomy, xxxii. 43. "rejoice, O ye nations, his people;" Psalm
lxxii. 11. "all nations shall serve him," verse 17. "all nations shall call him
blessed;" Psalm lxxxii. 8. "arise O God, for thou shall inherit all nations;"
Psalm ii. 8. "ask of me, and I will give the heathen thine inheritance, and the
utmost parts of the earth thy possession;" Psalm lxxxvi. 9. "all nations shall
come and worship before thee, and glorify thy name." Psalm c. all the earth are
called upon to make a joyful noise to the Lord, on account of his making us his
people and the sheep of his pasture: "Know ye." Who is to know? Answer, all the
earth. "Know ye that the Lord, he GOD, I read this verse without the words
supplied by the translators.
he has made us, and not we ourselves, his people and the sheep of his
pasture." Agreeable to Psalm cxvii. "O praise the Lord." Who? "All ye nations;
praise him all ye people." Where are any exempted? "For his merciful kindness
is great toward us." Toward who? All the earth, as extensive as the call to
praise him. "And the truth of the Lord forever; praise ye the LORD." His
merciful kindness; how is the greatness of it made manifest, and how does the
truth of the Lord appear to endure forever, but in him "who is the mercy and
the truth," in him "in whom all nations are blessed," in him "in whom thou will
perform the truth to Jacob and the mercy to Abraham, which thou have sworn to
our fathers in the days of old.

Now this blessedness of the nations, of which these passages speak, was to
have its accomplishment in the seed of Abraham, "In thy seed;" which is Christ.
Gallations iii. 6. Now if all the nations of the earth are included in the
blessedness in Christ Jesus, they are in him as their head; there is the
fullness of the human nature in Christ Jesus; so they were considered in him
before the evidences of it appeared in or upon any of them; and because of this
union, he is engaged in all the does for them, to bring them to himself. "This
is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my felsh; she shall be called woman
because she was taken cut of man." "Therefore," because of the previous union,
"shall a man leave his father and mother and cleave to his wife, and they shall
be one flesh: This is a great mystery, but," says the apostle, "I speak
concerning Christ and the church." "This is now bone of my bone, and flesh of
my flesh; she shall be called woman;" she shall wear my name, come into a
visible connection and intercourse with me, be interested in what I am and
have, etc. So in consequence of this union shall the church, in the most
extensive sense, even every member, from all the ends of the earth, be brought
to Jesus Christ, in his times, who is the blessed and only potentate; shall
bear his name; be called by the name which the mouth of the Lord does name:
It Is by his authority we are assured, she shall be called "the Lord our
righteousness." These things shall be made manifest when Psalm xlv. 15. 15. and
Psalm lxxii. from the 9th to the end of the 15th verse, have their
accomplishment.

Against what has been brought to view, particularly in the several quotations
from the Psalms, arises this objection, that the apostle appears to apply such
passages to those gathered by the gospel from the among the Gentiles; not to
the Gentiles in so extensive a manner as is expressed in the Psalms; and so
those passages are to be understood in the limited sense used by the apostles,
who direct their epistles to the believers of their testimony, collected from
among the Gentiles.

To this it may be answered, that the epistles of the apostles were wrote to
visible churches, and visible believers, for their express direction in their
conduct toward God and one another, and are left on record for the same end,
to all believers in all ages, as none but such as are led to the knowledge of
Jesus Christ, were capable of understanding the grace there made manifest, and
the obligations thence arising to glorify him in their spirits and bodies which
are his; but yet it is evident they were designed as a means of communication
of the knowledge of Christ to mankind in general. See Ephesians i. 9. 10.

Ephesians ii. 4 to 7. "But God who is rich in mercy, for his great love
wherewith he has loved us, even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us
together with Christ, and has raised us up together and made us sit together
in heavenly places in Christ Jesus." For what end? "I hat in the ages to come,
he might show the exceeding riches of his grace in kindness toward us, through
Christ Jesus." And in the 3d chapter, from the 2d verse* we have the end of the
dispensation of grace, given to the apostle toward the Ephesians, "how that by
revelation he made known unto me the mystery, which in other ages was not made
known unto the sons of men, as it is now revealed unto his holy apostles and
prophets by the spirit, that the Gentiles should be fellow heirs, and of the
same body, and partakers of his promise in Christ by the gospel; unto me, who
am less than the least of all saints, is this grace given that I should preach
among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ, and to make ALL MEN see
what the fellowship of the mystery, which from the beginning of the world has
been hid in God, who created all things by Jesus Christ."

Here we have glad tidings to ALL MEN; to ages to come; to all things in heaven
and earth, in what divine grace did for, and among the apostles and Ephesians.
The 5th of Romans, from the 14th to the end and 1st of Corinthians, v. 15. 19.
show the same thing, but have been already mentioned and need not be repeated.

Thus the second enquiry has been attended to, Viz. How does marriage convey as
in a mystery, the union of Christ and the church?

From what has been brought to view, we see the obligations those are under,
that are brought to the faith of the gospel, to collect together in the
profession of his name, and subjection to his authority, after the example of
the first disciples in the first churches, to the same end, which will, I
conceive, be the duty of the disciples till the second coming of Jesus Christ,
or till all things are put under his feet; till which time, he will use the
same means to the same end. Much might be said here, "but except the Lord build
the house, they labor in vain that build it."

And not only their obligations to stand forth in the profession of his name,
observing the order of the gospel, as practiced by the first churches, but
their obligations to an attention to all the precepts of the new testament,
concerning their conduct in every relation they sustain; particularly that of
husband and wife, which the apostle has in view in the passage before us,
beginning with the wives, verse 22. "Wives submit yourselves unto your own
husbands, as unto the Lord." Col. iii. 18. "as it is fit in the Lord." Titus
ii. 4. "That they may teach the young women to be sober, to love their
husbands, to love their children, discreet, chaste, keepers at home, good,
obedient to their husbands, that the name of God and his doctrine be not
blasphemed." 1st of Peter. iii. to the end of the 6th verse, "Likewise ye wives
in subjection to your own husbands; that if any obey not the word, they also
may without the word, be won by the conversation of the wives, while they
behold your chaste conversation, coupled with fear."

In these passages, the duty of the wives is made plain; inculcated and
enforced from the obligations to Jesus Christ, "as unto the Lord, as it is fit
in the Lord;" which shows the duty of the wise to flow from the authority of
Jesus Christ, and to be directed by his will: So that in all her attention and
submission to her husband, the authority and directions of Jesus Christ are
ever to be kept in view, as the first motive the apostle uses, and truly it is
no barren one, but full of excitation. The believing wife may thus think with
herself, While I am attending my duty to my husband, the ever blessed Jesus, in
his adorable condescension, is pleased to accept me as attending to him:
Therefore, as to the Lord, will be (...) in her mind, and excite to
ch^ar^ulness therein. The second m^tive, if it be a distinct one, is, "that the
name of God and his doctrine be not blasphemed." Titus ii. 4. 5. "That they,"
the aged women, "may teach the young women to be sober, to love their husbands,
to love their children." -- Wives are not only taught submission to their
husbands from a sense of duty, but "to love their husbands, to love their
children;" which will excite them, from inward affection, ever to be studying
and pursuing their comfort and happiness, while their own is increased by the
comfort of love: And when to the motive, "as unto the Lord," is joined the
"love of husbands and children, good, obedient to their own husbands, that the
name of God and his doctrine be not blasphemed," will follow; will follow, did
I say! is it not inseparably interwoven? O my Jesus! is thy name and doctrine
concerned in my love and duty to my husband and children; how happy have thou
made me, in making love, which is my happiness, my duty; and bringing thy name
and doctrine to my continual view; may it never be blasphemed by my evil
conduct toward my husband and children; methought I moved in a low sphere in
attending daily to them, but now I find I Am exalted to wait on my Lord; he has
been pleased to commit his name and doctrine to my daily care: Angels has not
higher employment than is appointed me, in the very place where he has placed
me; and when I dwell in love, I dwell in him. The third motive, "that if any
obey not the word, they also may, without the word, be won by the conversation
of the wives, while they behold your chaste conversation with fear," must also
be a powerful one, in the minds of believing wives, to an attention to the
hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptable, of a meek and quiet
spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price. If by the hidden man of
the heart* we understand Christ dwelling in the hearts of believers by faith,
we are led to that which is not corruptable, and to the pattern, fountain, and
foundation of a meek and quiet spirit, which indeed, in the sight of God, is of
great price. In Matthew xi. 29. Jesus Christ says, "Learn of me, for I am meek
and lowly, and ye shall sind rest to your souls." The believing wives
understand Jesus Christ to be the green olive tree from whence this fruit is
found. So did their examples in the old time; "The holy women who trusted in
God, and thus adorned themselves, being in subjection to their own husbands,
even as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him Lord, whose daughters ye are as long
as ye do well, and are not afraid with any amazement." What does that import?
So long as you are influenced by your duty to Jesus Christ, to attend your duty
as wives, you appear to be the children, the followers, or imitators of the
holy women who trusted in God; to belong to that family; and need not be afraid
with any amazement; for if our hearts condemn us not, then have we confidence
toward God. But if instead of attention to the directions of the apostles of
Christ, there is giving heed to temptation, not contented in "modest apparel,
with shamefacedness and sobriety," but giving way to a prevailing solicitude
for "the outward adorning of plating the hair," and of "wearing of gold, pearls
and costly array," you will appear to be under the influence of your lusts; to
be walking according to the course of this world; according to the prince of
the power of the air, the spirit that now works in the children of
disobedience; and the tendency of it will be to darkness and fear with
amazement, more especially at times when there is most need of consolation. It
certainly does not become women professing godliness, to be thus adorned; but
it becomes them to be adorned with good works. Certainly there appears ability
for the good works of the gospel; such as feeding the hungry and clothing the
naked, at least as far as the price of the gold, pearls and costly array beyond
modest apparel, that they wear; when the wearing it can be of no use, except
evidencing their inattention to the scripture, which prohibit their wearing it;
or what is worse, opposition to them. In which case they may be advised to read
James v. 1. 2. 3. with sober attention, which will show such a conduct to tend
to fear with amazement; which Christian women ought to turn from; to walk in
love to Jesus Christ, to their husbands and children, according to the
directions of the apostles of Jesus Christ, which tends to cast out the fear
that has torment. Verse 24. "Therefore, as the church is subject to Christ, so
let the wives to their own husbands, in every thing." Which shows the duty of
wives to submit to and seek to please their husbands, in every thing that is
not contrary to the mind of Jesus Christ, "as it is fit in the Lord." When the
wife makes this the rule of her conduct, she pursues her own happiness in
connection with her husband's. When his will is contrary to the mind of Christ,
or would wish his wife to do that she is afraid will incur his displeasure, she
is then only to point out her reasons from the word, and to persevere in
attention to the will of Jesus Christ. But when she sets up her own will in
opposition to her husband, and glories in a victory over him, however she may
seem to gratify herself, she will find it leads to future shame, and fear with
amazement.

We have also, in the passage before us, verse 25. "Husbands love your wives,
even as Christ also loved the church, and gave himself for it," etc. Verse 28.
29. and 30. "So ought men to love their wives as their own bodies; he that
loves his wife loves himself: For no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but
nourishes and cherishes it, even as the Lord the church. For we are members
of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones." From this passage, together with
Collosians iii. 19. and 1st of Peter, iii. 7. we may collect the mind of Jesus
Christ, as signified by the apostles, concerning the duty of husbands. It Is
comprehended in love. "Husbands love your wives." Love is the fulfiling of the
law, and the rule or measure of the love of the husband to the wife, is, "as
Christ loved the church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and
cleanse it, with the washing of water by the word; that he might make See the
former translation.
it to himself a glorious church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such
thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish."

"Jesus Christ loved the church, and gave himself for it." "Husbands love your
wives, even as Christ loved the church." Did Jesus Christ give himself; and am
I or have I any thing that is for the comfort and happiness of my wife, that
through covetousness or self-will I may withhold from her, and yet manifest I
love her as Christ loved the church? Jesus Christ paid the church's debt,
redeemed her from captivity, directed her in her duty, supplied her wants,
knows how to have compassion on the ignorant, and them that are out of the way:
He took her circumstances of want, distress and misery, upon himself, and
communicates of his fullness unto her; "is of God made to us wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption;" and is in all an example to
direct the love of the husband to his wife; that he attend to all her wants,
distresses and miseries; to relieve and supply them according to his measure.
And when any thing appears in the conduct of the wife inconsistent with her
duty, as the husband is the head of the wife, he is to point out her duty from
the word. "Jesus Christ gave himself for the church, that he might sanctity and
cleanse it, with the washing of water by the word." If the word be made use of
in the exercise of love, the tendency and efficacy would be to heal, as it
would always bring Christ's authority to the view of the wife, and keep his
example in the view of the husband, and guard against the evil cautioned in
Collosians iii. 19. "husbands love your wives, and be not bitter against them."
Remember that bitterness always springs from the root of bitterness; "the root
that bears gall and wormword, from the turning away from the root of the
righteous, that bears fruit." Yet so great is the deceitfulness of our own
hearts, and so imperceptible the prevalence of the enemy, transformed into an
angel of light, that this bitterness may appear to spring from a sort of
religious ignorance, or a mistaken religious Zeal.

When we read, "that the husband is the head of the wife," and that it is his
duty to rule well his own house, a strange notion of headship and rule may take
place, that upon every slight occasion there is a bitter resolution; I will be
master of my own house; I will be minded; it is my duty, etc. That instead of
viewing the head as the seat of wisdom, care and tenderness, it is viewed as
the seat of domineering; as if its only care was to see, that my will may be
done; and perhaps for no fault, only that a particular humor is not pleased,
there will be a stamp on the floor, enough to make all ring again, and the
husband hold himself not guilty, from a religious zeal to be minded to rule his
own house. If I find out the man, can he be offended if I should inquire, Dear
sir, where find you this in the example of Jesus Christ?

From this cause often proceeds such discontent with that which the industrious
wife has endeavored to prepare, with as much agreeableness to her husband, as
the means he had put into her hands was capable of; that he will despise both
it and her; and instead of coming with gratitude, thanksgiving and satisfaction
to his meals, as that which shows his increasing and perpetual obligation to
eat, drink, and do all to the glory of God, there will be bitter unneasiness
through the whole of the time calculated for family enjoyment and happiness. If
there be such a man, shall I put him in mind, that when Jesus fed the multitude
with barley bread and fish, he gave thanks; and when Paul and those with him on
board the ship, were about to eat, "he took bread and gave thanks to God, in
presence of them all, and when he had broken, he began to eat; then were they
all of good cheer, and they also took meat." Dear sir, thanksgiving to God, and
all of good cheer, becomes a Christan's table, which the head of the family is
to lead in:* Every thing contrary comes from the root of bitterterness, however
disordered the head may be, so as not to see whence it is. The caution, "be not
bitter against them," is to be attended to through the whole of the conduct of
the husband to the wife, with whom he is to "dwell according to knowledge." The
above described conduct must flow from ignorance and blindness, from the God of
this world blinding the mind, though it be with a religious zeal for his own
honor as the head of the wife, while the honor that is to be given to the wife
as the weaker vessel, as his own flesh, as now, "bone of his bone, and flesh of
his flesh, as heirs together of the grace of life," is not attended to, and
their mutual prayers are hereby hindered.

I have been the longer on this, because this evil may proceed from ignorance,
and the temptation in it not discovered, which, when brought to light, may be
the sooner turned from; for certainly, if a man find a proneness to these or
the like evils, in his temper, it will be natural to seek a hiding place, to
excuse and justify himself, and no where can he find one more easy, than under
a cloak of false religion. But when the true cause or source is discovered to
himself, he must conclude, that it is more agreeable to his duty, when he finds
a legal, fretful, froward disposition working in him, only waiting an
opportunity of breaking forth, to get alone, and take shame to himself, before
him to whom all things are naked and open, who is "the great High Priest that
is passed into the heavens, Jesus the son of God, touched with the feeling of
our infirmities, in all points tempted as we are, without sin," and take
encouragement from him, "to ask mercy, and find grace to help, in time of
need," and take his example with him into his family; who says, "learn of me,
for I am meek an lowly." Whence proceeds a gospel disposition, which is meek
and quiet.

Now then, if there be any in this honorable relation, "HEAD OF THE WIFE, EVEN
AS CHRIST IS HEAD OF THE CHURCH," who with their mouths show much love to "the
grace of God that brings salvation to all men that has appeared," who are so
far from soberly attending to its teaching "to deny ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly, looking for the blessed
hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior, Jesus
Christ; who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify us unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works," that they give
themselves over to ungodliness and worldly lusts, in such a manner, as to
neglect their business, their means of providing for the temporal salvation and
comfort of their families for idle company, and gaiming, till pinched with
want, they are fretful and profane in their families, to a degree, that would
be a scandel to heathens, where by the name of God and his doctrines are
blasphemed. I dare to appeal to their consciences, upon sober reflection (which
they must come to, whether they will or no) whether their hearts don't die
within them and become as a stone.

I was looking in my own mind, whether there were not a deception some how
attending the temptations, by which these persons are carried away. Perhaps
they will say, they thank God they are not as other men, -- worldly, covetous,
afraid of spending a little time or a little money; for their part they don't
desire to have their hearts overcharged with cares of this life, etc. But do
they not see, that this very practice involves them and their families in the
utmost perplexity? What, though they may sometimes appear to gain, has not
divine truth said, "wealth gotten by vanity shall be diminished"? Yes, it
shall. Divine power is engaged in the cause of divine truth, and it shall be
accomplished. Perhaps in this very instance in which you gain, it is fulfiled
respecting some other family.

When Jesus Christ exhorted his disciples. "Take heed least your hearts be over
charged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and that day
come upon you unawares," did he not give an example of diligence in working the
work of him that sent him? Says he, "my meat is to do the will of him that sent
me, and to finish his work." Is it not the character of his spouse? "She
works willingly with her hands, she looks well to the ways of her household,
and eats not the bread of idleness." And does not his apostles direct his
disciples, 1st of Thessalonians, iv. 11. 12. "That ye study to be quiet and do
your own business, and work with your own hands, that ye may walk honestly
toward them that are without, and ye may have lack of nothing." 2d of
Thessalonians, iii. 11. 12. "We hear that there are some that walk disorderly,
working not at all, but are busy bodies; now them that are such, we command and
exhort, by our LORD JESUS, that with quietness they work and eat their own
bread." Ephesians iv. 28. "Rather let him labor, working with his hands the
thing that is good, that he might have to give to him that needs." In this
the apostle was an example, 1st of Thessaionians, ii. 9. "For laboring night
and day, because we would not be chargeable unto any of you, we preached unto
you the gospel of God." Acts xx. 34. 35. "These hands have ministered to my
necessities, and to them that were with me: So laboring, ye ought to support
the weak, and to remember the words of our Lord Jesus, how he said it is more
blessed to give than to receive."

Let these sayings sink down into our ears, and let us remember the
exhortation, Romans xiii. 13. 14. "Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in
rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness, not in strife and
envy, but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make not provision for the
flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof." It Is all day with him; we are naked and
open before him; "If I say the darkness shall cover me, even the night shall be
light about me; yea, the darkness hides not from thee, but the night shines
as the day; the darkness and the light are both alike to thee."

As the duty of husband is now in view, I would take a little more particular
notice of the apostle Peter's comprehensive address to them, all contained in
one verse, 1st epistle, iii. 7. "Likewise ye husbands dwell with them according
to knowledge, giving honor unto the wife as to the weaker vessel, and as being
heirs together of the grace of life, that your prayers be not hindered."

"Dwell with them according to knowledge." This may import the knowledge of the
mystery contained in the marriage union; as it is a figure of the union of
Christ and the church, the knowledge of the love, care, compassion and
tenderness, that Jesus Christ shows to his church, as an example to the
husband, and of what his word and the nat^^e of the marriage union binds upon
them."

"Giving honor to the wise as to the weaker vessel." The apostle says, "If one
member suffer, all the members suffer with it; and if one member be (...), all
the members rejoice with it." It Is true here, if the head and husband give
honor to the wise, all the ^^^sible parts of the family rejoice; if she
frequently, and without cause, suffer his displeasure, all the family suffer
herein. But how may I understand this expression, "honor as to the weaker
vessel"? When I look into the house, I see the weaker vessels, the glass, the
china, honored with the most attention, the safest and most honorable place
assigned to them; they are handled with the greatest care and tenderness; and
in Isaiah xxii. from the 15th, I read, that when Shebna, who looked upon
himself as the nail fastened in the sure place, should be removed, cut down and
fall, and the burden on it broken, God would fasten Eliakim as a type of Jesus
Christ, a^ a nail in a sure place; "And they shall hang on him all the glory of
his Father's house, all vessels of small quantity, from the vessels of cups,
even to all the vessels of flaggons." Here is honor to the weaker vessels.
Hence the honor to the wife, denotes the care and tenderness with which she is
to be treated; and in all her fears, distresses and perplexities, to be put in
mind of the nail in the sure place, that can never be cut down and fall.

This is agreeable to what follows: "And as being heirs together of the grace
of life." The grace of life, is the grace that reigns through righteousness to
eternal life, by Jesus Christ our Lord; which comes not by works of
righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy. The idea of
heirship, is the idea of inheriting what was not our own, by the will of
another. Heirs together of the grace of life, carries the mutual obligation
that the grace of the gospel brings us under, to obedience to him in our mutual
duties one to another.

"That your prayers be not hindered." The direction, 1st of Peter, iv. 7. "Be
ye therefore sober, and watch unto prayer," together with the repeated
exhortations of Jesus Christ, to watch and pray, shows the duty of watchfulness
against every thing whereby our prayers may be hindered; and as Jesus Christ,
in Mark xi. 52. says, "When ye stand praying, forgive, if ye have ought against
any," we may easily see that the contrary spirit must hinder mutual prayer; for
where envy and stri^e is, there is confusion and every evil work. That your
prayers be not hindered, may have reference to mutual prayer in the church,
which ought to be attended in the exercise of fervent charity, and which may be
marred, weakened or broken, by an indulged carriage, unbecoming the gospel of
Christ; in which case the direction of Jesus Christ, "If thou bring thy gift to
the alter, and there remember that thy brother has ought against thee, leave
there thy gift before the alter, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy
brother, and then come and offer thy gift," ought to be attended to. -- It may
also have reference to their mutual prayers in the family, as their
circumstances, opportunity and sense of divine mercy, may call them thereunto:
For we have direction to pray with all prayer and supplication in the spirit;
and in every thing, by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, to be making
our requests known to God; and it must be the mutual duties of husbands and
wives, to guard against that conduct which would hinder the mutual enjoyment of
such a privilege.

In what has been brought to view, the scriptures, in their most obvious
meaning, have been attended to, as knowing they come with the authority of
Jesus Christ, who is Lord of all. The authority of the apostles is the
authority of Christ, as he has connected them with himself; so that he that
despises these their exhortations, despises not man, but God. And sure I am,
that an attention to them, is the surest way to domestic happiness. I have
often thought, that if two persons come together in the relation of husband and
wife, that wished to live happily in that relation, they could walk by no
better rules, even supposing they did not believe the scriptures; but in that
case they would have but the body or the letter, without the spirit. The honor,
the nearness, the endeared affection, and the obligations mutually arising in
that relation, cannot be fully seen but as they center in Christ Jesus, in his
union with, love to, and care of, his church; in whom the man is not without
the woman, nor the woman without the man: "For OF HIM, and TO HIM, and THROUGH
HIM, are all things:" To whom be glory forever. AMEN.

To this I would subjoin some thoughts by another hand, collected together some
years past.
ON MARRIAGE.
I.
WHEN such as we attempt to sing,
The praises of our heavenly King,
His mercies rise so fast to view,
That still the theme is always new.
II.
In early days his Godlike care
Of all his creatures, did appear;
Each of his kind an help-meet found,
To pass the days successive round.
III.
When man alone no partner knew,
This want was in his Maker's view;
Whose love and power the want supplied,
From sleeping Adam's tender side,
Whose rib he formed a lovely bride.
IV.
This good obtained, how blessed had been
Man's happy state, unstained by sin?
But too, too soon the unthinking pair,
By satan's arts beguiled were.
V.
From this foiled source did soon arise,
Lusts of the flesh, the world and eyes;
Whose all predominating power,
The happiest days of man devour;
VI.
Disturb the joys of social life,
And discord spread t'wixt man and wife
But praise and thanks to thee shall rise,
The joyful sound shall reach the skies;
VII.
That peace and good on earth proclaimed,
And man, the ungrateful subject, named,
Whom boundless mercy does arrest,
And thus compeleth to be blessed.
VIII.
Which brings to view eternal joy,
Which cannot admit of an alloy:
To purchase which, the SON of GOD
Did shed his own most precious blood.
IX.
This glorious news proclaimed abroad,
Makes wandering man return to God;
And thus the mind from earth is reared,
And with eternal joy is cheered.
X.
Thus over this short, contracted span,
Which is assigned to mortal man,
The gospel casts a smile of peace,
And bids our anxious cares to cease.
XI.
By this the husband and the wife,
Are taught to pass the days of life:
Their duty and their happiness,
Most closely here connected is:
XII.
Each tender passion does revive,
And mutual duties keep alive.
The unbounded love which Christ has shown,
Who for his church his life laid down,
XIII.
Is to the husband brought to view,
A pattern of affection true.
The church, his spotless bride, likewise,
Does as the wife's example rise.
XIV.
It Is thus the gospel does revive,
And keep each generous thought alive:
Arrests those lusts which bitter life,
And teach to live like man and wife.
APPENDIX,
Containing thoughts occasioned by the provisions of the table.
Upon looking over the time calculated for family enjoyment, happiness, etc.
mentioned in the 22d page; some thoughts occured on the provision of the table,
which swelled beyond the compass of a marginal note, and are brought in by way
of appendix, as follows.

WHEN the head of a family retiring from his business to his meals, has the
happiness to make them all set down around him and the example of Jesus Christ
and the apostle, to direct, excite, embolden, and encourage him to give thanks
before them all, if his mind is led to understand the glory of the gospel, what
can hinder his breaking forth into praise, for all spiritual blessings in
heavenly things, in Christ Jesus, as they are brought to his view in the
bounties of providence on his table; yea, though it be at a time of poverty,
and there be only bread and water, to preserve life till some further
provisions can be procured, yet even that would point us to the bread and water
of life, for even they were made by him, and for him, and do silently,
eminently and constantly hold forth his glory; if with them I have a piece of a
broiled fish, shall I be discontent because I have no more, and seem as if the
meal was not large enough to call me to thanksgiving; or shall I not rather
remember it is the same with which Jesus fed the multitudes after he had given
thanks; the same that was laid on the coals, John xxi. 9. to which he called
his disciples to "come and dine," verse 12; or would my discontented mind find
fault with my bread, because I cannot obtain every day the finest of the wheat,
let it rather remind me, that it was barley bread with which Jesus fed the
multitude, John vi 9. If the adversary, whose name is legion, for they are
many, attempt like the Midianites that typified them, Judges vi. to destroy the
increase of the earth, by introducing murmuring, discontent and uneasiness,
instead of thanksgiving at my table, may this barley bread with which the
multitudes were fed, remind me of what the barley cake did, in the host of the
Midianites, and be as officacious to take away my murmuring; for will it not
pierce my heart with grief and shame that I should murmur at that for which my
Lord gives thanks! Can I have the least appearance of a servant or disciple, to
be thus above my master and Lord, while a "perfect disciple shall be as his
master." Luke vi. 40. "Herein is the love perfect in us, that we should have
boldness in the day of judgment, for as he is, so are we in this world." 1st of
John, iv. 17. Methinks here is also a further lesson for me; when a lad had
only five barley loaves, and two small fishes, they were all at the service of
Jesus Christ, of whom and for whom he had them. If I am favored with meat, it
is calculated to lead me to the meat that endures to eternal life, which the
Son of man shall give, who says, "my flesh is meat indeed." If I have a dinner
of herbs, and the sense of divine love exciting me and my family to love one
another, it is better than a (...) ox, and hatred to my God and family
therewith: Shocking the thought! that my ungrateful heart is capable of this!
If I cast my eye on the salt, while I reach after it, it would silently remind
me of the favor of the knowledge of Christ, made manifest by his apostles in
every p^ace, "which is the salt of the covenant of God that never should be
lacking," typified by that which was to accompany all the offerings of the
children of Israel, and which was given them in Ezra's time, by Darius, chap.
vi. 9. and by Artaxerxes, chap. vii. 22. at the commandment of the priest,
without prescribing, pointing forward to the favor of the knowledge of Christ,
which my salt would remind me of: This turns my mind to an instruction we have
in Ezra iv. 14. "Now because we are salted with the salt of the palace, it was
not meet for us to see the kings dishonor:" This is the instruction my salt,
which was created by him, is of him and for him, would communicate to me. Is my
table furnished, and am I favored with roots, and will they not turn my mind
to the "root of Jesse," Isaiah xi. 10. "the root out of a ory ground," chap.
liii. 2. "the root of the righteous that yields or gives," Proverbs xii. 12.
For my roots were by him, they are from him and for him, to hold forth his
glory. Do I find my table enriched with fruits, the fruit of the vine; have I a
cup of wine there, surely it so fully points to Jesus Christ, that as often as I
drink it, I ought to remember him, whether it be at the Lord's supper, or at my
own table. Do I see the beans* pease and squashes on my table, either of these
are the fruit of the bush, and would lead my mind to the angel of the Lord, or
the agent Jehovah, that appeared to Moses in the bush, which burned with fire
and was not consumed, which caused Moses to turn aside, to behold with
attention, when he was told to put off his shoes from off his feet, in token of
reverence and resignation to his Lord, which be did, and was then instructed in
the meaning, which led Moses to understand, that though the posterity of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, were in bondage in Egypt, sighing and groaning, and
was expeled a stranger in Midian, a strange land, yet God saw their trouble and
heard their cry, and said unto him, "I am the God of thy father, the God of
Abraham, of Isaac and of Jacob, this is my name forever, and my memorial unto
all ages;" I that delivered Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in all their distresses,
particularly that saved Jacob, and his family when in danger o^ being burnt up
with famine, by bringing them into Egypt, and giving them there the blessing of
Joseph, with which he blessed his land in the seven plentious years, even the
sweetness of heaven, the dew, and the deep, and the sweet increase of the sun
and the moon, the precious things of the mountains and hills, and the precious
things of the earth, and the abundance thereof; whereby the good will of him
that dwelt in the bush rested on Joseph, and upon the top of the head of him
that was separated from his brethren, as a type of him in whom all fullness
dwells.

"I AM that I AM, I am the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob; this is my
name forever, and my memorial throughout all generations: I know the sorrows of
their posterity, therefore I am come down to deliver them." -- And is there not
in this name and memorial joy to the whole earth? Is he the God of the Jews
only, and not of the Gentiles also? Yes, "even of the Gentiles also; the God of
the whole earth shall he be called." The promise to Abraham is. "In thy seed
shall all the nations of the earth be blessed." So that there is not held forth
to Moses in the burning bush, the distressed state of the children of Israel
and their deliverance only, but of the whole human race, who by the curse of
the fiery law, appeared in danger of being burnt up without remedy; but Jesus
"was made under the law, to redeem them that were under the law;" he sustained
the fire, and freed us from being consumed. His sustaining of, and deliverance
from it, was the beginning of revenges on the enemy; on which the call is,
"Rejoice O ye nations, his people." In view of which, in the lxviith Psalm,
"All people" are called to "clap their hands, and shout with the voice of
triumph; for the Lord, High and Terrible, a Great King over all the earth, he
has subdued the people under us, and the nations under our feet." The nation
and people of the Jews, apprehended themselves above the Gentiles, and despised
them; but since "God is gone up with a shout, the Lord with the sound of the
trumpet," it is evident he has chosen our inheritance for us, "the excellency
of Jacob, whom he loved."

Our inheritance: All people, the Gentiles, who are fellow heirs, and of the
same body, and partakers of his promises in Christ by the gospel, and all
people, are called on, "Sing praises to God; sing praises; sing praises unto
our King, sing praises; for God is King of all the earth; sing ye praises that
have understanding: God reigns over the heathen; God siteth upon his holy
throne." -- Agreeable to Psalm ii. where it is said, "Yet have I set my King
upon my holy hill of Zion: Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee,"
(referring to the resurrection) "ask of me, and I will give the heathen thine
inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth thy possession." Upon his
resurrection, it is manifest they are his purchased possession. This King now
manifestly appears to reign in righteousness: "I have set my King upon my holy
hill of Zion." So in the above xlviith Psalm, on his ascension, he is "King of
all the earth," he "rigneth over the heathen," he "sits on his holy throne,"
he is come whose right it is; thus "the princes of the people are gathered
together, the people of the God of Abraham;" he not only shielded Abraham's
family in their affliction, but "the shields of the earth belong unto the Lord;
he is greatly exalted."

Is there not a lesson for me, under my distressing trials, of what sort
soever, to realize the reverence and subjection that is due to my Lord, as in
the case of Moses, Exodus iii. 5. and Joshua v. 15. resigning myself up to him
as not my own, but redeemed by him? Now this was the manner in Israel,
concerning redeeming and changing, -- to establish all things, a man plucked
off his shoe, and gave it to his neighbor, and this was a sure witness in
Israel that he had resigned his right, and it was the property of him that
redeemed it; which I am of my Lord Redeemer, and ought to realize it with
reverend submission, under every affliction, knowing that in his everlasting
name, his memorial through all generations, there is a fountain of
all-sufficient consolation.

Are not these things brought to my view in the fruit of the bush upon my
table? And does not the rising and growing of these bushes from year to year,
bring to my mind the use my Lord teaches me to make of this manifestation of
himself, in proof of the resurrection, in Luke xx. 37. 38? Or, are the
abovementioned beans, pease and squashes, with the cucumbers and mellons, on
my table, the fruit of the vine, then they all, with the blood of the grapes,
point to the true vine from whence they proceed, to whom they belong, and for
whom they were created. But have I not yet done? Am I presented with the fruit
of the apple tree, to bring to my mind the tree of life, which bear twelve
fruits, and yielded her fruit every month; which fruit was for meat, and the
leaf for medicine; "the leaves of the tree for the healing of the nations?" If
my apple should remind me of the fruit of the forbidden tree, by which sin and
death entered, it will also lead me to Christ, by and for whom the apple tree
was created; for "as the apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is my
beloved among the sons." I have all in this tree; for the fruit is for food and
the leaf for medicine. What may I understand by the leaves of the tree, in a
natural sense? It shows that which evidences of what sort the tree is: Thus the
fig tree was known it had leaves; and as the leaves of a fig tree were sewed
together for aprons, after the fall, to hide nakedness and shame, as has been
the manner ever since, "to cover with a covering, but not of God's spirit," to
go about to establish our own righteousness, which covering is too narrow, a
man cannot wrap himself in it; so when Jesus came the Lord our righteousness,
he says to the fig tree, the emblem of seeking life by our own righteousness,
"never man eat fruit of thee henceforth forever, and immediately the fig tree
withered away;" but his leaf shall not wither, -- his profession. -- The truth
he heard of God at this baptism, "this is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased," the truth he taught through his life and ministry, that he witnessed
a good confession to, before Pontious Pilot, that was witnessed in his
resurrection, whereby he is "declared the Son of God, with power according to
the spirit of holiness," this truth, which Peter made confession of, on which
he will build his church, is, I apprehend, what we are led to for the meaning
of the "leaves of the tree, that are for the healing of the nations," whose
virtues shall prevail 'till "there be no more curse."

But it is time to rise from table. Please, sir, to stop and taste a few nuts.
Yes, my friend, I will taste them, that they may lead me down to the garden of
nuts, of which I read, Song vi. 11. to see the "fruits of the valley;" for
valleys, mountains, rocks, hills and plains, beasts, and all cattle, fruitful
trees, and all cedars, creeping things, and fowls of every wing, all in their
places show forth his glory; for all things were created by him and for him: To
whom be glory forever. AMEN.

PART II. THOUGHTS on EDUCATION. Addressed to PARENTS.
YE honored, respectful sires,
A motive now appears,
Of cautious circumspection to'ards
Your children, young in years.
Provoke them not to wrath, least they
Discouraged should appear;
But by the nurture of the Lord,
Their tender spirits cheer.
He in his word does nurture give,
And admonition too;
Let it imparted be to them,
With faithfulness by you.
And may you ever sit with joy,
At our Emanuel's feet,
To learn with wisdom and with love,
The little ones to treat.

PARENT and child comprehends more endearing, engaging, and respectful ideas,
than I can conceive, much less express the fullness of: But when I think of
them, they appear as harmonious notes in agreeable music, which may delight
the ear of him who cannot give them their proper sound. Notwithstanding, I
shall attempt something that may be useful in conducting in that endeared
relation.

It Is the place and duty of a child to be in his parents presence with
reverence and delight; and it is the duty of the parent to guard against a
childless familiarity, that would tend to make the child humoursome, and bring
the parent into contempt; and against such an austerity as would make their
presence a dread which the child would seek to avoid. It Is their duty also to
guard against ill names, and such phrases and expressions as would intimate to
the minds of the children, that their parents have not the fear of God before
their eyes. If instead of the paternal, endearing expressions of -- my dear
child, my son, my daughter, -- it is -- you little our, you dog, you plague, --
or the like; it is, what shall I call it! a violent rape on the morals of the
child. Such children are early capable of reasoning after this manner, -- if I
am such a creature, what is my father that begat me, or my mother that brought
me forth? -- and they soon get emboldened to use the same expressions, at least
to those that offend them; which is productive of wrath and strife, and
promotes an undesirable hardness and harshness of temper and manners.

Parents must likewise guard against a customary threatening, which alienates
the mind, and sowers the temper of the children, and produces contempt of the
parents, when they see their threatenings are only verbal, never to be feared
except when they get into a passion. Threatenings ought to be given out with
great caution and care; to be what will be the parents indispensible duty in
the threatened case: They ought to be confined to moral evils; such as apparent
wilsul disobedience, lying, cheating, or profaneness; any thing that is an
apparent sin against God or our neighbor: And when judiciously given out, they
ought to be punctually executed, not in passion and anger, but in love and
faithfulness. And when any accidental miscarriage takes place, such as the
breaking an earthen vessel, or a square of glass, it should meet with a gentle
admonition, never carried so high as to tempt the children to lie to hide it,
for fear of the wrath of their parents.

Here I would take notice of the apostolic direction, Ephesians vi. 4. "And ye
fathers provoke not your children to wrath, least they be discouraged, but
bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord."

"Least they be discouraged." Does it not include in it every thing in the
education of children, that would give them a dreadful discouraging idea of
God, or of their natural parents, so as to cause them secretly to wish they
could hide themselves from him or them, or to make them unhappy at the thought
of being always in the Divine presence (a source of security and happiness
where his name is known) or at the thought of coming into the presence of their
parents.

The scripture account that God is love, and the way in which it is made
manifest, is calculated to show our highest happiness in his presence and
favor; and what is to be most feared, is that which will displease him, and
procure his frown. In like manner, if parents conduct by the Divine rule, their
children will be happiest in their presence and favor, and it must be a great
punishment to be turned away from them, as a token of displeasure, but for an
hour. But when, on the contrary, they cannot come where they are, without some
hard names or dreadful threatenings, they are provoked and discouraged.

"But bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord." Nurture conveys
the idea of nursing or nourishment, agreeable to 1st of Thessalonians, ii. 7.
"We were gentle among you, as a nurse cherishes her children;" 1st of Peter,
ii. 2. "As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow
thereby;" 1st of Timothy, iv. 6. "Nourished up in the words of faith and good
doctrine." Admonition conveys the idea, to counsel, advise, instruct, warn and
reprove.

The admonition of the Lord, leads my mind to 1st of Corinthians, x. 11. where
the apostle, speaking of the things written in the old testament, says, "they
are written for our admonition." The scriptures of the new began to be spoken
by the Lord, and was confirmed to us by them that heard him* They are the
admonition of the Lord; not only the sayings of Christ himself, but of his
apostles, that he connects with himself, "He that hears you, hears me;" are
the admonition of the Lord, as is expressed 1st of Thessalonians, ii. 11. "As
ye know how we exhorted and comforted and charged every one of you, as a father
his children, that ye would walk worthy of God, who has called you to his
kingdom and glory."

1st. For nurture. Let the children have the sincere milk of the word, that
they may grow thereby; let them suck and be satisfied with these breasts of
consolation. Only let us look into the various passages, in which Jesus Christ
spoke of, to, or about little children: See Matthew xviii. 1. to 14. chap. xix.
14. 15. Matthew xxi. 16. Mark xi. 13. to 16. Luke xviii. 14. 16. and see if
there is any thing besides glad tidings of great joy to them: If it be so, let
the dear children know it as soon as they are capable of understanding; let
them be "nourished up in the words of faith," in those truths that are to be
believed, "and good doctrine;" the good news, the glad tidings that the GOSPEL
contains. Or is there any threatenings of eternal damnation to children, by the
apostles of Christ? If not, who dare ring them in their ears!

There is indeed, temporal destruction, with the greatest infamy, threatened
disobedient children, Proverbs xxx. 17. which is a part of the second branch:
The admonition of the Lord so is, Luke xv. 15. where the prodigal, from a
father's house, where is bread enough, and to spare, is brought to be a poor
hungry swine-feeder.

So is every caution and warning through the scriptures, especially the new
testament, which the parents ought to be acquainted with, and bring to the
children's view, for warning, reproving, counseling, advising and instructing
on all occasions, particularly upon any thing that is sinful: The divine
admonition ought to be brought immediately from the lively oracles, and they
convinced it is disagreeable to the will of their Greater, Preserver and
Redeemer, on whom their all depends.

For an example of admonition, we have one drawn to our hands by the apostle,
1st of Corinthians 1. to 11. which being well considered, may help parents to
make use of other scriptures in a similar way, as there may be occasion.

Thus have I given some thoughts on the education of children, to whom I wish
the blessedness of an early acquaintance with what God has done for them, and
their obligations of gratitude to him. It Is the duty of parents, from
childhood, to acquaint them with the holy scriptures, wherein these things are
contained (as Timothy was) "which are able to make wise unto salvation, through
faith in Christ Jesus:" It Is with him to communicate the knowledge of himself,
according to his good pleasure: To whom be glory and dominion, forever. AMEN.

PART III. AN INQUIRY INTO THE CASE OF CHILDREN, WITH AN EXHORTATION TO THEM.
MATTHEW xviii. 4 -- Even so it is not the will of my Father which is in
Heaven, that one of these little ones should perish.
Third epistle of JOHN, 4. -- I have no greater joy than to hear that my
children walk in the truth.
WHEN I meditate on the case of children, and propose an exhortation to them,
instead of being governed by the various opinions there are about them. I would
turn to the scriptures, and form my apprehensions from them, that I may know
what ground there is for a word of exhortation to them. In Matthew xviii. 5.
and Mark ix. 37. Jesus Christ says, "Whosoever shall receive one such little
child in my name, receives me." One such; -- it was a child he took in his
arms, in Mark; a little child in Matthew: And in Luke xviii. 15. they brought
infants, and Jesus said, "Suffer the little children to come unto me and forbid
them not, for of such is the kingdom of Heaven." How comes infants constituted
of the kingdom of Heaven? Matthew xviii. 11. shows Jesus Christ came to save
them; therefore, "take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones; for I
say unto you, that in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my
father which is in heaven; for the son of man is come to save that which is
lost." Their angels: What is the office of the holy angels? "Are they not all
ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them that shall be heirs of
salvation?" If their angels always behold the face of the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who is in heaven, does it not convey the idea that nothing
can be done against them, in a way of despising them, but what must be
immediately known there? And if angels minister to infants, are they not heirs
of salvation? How came they heirs; are they not by nature children of wrath;
are they not lost in Adam, their head; how came they heirs of salvation? Verse
11. informs us, "For the son of man came to save that which was lost." Though
they are really lost in union with the first Adam, and however they may appear
lost in their own utter helplessness, and the various distresses and miseries,
even death itself, that they are exposed to; yet if the son of man is come to
save that which is lost; has taken hold of them, taken their nature into union
with himself, and constituted them of the kingdom of God, in virtue of his own
righteousness, who says, Luke xviii. 15. "for of such is the kingdom of God,"
then "take heed that ye despise not one of these little ones." Are they not
despised by those that freely and frequently speak of the everlasting damnation
of infants? Do they get it from any word of Jesus Christ concerning them? Why
is it so? That they are lost is readily acknowledged; but the son of man came
to save that which was lost: Will he not accomplish his design; is he not
mighty to save? He is the shepherd that looks after that which is lost," that
"takes the lambs into his arms and carries them in his bosom:" "How think ye,
if a man have an hundred sheep, if one of them be gone astray, does he not
leave the ninety-nine, and goes into the mountains and seeks that which is
gone astay* and if so be that he find it, verily I say unto you, that he
rejoiceth more of that than of the ninety-nine that went not astray: EVEN so it
is not the will of your Father who is in heaven, that one of these little ones
should perish." If Jesus Christ came to save them, and it is not the will of
your Father in heaven that one of them should perish, must not the despisers of
them, that so freely treat of their damnation, suspect themselves as advocates
for the destroyer? Do they not prevail to draw a vail over the power and
compassion of the Savior, and destroy the peace of thousands?

It may not be amiss to illustrate this, by bringing in the testimony of the
prophets and apostles. When God, by his prophet Jeremiah, was comforting
ancient Israel in what he would do for them, chap. xxxi. 1. to 14. the ground
and reason of which we have in the 11th verse, "For the Lord has redeemed
Jacob, and ransomed him from the hand of stronger than he." Having redeemed and
ransomed him, "He that scattered Israel will gather him, and keep him as a
shepherd his flock: Therefore they shall come and sing in the height of Zion;
and they shall not sorrow any more at all; then shall the virgin rejoice in the
dance, both young men and old men together; for I will turn their mourning into
joy, and make them rejoice from their sorrow, and I will satiate the soul of
the priest with fatness, and my people shall be satisfied with my goodness,
says the Lord." That this good news may reach the bottom of their affliction
and sorrow, expressed in verse 15. in a prophetic view, of the destruction of
the children of Bethlehem, by Herod, it is said, verse 16. "Refrain thy voice
from weeping, and thine eyes from tears, for thy work shall be rewarded, says
the Lord; and they shall come again from the land of the enemy, and there is
hope in thine end, says the Lord, that thy children shall come again to their
own border." Death was the enemy where they went; from which they shall come
again, and inherit their own border, in him, or by virtue of union with him,
"who through death, destroys him that had the power of death; that is the
devil." "Thus says the Lord, even the captives of the mighty shall be taken
away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered; for I will contend with
him that contendeth with thee, and I will save thy children, Isaiah xlix 25."
"They shall come again from the land of the enemy."

"And there is hope in thine end that thy children shall come again to their
own border." What is their own border? It Is the fruit of the purchase of Jesus
Christ, called their own in virtue of their union to him. To this I would add
the apostle Peter, in Acts ii. 39. "For the promise is to you and to your
children, and to all that are afar, of even as many as the Lord our God shall
call." The promise to you and your children, as extensive as the call of the
gospel, which is directed to every creature, and expressed in this language by
the prophet, "Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth."

It may not be unsuitable to take notice here of the error of many parents, and
others, who comfort themselves concerning their infant children, when they die,
from their innocence, saying they are undoubtedly gone to happiness, and rob
the Savior of his glory, and themselves of any true comfort. If they would
think a few minutes, if the salvation by Jesus Christ is excluded, and they
gone to happiness by virtue of their own innocence, it is a happiness that they
themselves can never be admitted to; "for there is no other name under Heaven
among men, whereby they can be saved, but the name of Jesus" They seem not to
attend to the apostle; "he has concluded all under sin, that he might have
mercy upon all."

The apostle John, when writing to the disciples, under the character of little
children, ^^ys, "I write unto you, little children, because your sin are
forgiven, for his name sake: I write unto you, little children, because you
have known the Father." The Father is not known to any but to whomsoever the
son will reveal him. When they understood the forgiveness of sins for his name's
sake, the know the father: Thus is he, who is love, made manifest. And this is
what little children in Christ's school are taught, by an aged apostle, "I
write unto you, little children, because your sins are forgiven you, for his
name's sake," which he lays in the foundation of his exhortations to them,
"Love not the world," etc.

I am aware of an objection against what I have brought to view. How can these
things be so, when we see children, as soon as they grow up, turn after their
own lusts, after "the course of this world, according to the prince of the
power of the air, the spirit that now works in the children of disobedience?"
Do we not see children and youth soon arrive at a shocking pitch of profaneness
and immoraity? Yes, verily, multitudes of them appear to be in the snare of the
devil, and led captive by him, at his will: But whose are they? Do they belong
to him who has ensnared them, and leads them captive; yea, though he so blind
their minds as to lead them to profane the name of their rightful owner, and to
say he shall not reign over us, does it alienate the property of them? May they
not be told with truth and propriety, that they are not their own, they belong
to Jesus Christ, to whom they must give an account of their conduct, who will
bring every knee of them to bow to him; that they are working out their own
shame and confusion of face before him? May they not be called to repent; to
return to their rightful proprietor, owner and Lord?

But how repent, unless they are wrong in their alienation to Jesus Christ, and
in their walking according to the spirit that now works in the children of
disobedience? How return, if they have not gone astray; if they belong not to
their Lord Redeemer; i^ he be not the shepherd and bishop of their souls? Is
not this idea held up in every call to repentance? Isaiah xiiv. 22. "Return,
for I have redeemed thee." Jeremiah iii. 12. "Return, thou backsliding Israel,
says the Lord;" 14. "Turn, O back sliding children, says the Lord. for I am
married unto you;" 22. "Return, ye back sliding children, I will heal your
backslidings." The idea of his right as Redeemer, Husband and Father, is
implied in the call to return, and every ca^^ to repentance supposes mercy: "I
here is forgiveness with thee, that thou may he feared," and we cannot
conceive of mercy but in a consistency with justice: If justice is satisfied,
mercy slows without obstruction, "Return, for I have redeemed thee."

Besides, if they are in the snare of the devil, led captive by him at his
will, "for this purpose was the son of man manifest, that he might destroy the
works of the devil." -- When the prophet Isaiah introduces the inquiry, chap.
xlix. 24. "Shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or Hebrew, in the bible
margin, "The captivity of the just."
the lawful captive delivered?" By "the lawful captive," or "the captivity of
the just," I understand, that those who were taken captive by the mighty
adversary, were taken from where they lawfully belonged, led captive from ^^e
just one, (...).
The answer is, verse 25. "But thus says the Lord, the captives of the mighty
shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered, for I
will contend with him that contendeth with thee, and I will save thy children."
He will not leave them in his hands; no, not one of the hundred; the shepherd
will not lose one of the hundred sheep; he came to save that which is lost; he
came to do his Father's will, and it is not his will "that one of these little
ones should perish."

Thus much OF CHILDREN; what follows is addressed TO CHILDREN.

Children, -- let me ask your attention to what is laid before you, simply from
the scriptures. -- Are these things so? If so, methinks it is "glad tidings of
great joy," and shows the ground of obligation that lies upon you to look upon
yourselves as not your own, as not at liberty to walk after your own lusts, as
not belonging to satan, however he may seek to devour or ensnare you, -- you
belong to Jesus Christ, our Creator, Preserver and Redeemer, he has bought you
with his blood, and therefore you are under the highest obligations to "glorify
him in your spirits and bodies which are his;" and is it not in this view, most
ungrateful, base and wicked, to walk contrary thereunto? I have thought whether
it were not the ignorance of children about what our Lord and Savior is to
them, has done, and is doing for them, that was the cause of their sinking so
low into the mire and filth of profaneness and immorality; while a sense of
love always carries with it, a sense of obligation to grateful obedience: Where
this is the case, it would be natural to turn our minds to the exhortation of
the apostle to children, "children obey your parents in the Lord, for this
right." When we consider the wretched, helpless circumstances we come into the
world in, and view the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of
mercies, giving paternal love, tenderness and compassion to our parents, and by
this means, daily loading us with his benefits; as soon as we are capable of
reflecting, it must give us a view of obligation to gratitude and thankfulness,
which cannot be expressed, without a sense of obligation to obedience;
therefore, children "obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right," it must
commend itself to your own consciences as right. -- I wish to unfold something
of the meaning of this expression; if I could, it would discover such
obligations as could not be broken through, without doing violence to our own
consciences, our peace and comfort, for it must lead to a united view of what
our Lord Jesus Christ has done, and is doing for us, and what he makes our
parents to us, and does for us by their means, which would lead our minds to
all the thought, care, toil and labor of the father, and to the compassionate
tenderness of the mother, who often, with much pain and pleasure, nourishes her
offspring from her own body, both night and day; well might the apostle say,
"children obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right." Here also is a
direction to children, when they come to years capable of understanding the
will of God in Christ Jesus concerning them; if ever the parents, through the
prevalency of temptation, command any thing contrary to his revealed will, to
remember the words of the apostle to the rulers who commanded them contrary to
the will of the Lord, "we ought to obey God rather than man," and dutifully to
remind their parents of the reasons of their conduct; to obey in any thing
contrary to his revealed will, would not be to obey them "in the LORD."

"Honor thy father and mother," which is the first commandment, with promise,
"that it may be well with thee, and that thou may live long on the earth;" a
contrary conduct, slights the divine authority that commands, and the divine
promise annexed thereto; it slights our own welfare, and forfeits life upon
earth. What base folly, guilt and shame, does disobedience to parents carry
along with it!

When the apostle to the Romans, speaks of God's giving over the Gentiles to a
reprobace mind, and rehearses what they were filled with which led thereunto,
we find in the catalogue. "disobedience to parents," Romans i. 30. So when he
speaks of the perilous times that should come in the last days, one part of the
description is, "disobedience to parents," 2d. of Timothy iii. 2.

This is that which, besides the ingratitude, baseness and wickedness that
appears in it, has a leading tendency, to various others, if not all kinds of
vice and wickedness: Therefore, "children obey your parents in the Lord;"
"Honor thy father and mother, that it may be well with thee, that thou may
live long upon the earth," even till it please God in his providence, to call
you by a natural death, in his own time and way, and not hurry yourselves, by
your disobedience, into the hands of civil justice, to an untimely death, to
which it has a tendency.

When Jesus Christ addressed his disciples under the character of little
children, John xiii. 33. the exhortation he had to give them, to which he thus
called their attention, was, verse 34, "a new commandment I give unto you, that
ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another." This
is the duty of every one, more especially of all who hope for salvation from
the love of the Savior, which ought to excite children to treat one another
with kindness and love, not to wish evil to any that offend us, not to "render
evil for evil," not to despise those that are poor, but endeavor to think of
the forgiveness and condescension of Jesus Christ, agreeable to the exhortation
of the apostle, Ephesians iv. 31. "let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger,
and clamor, and evil speaking, be put away from you, with all malice, and be
ye kind one to another, tender hearted, forgiving one another, even as God in
Christ has forgiven you."

Here I would take notice of what I have seen in some instances, with sorrow.
When young persons have been entrusted with the care of little children, either
at home, or to lead them abroad, they have seemed to lose all sense of that
kindness and tender-heartedness, of which the apostle speaks; and as it were,
cruelly divert themselves with telling the dear little ones frightful stories,
and giving out many threatenings to them, 'till ^ear and distress has banished
every agreeable feeling from their tender breasts, and they burst forth into
sobbing and crying; for which they have been called cross, -- twitch'd, scolded
at, threatened and beaten: Which conduct, in many cases, has been of very
hurtful consequences. How contrary is this to the obligations we are under to
walk in love one to another!

There is one consideration I would suggest to all that have the care of little
children; i. e. what Jesus Christ said, "of such is the kingdom of heaven," and
in that remarkable passage, Mark ix. 36. 37. "he took a child and set him in
the midst of them, and when he had taken him in his arms," (observe the bigness
of the child, a child in the arms) "he said unto them, whosoever shall receive
one of such children, in my name, receives me, and whosoever shall receive me,
receives him that sent me." Would we treat Jesus Christ in the above manner
were he upon earth! And will not the above passages warrant us to say that he
is now on earth, in the least of these his brethren; so that as ye did unto
them ye did unto him; and on reflection on the above conduct, any of us that
have been guilty, on recollecting what we have done when we thought no one saw
us, may well be afraid, and say -- surely God was in the place, and I knew it
not.

May the thought ever excite to an attention to the forementioned exhortation,
"Let all bitterness and wrath and anger and clamor and evil speaking, be put
away." Evil speaking comes from a little member, but "'it is a fire, a world of
iniquity* it sets on fire the (...) of nature, and is set on fire of hell,"
says the apostle James, iii. 6. It would perhaps be impossible to describe the
variety into which this fire blazes and unfolds itself. Without attempting
this, I shall just take notice of it as it discovers itself in profaneness,
uncleanness, covetousness, stealing and lying.

To begin with profaneness. Can there be any thing more base, ungrateful and
wicked, than to profane that worthy name, which is above every name, in which
there is salvation, the just God and the Savior, Emanuel, God with us. We know
not God but as he is thus manifest: So there can be no species of profaning
that name, but it includes in it the base ingratitude of profaning the Savior.
If the consideration of his being their God, was used as an argument against
profaneness with ancient Israel, as Levi^us xix. 12. "neither shall thou
profane the name of thy God," certainly the grace manifested in the gospel has
the same obligations in it; and opens up a ground of perpetual praise and
thanksgiving: And who of us are not at some times constrained to acknowledge
it; and with our tongues to bless God, even the Father? Shall we therewith
curse our follow-creatures, "that are made after the similitude of God?" James
iii. 9. Certainly these things ought not so to be; the grace of the gospel
teaches, by precept and example, "to bless them that curse you, bless and curse
not, love your enemies; do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that
despitefully use and persecute you." Here we are warranted to make use of the
Savior's name, in praying for our enemies; he bids us, and sets the example.
How contrary the profane practice of calling on his name to damn those we think
injure or displease us! It comes as evidently from the destroyer, our
adversary, the devil, as the abovementioned precepts and examples come from
the Savior. Stop dear child! stop young man, overheated with passion and
resentment, and hurried by temptation! stop one minute and consider which you
ought to follow: Hear the apostle, "Let all evil speaking*be put away from you,
with all malice."

The next branch of evil speaking I would take notice of, is uncleanness. If we
consider the warnings and cautions given against it by the apostles of Christ,
See Gallations v. 19 Ephasians v. 3 to 6. Collosians iii. 5. to 8 1st of
Thessalonians, iv. 3. to 8. 1st of Peter. iv. 2. 3. And in the epistle to the
Corinthians, the apostle says, "What, know ye not that your bodies are members
of Christ; shall I then take the members of Christ, and make them the members
of an harlot? GOD forbid. What I know ye not that he that is joined to an
harlot is one body, for two shall be one flesh; but he that is joined to the
Lord is one spirit. Flee fornication: Every sin that a man does is without the
body; but he that commiteth fornication, sineth against his own body. What!
know ye not that your body is the temple of the holy ghost in you, which ye
have of God, and ye are not your own, for ye are bought with a price? Therefore
glorify God in your body and in your spirit, which are God's." 1st of
Corinthians, vi. 15. to the end.
we must see the propriety of our children's being warned to shun the
appearance of this evil; to shun the speeches, behavior and company, that
tends hereunto. What shameful ingratitude does it discover, when we see our
children, who are privileged in their education so as to be able to write
their thoughts legibly, defiling the fences, as they pass the streets, with
shameful uncleanness! writing what they would at first be afraid to speak,
'till their minds are hardened by writing, then reading and repeating, 'till
they contract a habit of evil speaking; which has a tendency, as they grow up,
to lead after all uncleanness with greediness. I think I may tell them with
truth, if they should live two or three times twenty years after, it would not
obliterate, but increase the shame that such conduct must produce, upon the
remembrance of such follies; for old age has a lively remembrance of what is
done in youth, though it forgets later transactions; and the sense of
forgiveness does not take away the ground of shame, but increases it, agreeable
to Ezekiel xvi. 63. "That thou may remember and be ashamed and confounded,
and never open thy mouth any more because of thy shame, when I am pacified
toward thee for all that thou have done, says the Lord God." -- This I would
close with the advice of Divine wisdom. Proverbs vii. 24. to 27. "Hearken unto
me now therefore, O ye children, and attend to the words of my mouth; let not
thine heart decline to her ways; go not astray in her paths; for she has cast
down many wounded, yea, many strong have been slain by her: Her house the way
to hell, going down to the chambers of death."

I might mention the scripture warnings and cautions against covetousness,
stealing and lying. Covetousness in children discovers itself in a fretful
uneasiness for what belongs to other children, prompting them to attain it by
any means, if it cannot be had, as they say, by fair means, and tempts them to
steal, and then to lie to hide the crime. The story of Achan is left on record
for warning and admonition, which we have in Joshua vii. particularly verses 20
and 21, where Achan says, "Indeed I have sinned against the LORD GOD of Israel,
when I saw among the spoils a goodly Babylonish garment, and two hundred
shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold, of fifty shekels weight, then I coveted
them and took them, and behold them hid in the earth, in the midst of my tent."
etc.

Covetousness is idolatry, it makes an idol of what it fixes on: Can there be
any thing more base and disingenious, when we consider what God is to us, and
has done for us, than to prefer any thing our pevish minds covet after, and in
pursuit of it to disobey him. The apostle speaking to the Ephesians, who were
in some measure acquainted with what God in Christ was to them, and had done
for them, says, chap. iv 28. "Let him that stole, steal no more, but rather let
him labor, working with his hands the thing that is good, as showing a more
excellent way of attaining what we need, and helping those that may need help
from us. And in the same chapter, he exhorts to put away lying, and speak truth
"every man to his neighbor," from this motive, "for we are members one of
another;" therefore, in this view, we act as if we would deceive ourselves, as
if the eye should purposely betray the feet into the mire.

By what has been brought to view of the ingratitude and baseness of some of
the many works of the flesh, something is discoverable of the source from
whence they proceed, and of the darkness, distress and misery to which they
tend: It may lead to the same reflections on all the works of the flesh, which
are brought to view by Jesus Christ, Matthew xv* 19. 20. Mark vii. 21. 22. and
by the apostle, Gallations v 19. 20. 21. It might be very seasonable and
profitable by way of contrast, to consider the source and leading tendency of
the fruits of the spirit, against which there is ^o law, the very mention of
which, as they are enumerated by the apostle, Gallations v. 22. 23. wears the
aspect of delight and satisfaction, both as they flow from the love of Jesus,
and lead to an imitation of him, and satisfaction in him: But as I mean not to
burden young minds with what is over lengthy, I only hint at these things, to
open a field for themselves to walk in with pleasure, delight and thanksgiving,
Thanksgiving is a grateful, delightful expression of our obligations to God,
for the manifestation of himself, "in Christ Jesus who is love;" and for all
the mercies that flow to us from that fountain, both temporal, spiritual and
eternal, which is to be expressed in thinking, speaking, singing and living his
praise, to which children are encouraged, by the gracious acceptance the
children met with from Jesus Christ, in their hosanna's to the son of David,
Matthew xxi. 15. 16.
as they come to be capable; knowing that the path of the just one, which he
trod and laid out for his followers to walk in, who has given us an example,
"that we should follow his steps," is as "the shining light that shines more
and more unto the perfect day," while the way of the wicked one, into which he
seeks to ensnare his followers, is as darkness. Proverbs iv. 18. 19.

Thus, dear children, I have endeavored to lead your minds to the grace
revealed in the gospel, and to the view of the obligations this grace lays upon
us; -- if you accept my attempt, and are hereby excited to turn over the pages
of revelation and to attend to Jesus Christ and his apostles, speaking in them,
I have all I wish for from you: I know I am not my own, and that every
opportunity and talent I have, belongs to my Redeemer; therefore, so far as
duty to him. and love to you has excited me hereto, I have reason to be
satisfied, whatever reception it has. To his honor and glory, and your comfort
and benefit it is devoted. To the only wise God our Savior, glory and majesty,
dominion and power, both now and ever. AMEN.

THE LOVE of JESUS CHRIST, made manifest to little CHILDREN.
HOW shall a child aright conceive,
Of Jesus and his Love;
That shines in all he does so bright,
It Is angels thoughts above.
He took a child into his arms, Mark iv 36. 37.

There, union with him see;
Who does receive such in my name,
He says, receives me.
Jesus, both yesterday, to day, Hebrews xiii 8.

And ever is the same:
He on young children, laid his hands, Matthew xix. 10. 15.

And blessed be his name.
Of such my heavenly kingdom is, Matthew xix. 14.

Then let them come to me; Mark x. 14.

Thus safety for a helpless child,
And joy and comfort see.
Whoever through his haughty pride,
Disdains to take it so,
While that prevails they never shall,
Into his kingdom go. Mark x. 15.

O may I from my early youth,
Have constantly in mind,
The condescending love and grace,
Of child and infants friend.
And may I early know thy name,
And always trust thy care;
Help me Lord Jesus by thy word,
My conduct all to square.
Consolation in Christ for little Children.
WHERE shall a feeble, helpless child,
Find courage to it is mind;
But in the power and grace of him,
who came the lost to find. Matthew xviii. 11

As he that has an hundred sheep,
If one of them does stray,
Leaves ninety-nine to go and seek, Matthew xviii. 12.

And bring it on his way.
Your heavn'ly father, Jesus says,
As in his word we are told;
Will not have one such little one,
To perish from his fold. Matthew xviii. 14.

O may I know his worthy name,
And trust his faithful care;
In every gloomy fearful thought,
Find help and safety there.
Since God is love, and has it shown, 1st of John iv. 8. 16.

In Jesus unto me; 1st of John iv. 9.

May I from slavish dread of him,
Be evermore set free.
And ever have upon my mind,
A sense I Am not my own;
But am most gratefully obliged,
To live to him alone.
KING DAVID a Type of JESUS CHRIST, in his riding to Jerusalem.
THE Kings of ancient Israel were,
Horses to multiply forbid; Deutrconomy xvii. 16.

Nor do we find in all we read,
That ever their King David did.
We read of none he ever had,
Excepting his own humble mule, 1st of Kings. i. 33 38. 44.

On which his Solomon must ride,
To be anointed them to rule.
In this he stood a type of him,
He was designed to typify; Matthew v. 17. 18.

Who perfectly obeyed the law,
And did it fully magnify.
Be he the Prince of Kings on earth, Revelations i. 5.

In all our songs the joyful theme;
Whose title is the Lord of Lords, Revelations xix. 16.

Over highest Kings the King Supreme.
Then tune your harps to highest joy,
O Zion's lovely daughter dear; Zechariah ix. 9.

And let Jerus'lem's daughter too,
Attend with gladsome shouting here.
Behold thy King comes to thee,
With splendid ornaments divine;
He Is just, and yet salvation has,
In lowly meekness he does shine.
BEHOLD him riding in upon
A colt his own, for him prepared, The owners held their title under their
Lord: So Jesus says to his disciples, "say the Lord has need of him, and
straitway he will send him" Mark xi. 3 5. 6. Luke xix. 33. Is not this for our
instruction, and a rebuke to our covetousness, that would withold what he in
his members has need of.

On which no man before had sat,
Attend and hear the King declared.
A multitude, lo! very great,
With cheerfulness their garments lay; Matthew xxi. 3

Others cut goodly branches down, Mark xi. 8.

And joyful spread them by the way.
Hark! hear the shout of highest joy,
Of which we heard the prophet treat,
By those that go along before,
Which they who follow loud repeat.
Hosanna, blessed Israel's King,
That comes in the name, the Lord, Matthew xxi. 9. Hosanna seems to be the
acclamation of salvation and praise, or salvation and praise to the son of
David.

Hosanna to King David's Son,
Hosanna high with one accord.
Look! see among the crowded throng,
Children aloud hosanna cry; Matthew xxi. ^^

But it offends chief priests and scribes,
Who were spectators standing by.
Were I among the multitude,
Methinks I Would listen then to hear,
Does he reject, or now accept,
The praises of the children dear.
From babes and sucklings he approves,
The praises of his worthy name,
And asks chief priests and scribes, if they Matthew xxi. 16.

Remembered not to read the same.
But 'ere I leave this wondrous sight,
Methinks I long to hear the King.
His speech, the laws, his will, the news,
He does his vast dominions bring.
He to the heathen shall speak PEACE, Zechariah ix. 10

The ancient prophet testifies;
Peace in the heavens; and glory in Luke xix. 37. 38.

The highest; multitudes replies.
PEACE comprehends the blessed news; Isaiah 53 5. "The chastisement of our
peace was upon him, lvii. 19. I create the fruit of the lips; peace, peace to
far off and to near, says the Lord." " John xvi. 23. These things I have
spoken unto you, that in me ye might have PEACE;" John xix. 19 Jesus stood in
the midst, and said unto them, PEACE unto you; verse 21, then said Jesus unto
them again, PEACE unto you; verse 26. PEACE unto you." Acts x. 36. "Preaching
PEACE by Jesus Christ." Ephesians xi. 14. "for he is our PEACE; verse 17. and
came and preached PEACE to you that were a far off, and to them that were nigh.

And though I cannot longer stay,
To hear his speech, his laws, his will,
I Would bear this olive branch away.
PSALM CXVII.
YE nations all, of every tongue,
O praise, praise ye the Lord;
And people all, of every land,
To praise his name accord.
Because his kindness merciful,
And truth forever sure,
Is most exceeding great to us, To us; the mercy and truth is doubtless as
extensive as the call to praise him; for Psalm lxxii. 17. "all nations shall
call him blessed," Jeremiah iv. 2. "the nations shall bless themselves in him,
and in him (...) glory."

And ever shall endure.
Let slaves, let Kings, let low and high,
Together here accord;
And every soul, from all the earth,
Unite to praise the Lord.
PSALM CXLVIII.
A Universal shout of joy,
Now to Jehovah bring,
Ye heavens high, ye angels all,
Unite his praise to sing.
Praise him ye sun, and moon, and stars,
Ye heaven of heavens too,
And waters that above them are,
For he created you.
His glorious power, his arm of might,
Upholds you where you are;
By his established decree,
You ever stand fast there.
Let dragons, deeps, and cattle all,
Praise him from earth below;
Fire, hail and vapor, join herein,
With stormy wind and snow.
Let mountains praise, and all the hills.
And fowls of every wing,
The fruitful trees, and cedars all,
And every creeping thing.
Come and agree his name to praise,
Ye Kings of noble birth,
Together with each one that makes
All people of the earth.
Princes to him by whom you rule,
Your grateful homage bring;
And all the Judges of the earth,
Praise our Almighty King.
Both young men and the maidens too,
Old men and children small,
In consort here most gladly join,
His praise becomes you all.
Come one and all unite to praise,
The Lord's exalted name;
In which his glory is above
Both earth and heaven's frame.
This is the name that Jesus has,
Above each name always,
That in his name each knee should bow,
And tongue confess his praise.
Thus he exalts his people's horn,
That Is raised up for us,
Even our salvation's mighty horn,
In's servant David's house.
He is the subject of the praise,
Of all with one accord,
His saints, his Israel, near to him,
O then praise ye the Lord.
Note. In page 10th I mentioned, that both "he and she are called the Lord our
righteousness," referring to Jeremiah xxiii. 6. and xxxiii. 16. where we read,
"In those days shall Judah be saved and Jerusalem shall dwell safely; and this
is the name wherewith she shall be called, The Lord our righteousness." In the
former translation it is, "And he that shall call her, is the Lord our
righteousness;" referring to the glorious person by whom she should be called
into that safe and happy state. If our translators meant to be thus understood,
it did not appear clear in their manner of expression, -- which led me to
understand it as spoken of the name of the church. I have therefore recited the
passage as it stands in both translations.
FINIS.

