THREE SERMONS TO Little Children. ON THE NATURE AND BEAUTY OF THE DUTIFUL
TEMPER. [PUBLISHED BY DESIRE.] BY SAMUEL SPRING, A. M. Pastor of the North
Church, in NEWBURY-PORT.

BOSTON: PRINTED AND SOLD BY NATHANIEL COVERLY Opposite the WHITE-HORSE
M.DCCLXXXIII.

SERMON I.
EPHESIANS VI.1. Children, obey your PARENTS in the LORD, for this is right.


THE general design is already known. But, as the pulpit is rather in dept to
little Children, my particular design is to preach to them. I have often
thought of taking this method, to impress their tender minds with the
importance of early duty, in consequence of seeing them so attentive to
instruction, when distinguished by a particular address: and, as often have
been afraid of the attempt, left I should not treat things according to their
capacities, without being too free with the public rights of others. Their
little opening minds are capable of receiving some of the most important truths
of the gospel when they are easily connected, and plainly expressed. And,
though I cannot claim that tenderness, and instructive skill that are equal to
the subject, yet I am induced to address them in this public manner, because I
hope the divine blessing will succeed my intention, in answer to the unwearied
prayers of christians for their salvation. My hopes of some measure of success,
are also strengthened from this consideration, that all faithful persons who
love to form the minds of little children for Christ, and give them to him with
nurturing hands, will gratefully improve their advantages, in every department,
to extend, and widen these instructions, and add a lasting influence to them,
with line upon line, and precept upon precept, repeatedly, and continually.

The method will contain two general branches: in the first place, I shall show
children, what it is to obey their parents in the Lord: and secondly in what
respect, it is right or beautiful. And as the principal design, is to give
instruction to little children, I take it for granted, the candid, improved
mind will choose to hear them addressed, in their own plain, and familiar style:
we shall therefore indulge freedom of thought, and simplicity of expression.

And now, my dear children, since the sermon is to be preached to you, I ask
your diligent and careful attention to it. I hope you will remember this is the
Lord's day -- that yo^ a^e in the house of God -- and that he is now present to
observe your conduct, and take notice of all your thoughts. I hope you will
also remember that it is not the word of man, but of the Lord, that is now to
b^ be delivered to you* and therefore that he calls upon you to take heed how
you hear. Christ now speaks in th^s manner; "^ittle children keep yo^^se^ves
from idols," and give me your hearts. Gi^e them this moment, that you man obey
your parents in the Lord. And you will not act like wise and good children, to
expect a better opportunity. You have no right to promise yourselves another
sabb^th; for eve^ tomorrow, o^ the next moment ^s not yours. And, before ^he
next sabbath you may not only be taken sick, but taken away; and your tend
bodies covered up in the cold and si^^nt g^^v, where they will return to dust,
and not be seen any more till the last day; and your souls ^n a vast eternity!
Listen then now, with all your hearts, to the voice of Christ, that you may be
ready for an early death. You m^st not play, nor sleep nor indulge a
thoughtless, wandering mind, like many others, older than you, who ought to set
better examples. But, you must worship God in spirit, and in truth, and love
his word with all the heart; and then Christ will love you, as the tender lambs
of his flock.

IN the first branch of discourse, I am to show you, what it is, to obey your
parents in the Lord. And, to make it easy for you to understand. I will mention
six things, which belong to the wicked class of children, that you must not
indulge, if you intend to be dutiful.

First, To be dutiful children, you must not indulge a careless disposition,
respecting the directions of your parents. For the careless temper is one cause
of disobedience. And, if you have a great deal of this temper, you will have
the more disobedience. Careless children treat the directions of their parents,
as though not worthy of any notice. Even while in company with them, they often
hear without attention and consequently, without any more obedience to their
directions, than to the blowing of the wind. And when they happen to be at a
little distance, not only let them call a number of times, without giving an
answer; at all And what is this but disobedience? What is it better than
obedience to satan? For, he persuades them not to answer, that he may learn
them, not only to deceive, but to tell lies also. And hence it comes to pass,
when the parents have called with weariness, without receiving any answer from
the child, and they enquire whether he did not hear, he has NO for an answer as
quick as he can speak. And when this is done, satan feels highly pleased, for
he has not only learned him to be careless and deceitful, but to cover all over
with a LIE. And this is satan's method with children* he learns them one thing
after another, till they become so acquainted with sin, as to get by heart the
most wicked lesson he teaches. And, as soon as he prevails with children to be
careless, he finds it easy to learn them to be forgetful, to deceive, and lie,
and almost every thing he pleases in a short time. You must not then indulge a
careless disposition* For the careless child is the undutiful one.

Secondly, You must not indulge idleness. For the idle spirit is unfriendly to
obedience. The idle child cannot therefore be a dutiful one. And, idleness is
not only a bad thing in itself, but is the cause of a great ^n any more. For
when satan finds an ^d^e child, he will soon have something for him to do that
is very wicked. He has a great deal of business, for id^e children to
^ndertake; and they are such foolish, wicked little creatures, that they a^ways
love to do as he bid them, a thousand times better than to obey their pa^ents.
There are many children, who obey satan steadily all day long, and hate with
all their hearts to be obedient in the Lord. They love to escape the sight of
duty, and to keep at the greatest distance from it: And, therefore, when a
chi^d of this temper reads the bible, his catechism, or whatever, his heart is
still in love with idleness. He does not love to see the sabbath* if his
parents keep it in a strict, and holy manner, because he takes no pleasure in
duty: But, if his parents disregard the sabbath, and make it a day of idleness,
instead of holy resting, then he loves to see it, for a play-day. He is very
diligent at play, but has no diligence in duty. When, therefore he is directed
to do an errand, it seems as though idleness, and slothfulness together, would
not let him move a single step; but as soon as he sees an opportunity to slide
into play with disobedient children, he is all life, and spirit, and goes as
fast as he can run. And, this is the child that is so unfaithful, as soon as he
escapes the sight of his parents. He not only neglects to do as he is directed,
but stays a great while, though charged to return immediately; and frequently
very much disturbs the business of the family for some time. He acts as though
he could not obey his parents too little, and satan too much. In short, the
idle creature is always in satan's path, and the devil cannot go a along
without seeing him, or stumbling upon him. But, how foolish is it, for a child
to go, and wait for the devil to come along, to give him wicked thoughts, and
tell him what to do next? How foolish, did I say? Rather, how very wicked? How
dishonorable to God, who has made him to love, and obey his parents in the
most dutiful manner? And how destructive to his own soul? and when children
will indulge the idle disposition and throw themselves in satan's way, they
have nothing to expect, but God will give them up entirely, and let him lead
them where he pleases, till he leads them blind, right down to hell. Take care
then, children, and withdraw your feet from the path of idleness for it leads
directly to destruction. I hope you will remember, that idleness was one of the
great sins of Sodom, for which so many people were destroyed with fire from
heaven. And remember Lot's wife also, who became a pillar of salt, because she
was so idle, as to look back, when God told her to make haste, and escape for
her life, lest she should perish with the rest of the people. You must not then
stand all the day idle, with the wicked, but forsake idleness, and love
diligence, or you cannot be dutiful children. But,

Thirdly, If you intend to obey your parents in the Lord, you must not indulge
the spirit of anger. For "Anger rests in the bosom of fools." And, fire, you
not only resemblethe the angry revengeful man, whose tongue and eyes are full
of poison and spite, but the little malicious devils themselves. You must
therefore put away anger, and wrath, and every thing of that nature: for the
dutiful child is as gentle, and meek as a lamb. He has the spirit of Christ,
and does not love to be fretful, and peevish. And nothing alarms him (...) no
humility in their hearts till they are made new creatures, there is nothing
more common, than for them to obey their parents with his temper. And this is
the spirit, when they obey their parents only for ^he sake of being thought
better than others. Their hearts are so proud, and vain* as to be delighted
with empty praise. And they will often attend to the commands of their parents,
for the sake of gratifying the pride and vanity of their hearts, when nothing
else is sufficient to move them. But, this is poor obedience indeed, because it
is performed in pride, instead of humility: -- And, little children will never
appear beautiful, in the sight of God, whose eye is fixed on the heart, till
they are as humble as the dust. As they are taken from the dust, they can only
please God, when they feel humble, and little, and love to do their duty for
the sake of the holy pleasure they enjoy in it. And when this humble temper
prevails, like little diligent bees, which fly from one low flower to another,
to collect the richest honey, wherever they can find it, so humble little
chidren will love to go from thing to thing, where they can serve God the most,
and enjoy him the best. Vain worthless praise is very lightly esteemed; and the
lovely example of the little Jesus will be their delight: -- When Christ was a
child, he loved to obey his parents, not for the sake of idle praise, but
because he loved his duty. -- Duty was his delight -- and therefore he
conducted in such a lovely inoffensive manner, with so much wisdom, and
propriety, that as he increased in stature, or grew up, he increased in favor
with God, and man. He was loved by all, who loved the beauties of holiness, and
received the most lasting praises of the dutiful spirit. Here is an example for
little children that will never fade away, but grow brighter and brighter: And
you must forsake pride, and follow this example, if you intend to be dutiful
children, and worthy of true praise, But,

Fifthly, If you intend to be dutiful children, you must not indulge
selfishn^ss. For after all the soft, and pretty names which satan has given it
to deceive the world, it is the substance of all iniquity. And as the selfish
man, who appears to be a christian, only because he intends to be happy
forever, cannot be one, so the child who obeys his parents, only to obtain rich
clothes and fine things, cannot be dutiful. For, when a child is governed by
this spirit, it is not his parents he loves, but the fine things he intends to
obtain from them. And, hence this kind of obedience never lasts longer than the
prospect of private rewards. It always looks for pay, just like the obedience
of the Jews. When Christ came into the world, and manifested his almighty
power, -- in so many miracles, -- they were very agreeably struck with him
indeed: -- For a little time, they appeared to love him exceedingly, and were
so fond of obeying, that they intended to have made him King. But what may we
suppose, was the cause of so much love and respect? Were they in love with his
true character, or something else? -- I will tell you, children, if you will
attend: -- They were in love with themselves only, in the gratification of
their unlawful desires. They were in love with sin, and loved Christ only as
the kingly servant of their pleasures: -- They loved themselves the most, and
Christ only to defend them from their enemies, and increase their worldly
grandeur. And if he had done according to their selfish desires, they would
have loved him extremely, no doubt. But this was impossible, because he came to
destroy the kingdom of satan, instead of building it up -- Therefore, as soon
as he reproved them for their selfishness, and told them to give away their
riches to the poor, and take up the cross, and follow him in a holy manner,
they were highly offended: -- And not only so, but told the basest lies about
him they could invent. -- and did every thing possible to r^in his character;
and make every body hate him: -- But this was not all, for when he, in the most
friendly loving manner, warned them of the danger of their selfishness, it so
fired their hearts with hatred, and malice, that they put him to death without
pity or tears. They shed the blood of God (for Christ was God) only because he
would not indulge them in sin. O, ungreatful man! What have thou done! For
Christ came into the world to save thee from hell, and give thee heaven, and
when dying on the cross, prayed for thy salvation! And what have you done, my
children, or rather, what are you doing still, who do not love Christ with all
your hearts? But, let us not lose sight of the Jews. What was all that love and
obedience good for* which they showed Christ, when they intended to have put a
crown upon his head, and treated him as King? It was good for nothing, because
selfish: -- And so all selfish obedience will change itself instantly into the
most bitter spite and malice, when denied the thing it lusts after. This is the
natural picture of selfish religion, And, I have given you this instance, to
show that all the selfish obedience of children to their parents, is of no
value in the sight of God. There are many children, who appear to love their
parents, and obey them, and yet have no more true obedience than the Jews had
to Christ. And I believe there are not a few who have had very wrong feelings
toward their parents, when they h^ve been denied the things they choose. And
let me tell you, that as far as you have, any of you had such hearts-risings,
in case of a proper denial* that you resemble those wicked creatures, who put
Christ to death because he would not uphold and indulge t^em in sin: But if you
were not selfish, you would have no^e of these feelings: And instead of
displeasure toward your kind pa^ents, when they refuse to grant your
unreasonable request, you would think them the best judges of your wants, and
rest easy and contented. But as long as you have the selfi^h disposition, you
will feel more or lose of the uneasy, resentful spirit, even when denied things
which would be your ruin, just as wicked men feel angry with providence, when
things do not answer their desires and expectations. It is selfishness that
makes children desire, and ask for things not proper for them to have; and
resentful when denied: It makes you uneasy with the things you have, and
fretful that you have not more: It is this that makes so much uneasiness with
the conduct of parents, which is followed with so much disobedience: It makes
you so covetous, and loath to give, as your parents direct you, to poor little
children, who have nothing but poverty, and rags: -- It is selfishness that
prevents your doing as you would be done by. In short, it is the foundation of
disobedience, and as far as you are selfish, you cannot be dutiful children. It
will always be in the way; And you must not indulge it.

Sixthly* To be dutiful children, you must not be more afraid of correction
than you are of faults. For, to be more afraid of correction, than of faults is
to love one's self more than the command and honor of God, which cannot be
right. But there is a great deal of obedience, such as it is, that is wholly
indebted to the fear of correction, and nothing else: And, hence the undutiful
child, will often do as he is directed, when at the same time, if not afraid of
correction, would pay no sort of attention to the matter. But the dutiful child
is as much afraid of faults as of correction: And more too, I believe we may
say, as far as the dutiful disposition prevails: For he loves God with all his
heart. And no reason can be given why a person, where things are wisely
regulated, should be afraid of undeserved punishment, for God does not allow
the offender to be punished more than he deserves: -- And when parents, o^ any
others, punish a child more than the offense deserves, they offend God. But, I
will tell you how the undutiful child will conduct, who is afraid of
correction, and not of fault: -- He will go to school when directed, and not
play the ^^uant, lest he should be corrected; when at the same time, if not
afraid of correction, he would spend his whole time at play, and not go into
school at all: -- He is only afraid of punishment* if he does wrong* but the
wicked creature is not afraid of doing wrong. And from the same sla^ish fear,
some very wicked men* when so dangerously sick as to think they shall die, and
go to hell, will be f^ll of tears and distress, and make the most solemn
promises, if God will spare their lives, and give them health, that they will
amend their ways, and keep all his commands: -- But yet when to all appearance
they lie at the point of death, will not love God. And hence, as soon as God
removes the danger of the sickness in some measure, and they grow a little
better, w^ll instantly swear and curse as prosanely as ever: The reason is
this, they are not afraid of sinning, and are only afraid of punishment. I will
give you another instance of the same ^at ^re. When there comes up a most
terrib^e storm at sea, and if thunders and lighten* as though all nature would
s^lit to pieces, and burn up, and the ve^se^ is so tossed and hurried about by
the angry wind and waves, that the who^^ c^ew expect to go inst^ntly to the
bottom, then the most hard^^ed wre^ches, who never prayed i^ their lives, will
cry cut in their dist^e^^ -- "Lord have mercy on us," as loud as they can
scream, "Lord save our poor sinking souls," But what will they say as soon as
the storm abates, and their danger is a little over? I dare not tell you, my
children, it is so wicked; -- I can only say thus far; they will the very next
breath be at a loss for oa^hs profane enough to use on the occasion, when God
just preserved them from sinking, not only into the sea, but to the bottom of
hell. -- You therefore see, they do not cry to God for help, because they love
his holy mercy, but only because they are afraid of hell. -- And why do they
not cry to be saved from sin, as well as from punishment? Because they are only
afraid of punishment, and not of sin at all: -- They are not afraid of
offending God; and if he did not sometimes show a little of the power of his
vengence, they would not be afraid of any thing. They would neither fear God,
nor regard man, in any sense whatever. And if such hardened creatures do not
soon repent, God, in his mighty wrath, will bring them into greater danger
still, and make them feel what they now, at times, only fear; and will laugh at
their calamities, and mock when their fear comes, when fear comes as
desolation, and destruction as a whirlwind, when distress and anguish comes
upon them -- God is very merciful, but he does not regard the cries of those
who are in love with sin, and are only afraid of danger, any more than christ
regarded the prayer of satan, when he cried so earnestly, not to be tormented
before the time. And as God does not love such wicked creatures, because they
call for help in distress, when, at the same time, they hate his mercy with all
the heart, and are only afraid of punishment; neither does he love children who
obey their parents, on^y because they are afraid of correction: -- For when
correction is the only ground of obedience, it i^ nothing but forced obedience,
and consequently no obedience at all. And as God has not commanded forced
obedience* he will not accept of it now, nor will he accept of it at the great
day. You then see, that to be dutiful children, you must be principally afraid
of faults. As a poor man, who stands in great need of a little money and is so
honest that he will not steal it, though he has opportunity, because stealing
is forbiden by God; so you should be afraid of every act of disobedience,
because he has forbiden it. And further, when you remember that you are not
able, even by eternal suffering* to pay any part of the debt you owe God, for
past disobedience, let the value of your own souls, and the honor of God, and
shall I n^ say, the blood of Christ, engage you^ hearts to be afraid of sin.
Fear sin, because it is the enemy of God, and all good: And then you will be
dutiful, because obedience is delightful. You will be the children of wisdom,
who eat honey because it is good, and the honeycomb because it is pleasant to
the taste. I HAVE to^d yo^ six things, to remember; but not to indulge.



SERMON II.
EPHESIANS VI.1 CHILDREN, obey your PARENT^ in the LORD: For this is right.


I WILL now endeavor to show you, what dispositions belong to the dutiful
class of children. And, let me observe, that the great thing is a new heart.
This sums up all the rest. The new heart contains all the lovely dispositions
that make the dutiful child. And, one new heart is of more value, than all the
world full of silver and gold. Therefore, God, who knows the value of things,
says, My son, give me thy heart. An^ when a little child gives God his heart,
then he will obey his parents in the Lord, and not before. For all children
have wicked hearts when they are BORN: And that makes them so wicked, when they
grow up into life. Even little infants, that appear so innocent and pretty, are
God's little enemies at heart: For they were shapen in iniquity, and conceived
in sin. Their hearts are full of nothing but enmity to God. As a young serpent
has the nature of old one, so the little infant* has the nature of a wicked man
in his heart. And the hearts of old me^* and young men, and babes must all be
new, or they will not be saved* therefore Christ says, "Except a man be born
again; he "cannot see the kingdom of God." -- You then see, that the new heart
is the principal thing.

AND, now I will mention six things that belong to the new heart, and you must
have them all, or you will not obey your parents in the Lord.

First, You must love all the commandments, For if you are not pleased with the
entensive nature of God's law, you will not love the fifth command, which is*
"Honor thy father and mother." -- The fifth commandment and the text, contain
one and the same thing. And certainly you must love this, or you will not be
dutiful. But if you love the fifth, you will all the rest; for they hang
together, and make but one thing, which is love. -- Therefore the scripture
says, Love is the fulfilling o^ the law. But, to make it easy for you to see
the necessity of loving the commandments to be dutiful, let me ask: How can you
be truly obedient, when directed by your parents, not to take God's holy name
in vain, and not to use any wicked words, if you do not love the third
commandment? You remember it is this -- "Thou shall not take the name of the
Lord thy God in vain" -- And, how can you be obedient in the Lord i^ you do not
love the Lord's commandments? While I am speaking of this commandment, it
cannot be amiss to tell you, that the breach of it, is not only a great vice,
but a growing one. How often do you hear men swear and curse and damn each
other to hell as though they just came up with their tongues red hot from the
fire of damnation! And, how often do you hear little children who just begin to
run about street, speak the language of hell plainer than any other? I doubt,
my children, that you hear more of the language of hell than you do of heaven.
And the reason is this, people do not love the third commandment. See to it
then, that you do not act like others, but love it. But, to pass on: How can
you be dutiful children in the observance of the sabbath, when you are told by
your parents to be good children, not to play, but attend to all the duties of
it both at home and at meeting, if you do not love the fourth commandment? But
as soon as you love the commandment, you will love to read the bible, and all
other good books; the sabbath will be your delight, and all the branches of
duty which belong to it will be your pleasure. For the proper direction of your
parents is the commanding voice of God* that points out your duty. It is just
as though you heard him speak to you, as plainly as you hear it thunder. For,
he instructs them that they may instruct you. -- And they are inexcusable if
you are not instructed properly. Now then as the voice of parents, is the voice
of God, you easily see you must love the commandments of God, or you will not
obey your parents in the Lord. Instead of following the example of those wicked
children who saw Christ when on earth and heard him speak, and yet were not
obedient, you must obey him now, in loving all the directions of your parent.
Nor, must you, by any means, treat aged people, however poor, after the example
of those children who mocked Gods prophet as he went along; saying, "Go up thou
bald head, go up thou bald head." For they were cursed in the name of the Lord,
and torn to pieces by wild beasts* for the breach of the fifth commandment.
They did not love the commandment, and therefore did not choose to honor old
age and reverence the good man by bowing decently before him. Here you have a
glaring instance of the undutiful temper, and of God's displeasure in
consequence of it. And both were written for your instruction. And would you be
dutiful in the sight of God, when your parents direct you in the most careful
manner never to take the things of orhers with dishonest hearts, you must love
the eight commandment: This will make you honest worthy children. And then
instead of taking the least thing from your fellows, or carrying litte
pi^fering hands about house, to lay hold of every thing set aside for
particular use, like family thieves, you might be tr^sted with all the
treasures of the family. And not only so, but God would count you faithful, and
"Commit to your trust the true riches." And, would you always maintain a sacred
regard to truth, in little things, as well as great ones* you must have the
ninth command by heart, with love and delight. For the love of this command is
the love of truth. And then instead of those deceitful faces, those false, and
lying tongues, and that double dealing which looks one way and means another,
which belong to the devil's children, you will be the children of truth who
will not lie nor deceive: -- For, your words and actions will always show the
meaning of your hearts. -- When we hear you speak, we shall see your hearts:
And when we see you act, we shall know your intentions. -- Such a character as
this is lovely indeed. It will bear the light. For it was Christ's character
when a child, and worthy of the best imitation. And to be dutiful children it
must be yours. For the deceitful, lying temper, and the dutiful temper do not
agree any better than darkness and light. But,

Secondly, If you intend to be dutiful children, you must love repentance for
all your past disobedience. It is probable you rather think, some of you, that
you have not been disobedient. But, if you have not new hearts you have been
very disobedient in the sight of God, however you have appeared to others: --
You have violated the fifth commandment a great many times. -- And, without the
most heaaty repentance, you are still going on in the disobedient path. A Child
who is dutiful at present, is also penitent for all past disobedience. And if
you desire to know what repentance is, or what you must do to repent, I will
tell you as plainly as I can. It is to shun sin instead of indulging it in your
hearts: -- Thus when parents direct dutiful children not to keep company with
the wicked* they are very careful to escape their company, and avoid it by
every method that is lawful. They are afraid to trust their hearts in the
company of the wicked, lest they should be tempted to evil. But, penitent
obedient children love the company of each other for the sake of that sweet
fellowship and agreement, which always take place between them. As birds of a
feather flock together, so good children ^o^e to meet, and converse about God,
and Christ and eternal things. And you may always know a good child by his
company; and a wicked child two. For one makes choice of good company, and the
other of bad. And, as soon as it is evident that a child loves the company of
wicked children, there is great danger of his ruin. And it is high time for his
parents to take the best care of him they are able, lest his destruction should
be charged to their neglect. I could give you the history of a little boy* if I
had opportunity, who chose the company of wicked children and was bent upon
keeping such company, contrary to the directions and most positive commands of
his kind parents. And the longer he kept bad company, the more disobedient he
grew: For God gave him up to be disobedient. At length he was too hardened to
listen to his mother, or regard his father. He came to the years of discretion
without any discretion, and not a better man than child. For he was so base and
ungrateful* as to mock his weeping mother when she expressed her tears and
concern respecting him: and not only so, but in a short time was such a daring
monster, as not only to threaten, but strike his father in the face if he
offered to reprove him. The kind aged father was grieved and cut to the heat to
see his undutiful son, but was obliged to let him alone; for it was dangerous
to speak to him, he had such a spiteful malicious temper. And what may we
suppose has become of such a creature? But there are more sad examples of this
nature than one. And it is not strange, for there are a great many disobedient
children. And, if God should leave all disobedient children to conduct in this
manner, to destroy themselves quickly, as he justly might, the world wou^d soon
be full of such painful sights. And let me tell you therefore, if you see the
danger of early disobedience, you are under greater obligation to repent of it
immeadiately. And I hope you will remember, that to repent of disobedience, you
must become obedient; and to repent of choosing bad company, you must leave it
and choose good company. So you must repent of all wicked courses by forsaking
them, and choosing those that are good. And then you will have that repentance
which is the constant companion of the dutiful temper. But, Thirdly, If you
intend to be dutiful chidren, you must love to be sorry for your disobedience.
And if you only attend a moment, you will see the reasonableness of it. For you
have been great sinners already, though you are little* not only, in breaking
the fifth commandment, but in many other things. You are apt to think, I
suppose* your si^s are very small. But this is not true: -- For your sins are
all committed against the great God. If God were little then your sins would be
little, but as God is great, and his commandments are great, and exceeding
b^oad, all your sins are great, every one of them. There is no such thing as a
little sin: -- Some sins, it is true, are greater than others, but every sin
deserves God's wrath and curse both in this life, and that which is to come.
Your sins are great, like mountains upon mountains, not only higher than the
clouds, and stars, but infinitely high. And they are more in number than the
hairs of your heads. The angels themselves, whose knowledge is so extensive,
are not able to see the greatness of one little child's sin, because it is
committed against the infinitely great Jehovah. How sorry then should you be
for sin? It is impossible for your hearts to be too full of the deepest sorrow.
And, when God gives you dutiful hearts, you will feel sorry, that you will
hardly know what to do with yourselves: -- Sin will be your greatest burden: --
Sorrow will lie down with you. and prevent your sleep for hours together: -- It
will rise with you, and feel like a heavy pressing weight on your hearts. So I
suppose the good child's heart is sorry for sin, all night, while he is asleep.
Godly sorry cannot be slept away: -- For it lives in the heart day and night,
constantly. The good child is grieved, and out to the heart, that his kind
parents have been so much dishonored by his past disobedience. He cannot
forgive himself, that he has been so careless, idle, and obstinate; so pro^d,
and selfish; and so much in love with disobedience, as not to be afraid of any
thing, but correction in consequence of it. -- And more than this, he wonders
some times, that God can spare him a single moment* and does not cut the thread
of life, and let the weight of his sins carry him down instantly to hell. He
not only se^s, but FEELS it to be entirely just for* God to punish him and all
offenders, as their sins deserve. Thus he lies low in the dust before a just
and holy God, who is infinite^y offended with him for sin. -- He looks up and
admires the patience of God that prevents his falling; he looks down, and
plainly sees what he deserves, and does not feel ready to complain, if God's
patience should come to an end, and let him fall into the hands of strict
justice, and r^ap the wages of sin. And when he feels in this manner, it is his
choice to be wholly at the disposal of an infinitely just, and merciful God,
who can do no wrong. He is not afraid to trust himself entirely in the hand of
God, before he knows what he will do with him. As he deserves no good, he feels
that God would not treat him unjustly to give him none, and that infinite mercy
only can prevent all possible evils. Thus, my children, let me tell you and I
hope you will remember it, all persons feel who have new hearts, while they are
thinking in a particular manner of God's justice, and their own sinfulness. And
I hope you will all know, what it is to have these feelings of heart. For you
cannot be dutiful children, and christians without. But let us h^sten to the
next thing, for the connection between true sorrow and joy is quicker than we
can speak.

Fourthly, If you intend to be dutiful children, you must love Christ with all
the heart. For, God not only commands you to repent of sin, and to be heartily
humble, and sorry for it, but to look, and fly to Christ immediately for
salvation, in the most joyful sense. It would be wrong for men to continue
sinners, if no salvation were provided for them at all. For, sin is an
unreasonable thing. No one can justify Ad^m for attempting to hide from God,
and remaining his enemy a single moment after he fell, though he saw ^o
salvation offered, and nothing but destruction before him. For you can easily
tell, if asked, what else he should have done. Nor can we justify the wicked
spirits in hell for h^^ing God any longer, though he has no mercy for them. For
it is wrong to sin against a holy God, on earth, in hell, or any where e^^e.
Therefore, as Christ is most freely offered, to save you, not only from sin,
but from punishment too you cannot fly to him too soon, and with too much
eagerness of heart for salvation. I don't mean to direct you to love Christ
only to be saved from hell; for an undutiful child can do this, and remain an
enemy to Christ, when he has done -- But you must love him to be saved from sin
with a holy believing love. And when you have that true sorrow for sin which I
have just described, you will hate sin, and be more afraid of it than you are
of hell, and will feel it to be an infinite privilege, to come to Christ to be
saved from it. And, as Christ has suffered the curse, in his own body on the
c^oss, that those who believe and love him may be honorably s^ved from it, your
hearts should feel warm with true thankfulness, that there is an opportunity to
escape the wrath and curse of God. -- As you have no righteousness of your own,
you are under all possible obligations to accept of Christ, who is "The Lord
ou^ righteousness." And since we are all nakedly exposed to God's wrath, i^ not
in Christ by faith, and cannot be justified, and saved, but only on his acco^nt
-- since the best man on earth can do nothing acceptab^e to God without him,
you must go to God in his name, for strength to obey your parents, and all you
need here and hereafter. But this leads to say,

Fifthly, If you intend to be dutiful children, you must love prayer. Prayer is
humbly to ask God, in the name of Christ, for all those things which are proper
for him to give. And good children love to pray. They love to offer up their
desires to God, for things agreeable to his will, in the name of Christ, with
confession of their sins, and thankful acknowledgment of his mercy. They not
only say their prayers, like little parrots, but pray with their hearts. They
are penitent, and humble, and love the things they ask for. When they ask for
mercy, they love mercy. They love and reverence the holy name of Christ, in
which they pray. And, it is a great grief to them, that they have no more
repentance, and humility in their prayers. They tremble at the thought of
asking amiss. And thus they often pray God earnestly, to teach them to pray,
that they may come before him in a holy acceptable manner, without taking his
name in vain. And you must pray in this holy manner, or God will not hear you.
God will not hear the prayer of any one who regards iniquity in his heart. You
must then make good prayers. There is no such thing as a prayer, that is
neither good, nor bad. For the conduct of reason^ble creatures is not
indifferent; -- And a bad prayer you must not make; You must make such prayers
as God commands, and that he will accep^ of for Christ's sake when made, and
that will be acceptable at the great day: -- And not those, which he calls
nothing, and are forbidden. They must all then be made in the name -- in the
love -- and for the sake of Christ: And then God will love you. And, if you can
express yourselves without having a prayer by heart, you should go alone into
the closet, or some other secret place, ^here none can see or hear you but God,
and after kneeling humbly before him, confess your sins, and ask for mercy in
the name of Christ. Pray for all you need: Pray for your parents, your
brothers, and sisters, and every body. Pray that God would manifest his love
abundantly in the salvation of sinners, and that the whole world might be full
of good people -- And, if you can say nothing but the Lord's prayer, and the
little ones in the primmer, go with love to Christ in your hearts, and say
these. For God loves the little children of Christ, it gives him pleasure to
see them running to him with open hearts for what they need. For his fullness is
infinite, and he delights to supply them. You cannot tire God with holy prayer.
And he will hear you pray at any time, and in any place whatever. As God is
every where, you may pray any where. But as he loves order and regularity: As
the sun rises and sets according to strict order, you must be as steady and
regular as time in du^y. -- And particularly, in the duty of morning and
evening prayer. You m^st pray before you go to bed, and when you get up. Never
let the day begin, or end, without improving the best opportunity to get down
upon your little humble knees before God, in prayer. Morning and evening
mercies, and wants, call for morning and evening thanksgiving and prayer. And,
no creature, but the sinner, can be deaf to the call. But, such deafness we
must possess. For we shall soon end a shorr life in death, and leave time for
eternity. As it is therefore not s^fe to go out of the world without the spirit
of prayer, so, without the spirit of prayer, it is not safe to live in it. And
how a good child can live without daily humble prayer, I believe nobody will
undertake to tell, but the one who does not pray himself. A prayerless person
may plead, tha^ a man may be a christian, and yet live for some time together
without prayer. -- But, I am pretty s^re the real christian will differ with
him or her in opinion. For, as the natural appetite of children will lead them
to ask their parents, for common food; so the holy appetite, and desires of
good children, will lead them to ask their heavenly father every day for the
bread of life. Hence, my children, when you feel appetites for natural food,
night, and morning, it should make you think of your needy souls, which will
perish without the bread of life. And the only way to get the bread of life is
to ask for it. -- For he that asks receives. You will remember this in the
mean time, that you must ask in faith, and not ask amiss. Therefore God says,
"Let not that man think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord." If you do
not love Christ God will not love your prayers. But, I suppose some of you are
ready to make the common, and idle excuse, that you have no time to pray. But
let me entreat you not to make this excuse any more, unless you have no time to
die, whether prepared or unprepared, I lately read the account of a little boy
eleven years old, who often continued on his k^ees in prayer to God, half an
hour, and an hour at a time. He tried to keep it a secret, that he went away,
and prayed so much. But the family soon knew it, and a person one day having a
mind to know what this sweet child prayed for, went and listened; and heard him
very earnestly Pray for the church of God, and desire that the gospel might be
spread over the whole world, that the people of God might be more and more
holy, and that the kingdom of glory might be hastened. This child found time to
pray because he loved it. It was his delight. And if prayer was your delight,
you would find time also. For, God has most certainly given us as much time as
duty -- He has not commanded us to do any thing, without allowing sufficient
time for the performance. But, if you still think you have not time to pray,
let me ask you a little short question; Have you time to play? The question is
answered. -- And, what if you should only spend half of the time in sweet
humble prayer to God that you spend, every day at play, what different children
would you be? You would be little shining christians, almost too good to live
out of heaven any longer.

BUT since you may be called away by some person to attend to business before
you have prayed in secret, without the knowledge of your parents and masters,
who have given you time for secret duties you should take the first opportunity
and go again, and if interrupted still, go the third time; and not only so, but
the seventh time. Weary not in well doing, for i^ due season ye shall reap, if
ye faint not. And after proper attention, if you have time only to make the
shortest prayer, whether in the house, or by the way if you make it with a good
heart, God will hear you. There was a man, we read of, who only made this short
prayer, -- "God me merciful to me a sinner," -- and God heard, and answered
him. -- And if you only make such a little Prayer as this, with a humble heart,
God will hear and answer you as he did that penitent man.

But let me tell you one thing: Don't please satan so much, as to stay alone,
after you have done prayer, only to make people believe you love to pray. For
this is deceitful, and nothing but hypocrisy. You may, if you have opp^^tunity,
stay a little while, and (...) on what you have been doing, and ask yourself
whether you have prayed with the heart? For examination is a duty of the
closet, as well as prayer. I speak to you particularly on prayer, because it is
the first born of christian duties. And the dutiful child not only loves it,
but has a great many things to pray for. The commands of God, and consequently
the directions of parents are many. And he loves to go to God for strength to
obey. And dutiful children can no more live without prayer, than they can
without victuals and drink. As the children of Israel used to gather manna
every day to feed their bodies; so the little children of Christ, who choose to
keep themselves from idols and vanities, love to gather heavenly manna every
day to feed their souls. They cannot live on past food.

Sixthly, if you intend to obey your parents in the Lord, you must do all these
things that I have mentioned, and many more of the same nature constantly, only
to please the Lo^. Some children seem to be dutiful for a little while, but
like the morning cloud and early dew, the very appearance is s^^n gone. They
are d^tiful only by fits and starts, when they feel pleased with something
their parents do for them. But this does not deserve the name of duty. It is no
more than skin deep. and never comes from the heart. You must therefore be
dutiful all the time. There is not a moment for the undutiful temper. And, as
God made you, and your parents for himself, you must love and honor them to
please and reverence him, Children, obey your parents in the Lord. And, as the
sun rises and shines, and never tires, nor rests, so you must begin, and
continue to be dutiful

"Oh, like the sun, may I fulfill
"The appointed duties of the day,
"With ready mind, and active will,
"March on, and keep the heavenly way." --


SERMON III.
EPHESIANS VI.1. CHILDREN, obey your PARENTS in the LORD: For this is right.


SECONDLY, I must now fulfill my promise, and show in what respects it is right,
or beautiful, for children to obey their parents in the Lord. And, I must
inform you, before I begin, that it is too beautiful for me to express. It is
pleasant to see an elegant garden full of fruitful trees, useful plants, and
delightful flowers: So it is pleasant to see jewels and diamonds glisten before
the sun; but, all these thin^s are not half so beautiful as little children,
who obey their pa^ents in the Lo^d. It is like apples of gold in pictures of
silver, to see dutiful little children. It is one of the beauties of holin^ss.
And, what I cannot do by words in setting forth this beauty, I hope you will do
in actions. For dutiful conduct can speak the best for itself. But in what this
beauty consists, I will attempt to show in the following particulars.

First, it is right for children to obey their parents in the Lord, because
they are so much indebted to them. God has made children greatly in debt to
their parents indeed. Children are brought into the world by their parents; and
are little parts of their bodies, as limbs and branches are little parts of the
tree.

They are therefore in debt to them for their very beings. And not only so, but
in debt for all the early f^vours of life. God first gives good things to
parents, and then disposes them to imp^rt to their children: And things are so
wisely ordered, that parents can no more forget their children than themselves.
They seem to love them as tenderly as themselves. And, as little infants, and
children, are so feeb^e and helpless, that they cannot take care of themselves,
what a great favor is it, that God has given dispositions to parents, to take
care of them as they need. Little infants are some of the most helpless
creatures in the wo^ld. Some little creatures can take care of themselves very
early. But, if parents do not take the greatest care of their children when
they first come into the world, they soon go out of it again. --

The tender mother, who loves to hold the little babe in her arms, and feed,
and nourish it, is made use of in providence, to save its life. -- And no one,
I suppose, but tender parents themselves, has any just views of the care and
concern that are due to children, not only when infants, but for a number of
years together, before they are fit to act for themselves. And as children
require a great deal of attention, it is easy to see, how much they would
suffer, and how soon they would perish, if neglected. What would become of you,
if father and mother were taken away, and God should not leave any kind person
to take care of your little bodies and minds? You would soon become little
ragged, naked creatures. And not only so; but very ignorant too, and greatly
exposed indeed to destruction. You therefore see, as you receive so many
favors from your parents that you are under great obligations to obey them.
And, when you only remember, that all these favors come to you from God, only
through the hands of your parents, it is altogether right to obey them in the
Lord. O, how good is God to little children, to open his bountiful hand so
often to them, in the kindness they receive from their parents! And how
grateful and dutiful should they be when they think of it? And how often should
they think of it? Therefore, when dutiful brothers, and sisters think of the
constant love and attention of parents, instead of being afraid, like undutiful
children, that they shall do too much for them, they never think they can do
enough. And they often have little virtuous contentions among themselves, who
shall do the most, and be the best child. And how charming is such a sight?
But, above all things when they remember the goodness of God, in sending Christ
into the world with his grace, and giving parents to train them up for him; how
obedient will they be to their parents for Christ's sake? They will love Christ
because they are baptized in his holy name, and honor their parents for his
sake, because he has disposed their hearts to devote them so early to God.
They love to find themselves the children of christian parents, and members of
Christ's baptized and sealed family. And like young Josian, and little Timothy,
they early drink in the truths of scripture, and become wise unto salvation. In
short, these children feel so full of gratitude to God for their parents, and
favour^ they receive from them, that they don't know how to express it fast
enough, even in dutiful obedience. And we need only ask the question: -- How
beautiful is it for the^ thus to conduct? But,

Secondly, It is right for children to obey their parents in the Lord, that
they may be ready to assist them as they grow old and helpless. As the wisdom
of providence has made little children dependent on parents; so the ^^me
providence has made aged helpless parents dependent on their children. And,
they are as much obliged to assist their aged parent^ in a helpless state, as
their parents were to assist them in their infancy. And, the only way to be
properly prepared, to take a suitable care of aged parents, when they need as
much waiting upon almost as infants, is for children to become dutiful. If you
now love your parents in a dutiful manner, you will be pleased with an
opportunity of waiting upon them when they cannot help themselves. -- For
dutiful children always make kind and tender hearted men, especially to
helpless parents. And, as aged people lose those pretty engaging actions that
belong to children, and become a burden to themselves, and often to others, you
will need very dutiful hearts to dispose you to wait upon them as God requires.
And if you have not dutiful hearts, you will probably neglect them a great many
times, when they will stand in great need of your best kindnesses. But, if you
have dutiful dispositions, you will always embrace an opportunity to comfort
and help them, with the greatest pleasure. -- You will love to ^end them when
sick, and to supply them if poor: and when old age makes them children in
understanding, and mere infants in strength, you will be as kind to them as
though they were your own children. And this is beautiful, for the kindness of
children to old people is one of their best comforts: Whereas the least neglect
grieves and wounds their hearts. -- You may remember this, that the dutiful son
treats his aged helpless parents, as he would wish to be treated if one
himself. He loves the golden rule, and conducts accordingly, which makes his
conduct appear so beautiful toward his childish parents. And if you intend to
make this your rule, and wish to have things measured out to you in old age by
it, you should now take hold of it with your hearts, and be dutiful little
children. Thridly, It is right for children to obey their parents in the Lord,
that they may be the richest blessings to each other. As brothers, and sisters
are as near alike as nature can make them, like so many branches of the same
tree, they should resemble each other in love. Yes, little brothers and
sisters, whose features and actions have such a resemblance, as to be the very
images of their fathers, and pictures of their mothers, should all be alike in
love and friendship. All their little hearts should make but one. And then they
would be brothers and sisters indeed, and the loveliest little creatures in the
world. Therefore the scripture says, Behold how good, and how pleasant it is,
for brethren to dwell together in unity. It is like holy oil, and the most
refreshing dews. It is not only a little picture of the family of Christ on
earth, but of heaven itself, that is full of love and unity. And the only way
for children to live together in this sweet and lovely manner is to be dutiful
to their parents. For, if they are destitute of dutiful love, they will be of
brotherly love also. The lattex cannot exist without the former. Undutiful
children have such unfriendly hearts that they have no holy pleasure in
assisting one another, when there is an opportunity. But, rather choose to vex
and cross each other. And, hence it comes to pass, that the peace of the family
is often disturbed with their contentions and quarrels. And it is often in vain
for parents to attempt to make peace and friendship between them, when they are
little, for they do not love their parents will enough to listen to their
counsel and directions. And, when they grow up* instead of living together in
love and friendship, they live in envy and malice hateful and ha^ing one
another. These are the contentious children who have so much difficulty in
settleing the estate that is left by their parents. It is frequently the case,
as soon as the father is dead, and buried, and hardly cold in the grave, that
the consuming fire of brotherly contention is blown up about their portions.
One wants the most of the estate, and the other most, and a third at heart
wants it all, though ashamed to mention it. And thus the fire soon becomes too
great for them to manage. And, if kind neighbors cannot quench it, and settle
matters between them, the law must take it in hand, and end the strife. -- But
after all they hate each other, as long as they live: and often die with hatred
in their hearts, and go to hell. You then see that you cannot be loving
brothers and sisters when little, and imutual blessings afterward, without the
dutiful temper. But, if you become dutiful when little, you will live together
in peace and harmony like friendly birds and doves, without any contention. And
surely if birds can live together in the same nest without strife little
borthers and sisters, should fill the house with nothing but love.

Fourthly, It is right that you should obey your parents in the Lord, that you
may be blessings to all men. Children are not only under obligations to be
blessings to their parents, to each other, and the families where they live but
to be blessings to every body. But without the dutiful spirit, you will not.
For instance, when the undutiful child gets into the company of others, instead
of learning them to be dutiful from his example, he will learn them the
contrary, as far as his influence reaches. As one sinner destroys much good, so
one bad child often spoils a whole family of children; and frequently all the
children of his acquaintance -- Evil communication corrupts good manners. Hence
if you would be a blessing to other children, you must set them good examples,
and not bad ones.

BUT let us, my children, look a little forward: -- What will soon become of
the world, if children all make their appearance in public life with undutiful
tempers? For, as the fruits of the earth drop off every fall, and leave their
little seeds to come up in the spring, to produce more; so old people drop away
very fast; and, if children, like little tender plants, and blades, do not rise
up with* dutiful dispositions, to fill their vacant places, there is reason to
fear, the world will soon be very ripe for destruction. For, we have nothing to
expect of undutiful children, as fast as they arrive at manhood, but the
p^^sonous fruits of the unholy temper. We may not only expect to see the make
profane masters, and prayerl^^ parents, but the most impious rulers, who take
the shortest way satan can think of to ruin all branches of society. It is but
a little way that undutiful children have to go in the path of sin, before
swearing, cursing, and gaming, are the most pleasant practices. The open
violation of God's holy law becomes their amusement and common diversion. And
not only so, but a few years in the devil's school, will learn a youth to laugh
at hell, sport with destruction, deny the bible, desy death, and murder
himself, and others, to be happy. O take care!

But, on the other hand, what can be more promising and beautiful, than to see
children rising up with the dutiful temper? For presently, like little tender
buds and blossoms in the spring, they will yield the richest fruits. They will
be the joy and crown of their parents, the hope of families, and the firmest
pillars of the church and state. I am willing, my little hearers, you should
know that you are very capable members of society. The usefulness of aged
people is almost past: But little more can be expected from them. Our
expectations are placed on the rising generation. And, we hope that some of you
at least will be the finest men and women in the world. Nor do we hope in vain,
if you now become little christians. For, if God should spare your lives, and
lead you into public life, you will be the jewels and ornaments of the age. And
if all little children were to follow the lovely example, the temple of God
would be as wide as the world, and time itself would almost stand still, to
hear them sing the sweat hosanna, Bessed is he that comes in the name of the
Lord. And let us thank God with all our hearts, that the time is coming, when
all the little children on earth will be holy. For the world will be blessed
indeed. It will be heaven upon earth. In the mean time therefore let us be
holy, and pray God to hasten on that glorious day. For he has promised that
Christ shall see the fruits of his love. And when providence is ready, it will
shine. But,

Fifthly, I have one thing more to mention, and I shall close: It is right for
little children to obey their parents in the Lord, that they may be ready for
an early death. You should be entirely willing to die, as soon as God pleases.
Nor can you be ready too soon. You have often heard your parents say, the young
may die soon; ^ut the old must. It is as true, my little mortals, as any thing
can bel^i^e, like the light of a candle is soon gone. It p^sses away so softly,
we cannot see it move: We therefore wait for time to come till we find it gone
and out of sight. It is but a little distance from the cradle to the grave. A
hand's breadth only. As soon as we begin to live, we begin to die. Short is the
space between the weeping infant, and the dying old man. But shorter still
between the birth and death of the same child. And no age escapes death. It
mows down old and young. The great and silent congregation of the dead is made
up of all ages, and sizes of mankind; and if you think of it when w^lking over
their sleeping dust, you will notice many little short graves among the rest.
The ground is opened for little coffins as well as others. And I suppose some
of your little brothers, and sisters, died before your present age, and by this
time are mouldered away to dust. And you should remember, though you are so
young you may yet die, and (...) in the grave before your aged pa^^nts. They
must die soon, it is true, just as the lea^es in the fall of the year, that
have hung on through the season must be killed with the frost, and fall of
directly. But, as little tender plants, and flowers are often pin^hed, and
killed with an untimely frost; so the cold hand of death may suddenly take you
away while little. As I hinted at first, you may not live to see another
sabbath, nor another day. Death and health are not so far apart, as you
sometimes think. There is often but a step between them. And not only so, but
you may be well and dead the same moment. Time and eternity join: And you may
go from life to endless happiness or missery the same instant. How very
important then is it* to be prepared for sudden death? You must then be dutiful
children. For, if you die without this spirit, what will become of your poor
souls? You will not be carried to heaven in the arms of kind angels, but you
must be sent down to hell. And there you will lie in torment till the judgment
of the great day. Then you will be brought up in distress, and anguish to be
condemned, and forced immediately down again, with all the devils and damned
creatures. And when in hell, there you must lie millions, and millions and
millions of years. You m^st lie there an ENDLESS, ENDLESS FOREVER. You, and
Judas, and all lost creatures will wish you had never been born. For, to be in
hell will be unspeakable worse, than not to be at all. It is, in short,
infinitely better not to be, than to be, and be damned. For, when you have been
in hell as many millions of years, as there are stars in the skies, and as many
millions more as there are drops of water in the sea and little grains of dust
in the whole earth; after all this your torment will be only just begun, and no
nearer the end. Can you bear it? O, no!! For you cannot even bear your hand in
the fire a single moment. What then will your poor souls do in hell? But I told
you of this before, and don't know how to think of it. Yet this must be your
portion if you will not be dutiful: For God is so holy, and powerful that you
cannot escape his wrath if you live in sin.

BUT, if you obey your parents in the Lord, you will be ready to die at any
time whatever. And if Christ should send the messenger of death to call you
this night before the bar of God, instead of being frighted at the prospect,
you might think of it with pleasure: And say as a little child did once to her
parents, while weeping over her, just before she left the world. "My dear
father and mother, don't mourn for me: You might well mourn for me if I were to
go into utter darkness; but I am going to God in heaven. I long to be with the
Lord Jesus Christ. O Lord let thy angels come and carry me." What a lovely
child was this? But all children who love Christ may die in this manner. For
the love of Christ triumphs over death, takes away its sting, and makes the
king of terrors appear as peaceable as a lamb. For if you die with the dutiful
spirit, you will not be dragged down to hell by hateful devils, but the King of
Glory will open the door of heaven and the loving angels will carry you
immediately in. And all the blessed company will rejoice, and meet you with open
arms. A heaven, of eternal love and friendship will be your home. You will love
God and he will love you. -- You will be his children, and he will be your
father. All will be love and happiness. In this world you are exposed to sin,
pain distress, and death, but none of these will enter with you into heaven.
They all belong to the other state. In one word, you will be as holy and happy
as children can be. For you will be like Christ, and will live with him, and
enjoy him most sweetly forever. What then can be more beautiful, than for
children to obey their parents in the Lord? What more lovely than to glorify
God and enjoy him forever. For this is the chief end of man.

But, as hinted before, I cannot show how beautiful it is for children to obey
their parents in the Lord. It is one of the sweet beauties of holiness. And the
beauty of all beauties that children are capable of: and much better felt than
described. -- It is therefore the wann desire of a^l good people, that you
should taste of this lovely beauty, then you will know what it is in reality
and not before.

I HAVE time to say only this; as Christ has made me your minister, I hope you
will find me faithful to your souls in giving proper ^nstructions. For he will
soon call me before the judgment seat, to tell him in the presence of angels
and men, what instructions I have given little children as well as others. And
as you must stand before the bar of God with me. I hope you will wisely improve
the good instructions you receive from parents, me, and others. For it is a
great thing to be favored with the lessons of Jesus Christ? Take care then,
and make such improvement of the privileges you enjoy that the little heathen
may not rise up in judgment against you. We have, my tender children but a
little while to live together. We shall soon die. And whether I shall live to
see a number of you grow up, or be taken away the first, God only knows. But
this we know, that we shall all quickly sleep in the dust. Pray then, let us
not live as we sleep, and dream life away without the improvement of it. But,
let us wake up from the dead sleep of sin, and attend to duty with all our
hearts. As we have lost a great deal of precious time already, let us
diligent^y redeem it. Since we are mortal, let us redeem time to die. Let us
save, and improve our time so carefully, as always, to have a leisure, peaceful
moment for death. Instead of being found at death, in a conf^sed, distracted
hurry of thought, let us rather have all things prepared, and wait till our
great change come. But in order to make death a welcome messenger, lik^ the
little child just mentioned, you must possess her dutiful ^e^per. To die a
peaceful death you must live a ho^y life.

AND now, m^ dear litt^e immortals, th^^ you may be the ^or^'s* in ^i^e and
death; let me ask you again to obey your parents in the Lord, sot this is
right. And, I hope while christian parents, and pious people constantly pray
God to give yo^ new hearts, and fit you for his whole pleasure, I shall not
wholly fo^get you.

I HAVE only to repeat the leading thoughts of what you have heard, in an easy
method to refresh your memories and assist you to retain them.

THE careless, idle, haughty child,
Cannot be dutiful, and mild:
Nor can the proud, nor selfish son,
Be the kind, obed'ent one.
No more can he, who only fears
The painful rod, nor further cares.
Than, to God's law direct your eye,
Repent -- and in deep sorrow lie.
Love Jesus Christ, and humbly pray,
Both night and morning, every day,
For all the light, and love you need
To make you wise in word and deed.
Then* like the pruned little trees,
Whose buds, and blossoms early please
And in due season, loaded stand
With ripened fruit, to fill the hand.
You Will live together with one heart.
And to your parents joy impart,
Not only in your morning days,
But, as their strength by age decays.
You Will teach the young and bless the old
By fair example, rich as gold:
To live, or die will be your choice,
As you shall know God's sov'ran voice.
And, then at death, you will rise above,
To dwell with Christ, in endless love,
Where saints, and angels bow, and sing
High praises, to the eternal King.
BUT, while I close, let me address a word to the youth of the congregation.
And what more important than the text? Children obey your parents in the Lord,
for this is right. You are yet within the reach of this great command. And,
that you are under the greatest obligations to yield the most cordial obedience,
is a most evident truth, or I would ask you just to think of the tender mother
who bare you, and the kind father who has provided for you. The parental
favors you have received are more than you can number. Shall I propose the
question? Are you dutiful children? If so, bless God for his grace. Where you
dutiful little children? If so, bless God for his early grace. But if undutiful
children still, O how ungrateful! What then should be done first? What more
proper, tha^ to fall down immediately before the throne of grace with sincere
repentance, and deep humility of heart and ask for mercy like the returning
son. And what better use can you make o^ your empty closets than to enter in,
and fill them with the spirit of praye^ and supplication. Let wisdom keep your
hearts, and true discretion guide your steps. Keep thy father's commandment and
forsake not the law of thy mother.

I THOUGHT of a word to par^nts, but inspiration prevents me. "And ye Fathers
pro^oke not your children to wrath, but bring them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord. Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he
is old he will not depart from it." Your duty is as plain as the sun. You are
charged with the education of little Immortals for Christ and eternal glory.
And need I say, the happiest method you can adopt to satisfy the high demands
of parental duty; is constantly, to make the best p^ayers for them -- to give
the best instructions to them -- maintain the best government over them, and
live the best lives before them. If you have not adopted the method already, I
wish you wi^dom to do it immedia^e^y. I wish you the resolution of Joshua, the
faithfulness of Abraham and the constant guidance and influence of the holy
spirit. I wish you more than grace to be faithful -- I wish you may be
successful. For chi^dren are the heritage of the Lord and the fruit of the womb
is his reward.

AMEN.
As it is the duty of children, to employ their early breath in secret prayer:
-- and the duty of parents and others, as opportunity offers, to furnish them,
with suitable expressions, for this grateful performance; the Author takes
liberty in connection with the proceeding discourses, to add the following easy
forms of prayer: and hopes they will be in some measure useful.

Forms of Prayer for little Children.
A Morning prayer.
O LORD, in the morning thou shall hear my voice, in the morning, will I direct
my prayer unto thee, and look up. And while I humble myself as a little child
before thee in prayer, look down, O Father, in thy tender mercy, and accept of
me for the sake of Jesus Christ, in whose name I pray. -- Blessed be thy
constant goodness, that I have not slept the sleep of death, and that my so^l
is not confined in endless darkness. For though a little child, I am a sinner. I
was shapen in iniquity; and born with a very sinful nature. I brought into the
world a heart full of opposition to truth. and holiness. I have therefore, not
only broken thy holy law, but have slighted Christ, and despised the salvation
of the gospel. O Lord, I confess, my sins, and freely acknowledge I desereve
nothing, but thy present wrath, and the endless pains of hell. But, with true
submission to thy infinite justice, I humbly ask, and hope for mercy, in the
worthy name of Christ, because he has borne the curse: and mercy (...) freely,
and wisely offered for his sake. O Lord, for his holy name's sake pardon my
sins, and grant me thy salvation. Be thou my God, and Father, for I am thine:
forsake me not, for in a penitent believing manner I have given myself away to
Christ forever. Grant me the guidance of thy Holy Spirit, that I may constantly
keep thy commandments, and make the lest improvement of thy providence. Give
me more of Christ's lovely temper, that I may honor him in all my words, and
actions, and live in some measure, as he did when a child. And, as thou have
favored me with another day* prepare me for all the duties, and events of it.
Give me wisdom not only to depart from evil; but to see and escape every rising
temptation. Never let me be so foolish, as to trust my own heart. Give me
therefore thy fatherly hand, and lead me still in the path of duty. For,
without thee I can do nothing. As time is short, and swift, and never waits for
old nor young, let not duty wait for me. But, may I improve my precious moments
as they fly, with the greatest diligence. Let duty be my great and only
delight. Teach me to honor my parents by a steady obedience to their wise
commands. Enable me to love my brothers, and sisters, and all my fellow
creatures, according to thy will. Have mercy on all persons in distress.
Provide for the poor, and give them the riches of thy grace. Tenderly regard
thy feeble children, and make them perfect. Awaken sinners, who sleep in danger
of destruction, and lead them safely to Christ for salvation. O Lord, arise,
humble the pride of man, and fill the whole Ear^h with thy praise: for the sake
of Jesus Christ

AMEN.
An Evening Prayer.
O LORD my God, thou art the Author of all things. Thou have made the heavens,
and the earth, angels and men. And all things, from the least to the greatest,
are under the direction of thy providence. The sun rises and sets at thy
command, and darkness goes, and comes at thy (...). Blessed be thy name for the
rich manifestations thou have made of thy wisdom, power, and goodness in all
thy works. Thy work, O Lord, is not only honorable, but perfect: and plainly
declares the infinite perfection of thy eternal nature. And, though I can never
sufficiently acknowledge thy excellency, yet O God, accept of my feeble
thankfulness, for the great merc^es of another day. From morning 'till night,
thou have led me about, by thy fatherly hand, and carefully provided for me. My
health, and friends, food and raiment, and every temporal and spiritual comfort
are the gifts of thy bounty and grace. I thank the Lord, for all past, and
present favors, and humbly ask for more, because it is thy pleasure to supply
the poor, and needy. Forgive therefore the sins of this day and all my life. I
am a great sinner, yet O God destroy me not in thy righteous displeasure, but
save me for the sake of Jesus Christ* who has died, that repenting returning
sinners might live. When thou make up thy jewels, let me be found with them,
and read my name in the book of life. And now, O Lord, take a fatherly care of
me this night, for I leave myself, soul and body with thee. Save me from
distress, remove approaching danger, and prevent all midnight outcries, and
alarms. Give me kind, and refreshing sleep. And, while I close my eyes to
sleep, let me not forget that they will soon be closed in death. Preserve me
through the night, and if it please thee, open my eyes to see the cheerful
light of the moining. I ask for life to spend in obedience to thy commands. I
desire it for duty only. Let me not live in vain. Give me therefore wisdom so
to number my days, and redeem my h^s^y m^ments, that I may be ready to depart
with pleasu^e, at thy call, by night or by day. To thee, I therefore most
cheerfully resign myself, without any reserve. And will thou, great Parents. of
all parents take care this night of my father, and mother, and the rest of the
family: and let nothing but divine safety and protection attend them. Remember
in much mercy the great family of mankind, and order things well for them,
whether in prosperity or adversity: fit all men this night for rest; to sleep
in Jesus* and for the morning of the great day. O Lord, hear from heaven, thy
dewlling place, and answer the prayer of a humble, needy child, for the sake of
Jesus Christ.

AMEN.
For Sabbath-day-Morning.
GREAT and glorious God, blessed be thy name, for the light of another morning*
and blessed be thy Son's name, for the gracious light, and beauty of the
Sabbath. Thy mercy, O Lord, is infinite! And, th^ugh I shall forever express
the high praises of redeeming love, like a child yet accept of my present
thankfulness, that there is salvation for sinners. There is no love, like the
love of Christ: for, by his obedience and suffering, a door is opened for the
full exercise of divine mercy, in the great and glorious plan, and the work of
redemption. And, as this day is set apart for religious service, to honor the
great Redeemer, who is Lord of the Sabbath, give me thy early presence, that I
may spend it, in a holy manner. Take off my affections from the vanities of the
world, and prepare me for this closet duty, in which I am now engaged. Fit me
for morning meditations -- for all the duties of the family, and for the
entertainments and delights of thy house. Reach me therefore thy guiding hand,
and lead me to the sanctuary. Let me not speak my own words, nor think my own
thoughts while going to thy house, nor indulge an idle desire in it. Open my
ears to hear the truth, with attention; and enlarge my heart to embrace it.
Give me grace to worship thee in spirit, and in truth that my service may be
acceptable. Deliver me from the lying lip, the flattering tongue and the absent
heart. But, let my heart be with Christ all the day, that I may be sweetly fed,
and refreshed with the provisions of the gospel, and able to say at night, it
is good to love the Lord. Bless, O Lord, the minister, and give him wisdom, and
faithfulness rightly to divide the truth, and give to every one a portion, in
due season. Let him strengthen the weak, and confirm the strong: let him feed
us all with the bread of life, as we are able to bear it. And, O Lord, in thy
great mercy, let him be made a rich blessing to poor sinners, who will not come
to Christ. O God, be in the midst of assembly, and show us the beauties of
holiness: and fill the house with thy glory. Give a double portion of thy
spirit, this day to all the ministers of Christ, every where, and let them
deliver the word of the Lord faithfully, and will thou make it an enlightening,
seeking, and fi^ding season. O Lord, arise in the excellency of thy power, and
grace, enlarge the kingdom of Christ, and destroy the kingdom of Satan; and
fill the earth with the knowledge of the truth as it is in Jesus. O Lord, hear
and answer, and pardon all my sins for the sake of Jesus Christ, the Lord of
the Sabbath.

AMEN.
For Sabbath-day-Evening.
O LORD* thou art the first, and last, the greatest, and best of beings. Thou
art the God and Father of Jesus Christ, and the Father of mercy. Blessed be thy
name for the infinite pleasures of thy mercy, in sending Jesus Christ in the
world. And, blessed be thy holy name, that the offer of mercy is made freely to
all the children of men; that there is salvation, for old, and young, rich and
poor, bond and free, without money and without price, if they will only accept
of it. Who, O Lord, can utter the praises of divine love to such a sinful,
ungrateful world! But while I attempt to thank thee for thy infinite love to my
fellow creatures in general, let me be truly grateful, for the numberless
favors, I am made the partaker of in particular. From morning 'till night* and
from one Sabbath to another, thy great mercies constantly attend me. I thank
thee, O Lord, for all the mercies I have experienced, and particularly for the
privilege and advantage of this day. The rich treasures of gospel grace, have
once more been opened to my soul, in the preaching of the word. And, now O
Lord, let me not prove a forgetful hearer but enable me to live according to
the rules, and directions of the gospel, and bring forth much ^ruit. May I live
like those who have been with Jesus, and ^re acquainted with him at heart, and
love to imitate his example. Suffer me not be weary of the Sabbath, and with an
idle heart, rejoice to see it pass, though never to return. But, may I wisely
improve these few and hasty moments of holy time, in the remaining service of
the day. Give me grace to conclud^ the holy day, in a holy manner. And when
this Sabbath is past let me desire another. And thus let me desire, and spend
one Sabbath after another, as long as I live: and then let me enter into that
rest with Christ, and begin that Sabbath which will never end. O God, look upon
me in the riches of thy love to children, and strengthen these little feeble
desires, and make me strong in the Lord. O wash me clean in the blood of the
Lamb. For give the misimprovement of Sabbaths, and every other favor. Take a
father's care of me this night. Do good to all my friends, and have mercy on my
enemies. Provide for the poor, and distressed, and give thankfulness to the
rich and prosperous. Put an end to Satan's reign, and influence, and fill all
people with the spirit of Christ. Now to God, the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,
the great Jehovah, be given undivided and eternal praise. AMEN and AMEN.

THE END.

