A SERMON ON THE EVACUATION OF CHARLESTOWN. BY AN ETHIOPIAN.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed for the AUTHOR, and Sold by WILL. WOODHOUSE, in
Front-street, next Door to the Old Coffee-House. M.DCC.LXXXIII.

To the Honorable Thomas Heyward, Esquire, Of the State of South Carolina,
SIR,
I HOPE you will not be surprised at my placing your name in the front of a
piece, which I trust will meet with the approbation of the virtuous citizens of
your-state. Your private favors conferred upon me, when I was a sojourner in a
strange land, calls loudly for my thanks. Your sincere attachment to the cause
of America, intitles you to the love of all her virtuous citizens, wherever
they are dispersed; may they with you enjoy the blessings of peace and
independence, is the wish of

An Ethiopian.

A SERMON, etc.
PSALM lxxv. 1. Unto thee, O God, do we give thanks: Unto thee do we give
thanks, for that thy name is near, thy wondrous works declare.

The wicked flee, when no man pursues; but the righteous are as bold as lions.


ALL manner of Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is, at all times,
profitable for reproof or instruction, that we may have knowledge upon whom the
ends of the world are come. -- As war is pernicious in it is nature, so it is
hurtful to individuals, as well as to communities, and brings with it numbers
of misfortunes: extortion and injustice are it is companions; it makes many
wealthy, -- brings many to poverty, and, in general, the forerunners thereof
seem the first to avoid it, and would willingly give up the laborious task,
without honor or profit.

But, as the hearts of all men are in the hands of the Lord, and he can turn
them as it seems good unto him; so he can reverse the fortune of war, and
relieve those who have been mightily oppressed. -- He is the great and
universal Author of all mankind; -- he rules and reigns in the armies of
heaven, and amongst the inhabitants of the earth, and there is none to stay his
hand, or say unto him, what do thou? -- His interposition, in behalf of his
own people, has often appeared, and brought them a joyful morning, after the
long and tedious night of oppression, cruelty, and bondage: such deliverance as
this the royal Psalmist had often experienced, and in return to his bountiful
benefactor he utters forth these words -- Unto thee, O God, do we give thanks:
unto thee do we give thanks for that thy name is near thy wondrous works
declare.

In further treating on this subject, I shall endeavor to give a short
description of the divine goodness toward his creatures, in all ages, and to
America in general, and then sum up the whole by addressing myself to the
citizens of South Carolina in particular.

The goodness of the munificent Creator has always been displayed toward his
creatures; and, whoever has read the sacred writings, cannot fail of seeing
deliverance in every page: -- He delivered Israel from the hand of Pharaoh,
when he had them in bondage, in the cruel land of Egypt, for four hundred and
thirty years: -- he commissioned his servant Moses to speak in the ears of this
tyrannical monarch these awful words -- If you will not let my son go, even
Israel my firstborn, I will slay thy son even thy firstborn. -- Ex. iv. 22,
23.

But this haughty Monarch, like Britain's present King, hardened his heart
against the Lord, and it ended in his utter destruction; the Red Sea
overwhelmed him and his furious host. The protection of the divine goodness
appeared further for Israel, in the wilderness; David from the hands of Saul,
Daniel from the lions mouth, Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, from
Nebuchadnezzar's fiery furnace, Jonah from the devouring whale, and Peter from
the tyrannical Herod. Acts. xii. 6, 7, 8, and following verses. There are many
other wonderful deliverances recorded in the sacred writings for your farther
information. Thus did God deliver his people from their cruel oppressions in
ancient days; and as he was the God of Israel, so he is the God of America, and
will, in his own time, deliver her from all her enemies, foreign and domestic,
external and internal. Unto God then let all America give thanks, for his
delivering hand has been near unto them, since the commencement of this horrid
war. You have been wonderfully blessed by the propitious hand of Providence, so
as to be able to withstand the vigorous attack of Britain's formidable forces,
at the commencement of her hostilities: when an infant country, no men, no
money, no allies, no disciplined troops, to meet a veteran army commanded by
able generals. The fair fields of Boston stand as eternal monuments of their
savage proceedings; -- the blood of an Attucks, and a Maverick can tell!

O Britannia! Britannia! Let not avarice that fatal rock, or ambition that
earthly deity, compel you to spill innocent blood, and to delight in making
carnage; -- the blood of the murdered Americans will cry aloud for vengeance
and retaliation. O unfortunate Huddy! where is thy indignant ghost to prompt
America to retaliate? O America! patronise Mrs. Asgill, and, by supplication
and foreign mediations, snatch your citizens from death to life: let not a
woman's weakness triumph over your strength.

Fear not, ye virtuous and brave Americans, rewards and punishments are in
reserve for those who have merited them. You who have fought and bled for your
country, have got great consolation; the consciousness of having discharged
your duty faithfully when in the field, must make you smile in affliction, and
rejoice in tribulation. Your cause, conduct, fortitude and courage, have been
unshaken, and entitled you to an alliance with one of the first powers in
Europe; the conduct of that Monarch has not been equalled in any age whatever.
-- O brave Americans! by him, under heaven, ye have been able to contend with
the imperious and haughty sons of Britain. Your sustaining Britain's formidable
forces, before your alliance with her, astonishes the world, and will be the
admiration of future ages; -- but remember it is not your own arm that has
saved you; it is through the mercy of him, whose compassion never fails.

O Britain! little Britain! if the earth was commissioned from it is great
Creator to avenge innocent blood, it would have swallowed you up, as it did the
company of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram. Be ashamed, O ancient Britons! of your
past conduct toward those, who were once the bone of your bone, and flesh of
your flesh; but now for ever dissolved, and as far distant as the north is from
the south. A second burning of a Norfolk, a Kingston, a Charlestown, or any
other hostile attempt, will never eradicate from America's bosom her growing
independence. North America, this new world, far excels you in humanity,
generosity, and valor; they have catched the genial flame from, your ancient
fires, and it is cheerfully distended through these magnificent United States
-- States that have resisted misfortune with manly firmness, and conquered
adversity in her most ghastly shapes; -- her lenity toward you has been
unequalled; she has not only spared the transgressor, but the guilty murderer
has escaped the sword of justice. and permitted to go free: but alas! he is not
free -- he will be found. "Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord."
Though his vengeance seems slow, he will not let the guilty go unpunished. It
is noble to revenge, more noble to forgive; -- but your lenity toward her has
been of no avail; it has been like adding fuel to the burning flame, and served
to embitter the captivity of your suffering countrymen, who now lie exposed in
dark dungeons, and loathsome prison ships, naked, half starved, and waiting
there these alternatives -- death, exchange, or your conquering their
conquerors. Rise and dispel, dissipate and scatter them from their last strong
hold; drive out these Canaanites from their dwelling amongst the true
Israelites: they have too long dwelt amongst you -- too long afflicted your
citizens, the freemen of America.

Ye hills and dales! ye mountains and valleys! cry aloud, Retaliate, relatiate.
-- O Britain! have thy savage soldiery and ruthless sword wantonly and
barbarously deprived the man of integrity of his life, made his children
fatherless, and his wife a widow: you shall not go unpunished: their blood will
cry to heaven for vengeance, as the blood of the Gibeonites did to the house of
Saul, in the days of David. 2 Samuel xxi. 1. For you, O Britain! there is wrath
in store; under some hidden cloud, there is a rod for the oppressor, and a
sword of justice for him that delighted in blood. Justice will find out the
wilful murderer and the private assassin, after expiring years, as the son of
Timoleon did the murderer of his father in the temple. Your robberies and
plundering, murders and depredations, have gained you the abhorrence of all
America. Death and destruction have been the lot of her virtuous sons, whenever
fortune throws them into your hands. No distinction has been made; the noble
and the ignoble fell victims alike in one common carnage: though you may
imagine you have been always victorious, if you recollect the defeats and
retreats, you will cease boasting, and call upon your skilful General,
retreating before the undisciplined army of the magnanimous Washington. --
White Plains, Red Bank, Brandywine, Bunker's Hill, Princeton, Monmouth,
Germantown and Trenton, are sufficient evidences against your boastings. Your
experienced Generals forget their lessons, when attacked by Americans -- and no
wonder; the former endeavoring to take away liberty, heaven's choicest
blessing; the latter determined to defend it to the last extremity. Her
unshaken and intrepid soldiery have overcome difficulties, (even with a
treacherous Arnold) that seemed to mankind unsurmountable, and gained him the
character of Hannibal. The cold regions of Canada, Lake Champlain, and
Ticonderoga, have nobly told of her heroic sons.

Dear sons of liberty, excuse an Ethiopian; reward your military for their
eminent services done you in the field; they have endured, with a veteran
firmness, the powerful attacks of Britain's superior force, whenever brought to
action. The wounded soldier, who has lost a leg or an arm, or both legs, in the
defense of his country, calls loudly for your approbation, and immediate
assistance. Dear fellow citizens, let not such merit go unrewarded. Courage
deserves applause, and heroic acts your best approbation. Let not the deceased
soldier's widows and orphans want bread, in any of your states. The soldier
thus rewarded, will always be ready to take the field with vigor and spirit,
when the public cause demands his assistance against any foreign invaders, or
domestic usurpers: these are the men who have been subservient toward erecting
the magnificent edifice of your flourishing Independence; and, if I may be
allowed the expression, are as so many branches of that American tree -- that
tree which Britain has been endeavoring to eradicate from your minds, but
cannot, and, I hope, will not while America has a name. -- Be no more her
slaves, leave that condescension to foreign petty princes, who have hired their
troops to subdue you. -- But all is in vain; -- they, tired of despotism,
desert the royal cause, remain in America as tillers of the earth, hewers of
wood, and drawers of water, and left their hire in the hands of a tyrannical
King and factious Parliament to decide. O ye Americans! exalted by heaven --
Say with the Psalmist, Unto thee, O God, do we give thanks, for delivering us
from the bitter enemies of America. May we be thankful, and make our states
independent states indeed, by gradually abolishing slavery, and making the
Ethiopian race comfortable amongst us.

I have greatly enlarged on America in general, yet have not forgotten Carolina
in particular, and will, immediately after this one remark, address myself to
its inhabitants on the evacuation of Charlestown.

Fear not, ye sons of Columbia! Britain has risen to her zenith, as the empires
of Cyrus and Belus; like them she will meet her approaching dissolution, and
moulder with them into ruin. The sword of America, and her allies, will yet
cause Britain's King to tremble on his throne, and shake it to it is very
foundation. Her success, with the navy of our allies, in the Western Isles, and
her defeating the combined forces at the Rock, have made her more arrogant and
haughty; though her boast lies in her naval force, she will not always be
victorious: the race is not always to the swift, nor the battle to the strong.
British veterans Battle at Stony-point.
have entreated for mercy from the undisciplined Americans, and mercy they
found from that officer whose name has been a terror to them, Major General
Wayne.

Now let me address my worthy sons of Carolina's state. All hail, you staunch
Carolinians, you suffering Americans! I welcome you to your own state once
more. I congratulate you on the happy event. My returning fellow citizens, my
worthy Carolinians -- I mean you who have been eyewitnesses of national faith
and solemn capitulations scandalously broken -- You who have been politically
sent away three hundred miles south of your own country, to suffer eleven
months captivity in the dreary desert of East-Florida -- You who have had your
beloved wives sent with their children to the north, by your implacable and
bitter enemies -- I congratulate you on the evacuation of Charlestown; a period
long expected by you, though never desired by your enemies; they, with the
loyal sycophant, never expected your return: but all their hopes are vain. Even
an infatuated ministry had some ideas, that America was subdued, when your
capital was reduced by Sir Henry Clinton: great honor he gained with his
thousands, and a formidable fleet, when he obliged a handful of men, one half
of whom were disaffected, to surrender; and this they did not do, until
compelled by necessity, and not before the American cannon thundered in his
ears, and slew some of his chosen men. O Charlestown! did Britain send her
thronged legions to thy peaceful shore, to distress, possess, and then to
evacuate it? they thought that America's independent sun was set in darkness,
when Clinton marched into your capital; but how have they been deceived! though
it set in the south, it rose in the north, and compelled the southern hero to
capitulate with his thousands. You who have without delay, since your exchange,
joined your American brethren in the field, under that respectable and gallant
Commander, Major General Green. You who have endured with him watching, and
every soldierly hardship -- you I congratulate on the happy event. You wealthy
farmers, who have had your houses and estates plundered; you who have suffered
in every part, and have now returned, praise ye the Lord: you who used to live
by the sweat of your brow, in peace and contentment, return; the gates of your
city are now wide expanded for your reception, and, I hope, will never be
barred any more, except by you against invaders.

Britain's hostile forces unable to conquer, and tired of being defeated,
quaked with fear, and were obliged to evacuate your capital; the many battles
which have been fought, since the reduction of Charlestown, are more than I can
at present recollect; their barbarities, at the battle of Camden, are
unparalleled in any civilized country. See them, though boasting, yet worsted
at the battle of Guildford, by the gallant General Green. See them shamefully
beaten at the Cowpens. See their shattered army, under Stewart, flying into
Charlestown, from the battle of the Eutaw Springs, though they boasted of their
victory by fortune throwing into their hands Lieutenant Colonel Washington, and
some other prisoners. See Lord Rawdon flying before the country militia, and
retreating into Charlestown. See them checked all over your state by the
Generals Green, Wayne and Marion. See them at last driven in from the out
posts which they held, and circumscribed to the capital. See them reduced to
the wretched alternative of bartering merchandise for produce, for the
sustenance of their troops. See them at last obliged to send a strong force for
the necessary supply of water. See them at last obliged to quit their temporary
habitation, and to seek an assylum in the mighty deep, and the Western Islands.
Let Carolina rejoice, and all her numerous citizens, at the goodness of the
Lord, for delivering their land from a savage foe; enemies that are worse than
the Heathens who dwell in the dark regions of Africa. See them gone; though not
before permitting their adherents to spill innocent blood.

O Britain! Britain! thy vice has given sanction to numberless barbarities in
America. Exasperated at leaving your state, they shed the blood of war in the
time of an evacuation fixed by treaty; but no ties of honor can bind a lost
nation; your servants they have carried away in violation of the treaty, and
some of them will feel the effects of their folly, in the places whither they
are gone. Rejoice ye United States with your sister Carolina, for her present
glorious situation; rejoice with her particularly Massachusett's Bay,
Pennsylvania, and Georgia. You have felt with her British imposition, and they
have left your states as they left her in haste, and great precipitation. The
embarrassment of a Dorchester hill in the Massachusett's government, caused
them to take shipping, and flee away in great fear. The maneuvers of a
Washington, in defeating their armies, when they laid in Pennsylvania, and the
expectation of a D'Estaing, produced a speedy evacuation. A gallant Wayne,
before the lines of Savanna, compelled them to leave the capital also. The
vigilance of a Green, under Heaven, has terrified them, and brought about to
your great joy, the evacuation of your capital: then unto God give thanks, and
say, the sword of the Lord, and of General Green, O inhabitants of
South Carolina, great and small! rejoice, the Lord has done great things for
you, whereof we are glad: therefore, laud and magnify his name for ever.

O Britain! all your intrigues and most secret machinations have been
wonderfully discovered. An Andre could not bribe, a treacherous and infamous
Arnold could not succeed. O unhappy for America, that thou, O maledict Arnold,
have escaped her vengeful sword! but your punishment is sure. I will not
deviate from my point in view.

Come, my beloved Carolinians, ye who have been bereft of all domestic
happiness; ye who have been distressed in every quarter; ye who have been
robbed, plundered and spoiled, come, reinstate, and possess yourselves of your
invaluable rights, given to your ancestors by the indulgent hand of Heaven.
Come all ye females, who have been (...) separated from your (...) return,
enjoy your beloved companions, who have long sustained indefatigable hardships,
and have overcome their cruel oppressors. Come you noble youths, who have been
torn from your studies and books, to take up arms; come, you have been in the
wilderness, fighting for your country; come, and view the land of freedom and
liberty; come, you who have been abroad in distress; come, and once more sit
down, and, I hope, have none to make you afraid; come, ye babes and young men,
once more recross the mighty deep, and land on your native shore; come, and see
the strong hold deserted by it is late temporary owners.

I am afraid I shall transgress upon my readers; but, indulge me a few moments
longer. My tongue faulters in the characters I am now about to describe. What
must be done to the loyal subjects now amongst you, who took shelter under the
tyrannical standard, and who were some of the chief promoters of your
distresses. Necessity and policy obliged some to seek protection; but those
have since joined you: restore them to favor, and acquiesce with the law:
those who have neither joined you, nor fled their country, I will not be too
rash in judgment. I leave them in the hands of those who hold the reins of
government: if they go unpunished, what will be the issue? Why, the soldier who
has been fighting your battles, and hazarded his life in defense of your state,
will look for a high reward. Every partial grant is injustice to them who have
been spilling their blood in defense of your state.

Your officers -- your volunteers deserve your notice: if justice be permitted
to draw her sword, she will cut down the briar and bramble, which are now
cherished; and, in their stead, place those salutary plants which have been
beneficial to the state, in the time of her distress: these are the men, and
these only, who deserve promotion in the United States; these ought to be the
men, who should sit in the Senate, and assist in enacting such laws, as will be
a terror to the disaffected, and a praise and safeguard to those who have been
doing well. View your (...) campaigns, and piercing winter's rigorous and hoary
season -- See the man who has been invincible in danger, and intrepid in the
field of battle -- View him cast down with dejected look and gloomy
countenance; if you ask him the reason, he will answer you thus, "I am
afflicted to see virtue and courage trampled upon, and vice and cowardice
cherished." He will tell you, he thinks the man that is come from a foreign
country, and though a native of America, has no right to a vote in the senate
of his country, after hiding himself from the heat and burden of the day, when
his fellow citizens have borne it with fortitude and patience.

Those who have been spilling their blood in the cause of liberty, and offered
their lives a willing sacrifice, have reason to be jealous, if they see
partiality lavished upon those the least deserving of it. Let your Constitution
be your Magna Charta, your Bill of Rights. Enact good and wholesome laws in
your state; you will make every individual a citizen, and they will be your
safeguards, bulwarks, and fortifications: then, when this is done, all the
surrounding nations will be astonished at your courage, perseverance,
fortitude, and wisdom; and posterity will read with pleasure, in the annals of
your country, your glorious achievements and warlike actions, and children yet
unborn shall sing of America and her warfare. Liberty shall rear her head in
these United States, and oppression and tyranny shall tremble and hide their
heads, and sink into oblivion. The mouth of the loud thundering cannon shall be
stopped, and the carnage of America by Britain's sword, be for ever done away.

Now, ye Carolina Americans, enjoy yourselves; yet still be on your guard,
until Britain sends this appellation to the United States, of your being the
Lords and Rulers of North America: if there be any amongst you like unto Achan,
avaricious and treacherous, treat them as Joshua did him in the valley of
Achor. Joshua vii. 17, 20, and following verses. O my friends! you will yet be
happy in spite of all opposition; your state will yet be a haven for foreign
ships, and trade and commerce will come unto you in great abundance; and you
shall appear as in the times of old. Come all ye ministers of God, who have
been banished your country, return, reassume your former work in the sanctuary,
and administer in the duties of your sacred functions: though the sanctuaries
have been defiled and corrupted, yet bless the Lord in them, and with your
returning fellow citizens, praise and magnify him for ever.

O Carolina! have you no worthies to lament, before I conclude? Yes, ye have,
though some long forgotten by many: the remembrance of a Polaski at Savannah,
the death of the amiable and gallant Laurens, must dwell near your hearts; he
fell a victim to British fury. O noble youth! in the bloom of life, thou native
of Carolina, thou who left thy gentle spouse, thy near relation, to cross the
Atlantic, and fight the battles of thy country; we lament thee, O Stono's
plain! let no dew or rain fall upon thee, for there the gallant Laurens fell a
martyr in defense of his country. Are there no more? Yes, there is the murdered
blood of a Lining crying aloud for vengeance. O ye mourning widows and orphan
children! cease to weep, dry up your tears, the Lord will avenge your wrongs.
Ye sons of his, perhaps you shall revenge your father's death, as Solomon did
the transgressors of his father's reign, though they had caught hold of the
horns of the altar. O Haynes! I revere thy character, I pity thy destiny, thy
untimely, and unhappy death: thy lawless accusers and murderers, though fled,
are not yet out of the reach of the sword of justice; thy blood cries aloud
for vengeance, and though the enquiry of your execution was expelled a British
tribunal, though strenuously introduced by a Richmond, there remains a higher
tribunal, where a Rawdon and a Balfour must undoubtedly appear. O ye orphans of
his! Heaven will avenge your father's blood.

Now having imperfectly finished the plan first laid down, let me conclude as I
began, Unto thee, O God, do we give thanks, unto thee ought all America to give
thanks, for that thy name has been near unto them, thy wondrous works* declare.
Amen and amen.


