NEW YORK, November 26. Last Sunday night arrived the Lord Hyde Packet, in 47
days from Falmouth. Fro. the English papers brought we have extracted the
following important ADVICES: LONDON, September 30. THE Definitive Treaty,
Between GREAT BRITAIN and the UNITED STATES of America, signed at Paris the 3d
day of September, 1783.
In the Name of the most holy and undivided Trinity.
IT having pleased the Divine Providence to dispose the hearts of the most
serene and most potent prince George the third, by the grace of God, king of
Great Britain, France and Ireland, defender of the faith, duke of Brunswick and
Lu^enburgh, arch-treasurer and prince elector of the holy Roman empire, etc.
and of the United-States of America, to forget all past misunderstandings and
differences that have unhappily interrupted the good correspondence and
friendship which they mutually wish to restore, and to establish such a
beneficial and satisfactory intercourse between the two countries, upon the
ground of reciprocal advantages and mutual convenience, as may promote and
secure to both perpetual peace and harmony; and having for this desirable end
already laid the foundation of peace and reconciliation, by the provisional
articles signed at Paris on the 30th of November, 1782, by the commissioners
empowered on each part, which articles were agreed to be inserted in, and to
constitute the treaty of peace proposed to be concluded between the crown of
Great Britain and the said United States, but which treaty was not to be
concluded until terms of peace should be agreed upon between Great Britain and
France, and his Britannic majesty should be ready to conclude such treaty
accordingly: and the treaty between Great Britain and France having since been
concluded his Britannic majesty and the United States of America, in order to
carry into full effect the provisional articles abovementioned, according to
the tenor thereof, have constituted (...) say, (...) member of the parliament
of Great Britain, and the said United States on their part, John Adams, esquire.
late a commissioner of the United States of America at the court of Versailles,
late delegate in Congress from the state of Massachusetts, and chief justice of
the said state, and minister plenipotentiary of the said United States to their
high mightinesses the states general of the United Netherlands; Benjamin
Franklin, esquire. late delegate in Congress from the state of Pennsylvania,
president of the convention of the said state, and minister plenipotentiary
from the United States of America at the court of Versailles; and John Jay,
esquire. late president of Congress, and chief justice of the state of New York,
and minister plenipotentiary from the said United States at the court of
Madrid, to be the plenipotentiaries for the concluding and signing the present
definitive treaty* who, after having reciprocally communicated their respective
full powers, have agreed upon and confirmed the following articles*

Art. 1. His Britannic majesty acknowledges the said United States, viz.
New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island and Providence Plantations,
Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia,
North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia, to be free, sovereign, and
independent states; that he treats with them as such, and for himself, his
heirs and successors, relinquishes all claims to the government, property, and
territorial rights of the same, and every part thereof.

Art 2. And that all disputes which might arise in future, on the subject of
the boundaries of the said United States, may be prevented, it is hereby agreed
and declared, that the following are and shall be their boundaries, viz. From
the north west angle of Nova Scotia, viz. that angle which is formed by a line
drawn due north from the source of St. Croix river to the Highland, along the
said Highlands, which divide those rivers that empty themselves into the river
St. Lawrence, from those which sail into the Atlantic Ocean, to the
north-western most head of Connecticut-River; thence down along the middle of
that river to the forty-fifth degree of north latitude; from thence by a line
due west of said latitude, until it strikes the river Irriquois or Cataraqui;
thence along the middle of the said river into Lake Ontario; through the middle
of the said lake until it strikes the communication by water between that lake
and Lake Erie; thence along the middle of said communication into Lake Erie,
through the middle of said lake, until it arrives at the water communication
between that lake and Lake Huron, thence through the middle of said lake to the
water communication between that lake and Lake Superior; thence through Lake
Superior, northward of the isles Royal and Purlipeaux to the Long Lake; thence
through the middle of said Long Lake and the water communication between it and
the Lake of the Woods, to the said lake of the Woods, thence through the said
lake to the most north-western point thereof, and from thence on a due west
course to the river Mississippi; thence by a line to be drawn along the middle
of the said river Mississippi; thence by a line to be drawn along the middle of
the said river Mississippi until it shall intersect the northernmost part of
the thirty first degree of north latitude. South, by a line to be drawn due
east from the determination of the line last mentioned in the latitude of
thirty-one degrees north of the equator, to the middle of the river
Apalachicola or Catahou^^e; thence along the middle thereof to its junction
with the Flint River; thence strait to the head of St. Mary's River; and thence
down along the middle of St. Mary's River to the Atlantic Ocean; east, by a
line to be drawn along the middle of the River St. Croix from its mouth in the
Bay of Fundy to its source, and from its source directly north to the aforesaid
Highlands which divide the rivers that fall into the Atlantic Ocean from those
which fall into the River St. Lawrence, comprehending all islands within twenty
leagues of any part of the shores of the United States, and lying between lines
to be drawn due east from the points where the aforesaid boundaries between
Nova Scotia on the one part, and East Florida on the other, shall respectively
touch the Bay of Fundy and the Atlantic Ocean, excepting such islands as now
are or heretofore have been within the limits of the said province of Nova
Scotia.

Art. 3. It is agreed that the people of the United States shall continue to
enjoy unmolested the right to take fish of every kind on the Grand Bank, and on
all the other banks of Newfoundland, also in the gulf of St. Lawrence, and all
other places in the sea, where the inhabitants of both countries used at any
time heretofore to fish. And also that the inhabitants of the United States
shall have liberty to take fish of every kind on such part of the coast of
Newfoundland as British fishermen shall use, (but not to dry or cure the same
on that island) and also on the coasts, bays and creeks of all others of his
Britannic majesty's dominions in America; and that the American fishermen shall
have liberty to dry and cure fish in any of the unsettled bays, harbors and
creeks of Nova Scotia, Magdalen Islands and Labrador, so long as the same shall
remain unsettled; but so soon as the same or either of them shall be settled,
it shall not be lawful for the said fishermen to dry or cure fish at such
settlement, without a previous agreement for that purpose with the inhabitants,
proprietors or possessors of the ground.

Art. 4. It is agreed that the creditors on either side shall meet with no
lawful impediment to the recovery of the full value, in sterling money, of all
bona fide debts heretofore contracted.

Art. 5. It is agreed that Congress shall earnestly recommend it to the
legislatures of the respective states, to provide for the restitution of all
estates, rights and properties, which have been confiscated, belonging to real
British subjects; and also of the estates, rights and properties of persons
resident in districts in the possession of his majesty's arms, and who have not
borne arms against the said United States; and that persons of any other
description shall have free liberty to go to any part or parts of any of the
Thirteen United States, and therein to remain twelve months unmolested in their
endeavors to obtain the restitution of such of their estates, rights and
properties, as may have been confiscated; and that Congress shall also
earnestly recommend to the several states a reconsideration and revision of all
acts or laws regarding the premises, so as to render the said laws or acts
perfectly consistent, not only with justice and equity, but with that spirit of
conciliation, which, on the return of the blessings of peace, should
universally prevail: and that Congress shall also earnestly recommend to the
several states, that the estates, rights and properties of such last mentioned
persons shall be restored to them, they refunding to any persons who may be now
in possession the bona fide price (where any has been given) which such persons
may have paid on purchasing any of the said lands, rights or properties since
the confiscation.

And it is agreed, that all persons who have any interest in confiscated lands,
either by debts, marriage settlements, or otherwise, shall meet with no lawful
impediment in the prosecution of their just rights.

Art. 6. That there shall be no future confiscations made, nor any prosecutions
commenced against any person or persons for, or by reason of the part which he
or they may have taken in the present war; and that no person shall, on that
account, suffer any future loss or damage, either in his person, liberty, or
property: and that those who may be in confinement on such charges, at the time
of the ratification of the treaty in America, shall be immediately set at
liberty, and the prosecutions so commenced be discontinued.

Art. 7. There shall be a firm and perpetual peace between his Britannic
majesty and the said states, and between the subjects of the one and the
citizens of the other; wherefore all hostilities, both by sea and land, shall
from henceforth cease; all prisoners on both sides shall be set at liberty, and
his Britannic majesty shall, with all convenient speed, and without causing any
destruction, or carrying away any negroes, or other property of the American
inhabitants, withdraw all his armies, garrisons and fleets, from the said
United States, and from every port, place and harbor, within the same, leaving
in all fortifications the American artillery that may be therein; and shall
also order and cause all archives, records, deeds and papers belonging to any
of the said States, or their citizens, which in the course of the war may have
fallen into the hands of his officers, to be forthwith restored, and delivered
to the proper state and persons to whom they belong.

Art. 8. The navigation of the river Mississippi, from its source to the ocean,
shall for ever remain free and open to the subjects of Great Britain, and the
citizens of the United States.

Art. 9. In case it should so happen that any place or territory belonging to
Great Britain, or to the United States, should have been conquered by the arms
of either from the other, before the arrival of the said provisional articles
in America, it is agreed, that the same shall be restored without difficulty,
and without requiring any compensation.

Art. 10. The solemn ratifications of the present treaty, expedited in good and
due form, shall be exchanged between the Contracting Parties in the space of
six months, or sooner, if possible, to be computed from the day of the
signature of the present treaty. In Witness whereof, we the under signed, their
ministers plenipotentiary, have in their name, and in virtue of our full
powers, signed with our hands the present Definitive Treaty, and caused the
seals of our arms to be affixed thereto.

Done at Paris, this 3d day of September, in the year of our Lord one thousand
seven hundred and eighty-three. (L. S.) JOHN ADAMS, (L. S.) DAVID HARTLEY, (L.
S.) B. FRANKLIN, (L. S.) JOHN JAY.


BALTIMORE: Printed by J. Hayes and J. A. Killen.


