THE LAST OFFICIAL ADDRESS, OF HIS EXCELLENCY General WASHINGTON, TO THE
Legislatures of the United States. TO WHICH IS ANNEXED, A COLLECTION OF PAPERS
RELATIVE TO HALF - PAY, AND COMMUTATION OF HALF - PAY, Granted by CONGRESS to
the OFFICERS of the ARMY.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN. M.DCC.LXXXIII.

THE design of publishing the following collection of original papers, is to
give the people of America and opportunity of becoming acquainted with the
state of facts, respecting the half pay and commutation, granted by Congress to
the officers of the army; together with the reason, the necessity and policy
which induced the measure. -- The proceedings will explain themselves; -- the
arguments offered at the moment need no comment; -- and the consequences which
have resulted from the system, give the strongest sanction to it.

(Circular.)
Headquarters, Newburgh, June 1783. SIR,
THE great object, for which I had the honor to hold an appointment in the
service of my country, being accomplished, I am now preparing to resign it into
the hands of Congress, and to return to that domestic retirement, which, it is
well known, I left with the greatest reluctance; -- a retirement, for which I
have never ceased to sigh, through a long and painful absence, -- and in which,
remote from the noise and trouble of the world, I meditate to pass the
remainder of life, in a state of undisturbed repose. --

But before I carry this resolution into effect, I think it a duty incumbent
upon me to make this my last official communication, -- to congratulate you on
the glorious events, which Heaven has been pleased to produce in our favor, --
to offer my sentiments respecting some important subjects which appear to me to
be intimately connected with the tranquillity of the United States, -- to take
my leave of your Excellency as a public character, and to give my final
blessing to that country in whose service I have spent the prime of my life --
for whose sake I have consumed so many anxious days and watchful nights, and
whose happiness being extremely dear to me, will always constitute no
inconsiderable part of my own. --

Impressed with the liveliest sensibility on this pleasing occasion, I will
claim the indulgence of dilating the more copiously on the subjects of our
mutual felicitation; -- When we consider the magnitude of the prize we
contended for, the doubtful nature of the contest, and the favorable manner in
which it has terminated; we shall find the greatest possible reason for
gratitude and rejoicing; -- this is a theme that will afford infinite delight
to every benevolent and liberal mind, whether the event in contemplation, be
considered as the source of present enjoyment, or the parent of future
happiness, -- and we shall have equal occasion to felicitate ourselves on the
lot which Providence has assigned us, whether we view it in a natural, a
political or moral point of light.

The citizens of America, placed in the most enviable condition, as the sole
Lords and Proprietors of a vast tract of continent, comprehending all the
various soils and climates of the world, and abounding with all the necessaries
and conveniences of life, are now, by the late satisfactory pacification,
acknowledged to be possessed of absolute freedom and independency; -- They are
from this period, to be considered as the actors on a most conspicuous theater,
which seems to be peculiarly designated by Providence, for the display of human
greatness and felicity. -- Here, they are not only surrounded with every thing
which can contribute to the completion of private and domestic enjoyment; but
Heaven has crowned all its other blessings, by giving a fairer opportunity for
political happiness, than any other nation has ever been favored with. --
Nothing can illustrate these observations more forcibly, than a recollection of
the happy conjuncture of times and circumstances, under which our republic
assumed its rank among the nations. The foundation of our empire was not laid
in the gloomy age of ignorance and superstition, but at an epoch when the
rights of mankind were better understood and more clearly defined, than at any
former period; -- the researches of the human mind, after social happiness,
have been carried to a great extent, -- the treasures of knowledge, acquired by
the labors of philosophers, sages and legislators, through a long succession of
years, are laid open for our use, and their collected wisdom may be happily
applied in the establishment of our forms of government. -- The free
cultivation of letters, the unbounded extension of commerce, the progressive
refinement of manners, the growing liberality of sentiment, and above all, the
pure and benign light of revelation, have had a meliorating influence on
mankind, and increased the blessings of society; -- at this auspicious period,
the United States came into existence as a nation, and if their citizens should
not be completely free and happy, the fault will be entirely their own.

Such is our situation, and such are our prospects; -- but notwithstanding the
cup of blessing is thus reached out to us, -- notwithstanding happiness is
ours, if we have a disposition to seize the occasion and make it our own, yet,
it appears to me, there is an option still left to the United States of
America, that it is in their choice and depends upon their conduct, whether
they will be respectable and prosperous, or contemptible and miserable as a
nation; -- this is the time of their political probation, -- this is the moment
when the eyes of the whole world are turned upon them -- this is the moment to
establish or ruin their national character for ever, -- this is the favorable
moment to give such a tone to our foederal government, as will enable it to
answer the ends of its institution, -- or this may be the ill-fated moment for
relaxing the powers of the union, annihilating the cement of the confederation,
and exposing us to become the sport of European politics, which may play one
state against another to prevent their growing importance, and to serve their
own interested purposes: For according to the system of policy the States shall
adopt at this moment, they will stand or fall; and by their confirmation or
lapse, it is yet to be decided, whether the revolution must ultimately be
considered as a blessing or a curse* -- a blessing or a curse, not to the
present age alone, for with our fate will the destiny of unborn millions be
involved.

With this conviction in my mind, of the importance of the present crisis,
silence in me would be a crime, -- I will therefore speak to your Excellency,
the language of freedom and of sincerity without disguise; -- I am aware
however that those who differ from me in political sentiment may perhaps
remark, I am stepping out of the proper line of my duty, and they may possibly
ascribe to arrogance or oftentation, what I know is alone the result of the
purest intention -- but the rectitude of my own heart, which disdains such
unworthy motives, the part I have hitherto acted in life, the determination I
have formed, of not taking any share in public business hereafter, the ardent
desire I feel, and shall continue to manifest of quietly enjoying in private
life, after all the toils of war, the benefits of a wise and liberal
government, will, I flatter myself sooner or later, convince my countrymen,
that I could have no sinister views in delivering with so little reserve the
opinions contained in this address.

There are four things, which I humbly conceive, are essential to the well
being, I may even venture to say, to the existence of the United States as an
Independent Power.

1st, An indissoluble union of the States under one foederal head.

2dly, A sacred regard to public justice.

3dly. The adoption of a proper peace establishment. And,

4thly, The prevalence of that pacific and friendly disposition among the
people of the United States, which will induce them to forget their local
prejudices and policies, to make those mutual concessions which are requisite
to the general prosperity, and in some instances, to sacrifice their individual
advantages to the interest of the community.

These are the pillars, on which the glorious fabric of our independency and
national character, must be supported, -- Liberty is the basis, -- and whoever
would dare to sap the foundation, or overturn the structure, under whatever
specious pretexs he may attempt it, will merit the bitterest execration, and
the severest punishment which can be inflicted by his injured country.

On the three first articles, I will make a few observations, -- leaving the
last to the good sense and serious consideration of those immediately concerned.

Under the first head, although it may not be necessary or proper for me in
this place, to enter into a particular disquisition of the principles of the
union, and to take up the great question, which has been frequently agitated,
whether it be expedient and requisite for the States to delegate a larger
proportion of power to Congress, or not, -- yet it will be a part of my duty,
and that of every true patriot, to assert without reserve, and to insist upon
the following positions: -- That unless the States will suffer Congress to
exercise those prerogatives, they are undoubtedly invested with by the
constitution, every thing must very rapidly tend to anarchy and confusion --
That it is indispensable to the happiness of the individual States that there
should be lodged somewhere, a supreme power, to regulate and govern the general
concerns of the Confederated Republic, without which the union cannot be of
long duration -- That there must be a faithful and pointed compliance, on the
part of every State, with the late proposals and demands of Congress, or the
most fatal consequences will ensue -- That whatever measures have a tendency to
dissolve the union, or contribute to violate or lessen the sovereign authority,
ought to be considered as hostile to the liberty and independency of America,
and the authors of them treated accordingly -- And lastly, That unless we can
be enabled, by the concurrence of the States, to participate of the fruits of
the revolution, and enjoy the essential benefits of civil society under a form
of government so free and uncorrupted, so happily guarded, against the danger
of oppression, as has been devised and adopted by the articles of
confederation, -- that it will be a subject of regret, that so much blood and
treasure have been lavished for no purpose, that so many sufferings have been
encountered, without a compensation, and that so many sacrifices have been made
in vain. Many other considerations might here be adduced to prove, that without
an entire conformity to the spirit of the union, we cannot exist as an
Independent Power, -- it will be sufficient for my present purpose to mention,
but one or two, which seem to me of the greatest importance: It is only in our
united character as an empire, that our independence is acknowledged, that our
power can be regarded, or our credit supported among foreign nations -- The
treaties of the European powers with the United States of America, will have no
validity on a dissolution of the union. -- We shall be left nearly in a state
of nature, or we may find by our own unhappy experience, that there is a
natural and necessary progression from the extreme of anarchy to the extreme of
tyranny; and that arbitrary power is most easily established on the ruins of
liberty abused to licentiousness.

As to the second article, which respects the performance of public justice,
Congress have in their late address to the United States, almost exhausted the
subject, -- they have explained their ideas so fully, and have enforced the
obligations the States are under to render complete justice to all the public
creditors, with so much dignity and energy, that in my opinion, no real friend
to the honor and independency of America, can hesitate a single moment
respecting the propriety of complying with the just and honorable measures
proposed; if their arguments do not produce conviction, I know of nothing that
will have greater influence; especially when we recollect that the system
referred to, being the result of the collected wisdom of the continent, must be
esteemed, if not perfect, certainly the least objectionable of any that could
be devised; and that if it shall not be carried into immediate execution, a
national bankruptcy, with all its deplorable consequences will take place,
before any different plan can possibly be proposed and adopted -- So pressing
are the present circumstances! and such is the alternative now offered to the
States!

The ability of the country to discharge the debts which have been incurred in
its defense is not to be doubted -- An inclination I flatter myself will not be
wanting -- The path of our duty is plain before us. -- Honesty, will be found
on every experiment, to be the best and only true policy. -- Let us then, as a
nation, be just -- Let us fulfill the public contracts, which Congress had
undoubtedly a right to make for the purpose of carrying on the war, with the
same good faith, we suppose ourselves bound to perform our private engagements
-- In the mean time, let an attention to the cheerful performance of their
proper business as individuals, and as members of society, be earnestly
inculcated on the citizens of America; then will they strengthen the hands of
government, and be happy under its protection -- every one will reap the fruit
of his labors -- every one will enjoy his own acquisitions, without
molestation and without danger.

In this state of absolute freedom, and perfect security, who will grudge to
yield a very little of his property to support the common interest of society,
and ensure the protection of government? Who does not remember, the frequent
declarations at the commencement of the war, that we should be completely
satisfied, if at the expense of one half, we could defend the remainder of our
possessions? Where is the man to be found who wishes to remain indebted, for
the defense of his own person and property, to the exertions, the bravery, and
the blood of others, without making one generous effort to repay the debt of
honor and of gratitude? In what part of the continent shall we find any man or
body of men, who would not blush to stand up and propose measures, purposely
calculated to rob the soldier of his stipend, and the public creditor of his
due? And were it possible that such a flagrant instance of injustice could ever
happen, would it not excite the general indignation, and tend to bring down,
upon the authors of such measures, the aggravated vengeance of heaven?

If after all, a spirit of disunion or a temper of obstinacy and perverseness,
should manifest itself in any of the States, if such an ungracious disposition
should attempt to frustrate all the happy effects that might be expected to
flow from the union, -- if there should be a refusal to comply with the
requisitions for funds to discharge the annual interest of the public debts,
and if that refusal should revive again all those jealousies, and produce all
those evils which are now happily removed, Congress, who have in all their
transactions shown a great degree of magnanimity and justice, will stand
justified in the sight of God, and man, and the state alone which puts itself
in opposition, to the aggregate wisdom of the continent, and follows such
mistaken and pernicious councils, will be responsible for all the consequences.

For my own part, conscious of having acted while a servant of the public, in
the manner I conceived best suited to promote the real interests of my country;
having in consequence of my fixed belief, in some measure pledged myself to the
army, that their country would finally do them complete and ample justice; and
not wishing to conceal any instance of my official conduct from the eyes of the
world, I have thought proper to transmit to your Excellency the enclosed
collection of papers, relative to the half-pay and commutation granted by
Congress to the officers of the army -- From these communications my decided
sentiment will be clearly comprehended, together with the conclusive reasons
which induced me, at an early period, to recommend the adoption of this measure
in the most earnest and serious manner.

As the proceedings of congress, the army and myself, are open to all, and
contain in my opinion, sufficient information to remove the prejudices and
errors which may have been entertained by any, I think it unnecessary to say
any thing more than just to observe, that the resolutions of Congress now
alluded to, are undoubtedly as absolutely binding upon the United States, as
the most solemn acts of confederation or legislation.

As to the idea, which I am informed has in some instances prevailed, that the
half-pay and commutation are to be regarded merely in the odious light of a
pension, it ought to be exploded forever; -- that provision, should be viewed
as it really was, a reasonable compensation offered by Congress, at a time when
they had nothing else to give, to the officers of the army for services then to
be performed -- it was the only means to prevent a total derelection of the
service. -- it was a part of their hire -- I may be allowed to say, it was the
price of their blood and of your independency: it is therefore more than a
common debt -- it is a debt of honor, -- it can never be considered as a
pension or gratuity, nor be cancelled until it is fairly discharged.

With regard to a distinction between officers and soldiers, it is sufficient
that the uniform experience of every nation of the world, combined with our
own, proves the utility and propriety of the discrimination -- Rewards in
proportion to the aids the public derives from them, are unquestionably due to
all its servants; in some lines, the soldiers have perhaps generally had an
ample compensation for their services, by their large bounties which have been
paid them, as their officers will receive in the proposed commutation; in
others, if besides the donation of lands, the payment of arrearages of
clothing and wages (in which articles all the component parts of the army must
be put upon the same footing) we take into the estimate, the bounties many of
the soldiers have received and the gratuity of one years full pay, which is
promised to all, possibly their situation (every circumstance being duly
considered) will not be deemed less eligible than that of their officers; --
should a further reward, however, be judged equitable, I will venture to
assert, no one will enjoy greater satisfaction than myself, on seeing, an
exemption from taxes for a limited time (which has been petitioned for in some
instances) or any other adequate immunity, or compensation, granted to the
brave desenders of their country's cause; but neither the adoption or rejection
of this proposition will in any manner effect, much less militate against, the
act of Congress, by which they have offered five years full pay in lieu of the
half-pay for life, which had been before promised to the officers of the army.

Before I conclude the subject of public justice, I cannot omit to mention the
obligations this country is under to that meritorious class of veteran
non-commissioned officers and privates, who have been discharged for inability
in consequence of the resolution of Congress of the 23d of April 1782, on an
annual pension for life, -- their peculiar sufferings, their singular merits
and claims to that provision, need only be known, to interest all the feelings
of humanity in their behalf -- nothing but a punctual payment of their annual
allowance can rescue them from the most complicated misery, and nothing could
be a more melancholy, and distressing sight, than to behold those who have shed
their blood, or lost their limbs in the service of their country, without a
shelter, without a friend, and without the means of obtaining any of the
necessaries or comforts of life, compelled to beg their daily bread from door
to door -- Suffer me to recommend those of this description, belonging to your
State, to the warmest patronage of your Excellency and your legislature.

It is necessary to say but a few words on the third topic which was proposed,
and which regards particularly the defense of the republic. As there can be
little doubt but Congress will recommend a proper peace establishment for the
United States, in which a due attention will be paid to the importance of
placing the militia of the Union upon a regular and respectable footing; if
this should be the case, I would beg leave to urge the great advantage of it in
the strongest terms. -- The militia of this country must be considered as the
palladium of our security, and the first effectual resort in case of hostility;
-- it is essential therefore, that the same system should pervade the whole --
that the formation and discipline of the militia of the Continent, should be
absolutely uniform, and that the same species of arms, accoutrements, and
military apparatus, should be introduced in every part of the United States; --
No one who has not learned it from experience, can conceive the difficulty,
expense and confusion, which result from a contrary system, or the vague
arrangements which have hitherto prevailed.

If in treating of political points, a greater latitude than usual has been
taken in the course of this address -- the importance of the crisis, and the
magnitude of the objects in discussion, must be my apology; -- it is however,
neither my wish or expectation that the preceding observations, should claim
any regard, except so far as they shall appear to be dictated by a good
intention, consonant to the immutable rules of justice, calculated to produce a
liberal system of policy, and founded on whatever experience may have been
acquired, by a long and close attention to public business; -- here I might
speak with the more confidence from my actual observations, and, if it would
not swell this letter (already too prolix) beyond the bounds I had prescribed
myself, I could demonstate, to every mind open to conviction, that in less time
and with much less expense than has been incurred, the war might have been
brought to the same happy conclusion, if the resources of the Continent could
have been properly brought forth, -- that the distresses and disappointments
which have very often occurred, have in too many instances, resulted more from
a want of energy in the Continental government, than a deficiency of means in
the particular States; -- that the inefficacy of measures, arising from the
want of an adequate authority in the supreme power, from a partial compliance
with the requisitions of Congress in some of the States, and from a failure of
punctuality in others, while it tended to damp the zeal of those which were
more willing to exert themselves, served also to accumulate the expenses of the
war, and to frustate the best concerted plans, -- md that the discouragement
occasioned by the complicated difficulties and embarrasments, in which our
affairs were by this means involved, would have long ago produced the
dissolution of any army, less patient, less virtuous and less persevering, than
that which I have had the honor to command; But while I mention these things,
which are notorious facts, as the defects of our foederal constitution,
particularly in the prosecution of a war, -- I beg it may be understood, that
as I have ever taken a pleasure in gratefully acknowledging the assistance and
support I have derived, from every class of citizens, so shall I always be
happy to do justice to the unparalled exertions of the individual States, on
many interesting occasions.

I have thus freely disclosed what I wished to make known, before I surrendered
up my public trust to those who committed it to me. -- The task is now
accomplished. -- I now bid adieu to your Excellency as the chief magistrate of
your State, -- at the same time I bid a last farewell to the cares of office,
and all the employments of public life.

It remains then to be my final and only request that your Excellency will
communicate these sentiments to your Legislature at their next meeting, and
that they may be considered as the legacy of one, who has ardently wished on
all occasions, to be useful to his country, and who, even in the shade of
retirement, will not fail to implore the divine benediction upon it.

I now make it my earnest prayer, that God would have you, and the State over
which you preside, in his holy protection, -- that he would incline the hearts
of the citizens to cultivate a spirit of subordination and obedience to
government, -- to entertain a brotherly affection and love for one another, for
their fellow citizens of the United States, and particularly for their brethren
who have served in the field -- and finally, that he would most graciously be
pleased to dispose us all to do justice, to love mercy, and to demean ourselves
with that charity, humility and pacific temper of mind, which were the
characteristics of the divine author of our blessed religion, and without an
humble imitation of whose example in these things, we can never hope to be a
happy nation.

I have the honor to be, with great respect and esteem,

Your Excellency's most obedient and very humble servant GEORGE WASHINGTON.
His Excellency Governor Trumbull.



A Collection of Papers, relative to Half-Pay and Commutation of Half-Pay,
compiled by Permission of His Excellency General WASHINGTON, from the original
Papers in his Possession.
EXTRACT of a REPRESENTATION made by General WASHINGTON to a COMMITTEE of
CONGRESS, January 29, 1778.
Gentlemen,
THE numerous defects in our present military establishment, rendering many
reformations and many new arrangements absolutely necessary, and Congress
having been pleased to appoint you a Committee, in concert with me, to make and
recommend such as shall appear eligible, in pursuance of the various objects
expressed in their resolution for that purpose. -- I have in the following
sheets, briefly delivered my sentiments upon such of them, as seemed to me most
essential, so far, as observation has suggested, and leisure permitted. --
These are submitted to consideration, and I shall be happy if they are found
conducive to remedying the evils and inconveniences we are now subject to, and
putting the army upon a more respectable footing. Something must be done, --
important alterations must be made, -- necessity requires that our resources
should be enlarged and our system improved; for without it, if the dissolution
of the army should not be the consequence, at least its operations must
infallibly be feeble, languid and ineffectual.

As I consider a proper and satisfactory provision for officers, in a manner,
as the basis of every other regulation and arrangement necessary to be made;
since without officers no army can exist, and unless some measures be devised
to place those of ours in a more desirable situation, few of them would be
able, if willing, to continue in it. -- I shall begin with a few reflections,
tending to prove the necessity OF A HALF-PAY ESTABLISHMENT.

A small knowledge of human nature will convince us, that with far the greatest
part of mankind, interest is the governing principle; and that, almost, every
man is more or less under its influence. Motives of public virtue may for a
time, or in particular instances, actuate men to the observance of a conduct
purely disinterested; but they are not of themselves sufficient to produce a
persevering conformity to the refined dictates and obligations of social duty.

Few men are capable of making a continual sacrifice of all views of private
interest, or advantage, to common good. -- It is in vain to exclaim against the
depravity of human nature on this account -- the fact is so, the experience of
every age and nation has proved it; and we must, in a great measure, change the
constitution of man, before we can make it otherwise. No institution, not built
on the presumptive truth of these maxims, can succeed.

We find them exemplified in the American officers, as well as in all other
men. At the commencement of the dispute, -- in the first effusions of their
zeal, and looking upon the service to be only temporary, they entered into it,
without paying any regard to pecuniary or selfish considerations. But finding
its duration to be much longer than they at first suspected, and that instead
of deriving any advantage from the hardships and dangers to which they were
exposed, they on the contrary, were losers by their patriotism, and fell far
short even of a competency to supply their wants, they have gradually abated in
their ardor; and with many, an entire disinclination to the service, under its
present circumstances, has taken place. To this, in an eminent degree, must be
ascribed the frequent resignations daily happening, and the more frequent
importunities for permission to resign, and from some officers of the greatest
merit. To this also may we ascribe the apathy, inattention and neglect of duty,
which pervade all ranks, and which will necessarily continue and increase,
while an officer, instead of gaining any thing, is impoverished by his
commission; and conceives he is conferring, not receiving, a favor in holding
it. There can be no sufficient tie upon men possessing such sentiments. Nor can
any method be adopted to oblige those, to a punctual discharge of duty, who are
indifferent about their continuance in the service, and are often seeking a
pretext to disengage themselves from it. Punishment in this case will be
unavailing; but when an officer's commission is made valuable to him, and he
fears to lose it, you may then exact obedience from him. It is not indeed
consistent with reason, or justice, to expect, that one set of men should make
a sacrifice of property, domestic ease and happiness -- encounter the rigours
of the field -- the perils and vicissitudes of war, to obtain those blessings
which every citizen will enjoy, in common with them, without some adequate
compensation. It must also be a comfortless reflection to any man, that after
he may have contributed to securing the rights of his country, at the risk of
his life, and the ruin of his fortune, there would be no provision made to
prevent himself and family from sinking into indigence and wretchedness.
Besides adopting some methods to make the provision for officers, equal to
their present exigencies, a due regard should be paid to futurity. Nothing, in
my opinion, would serve more powerfully to reanimate their languishing zeal,
and interest them thoroughly in the service, than a half-pay establishment.
This would not only dispel the apprehension of personal distress, at the
termination of the war, from having thrown themselves out of professions and
employments, they might not have it in their power to resume; but would in a
great degree, relieve the painful anticipation of leaving their widows and
orphans a burden on the charity of their country, should it be their lot to
fall in its defense.

I am earnest in recommending this measure, because I know it is the general
with and expectation; and that many officers, whom, upon every principle we
should wish to retain in the service, are only waiting to see whether something
of the kind will, or will not take place, to be determined in their
resolutions, either of staying in or quitting it immediately; and I urge my
sentiments with the greater freedom, because I cannot, and shall not, receive
the smallest benefit from the establishment, and can have no other inducement
for proposing it, than a full conviction of its utility and propriety.

I am sensible the expense will be a capital objection to it; but to this I
oppose the necessity. -- The officers are now discontented with their
situation; -- if some generous expedient is not embraced to remove their
discontent, so extensive a desertion of the service will ensue, and so much
discouragement be cast upon those who remain, as must wound it in a very
essential manner: Every thing that has this effect, has a tendency at least to
protract the war; and though dictated by a well intended frugality, will, I
fear, in the end, prove erroneous economy.

Congress being fully convinced of the propriety and necessity of making some
further provision for the army, were pleased to pass the following resolutions:
IN CONGRESS, MAY 15, 1778.
Resolved unanimously, That all military officers commissioned by Congress, who
now are or hereafter may be in the service of the United States, and shall
continue therein during the (...) and not hold any office of profit under these
States or any of them, shall after the conclusion of the war, be entitled to
receive annually, for the term of seven years, if they live so long, one half
of the present pay of such officers; provided that no general officer of the
cavalry, artillery or infantly shall be entitled to receive more than the one
half part of the pay of a Colonel of such corpse respectively; and provided that
this resolution shall not extend to any officer in the service of the United
States, unless he shall have taken an oath of allegiance to, and shall actually
reside within some of the United States.

Resolved unanimously, That every non-commissioned military officer and soldier
who has enlisted, or shall enlist into the service of these States, for during
the war, and shall continue therein to the end thereof, shall be entitled to
receive a further reward of eighty dollars at the expiration of the war.

In addition to the foregoing resolutions, Congress were pleased to make the
following resolve, calculated to afford that relief to the unfortunate and
distressed, which humanity and gratitude demanded:
IN CONGRESS, AUGUST 24, 1780.
Resolved, That the resolution of the 15th day of May, 1778, granting half-pay
for seven years, to the officers of the army who should continue in service to
the end of the war, be extended to the widows of those officers who have died
or shall hereafter die in the service, to commence from the time of such
officer's death, and continue for the term of seven years; or if there be no
widow, or in case of her death or intermarriage, the said half-pay be given to
the orphan children of the officer dying as aforesaid, if he shall have left
any; and that it be recommended to the legislatures of the respective states to
which such officers belong, to make provision for paying the same on account of
the United States.

These resolutions, for a short time, produced the desired effect; but the
increasing distresses of the army, in the subsequent years, arising from the
inability of the public to perform their engagements, caused such discontents
and uneasinesses, that alarming consequences were feared; at the same time, the
reform of the army, which was proposed to take place by the resolution of
Congress of the 3d of October, 1780 -- not a little irritated their minds,
already soured by disappointment. Under these circumstances the following part
of a letter from the Commander in Chief was written to Congress:
TRANSCRIPT of a LETTER from General WASHINGTON, to the PRESIDENT of CONGRESS,
dated near Passaick-Falls, October 11, 1780.
THAT there are the most conclusive reasons for reducing the number of
regiments, no person acquainted with the situation of our affairs and the state
of the army, will deny. -- A want of officers, independent of other
considerations, were sufficient to compel us. -- But that the temper of the
army, produced by its sufferings, requires great caution, in any reforms that
are attempted, is a position not less evident than the former. In services the
best established, where the hands of government are strengthened by the
strongest interests of the army to submission, the reducing its regiments, and
dismissing great part of its officers, is always a measure of delicacy and
difficulty. In ours, where the officers are held by the feeblest ties, and are
mouldering away by daily resignations, it is peculiarly so. -- The last
reduction occasioned many to quit the service, besides those who were reformed,
and left durable seeds of discontent among those who remained.

The general topic of declamation was, that it was as hard as dishonorable for
men, who had made every sacrifice to the service, to be turned out of it at the
pleasure of those in power, without an adequate compensation. In the maturity
to which their uneasinesses have now arisen, from a continuance in misery, they
will be still more impatient under an attempt of a similar nature. -- How far
these dispositions may be reasonable, I pretend not to decide, but in the
extremity to which we are arrived, policy forbids us to add new irritations. --
Too many of the officers wish to get rid of their commissions, but they are not
willing to be forced to it. It is not the intention of these remarks to
discourage a reform, but to show the necessity of guarding against the ill
effects, by an ample provision, both for the officers who stay, and for those
who are reduced; -- This should be the basis of the plan, and without it, I
apprehend the most mischievous consequences. This would obviate many scruples
that will otherwise be found prejudicial in the extreme. I am convinced
Congress are not a little straitened in the means of a present provision, so
ample as to give satisfaction, but this proves the expediency of a future one,
-- and brings me to that which I have so frequently recommended, as the most
oeconomical, the most politic and the most effectual that could be devised, a
half-pay for life. Supported by a prospect of a permanent dependence, the
officers would be tied to the service, and would submit to many momentary
privations and to the inconveniences, which the situation of public affairs
makes unavoidable. This is exemplified in the Pennsylvania officers, who being
upon this establishment, are so much interested in the service, that in the
course of many months there has been only one resignation in that line.

If the objection, drawn from the principle of this measure being incompatible
with the genius of our government, is thought insurmountable, I would propose a
substitute, less eligible in my opinion, but which may answer the purpose; it
is to make the present half-pay for seven years, whole pay for the same period,
to be advanced at two different payments, one half in a year after the
conclusion of peace, the other half in two years subsequent to the first.

No objection to this measure occurs to me, except it be though it too great an
expense; but in my judgment, whatever can give consistency to our military
establishment, will be ultimately favorable to economy. It is not easy to be
conceived, except by those who are witnesses to it, what an additional waste
and consumption of every thing, and consequently what an increase of expense,
results from the laxness of discipline in the army. And where the officers
think they are doing the public a favor, by holding their commissions, and the
men are continually fluctuating, it is impossible to maintain discipline.
Nothing can be to me more obvious, than that a found military establishment,
and the interest of economy, are the same. How much more the purposes of the
war would be promoted by it, in other respects, will not admit of an argument.

In reasoning upon the measure of a future provision, I have heard gentlemen
object, the want of it in some foreign armies, without adverting to the
difference of circumstances. The military state holds the first rank in most of
the countries of Europe, and is the road to honor and emolument. The
establishment is permanent, and whatever be an officer's provision, it is for
life, -- and he has a profession for life. He has future, as well as present
motives of military honor and preferment; he is attached to the service, by the
spirit of government, by education, and in most cases, by early habit; his
present condition, though not splendid, is comfortable, pensions and
distinctions and particular privileges, are commonly his reward in retirement.
In the case of the American officers, the military character has been suddenly
taken up, and is to end with the war.

Congress will herewith receive a list of the officers in the New Hampshire,
Massachusetts, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and Maryland
line, previous to its marching to the southward, also Crane's and Lamb's
artillery, Sheldon, 8 horse, and in Hazen's, Sherburne's, Spencer's and
Livingston's regiments, who have actually had their resignations entered at
Headquarters, in the course of this year; and who in general urged their
necessities, when they applied on the subject, and insisted, notwithstanding
every persuasion to induce their continuance, that their circumstances would
not admit of their remaining in service longer, -- besides those resignations,
there are a great many of which I have no certain account, as the officers
being permitted to go home on furlough, in the course of the last winter, have
never rejoined the army, and have only sent messages or written to their
regimental officers, that their own distresses and those of their families
would not permit their return.

As to the resignations which have taken place in the Virginia line, and the
other troops at the southward, since they were acting in that quarter, I have
no account of them, but I make no doubt that many have happened.

All these serve to show the necessity of some more competent establishment
than the present one, -- and I hold it my duty to mention, from the accounts I
daily receive, unless this is the case, that I have strong reasons to believe,
we shall not be able to retain, after the end of the campaign, as many
officers, especially in some lines, as will be even sufficient for common
duties when in quarters.

If matters fortunately should not proceed, to the lengths my fears forebode,
yet Congress will be sensible, at the first view, of the injuries and great
inconveniences, which must attend such a continual change of officers, and
consequent promotions which are and will be inevitable.

Soon after Congress were pleased to pass the following resolutions:
IN CONGRESS, OCTOBER 21, 1780.
Resolved, That the Commander in Chief, and Commanding Officer in the southern
department, direct the officers of each state to meet and agree upon the
officers for the regiments to be raised by their respective states, from those
who incline to continue in service; and, where it cannot be done by agreement,
to be determined by seniority, and make return of those who are to remain,
which is to be transmitted to Congress, together with the names of the officers
reduced, who are to be allowed half-pay for life.

Resolved, That the officers who shall continue in the service to the end of
the war, shall be entitled to half-pay during life, to commence from the time
of their reduction.

These resolutions of Congress gave that satisfaction to the army which their
wants and sufferings demanded, and the United States have since had no cause
but to rejoice that their well-timed generosity has produced the most happy
effects, for it is well known to all who were conversant with the state of the
army in the year 1780, that the ability of the public was totally inadequate to
their just demands, and that any thing less than the resolutions which Congress
passed at that time, would have put an end to the American opposition: -- Since
that period the army, confidentially relying on the resolutions of Congress,
have endured hunger, poverty and want, without a murmur, and with cheerfulness
have encountered dangers which their profession demanded, knowing, that in some
future period a generous public would pour the oil of gratitude into their
wounds, and cause their gray hairs to rejoice; -- this confidence would have
remained unshaken, if the ungrateful sentiments which had been frequently
propagated by some interested persons, "That Congress did not mean to comply
with their resolutions for half-pay," had not produced that uneasiness in the
army which caused the following proceedings:

TO THE UNITED STATES IN CONGRESS ASSEMBLED. The ADDRESS and PETITION of the
OFFICERS of the ARMY of the UNITED STATES:
Humbly shows,
THAT we the officers of the army of the United States, in behalf of ourselves
and our brethren the soldiers, beg leave with all proper deference and respect,
freely to state to Congress, the supreme power of the United States, the great
distress under which we labor.

At this present period of the war, it is with peculiar pain, we find ourselves
constrained to address your august body on matters of a pecuniary nature.

We have struggled with our difficulties year after year, under the hopes that
each would be last, but we have been disappointed. We find our embarrassments
thicken so fast and have become so complex, that many of us are unable to go
further.

In this exigence we apply to Congress for relief as our head and sovereign.

To prove that our hardships are exceedingly disproportionate to those of any
other citizens of America, let a recurrence be had to the Pay-master's accounts
for four years past. -- If to this it should be objected, that the respective
States have made settlements and given securities for the pay due for part of
that time, let the present value of those nominal obligations be ascertained by
the monied men, and they will be found to be worth but little indeed; and yet
trifling as they are, many have been under the sad necessity of parting with
them, to prevent their families from actually starving.

We complain that shadows have been offered to us, while the substance has been
gleaned by every person bearing the mark of civil authority throughout the
United States. -- Our situation compels us to search for the cause of our
extreme poverty. -- The citizens murmur at the greatness of their taxes, and
are astonished that no part reaches the army. The numerous demands which are
between the first collectors and the soldiers swallow up the whole.

Our distresses are now brought to a point. We have borne all that we can bear,
our property is expended -- our private resources are at an end -- and our
friends are wearied out and disgusted with our incessant applications. We
therefore most seriously and earnestly beg, that a supply of money may be
forwarded to the army as soon as possible. The uneasiness of the soldiers, for
want of pay, is great and dangerous; any further experiments on their patience,
may have fatal effects.

The promised subsistence or ration of provisions consisted of certain
articles, specified in kind and quantity; this ration, without regard, that we
can conceive, to the health of the troops, has been frequently altered as
necessity or convenience suggested, generally losing by the change some part of
its substance. On an average, not more than seven or eight tenths have been
issued, the retained parts were for a short time paid for; but the business
became trouble some to those who were to execute it. -- For this or some other
reasons, all regard to the dues, as they respected the soldiers, has been
discontinued (now and then a trifling gratuity excepted. -- As these dues
respected the officers, they were compensated during one year, and part of
another, by an extra ration as to the retained rations, the account for several
years remained unsettled; there is a large balance due upon it; and a
considerable sum for that of forage.

The clothing was another part of the soldiers hire -- the arrearages on that
score, for the year 1777, were paid off in contiental money, when the dollar
was worth about fourpence; the arrearages for the following years are
unliquidated, and we apprehend scarcely thought of but by the army. -- Whenever
there has been a real want of means -- any defect in system, or neglect in
execution, in the departments of the army, we have inevitably been the
sufferers, by hunger and nakedness, and by lanquishing in a hospital. We beg
leave to urge an immediate adjustment of all dues; that, as great a part as
possible be paid and the remainder put on such a footing as will restore
cheerfulness to the army, revive confidence in the justice and generosity of
its constituents, and contribute to the very desirable effect of
re-establishing public credit.

We are grieved to find that our brethren, who retired from service on half-pay
under the resolution of Congress in 1780 are, not only destitute of any
effectual provision, but are become the objects of obloquy.*Their condition has
a very discouraging aspect on us, who must sooner or later retire, and, from
every consideration, gratitude and policy, demands attention and redress.

We regard the act of Congress respecting half-pay, as an honorable and just
recompense for several years hard service, in which the health and fortunes of
the officers have been worn down and exhausted. -- We see with chagrin the
odious point of view, in which the citizens of too many of the states endeavor
to place the men entitled to it.

We hope for the honor of human nature, that there are none, so hardened in the
sin of ingratitude, as to deny the justice of the reward. We have reason to
believe that the objection generally, is against the mode only* -- To prevent
therefore any altercations and distinctions which may tend to injure that
harmony, which we ardently desire may reign throughout the community, we are
willing to commute the half-pay pledged, for full pay for a certain number of
years, or for a sum in gross, as shall be agreed on by the Committee sent with
this address.

To the representation now made, the army have not a doubt that Congress will
pay all that attention, which the serious nature of it requires. It would be
criminal in the officers to conceal the general dissatisfaction which prevails,
and is gaining ground in the army, from the pressure of evils and injuries,
which, in the course of seven long years, have made their condition, in many
instances, wretched. -- They therefore entreat that Congress (to convince the
army and the world, that the independence of America shall not be placed on the
ruin of any particular class of citizens) will point out a mode for immediate
redress. And in this we pray, that the disabled officers and soldiers, with the
widows and orphans of those who have expended or may expend their lives in the
service of their country, may be fully comprehended. We also beg, that some
mode may be pointed out for the eventual payment of those soldiers, who are the
subjects of the resolution of Congress of the 15th of May, 1778.



In consequence of which Congress were pleased to pass the following
resolutions, viz.
BY THE UNITED STATES IN CONGRESS ASSEMBLED, January 25th, 1783.
THE grand Committee, consisting of a member from each State, report that they
have considered the contents of a memorial presented by the army, and find that
they comprehend five different articles:

1st. Present pay.

2d. A settlement of accounts of the arrearages, of pay, and security for what
is due.

3d. A commutation of the half pay allowed by different resolutions of Congress
for an equivalent in gross.

4th. A settlement of the accounts of deficiencies of rations and compensation.

5th. A settlement of the accounts of deficiencies of clothing and compensation.

Whereupon, Resolved, As to the first, that the Superintendant of Finance be
directed, conformable to the measures already taken for that purpose, as soon
as the state of the public finances will permit, to make such payment, and in
such manner, as he shall think proper, till the further order of Congress.

Resolved, With respect to the second article, so far as relates to the
settlement of accounts, that the several states be called upon to complete,
without delay, the settlements with their respective lines of the army, up to
the first day of August, 1780, and that the Superintendant of Finance be
directed to take such measures as shall appear to him most proper for effecting
the settlement from that period.

As to what relates to the providing security for what shall be found due on
such settlement:

Resolved, That the troops of the United States, in common with all creditors
of the same, have an undoubted right to expect such security; and that Congress
will make every effort in their power, to obtain from the respective sttates,
substantial funds, adequate to the object of funding the whole debt of the
United States, and will enter upon an immediate and full consideration of the
nature of such funds, and the most likely mode of obtaining them.

Ordered, That the remainder of the report be referred to a Committee of five.

Soon after the Committee of the army made the following general report to
Major General Knox, with whom they had been directed to correspond on the
subjects of the foregoing petition to Congress.
PHILADELPHIA, 8 th February, 1783. DEAR SIR,
THE army has, no doubt, been anxious to hear from us, and we should have had
as much pleasure in communicating to them any success of our application for
them, as they are to receive it: But nothing of any moment has yet been decided
for them. We spent the first week, after our arrival, in conversing with the
members of Congress on the subject of the address; to prepare them for the
reception of it before it was read, left the want of information, should retard
a favorable resolution on it. On its being read, a Committee was appointed to
confer with us, consisting of a member from each state, but Georgia; which was
unrepresented, and had no member attending. The Financier attending at this
meeting. To this Committee we communicated the condition of the army, and we
dilated very diffusely all the subjects stated in the address; indeed truth and
decency were the only bounds observed in our conference with them. The reason
of our applying to Congress to determine on a compensation for half-pay, was
also minutely detailed.

The result as to present pay, will be communicated to you by Colonel Brooks.
On this subject we can only commit to paper, that a months pay in notes to the
officers, and one to the noncommissioned and privates, at weekly payments of
half a dollar per week to the latter, is all that can be now obtained. This
grand Committee appointed a Sub-Committee to converse with us, as occasion
should require, if any new matter occurred to us; and to inspect critically
into the principles of annuities, in order to determine on an equivalent for
the half-pay.

In about ten days they reported to the grand Committee, that twelve years was
a mean life of the ages of the officers of the army; and that six whole years
pay was equal to the country and the army, to the half-pay for life. The
Committee then reported to Congress, which produced the resolutions which have
been transmitted to the Commander in Chief. That part of the report which
respected the value of the half-pay, was recommitted to a smaller Committee,
the number of years being considered too many.

This Committee took up some time to examine calculations on annuities, and two
days ago they reported five years whole pay as equal to the half-pay for life,
but nine states would not approve the report, Georgia, Maryland and Delaware
unrepresented. We advised our friends not to press for a determination, if they
could not carry the question, as the sense of Maryland and Delaware were known
to be favorable to us, and their delegates were daily expected in town. -- On
discussion in Congress, some of the members opposed to the commutation, and
equally so to half-pay, expressed a desire to put off the question, to give
them time for more consideration; it was accordingly granted. Thus stands the
matter of commutation.

Massachusetts, New York, Pennsylvania, Virginia, North and South Carolina were
for the equivalent; New Hampshire, Rhode Island, Connecticut, and Jersey were
against it. There is some prospect of getting one or more of these states to
vote for the commutation. If this is accomplished, with Maryland and Delaware,
the question will be carried. Whenever it is, as the report now stands, it will
be at the election of a line, as such, to accept of the commutation or retain
their claim to the halfpay, Congress being determined that no alteration shall
take place in the emolument held out to the army, but by their consent.

This rendered it unnecessary for us to consult the army on the equivalent for
the half-pay. -- The zeal of a great number of members of Congress to get
continental funds, while a few wished to have us referred to the states,
induced us to conceal what funds we wished, or expected, left our declaration
for one or the other, might retard a settlement of our occounts, or a
determination on the equivalent for the half pay. Indeed some of our best
friends in Congress declared, however desirous they were to have our accounts
settled, and the commutation fixed, as well as to get funds, yet they would
oppose referring us to the states for a settlement and security, till all
prospect of obtaining continental funds was at an end.

Whether this is near or not, as commutation for the half-pay was one of the
principal objects of the address, the obtaining of that is necessary, previous
to our particularizing what fund will be most agreeable to us: This must be
determined by circumstances. -- If Congress get funds we shall be secured. If
not, the equivalent settled, a principal will be established, which will be
more acceptable to the eastern states than half-pay, if application must be
made to them. -- As it is not likely that Congress will be able to determine
soon on the commutation (for the reasons above mentioned) it is judged
necessary that Colonel Brooks return to the army, to give them a more
particular detail of our prospects than can be done in the compass of a letter.
It is however thought proper that General M'Dougal should remain in
Philadelphia, to endeavor at a proper time to bring on the determination of
Congress, on the important question; as well as to quicken the accomplishment
of the other points contained in the address. In the mean time Colonel Ogden
visits his family, as well as to do some business, which will greatly promote
the object of our being sent here. Colonel Ogden will however return if it
should be judged necessary. We conceived it expedient to make the army this
general report, and beg leave to refer you to Colonel Brooks for a more
particular one.

We are, Sir, with great truth,

Your affectionate humble servants, (Signed)
ALEX. M'DOUGAL, M. OGDEN.

Major General KNOX.



On the 10th of March the following anonymous notification made its appearance,
and was accompanied by an anonymous address to the officers of the army, which
is subjoined:
No. I.
A MEETING of the general and field officers is requested at the Public
Building on Tuesday next, 11 o'clock. -- A commissioned officer from each
company is expected, and a delegate from the medical staff. The object of this
convention is to consider the late letter from our representatives in
Philadelphia, and what measure (if any) should be adopted to obtain that
redress of grievances which they seem to have solicited in vain.

No. II.
TO THE OFFICERS OF THE ARMY.
Gentlemen,
A FELLOW-SOLDIER, whose interests and affections bind him strongly to you,
whose past sufferings have been as great, and whose future fortunes may be as
desperate as yours -- would beg leave to address you.

Age has its claims, and rank is not without its pretentions to advise; but
though unsupported by both, he flatters himself, that the plain language of
sincerity and experience, will neither be unheard nor unregarded.

Like many of you, he loved private life, and left it with regret. -- He left
it, determined to retire from the field, with the necessity that called him to
it, and not till then, -- not till the enemies of his country, the slaves of
power and the hirelings of injustice, were compelled to abandon their schemes,
and acknowledge America as terrible in arms, as she had been humble in
remonstrance. -- With this object in view, he has long shared in your toils,
and mingled in your dangers, -- he has felt the cold hand of poverty, without a
murmur, and has seen the insolence of wealth, without a sigh. -- But too much
under the direction of his wishes, and sometimes weak enough to mistake desire
for opinion, he has till lately, very lately, believed in the justice of his
country. -- He hoped that as the clouds of adversity scattered, and as the
sunshine of peace and better fortune broke in upon us, -- the coldness and
severity of government would relax, and that more than justice, that gratitude,
would blaze forth upon those hands, which had upheld her, in the darkest stages
of her passage, from impending servitude, to acknowledged independence.

But faith has its limits as well as temper, and there are points, beyond which
neither can be stretched without sinking into cowardice, or plunging into
credulity. -- This, my friends, I conceive to be your situation -- hurried to
the very verge of both, another step would ruin you forever. -- To be tame and
unprovoked, when injuries press hard upon you, is more than weakness, but to
look up for kinder usage, without one manly effort of your own, would fix your
character, and show the world how richly you deserve those chains you broke. To
guard against this evil, let us take a view of the ground upon which we now
stand, and from thence carry our thoughts forward, for a moment, into the
unexplored field of expedient.

After a pursuit of seven long years, the object for which we set out, is at
length brought within our reach. -- Yes, my friends, that suffering courage of
yours, was active once; it has conducted the United States of America, through
a doubtful and a bloody war -- it has placed her in the chair of independency,
and peace returns again to bless -- Whom? A country willing to redress your
wrongs, cherish your worth, and reward your services? -- A country courting
your return to private life, with tears of gratitude and smiles of admiration?
-- Longing to divide with you that independency which your gallantry has given,
and those riches which your wounds have preserved? -- Is this the case? Or is
it rather a country that tramples upon your rights, disdains your cries, and
insults your distresses? -- Have you not more than once suggested your wishes,
and made known your wants to Congress (wants and wishes which gratitude and
policy should have anticipated, rather than evaded) and have you not lately, in
the meek language of entreating memorials, begged from their justice what you
could no longer expect from their favor? How have you been answered? -- Let
the letter which you are called to consider tomorrow, make reply! -- If this
then be your treatment, while the swords you wear are necessary for the defense
of America, what have you to expect from peace; when your voice shall sink, and
your strength dissipate by division -- when those very swords, the instruments
and companions of your glory, shall be taken from your sides, and no remaining
mark of military distinction left, but your wants, infirmities and scars. --
Can you then consent to be the only sufferers by this revolution, -- and
retiring from the field, grow old in poverty, wretchedness and contempt? -- Can
you consent to wade through the vile mire of dependency, and owe the miserable
remnant of that life to charity, which has hitherto been spent in honor? -- If
you can -- Go -- and carry with you, the jest of Tories, and the scorn of Whigs
-- the ridicule, and what is worse -- the pity of the world. -- Go -- starve
and be forgotten. -- But if your spirits should revolt at this, if you have
sense enough to discover, and spirit sufficient to oppose tyranny, under
whatever garb it may assume -- whether it be the plain coat of republicanism --
or the splendid robe of royalty; -- if you have yet learned to discriminate,
between a people and cause -- between men and principles, -- awake, attend to
your situation and redress yourselves. If the present moment be lost, every
future effort is in vain -- your threats then, will be as empty, as your
entreaties now. I would advise you therefore, to come to some final opinion, of
what you can bear and what you will suffer. If your determination be in any
proportion to your wrongs -- carry your appeal from the justice to the fears of
government. Change the milk and water style of your last memorial. -- Assume a
bolder tone, decent, but lively, spirited and determined; -- and suspect the
man who would advise to more moderation, and longer forbearance. Let two or
three men who can feel as well as write, be appointed to draw up your last
remonstrance (for I would no longer give it the sueing, soft, unsuccessful
epithet of memorial) Let is represent in language, that will neither dishonor
you by its rudeness, nor betray you by its fears -- what has been promised by
Congress, and what has been performed; -- how long and how patiently you have
suffered -- how little you have asked, and how much of that little has been
denied. -- Tell them, that though you were the first, and would wish to be the
last, to encounter danger -- though despair itself can never drive you into
dishonor, it may drive you from the field. -- That the wound often irritated
and never healed, may at lengh become incurable, -- and that the slightest mark
of indignity from Congress now, must operate like the grave, and part you
forever. That in any political event, the army has its alternative. -- If
peace, that nothing shall separate you from your arms but death. -- If war,
that courting the auspices, and inviting the direction of your illustrious
leader, you will retire to some yet unsettled country, smile in your turn, "and
mock when their fear comes on." -- But let it represent also, that should they
comply with the request of your late memorial, it would make you more happy,
and them more respectable. -- That while the war should continue, you would
follow their standard in the field, -- and that when it came to an end, you
would withdraw into the shade of private life, and give the world another
subject of wonder and applause -- an army victorious over its enemies --
victorious over itself.

In consequence of the preceding Papers, the subsequent Orders were issued:
No. III.
Headquarters, Newburgh, March 11, 1783.
THE Commander in Chief, having heard that a general meeting of the officers of
the army, was proposed to be held this day at the New-Building, in an anonymous
paper which was circulated yesterday by some unknown person, conceives
(although he is fully persuaded that the good sense of the officers would
induce them to pay very little attention to such irregular invitation) his duty
as well as the reputation and true interests of the army, require his
disapprobation of such disorderly proceedings; at the same time, he requests
the general and field officers, with one officer from each company, and a
proper representation of the staff of the army, will assemble at 12 o'clock on
Saturday next at the New-Building, to hear the report of the Committee of the
army to Congress.

After mature deliberation, they will devise what further measures ought to be
adopted, as most rational, and best calculated, to attain the important object
in view.

The senior officer in rank present, will be pleased to preside, and report the
result of the deliberation to the Commander in Chief.

The next evening the following anonymous Address, marked No. II. was dispersed
through the Army:
No. IV.
To the OFFICERS of the ARMY.
Gentlemen,
THE author of the late address, anxious to deserve, though he should fail to
engage, your esteem, and determined at every risque, to unfold your duty, and
discharge his own -- would beg leave to solicit the further indulgence of a few
moments attention.

Aware of the coyness with which his last letter would be received; he feels
himself neither disappointed, nor displeased with the caution it has met -- He
well knew, that it spoke a language, which till now, had been heard only in
whispers; and that it contained some sentiments, which confidence itself would
have breathed with distrust -- But their lives have been short, and their
observation imperfect indeed, who have yet to learn, that alarms may be false
-- that the best designs are sometimes obliged to assume the worst aspect; and
that however synonymous, surprise and disaster may be in military phrase, in
moral and political meaning, they convey ideas, as different as they are
distinct -- Suspicion, detestable as it is in private life, is the loveliest
trait of political characters. It prompts to enquiry, bars the door against
design, and opens every avenue to truth. It was the first to oppose a tyrant
here, and still stands sentinel over the liberties of America -- With this
belief, it would illy become me, to stifle the voice of this honest guardian --
A guardian who (authorized by circumstance, digested into proof) has herself
given birth to the address you have read, and now goes forth among you, with a
request to all, that it may be treated fairly, -- that it may be considered
before it be abused -- and condemned, before it be tortured; -- convinced that,
in a search after error, truth will appear; that apathy itself will grow warm
in the pursuit, and though it will be the last to adopt her advice, it will be
the first to act upon it.

The general order of yesterday, which the weak may mistake for disapprobation,
and the designing dare to represent as such, wears, in my opinion, a very
different complexion, and carries with it a very opposite tendency.

Till now, the Commander in Chief has regarded the stops you have taken for
redress, with good wishes alone, -- his ostensible silence has authorized your
meetings, and his private opinion has sanctified your claims. Had he disliked
the object in view, would not the same sense of duty, which forbad your meeting
on the third day of the week, have forbidden you from meeting on the seventh?
-- Is not the same subject held up for your discussion* and has it not passed
the seal of office, and taken all the solemnity of an order? -- This will give
system to your proceedings, and stability to your resolves. It will ripen
speculation into fact, and while it adds to the unanimity, it cannot possibly
lessen the independency of your sentiments. It may be necessary to add upon
this subject, that from the injunction with which the general orders close,
every man is at liberty to conclude, that the report to be made to
Headquarters, is intended for Congress. Hence will arise another motive for
that energy which has been recommended. For, can you give the lie to the
pathetic descriptions of your representations, and the more alarming
predictions of your friends?

To such as make a want of signature, an objection to opinion, I reply, -- that
it matters very little, who is the author of sentiments, which grow out of your
feelings and apply to your wants. That in this instance dissidence suggested
what experience enjoins; and that, while I continue to move on the high road of
argument and advice (which is open to all) I shall continue to be the sole
confident of my own secret. But should the time come, when it shall be
necessary to depart from this general line, and hold up any individual among
you as an object of the resentment or contempt of the rest, I thus publicly
pledge my honor as a soldier, and veracity as a man, that I will then assume a
visible existence, and give my name to the army, with as little reserve as I
now give my opinions. I am, etc;.

The four preceding Papers were transmitted to Congress by the Commander in
Chief, in his letter of the 12th March, which was conceived in the following
words, viz.
Headquarters, March 12, 1783. SIR,
IT is with inexpressible concern I make the following report to your
Excellency.

Two days ago, anonymous notifications were circulated in the army, requesting
a general meeting of the officers next day, a copy of one of these papers is
enclosed, marked No. I. About the same time another anonymous writing,
purporting to be an address to the officers of the army, was handed about in a
clandestine manner, it is also enclosed and marked No. II. To prevent any
precipitate and dangerous resolutions from being taken at this perilous moment,
while the passions were all inflamed, -- as soon as these things had come to my
knowledge, -- the next morning I issued the enclosed order, No. III. and in
this situation the affair now rests.

As all opinion must be suspended until after the meeting, on Saturday next, --
I have nothing further to add, except a wish that the measure I have taken to
dissipate a storm, which has gathered so suddenly and unexpectedly, may be
acceptable to Congress; and to assure them, that in every vicissitude of
circumstances, still actuated with the greatest zeal in their service, I shall
continue my utmost exertions to promote the welfare of my country, under the
most lively expectation, that Congress have the best intention of doing ample
justice to the army, as soon as circumstances will possibly admit.

I have the honor to be, etc;.
N. B. Since writing the foregoing, another anonymous paper is put in
circulation, and is enclosed No. IV.



His Excellency the PRESIDENT of CONGRESS.
And on the 16th of the same month, the Commander in Chief wrote the following
letter to his Excellency the President of Congress:
HEADQUARTERS, 16 th March, 1783. SIR,
I HAVE the honor to inform your Excellency, for the satisfaction of Congress,
that the meeting of the officers which was mentioned in my last, has been held
yesterday, -- that it has terminated in a manner which I had reason to expect,
from a knowledge of that good sense and steady patrotism of the gentlemen of
the army, which on frequent occasions I have discovered.

The report of the meeting, with the other papers which will be necessary to
accompany it, I shall do myself the honor to transmit to Congress, as soon as
they can possibly be prepared.

I have the honor to be, etc;.

On the 18th General WASHINGTON expressed his approbation in the following
public orders:
HEADQUARTERS, NEWBURGH, March 18 th, 1783.
THE Commander in Chief is highly satisfied with the report of the proceedings
of the officers assembled on the 15th instant; in obedience to the orders of
the 11th. -- He begs his inability to communicate an adequate idea of the
pleasing feelings which have been excited in his breast, by the affectionate
sentiments expressed toward him on that occasion, may be considered as an
apology for his silence.

On the 18th March, the following letter from the Commander in Chief was
written to Congress:
HEADQUARTERS, NEWBURGH, March 18 th, 1783. SIR,
THE result of the proceedings of the grand convention of officers, which I
have the honor of enclosing to your Excellency for the inspection of Congress,
will, I flatter myself, be considered as the last glorious proof of patriotism,
which could have been given by men who aspired to the distinction of a patriot
army, and will not only confirm their claim to the justice, but will increase
their title to the gratitude of their country.

Having seen the proceedings on the part of the army, terminate with perfect
unanimity, and in a manner entirely consonant to my wishes; being impressed
with the liveliest sentiments of affection for those, who have so long, so
patiently and so cheerfully suffered and fought under my immediate direction,
having from motives of justice, duty and gratitude, spontaneously offered
myself, as an advocate for their rights; and having been requested to write to
your Excellency, earnestly entreating the most speedy decision of Congress upon
the subjects of the late address from the army to that honorable body, -- it
now only remains for me to perform the task I have assumed, -- and to intercede
in their behalf as I now do, that the sovereign power will be pleased to verify
the predictions I have pronounced of, and the confidence the army have reposed
in, the justice of their country. -- And here, I humbly conceive, it is
altogether unnecessary (while I am pleading the cause of an army which have
done and suffered more than any other army ever did, in the defense of the
rights and liberties of human nature) to expatiate on their claims to the most
ample compensation for their meritorious services, -- because they are
perfectly known to the whole world, -- and because (although the topics are
inexhaustible) enough has already been said on the subject. To prove these
assertions, to evince that my sentiments have ever been uniform, and to show
what my ideas of the rewards in question have always been, -- I appeal to the
archives of Congress, and call on those sacred deposits to witness for me. --
And in order that my observations and arguments, in favor of a future adequate
provision for the officers of the army, may be brought to remembrance again,
and considered in a single point of view, without giving Congress the trouble
of having recourse to their files; I will beg leave to transmit herewith, an
extract from a representation made by me to a committee of Congress, so long
ago as the 29th of January, 1778 See Page 13.
, -- and also the transcript of a letter to the President of Congress, dated
near Passaick-Falls, October 11, 1780 See Page 17.
.

That in the critical and perilous moment when the last mentioned communication
was made, there was the utmost danger, a dissolution of the army would have
taken place, unless measures similar to those recommended, had been adopted,
will not admit a doubt. That the adoption of the resolution, granting half-pay
for life, has been attended with all the happy consequences I had foretold, so
far as respected the good of the service, let the astonishing contrast between
the state of the army at this instant, and at the former period determine. And
that the establishment of funds, and securities for the payment of all the just
demands of the army, will be the most certain means of preserving the national
faith and future tranquillity of this extensive continent, is my decided opinion.

By the preceding remarks it will readily be imagined that instead of
retracting and reprehending (from farther experience and reflection) the mode
of compensation so strenuously urged in the enclosures, I am more and more
confirmed in the sentiment, -- and if in the wrong, suffer me to please myself
with the grateful delusion.

For if, besides the simple payment of their wages, a farther compensation is
not due to the sufferings and sacrifices of the officers, -- then have I been
mistaken indeed; -- if the whole army have not merited, whatever a grateful
people can bestow, then I have been beguiled by prejudice, and built opinion on
the basis of error. If this country should not in the event, perform every
thing which has been requested, in the late memorial to Congress, then will my
belief become vain, and the hope that has been excited void of foundation. And
if (as has been suggested for the purpose of inflaming their passions) the
officers of the army, are to be the only sufferers by this revolution, -- if,
"retiring from the field they are to grow old in poverty, wretchedness and
contempt, -- if they are to wade through the vile mire of dependency, and owe
the miserable remnant of that life to charity, which has hitherto been spent in
honor," -- then shall I have learned what ingratitude is, then shall I have
realiza tale, which will imbitter every moment of my future life: -- But I am
under no such apprehensions, a country rescued by their arms from impending
ruin, will never leave unpaid the debt of gratitude.

Should any intemperate or improper warmth, have mingled itself amongst the
foregoing observations, -- I must entreat your Excellency and Congress, it may
be attributed to the effusion of an honest zeal in the best of causes, and that
my peculiar situation may be my apology; -- and I hope I need not, on this
momentuous occasion, make any new protestations, of personal disinterestedness,
having ever renounced for myself, the idea of pecuniary reward. The
consciousness of having attempted, faithfully to discharge my duty, and the
approbation of my country, will be a sufficient recompense for my services.

I have the honor to be, with perfect respect,

Your Excellency's most obedient servant.

The papers enclosed in the preceding letter, are annexed, except the extract
from a representation made by General Washington to a Committee of Congress,
January 29th, 1778, which is inserted in the 13th page; and also the transcript
of a letter from General Washington to the President of Congress, dated near
Passaick Falls, October 11th, 1780, which likewise may be seen at page 17th.
REPORT of the CONVENTION of OFFICERS, held at the Cantonment, 15th March, 1783.
AGREEABLE to the orders of the 11th instant the officers of the American army
being convened. The honorable Major General Gates President.

His Excellency the Commander in Chief was pleased to open the meeting with the
following address to them, on the subject of their being called together; which
with some other papers were left for the consideration of the assembly.

Gentlemen,

BY an anonymous summons, an attempt has been made to convene you together, --
how inconsistent with the rules of propriety! How unmilitary! And how
subversive of all good order and discipline! -- Let the good sense of the army
decide!

In the moment of this summons, another anonymous production was sent into
circulation; addressed more to the feelings and passions, than to the reason
and judgment of the army. The author of the piece, is entitled to much credit
for the goodness of his pen, and I could wish he had as much credit for the
rectitude of his heart; for as men see through different optics, and are
induced by the reflecting faculties of the mind, to use different means to
obtain the same end, -- the author of the address, should have had more
charity, than to mark for suspicion, the man, who shall recommend moderation
and longer forbearance, -- or in other words, who shall not think as he thinks,
and act as he advises. -- But he had another plan in view, in which candor and
liberality of sentiment, regard to justice, and love of country, have no part;
and he was right to insinuate the darkest suspicion, to effect the blackest
designs.

That the address is drawn with great art, and is designed to answer the most
insidious purposes, that it is calculated to impress the mind, with an idea of
premeditated injustice in the sovereign power of the United States, and rouse
all those resentments, which must unavoidably flow from such a belief, -- that
the secret mover of this scheme (whoever he may be) intended to take advantage
of the passions while they were warmed, by the recollection of past distresses,
without giving time for cool, deliberate thinking, and that composure of mind,
which is so necessary to give dignity and stability to measures, is rendered
too obvious, by the mode of conducting the business, to need other proof, than
a reference to the proceeding.

Thus much, Gentlemen, I have thought it incumbent on me to observe to you, to
show upon what principles, I opposed the irregular and hasty meeting, which,
was proposed to have been held on Tuesday last, and not because, I wanted a
disposition to give you every opportunity, consistent with your own honor, and
the dignity of the army, to make known your grievances. -- If my conduct
heretofore has not evinced to you that I have been a faithful friend to the
army, my declaration of it at this time, would be equally unavailing and
improper; but as I was among the first who embarked in the cause of our common
country; as I have never left your side one moment, but when called from you on
public duty; as I have been the constant companion and witness of your
distresses, and not among the last to feel and acknowledge your merits; as I
have ever considered my own military reputation, as inseparably connected with
that of the army, as my heart has ever expanded with joy, when I have heard its
praises, and my indignation has arisen, when the mouth of detraction has been
opened against it, -- it can scarcely be supposed, at this late stage of the
war, that I am indifferent to its interests. -- But -- how are they to be
promoted? -- The way is plain, says the anonymous addresser -- if war
continues, remove into the unsettled country, -- there establish yourselves,
and leave an ungrateful country to defend itself. -- But who are they to
defend? -- Our wives, our children, our farms and other property which we leave
behind us? -- Or, in the state of hostile separation, are we to take the two
first (the latter cannot be removed) to perish in a wilderness with hunger,
cold and nakedness? -- If peace takes place, never sheath your swords (says he)
until you have obtained full and ample justice: -- This dreadful alternative,
of either deserting our country, in the extremest hour of distress, or turning
our arms against it, (which is the apparent object, unless Congress can be
compelled into instant compliance) has something so shocking in it, -- that
humanity revolts at the idea. -- My God! -- what can this writer have in view
by recommending such measures? Can he be a friend to the army? Can he be a
friend to this country? -- Rather is he not an insidious foe? -- some emissary,
perhaps, from NewYork, plotting the ruin of both, by sowing the seeds of
discord and separation between the civil and military powers of the continent?
-- And what a compliment does he pay to our understandings, when he recommends
measures, in either alternative, impracticable in their nature?

But here, Gentlemen, I will drop the curtain, -- because it would be as
imprudent in me, to assign my reasons for this opinion, as it would be
insulting to your conception, to suppose you stood in need of them. -- A
moment's reflection, will convince every dispassionate mind, of the physical
impossibility, of carrying either proposal into execution.

There might, Gentlemen, be an impropriety in my taking notice, in this address
to you, of an anonymous production, -- but the manner in which that performance
has been introduced to the army, -- the effect it was intended to have,
together with some other circumstances, will amply justify my oservations, on
the tendency of that writing. With respect to the advice given by the author to
suspect the man, who shall recommend moderate measures and longer forbearance,
I spurn it, -- as every man who regards that liberty, and reveres that justice,
for which we contend, undoubtedly must. -- For if men are to be precluded from
offering their sentiments on a matter, which may involve the most serious and
alarming consequences, that can invite the consideration of mankind, reason is
of no use to us; -- the freedom of speech may be taken away, and dumb and
silent, we may be led like sheep to the slaughter.

I cannot in justice to my own belief, and what I have great reason to conceive
is the intention of Congress, conclude this address without giving it as my
decided opinion, that that honorable body, entertain exalted sentiments of the
services of the army, and from a full conviction of its merits and sufferings,
will do it complete justice. That their endeavors to discover and establish
funds for this purpose, have been unwearied, and will not cease till they have
succeeded, I have no doubt; but, like all other large bodies, where there is a
variety of different interests to reconcile, their deliberations are slow. --
Why then should we distrust them? and, in consequence of that distrust, adopt
measures, which may cast a shade, over that glory which has been so justly
acquired, and tarnish the reputation of an army, which is celebrated through
all Europe, for its fortitude and patriotism? and for what is this done? -- to
bring the object we seek nearer? -- No -- most certainly, in my opinion, it
will cast it at a greater distance.

For myself (and I take no merit in giving the assurance, being induced to it
from principles of gratitude, veracity and justice) -- a grateful sense of the
confidence you have ever placed in me, a recollection of the cheerful
assistance, and prompt obedience I have experienced from you, under every
vicissitude of fortune, and the sincere affection I feel for an army, I have so
long had the honor to command, -- will oblige me to declare, in this public and
solemn manner; that, in the attainment of complete justice, for all your toils
and dangers, and in the gratification of every wish, so far as may be done
consistently with the great duty I owe my country, and those powers we are
bound to respect, you may freely command my services to the utmost extent of my
abilities.

While I give you these assurances, and pledge myself in the most unequivocal
manner, to exert whatever ability I am possessed of, in your favor, let me
entreat you, Gentlemen, on your part, not to take any measures, which, viewed
in the calm light of reason, will lessen the dignity, and fully the glory you
have hitherto maintained. Let me request you, to rely on the plighted faith of
your country, and place a full confidence in the purity of the intentions of
Congress, that previous to your dissolution as an army they will cause all your
accounts to be fairly liquidated, as directed in their resolutions which were
published to you two days ago, and that they will adopt the most effectual
measures in their power, to render ample justice to you, for your faithful and
meritorious services. And let me conjure you in the name of our common country,
as you value your own sacred honor, as you respect the rights of humanity, and
as you regard the military and national character of America, to express your
utmost horror and detestation of the man who wishes, under any specious
pretenses, to overturn the liberties of our country, and who wickedly attempts
to open the floodgates of civil discord, and deluge our rising empire in blood.

By thus determining and thus acting, you will pursue the plain and direct road
to the attainment of your wishes; you will defeat the insidious designs of our
enemies, who are compelled to resort from open force to secret artifice. You
will give one more distinguished proof of unexampled patriotism and patient
virtue, rising superior to the pressure of the most complicated sufferings; and
you will, by the dignity of your conduct, afford occasion for posterity to say,
when speaking of the glorious example you have exhibited to mankind, had this
day been wanting, the world had never seen the last stage of perfection to
which human nature is capable of attaining.

His Excellency having withdrawn, on motion made by General Knox, seconded by
General Putnam,

Resolved, That the unanimous thanks of the officers of the army be presented
to his Excellency the commander in chief, for his excellent address, and the
communications he has been pleased to make to them; and to assure him that the
officers reciprocate his affectionate expressions, with the greatest sincerity
of which the human heart is capable.

The address from the army to Congress -- the report of the committee from the
army -- and the resolutions of Congress of the 25th of January, being read, --
on a motion by General Putnam, seconded by General Hand,

Voted, That a committee be appointed immediately to draw up some resolutions,
expressive of the business before us, and report in half an hour; that this
committee consist of one General, one Field-Officer, and one Captain:

That General Knox, Colonel Brooks, and Captain Howard, compose the said
committee.

The report of the committee having been brought in, and fully considered.

Resolved unanimously, That at the commencement of the present war, the
officers of the American army, engaged in the service of their country from the
purest love, and attachment to the rights and liberties of human nature; which
motives still exist in the highest degree; and that no circumstance of distress
or danger, shall induce a conduct, that may tend to sully the reputation and
glory, which they have acquired at the price of their blood, and eight years
faithful services.

Resolved unanimously, That the army continue to have an unshaken confidence in
the justice of Congress and their country; and are fully convinced that the
representatives of America will not disband or disperse the army, until their
accounts are liquidated, the balances accurately ascertained, and adequate
funds established for payment.

And in this arrangement the officers expect that the half pay, or commutation
of it, should be efficaciously comprehended.

Resolved unanimously, That his Excellency the Commander in Chief be requested
to write to his Excellency the President of Congress, earnestly entreating the
more speedy decision of that honorable body, upon the subjects of our late
address, which was forwarded by a committee of the army, some of whom are
waiting upon Congress for the result. In the alternative of peace or war, this
event would be highly satisfactory, and would produce immediate tranquillity in
the minds of the army; and prevent any further machinations of designing men,
to sow discord between the civil and military powers of the United States.

Resolved unanimously, That the officers of the American army view with
abhorrence, and reject with disdain, the infamous propositions contained in a
late anonymous address to the officers of the army, and resent with
indignation, the secret attempts of some unknown persons, to collect the
officers together, in a manner totally subversive of all discipline and good
order.

Resolved unanimously, That the thanks of the officers of the army my be given
to the committee, who presented to Congress the late address of the army, for
the wisdom and prudence with which they have conducted that business; and that
a copy of the proceedings of this day be transmitted by the President to
Major General M'Dougal; and that he be requested to continue his solicitations
at Congress, until the objects of his mission are accomplished.

The meeting was then dissolved.

HORATIO GATES, Major General, President.

Previous to the receipt of the foregoing letter, with its enclosures, --
Congress were pleased to pass the following resolutions:
MARCH 18th, 1783. BY THE UNITED STATES IN CONGRESS ASSEMBLED.
On a report of a committee, to whom was referred a letter of the 12th of
March, from the Commander in Chief:

Ordered, That the Superintendant of Finance lay before Congress an account of
the payments made to the army, in consequence of the resolution of the 25th day
of January last, -- and what sums the state of the public finances will enable
him to pay to the army at present; and also that he communicate to Congress
what steps have been taken, toward settling the accounts of the army since the
said resolution.

CHARLES THOMSON, Secretary.

MARCH 22, 1783. BY THE UNITED STATES IN CONGRESS ASSEMBLED.
On the report of a committee, to whom was referred a motion of Mr. Dver,
together with the memorial of the army, and report of the committee thereon; --
Congress came to the following resolutions:

Whereas the officers of the several lines, under the immediate command of his
Excellency General Washington, did by their late memorial transmitted,
represent to Congress, that the half-pay granted by sundry resolutions, was
regarded in an unfavourable light by the citizens of some of these States, who
would prefer a compensation for a limited term of years, or by a sum in gross,
to an establishment for life; and did on that account, solicit a commutation of
their half-pay, for an equivalent in one of the modes abovementioned, in order
to remove all subjects of dissatisfaction from the minds of their fellow
citizens. -- And whereas Congress are desirous, as well of gratifying the
reasonable expectations of the officers of the army, as of removing all
objections which may exist in any part of the United States, to the principles
of the half pay establishment, for which the faith of the United States has
been pledged, persuaded that those objections can only arise from the nature of
the compensation, not from any indisposition to compensate those, whose
services, sacrifices and sufferings, have so justly a title to the approbation
and rewards of their country: Therefore,

Resolved, That such officers as are now in service, and shall continue therein
to the end of the war, shall be entitled to receive the amount of five years
full pay in money or securities, on interest at six percent per annum, as
Congress shall find most convenient, instead of the half pay promised for life,
by the resolution of the 21st day of October, 1780 -- the said securities to be
such as shall be given to the creditors of the United States: Provided that it
be at the option of the lines of the respective states, and not of officers
individually in those lines, to accept or refuse the same; and provided also,
that their election shall be signified to Congress through the Commander in
Chief, from the lines under his immediate command, within two months; and
through the commanding officer of the southren army, from those under his
command, within six months from the date of this resolution:

That the same commutation shall extend to the corpse not belonging to the lines
of particular states, and who are entitled to half-pay for life as aforesaid;
the acceptance or refusal to be determined by corpse, and to be signified in the
same manner, and within the same time, as above mentioned:

That all officers belonging to the hospital department, who are entitled to
half-pay by the resolution of the 17th day of January, 1781, may collectively
agree to accept or refuse the aforesaid commutation, signifying the same
through the Commander in Chief, within six months from this time:

That such officers as have retired at different periods, entitled to half-pay
for life, may collectively, in each state of which they are inhabitants, accept
or refuse the same, their acceptance or refusal to be signified by agents
authorized for that purpose, within six months from this period: That with
respect to such retiring officers, the commutation, if accepted by them, shall
be in lieu of whatever may be now due to them since the time of their retiring
from service, as well as of what might hereafter become due; and that so soon
as their acceptance shall be signified, the Superintendant of Finance be, and
he is hereby directed to take measures for the settlement of their accounts
accordingly, and to issue to them certificates bearing interest at six per cent:

That all officers entitled to half pay for life, not included in the preceding
resolution, may also collectively agree, to accept or refuse the aforesaid
commutation, signifying the same within six months from this time.

Just at the moment when Congress had given their sanction to the Act of
Commutation, intelligence arrived that the provisional Articles of Peace were
signed; but the arrival of the Definitive Treaty being delayed beyond the
general Expectation, and it being found necessary to diminish the public
Expenditures, Congress thought proper to pass the following Resolution:
By the UNITED STATES in CONGRESS Assembled, May 26th, 1783.
On motion,
Resolved, That the Commander in Chief be instructed to grant furloughs to the
non-commissioned officers and soldiers in the service of the United States
enlisted to serve during the war, who shall be discharged as soon as the
definitive treaty of peace is concluded, together with a proportionable number
of commissioned officers of the different grades: And that the Secretary at War
and Commander in Chief take the proper measures for conducting those troops to
their respective homes, in such manner as may be most convenient to themselves
and to the states through which they may pass; and that the men thus furloughed
be allowed to take their arms with them.

CHARLES THOMSON, Secretary.

Upon the Promulgation of this Resolution the subsequent Address was presented
to the Commander in Chief.
SIR,
IT is difficult for us to express the regret we feel at being obliged again to
solicit your Excellency's attention and patronage. Next to the anguish which
the prospect of our own wretchedness excites in our breasts, is the pain which
arises from a knowledge of your anxiety on account of those men who have been
the sharers of your fortunes, and have had the honor of being your companions
through the various vicissitudes of the war. Nothing, therefore, but necessity
could induce us to a representation which we know must give you concern.

Your Excellency has so intimate a knowledge of the condition of the army, as
to render a particular delineation unnecessary. As you have been a witness of
our sufferings during a war uncommon in its nature, and unparalleled in many
circumstances attending it, so you are now, Sir, no less a witness of the
unequal burden which has fallen upon us, from the want of that provision, to
which, from our assiduous and unremitting services, we conceive, we are
entitled. Having recently expressed our sense of what was due to our distress
-- having repeated from your Excellency the confidence we had, that our
accounts would be liquidated, the balances ascertained, and adequate funds
provided for payment, previous to our being dispersed or disbanded -- having
seen, with pleasure, the approbation which Congress gave our reliance -- it is
with a mixture of astonishment and chagrin, that we view the late resolve of
Congress, by which the soldiers for the war, and a proportionate number of
officers, are to be furloughed without any one of those important objects being
accomplished; and, to complete the scene of woe, are to be compelled to leave
the army without the means of defraying the debts we have necessarily incurred
in the course of service, or even of gratifying those menials, in the pittance
which is their due; much less, to carry with us that support and comfort to our
families, of which, from our long military services they have been deprived. No
less exposed then, to the insults of the meanest followers of the army, than to
the arrests of the sheriff; deprived of the ability to assist our families; and
without an evidence that any thing is due to us for our services; and,
consequently, without the least prospect of obtaining credit for even a
temporary subsistence until we can get into business -- to what quarter can we
look? We take the liberty to say, Sir, only to your Excellency. And from the
sincerity of our hearts, we do it, no less from a persuasion of the efficiency
of your further efforts in our favor, than from the kind assurances you have
been pleased to give us of your support.

To your Excellency then we make our appeal, and in the most solemn manner,
from that abhorrence of oppression and injustice which first unsheathed our
swords, from the remembrance of the common dangers through which we have
passed; and from the recollection of those astonishing events which have been
effected by our united efforts, permit us to solicit your further aid; and to
entreat, that the order of the 2d instant, founded on the act of Congress of
the 26th of May last, may be suspended or varied in its operation, so far, as
that no officers or soldier be obliged to receive a furlough, until that
honorable body can be apprised of the wretched situation into which the army
must be plunged, by a conformity to it; that your Excellency will endeavor to
prevail on Congress -- nay, that, on the principles of common justice, you will
insist that neither officer nor soldier be compelled to leave the field, until
a liquidation of accounts can be effected, till the balances are ascertained,
certificates for the sums due given, including the commutation of half-pay to
the officers, and the gratuity of eighty dollars to the soldiers, and till a
supply of money can be furnished sufficient to carry us from the field of
glory, with honor to ourselves and credit to our country. We still wish to
believe, that that country, to which we have been so long devoted, will never
look with indifference on the distresses of those of her sons who have so
essentially contributed to the establishment of freedom, the security of
property, and the rearing of an empire.

In the name and behalf of the Generals and officers commanding regiments, and
corpse in the cantonment on Hudson's river.

I have the honor to be, with the highest respect,

Your Excellency's most obedient servant, W. HEATH, Major General, President.
June 5, 1783.
To the foregoing Address, General Washington was pleased to return the
following Answer, viz.
HEADQUARTERS, 6 th June, 1783. SIR,
BEFORE I make a reply to the subject of the address of the Generals and
officers commanding the regiments and corpse of this army, presented by yourself
yesterday, I entreat that those gentlemen will accept my warmest acknowledgment
for the confidence they have been pleased to repose in me; they may be assured
it shall never be abused; and I beg they will be persuaded, that as no man can
possibly be better acquainted than I am with the past merits and services of
the army, so no one can possibly be more strongly impressed with their present
ineligible situation, feel a keener sensibility at their distresses, or more
ardently desire to alleviate or remove them, -- but it would be unnecessary
perhaps, to enter into a detail of what I have done, and what I am still
attempting to do, in order to assist in the accomplishment of this interesting
purpose, -- let it be sufficient to observe, I do not yet despair of success;
for I am perfectly convinced that the States cannot, without involving
themselves in national bankruptcy and ruin, refuse to comply with the
requisitions of Congress: Who, it must be acknowledged, have done every thing
in their power to obtain ample and complete justice for the army, and whose
great object in the present measure undoubtedly was, by a reduction of expense
to enable the Financier to make the three months payment to the army, which on
all hands has been agreed to be absolutely and indispensibly necessary: To
explain this matter, I beg leave to insert an extract of a letter from the
Superintendant of Finance, dated the 29th ultimo.

It is now above a month since the Committee conferred with me on that subject,
and I then told them no payment could be made to the army, but by means of a
paper anticipation; and unless our expenditures were immediately and
considerably reduced, even that could not be done. Our expenditures have
nevertheless been continued, and our revenues lessen; the states growing daily
more and more remiss in their collections. The consequence is that I cannot
make payment in the manner first intended: The notes issued for this purpose
would have been payable at two, four and six months from the date, but at
present they will be at six months, and even that will soon become
impracticable, unless our expenses be immediately curtailed.

I shall cause such notes to be issued for three months pay to the army, and I
must entreat, Sir, that every influence be used with the States to absorb them
together with my other engagements by taxation.

Three days ago a messenger was despatched by me to urge the necessity of
forwarding these notes with the greatest possible expedition.

Under this state of circumstances, I need scarcely add that the expense of
every day in feeding the whole army, will increase very considerably, the
inability of the public to discharge the debts already incurred, at least for a
considerable time to come.

Although the officers of the army very well know my official situation, that I
am only a servant of the public, and that it is not for me to dispense with
orders, which it is my duty to carry into execution, -- yet as furloughs in all
services are considered as a matter of indulgence and not of compulsion; as
Congress, I am persuaded, entertain the best disposition toward the army, and
as I apprehend, in a very short time, the two principal articles of complaint
will be removed; -- until the further pleasure of Congress can be known, I
shall not hesitate to comply with the wishes of the army, under these
reservations only, that officers sufficient to conduct the men who choose to
receive furloughs, will attend them either on furlough or by detachment; the
propriety and necessity of this measure must be obvious to all, it need not
therefore be enforced; and with regard to the non-commissioned officers and
privates, such as from a peculiarity of circumstances, wish not to receive
furloughs at this time, will give in their names by twelve o'clock tomorrow to
the commanding officers of their regiments, that on a report to the
Adjutant-General, an equal number of men engaged for three years may be
furloughed, which will make the saving of expenses exactly the same to the
public.

I cannot but hope the notes will soon arrive, and that the settlement of
accounts may be completed by the assistance of the Pay-masters, in a very few
days. In the mean time I shall have the honor of laying the sentiments of the
Generals and officers commanding regiments and corpse, before Congress -- they
are expressed in such a decent, candid and affecting manner, that I am certain
every mark of attention will be paid to them.

I have the honor to be, with very great esteem, Sir, your most obedient
servant, Major General HEATH.

The two preceding papers were enclosed in the following letter to his
Excellency the President of Congress.
HEADQUARTERS, NEWBURGH, June 7 th, 1783. SIR,
I HAVE the honor to enclose to your Excellency, the copy of an address to me,
from the Generals and officers commanding regiments and corpse, together with my
answer to it. These enclosures will explain the distresses which resulted from
the measures now carrying into execution in consequence of the resolution of
the 26th of May, but the sensibility occasioned by a parting scene, under such
peculiar circumstances, will not admit of description.

The two subjects of complaint with the army appear to be, the delay of the
three months payment which had been expected, and the want of a settlement of
accounts -- I have though it myself authorized to assure them, Congress had and
would attend particularly to their grievances; and have made some little
variations respecting furloughs, from what was at first proposed: -- The
Secretary at War will be able to explain the reason and propriety of this
alteration.

While I consider it a tribute of justice on this occasion to mention the
temperate and orderly behavior of the whole army, and particularly the
accommodating spirit of the officers in arranging themselves to the command of
the battalions which will be composed of the three year's men; permit me to
recall to mind all their former sufferings and merits, and to recommend their
reasonable requests to the early and favorable notice of Congress. I have the
honor to be, etc;.


