THE CASE OF OUR FELLOW CREATURES, THE Oppressed Africans, RESPECTFULLY
RECOMMENDED TO THE SERIOUS CONSIDERATION OF THE LEGISLATURE OF GREAT BRITAIN,
BY THE PEOPLE CALLED QUAKERS.

LONDON, PRINTED: PHILADELPHIA: REPRINTED BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, IN
MARKET-STREET, BETWEEN SECOND AND THIRD-STREETS. MDCCLXXXIV

THE following petition was presented to the Parliament of Great Britain, by a
deputation from the yearly meeting of our brethren in that nation, held in
London in the 6th month, 1783; and the representation hereto subjoined, has
since been delivered to the King and his ministers, the members of parliament,
and others in authority there.

The like benevolent motives which actuated our brethren in that kingdom, thus
publicly to advocate the cause of the most oppressed part of the human species,
induced our yearly meeting held in Philadelphia last year, to address the
Congress of these American states, on the same very interesting and important
subject, which being courteously received, we are encouraged to republish the
above mentioned petition and representation, in hope the minds of those who are
invested with power here, may become so effectually moved by a sense of the
enormity of the evil complained of, as to exert their authority to remove it,
that the cry of this oppression may not be continued in our land.

Signed in and by order of the meeting for sufferings, in Philadelphia, 16th of
the 9th month, 1784. JOHN DRINKER, CLERK.

TO THE COMMONS of GREAT BRITAIN, in PARLIAMENT assembled. The PETITION of the
People called QUAKERS,
SHOWS,
THAT your petitioners met in this their annual assembly, having solemnly
considered the state of the enslaved Negroes, conceive themselves engaged in
religious duty to lay the suffering situation of that unhappy people before
you, as a subject loudly calling for the humane interposition of the
Legislature. Your petitioners regret, that a nation professing the Christian
faith, should so far counteract the principles of humanity and justice, as by
cruel treatment of this oppressed race, to fill their minds with prejudices
against the mild and beneficent doctrines of the Gospel.

Under the countenance of the laws of this country, many thousands of these our
fellow creatures, entitled to the natural rights of mankind, are held as
personal property in cruel bondage; and your petitioners being informed that a
bill for the regulation of the African trade, is now before the House,
containing a clause which restrains the officers of the African Company from
exporting Negroes: your petitioners, deeply affected with a consideration of
the rapine, oppression, and bloodshed, attending this traffic, humbly request,
that this restriction may be extended to all persons whatsoever, or that the
House would grant such other relief in the premises, as in its wisdom may seem
meet.

Signed in and on behalf of our yearly meeting, held in London, the 16th day of
the sixth month, 1783.

THE CASE OF THE OPPRESSED AFRICANS.
WE are engaged, under a sense of duty, to bear a public testimony against a
species of oppression which, under the sanction of national authority, has long
been exercised upon the natives of Africa, is grown up into a system of
tyranny, and is unhappily become a considerable branch of the commerce of this
kingdom: an oppression which in the injustice of its origin, and the inhumanity
of its progress, has not, we apprehend, been exceeded, or even equalled, in the
most barbarous ages.

We are taught, both by the holy scriptures, and by the experience of ages, to
believe that the Righteous Judge of the whole earth chastises nations for
their sins, as well as individuals: and can it be expected that he will suffer
this great iniquity to go unpunished? As the design of the institution of
government is for a terror to evildoers, and the praise of them that do well,
we wish it may be seriously considered, whether this has been made the rule of
its administration in this land. Will it not rather be found on inquiry, that,
with respect to the enslaved negroes, its benevolent purposes have been
perverted; that its terrors have fallen on the innocent, while evil doers, and
oppressors, have been openly encouraged?

But notwithstanding government, in former times, have been induced by what we
conceive to be a mistaken, as well as an unjust, policy, to promote this evil,
we are persuaded that many of the present members of the legislature, as true
friends of civil and religious liberty, hold this unrighteous trafic in the
utmost abhorrence. This persuasion, joined to the favorable reception of the
petition of our last Yearly Meeting to the House of Commons, encourages us to
address you, thus freely, on this important subject; and we apprehend that the
abolition of this iniquitous practice is not only required by the calls of
justice and humanity, but is also consistent with sound policy. For avarice in
this, as in other instances, has defeated its own purpose. Africa, so populous,
and so rich in vegetable and mineral productions, instead of affording all the
advantages of a well regulated commerce, is scarcely known but as a mart for
slaves, and as the scene of violence and barbarities, perpetrated, in order to
procure them, by men professing the Christian religion.

The arguments which have been advanced by the few writers, who have attempted
to justify this inhuman business, can have no weight with generous minds.
Those, in particular, which are drawn from the permission to hold slaves
amongst the Jews, can in no wise be applied to the practice amongst us: for,
blessed be the God and Father of all our mercies Acts xvii. 26.
, who has made of one blood all nations of men, we now live under a
dispensation essentially different from that of the law; in which many things
were permitted to the Jews, because of the hardness of their hearts. All
distinctions of name and country, so far as they relate to the social duties,
are now abolished. We are taught by our blessed Redeemer to look upon all men,
even our enemies, as neighbors and brethren, and to do unto them as we would
they should do unto us.

Under a dispensation so admirably adapted to promote the temporal as well as
the eternal happiness of mankind, that any should deviate so far from its
principles, as to encourage a practice so replete with iniquity, and in
particular that this nation, generally characterized by its attachment to civil
and religious liberty, should have contributed, perhaps more than any other, to
the establishment and continuance of slavery, is a most painful reflection. It
would surely have been more consistent with the avowed principles of
Englishmen, both as men and as Christians, if their settlement in heathen
countries had been succeeded by mild and benevolent attempts to civilize their
inhabitants, and to incline them to receive the glad tidings of the gospel. But
how different a conduct toward them has been pursued! it has not only been
repugnant in a political view, to those commercial advantages which a fair and
honorable treatment might have procured, but has evidently tended to increase
the barbarity of their manners, and to excite in their minds an aversion to
that religion, the professors whereof so cruelly treat them.

This traffic is the principal source of the destructive wars which prevail
among these unhappy people, and it is attended with consequences, the mere
recital of which is shocking to humanity. The violent separation of the dearest
relatives, the tears of conjugal and parental affection, the reluctance of the
slaves to a voyage from which they can have no prospect of returning, must
present scenes of distress which would pierce the heart of any, in whom the
principles of humanity are not wholly effaced. This, however, is but the
beginning of sorrows with the poor captives. Under their cruel treatment on
shipboard, where, without regard to health or decency, hundreds are confined
within the narrow limits of the hold, numbers perish; and, by what is called
the seasoning in the Islands, many are relieved by a premature death, from that
series of accumulated sufferings which awaits their less happy survivors. The
measure of their afflictions yet remains to be filled; being sold to the
highest bidder, and branded with a hot iron, they have yet to linger on,
unpitied, the whole term of their miserable existence, in excessive labor, and
too often under the merciless control of unprincipled and unfeeling men,
without proper food or clothing, or any encouragement to sweeten their toil;
whilst every fault, real, or imaginary, is punished with a rigor which is but
weakly restrained by the colony laws: instances of the greatest enormity, even
the most wanton or deliberate murder of the slaves, being only punished, if
punished at all, by trifling pecuniary fines.

But a bare enumeration of the calamities of this wretched people, would exceed
the limits proposed to this short address: we think it not improper, however,
to give the following extract from a late author, who was an eyewitness of the
miseries of this persecuted race.

If we bring this matter home, and, as Job proposed to his friends, "put our
soul in their souls stead;" if we consider ourselves, and our children, as
exposed to the hardships which these people lie under, in supporting an
imaginary greatness;

Did we, in such case, behold an increase of luxury and superfluity among our
oppressors, and therewith feel an increase of the weight of our burdens, and
expect our posterity to groan under oppression after us;

Under all this misery, had we none to plead our cause, nor any hope of relief
from man, how would our cries ascend to the God of the spirits of all flesh,
who judges the world in righteousness, and, in his own time, is a refuge for
the oppressed!

When we were hunger-bitten, and could not have sufficient nourishment, but saw
them in fullness, pleasing their taste with things fetched from far;

When we were wearied with labor, denied the liberty to rest, and saw them
spending their time at ease; when garments, answerable to our necessities, were
denied us, while we saw them clothed in that which was costly and delicate;

Under such affliction, how would these painful feelings rise up as witnesses
against their pretended devotion! And if the name of their religion were
mentioned in our hearing, how would it sound in our ears, like a word which
signified self-exaltation and hardness of heart!

When a trade is carried on productive of much misery, and they who suffer by
it are some thousands miles off, the danger is the greater of not laying their
sufferings to heart.

In procuring slaves from the coast of Africa, many children are stolen
privately; wars also are encouraged among the negroes: but all is at a great
distance. Many groans arise from dying men, which we hear not. Many cries are
uttered by widows and fatherless children, which reach not our ears. Many
cheeks are wet with tears, and faces sad with unutterable grief, which we see
not. Cruel tyranny is encouraged. The hands of robbers are strengthened; and
thousands reduced to the most abject slavery, who never injured us.

Were we, for the term of one year only, to be eyewitnesses to what passes in
getting these slaves; was the blood which is there shed, to be sprinkled on our
garments; were the poor captives, bound with thongs, heavy laden with elephants
teeth, to pass before our eyes, in their way to the sea;

Were their bitter lamentations, day after day, to ring in our ears, and their
mournful cries in the night, to hinder us from sleeping!

Were we to hear the sound of the tumult, when the slaves on board the ships
attempt to kill the English, and behold the issue of those bloody conflicts:
what pious man could be a witness to these things, and see a trade carried on
in this manner, without being deeply affected with sorrow?

Our religious society in these kingdoms, and in North America, have for many
years tenderly sympathized with this unhappy people, under their complicated
sufferings, and have endeavored to procure them relief: nor has their cause
been without other advocates; whose numbers we have with much satisfaction
observed to increase. The expectation of many, who are anxiously concerned for
the suppression of this national evil, is now under Providence, fixed upon the
wise and humane interposition of the legislature; to whom, with dutiful
submission, we earnestly recommend the serious consideration of this important
subject; with a pleasing hope, that the result will be, a prohibition of this
traffic in future, and an extension of such relief to those who already groan
in bondage, as justice and mercy may dictate, and their particular situations
may admit. That so the blessings of those who are ready to perish may rest upon
you, and this nation may no longer, on their account, remain obnoxious to the
righteous judgments of the Lord, who, in the most awful manner, declared by his
prophet, That the land should tremble, Amos iv and viii. chap.
and every one mourn that dwells therein, for the iniquity of those who
oppress the poor, and crush the needy; and who likewise pronounced a woe
Jeremiah xxii. chap.
unto him, that builds his house by unrighteousness, and his chambers by
wrong; that uses his neighbor's service without wages, and gives him not for
his work.

Signed by order of the Meeting for Sufferings, This meeting is composed of
about one hundred members residing in London, who are chosen by, and correspond
with, the meetings in the country. It was instituted, and thus named, during
the times of persecution, (anno 1675) in order to receive accounts of the
sufferings, of our members, and to solicit relief from those in power. It still
continues to superintend the general concerns of the society during the
intervals of the Yearly Meeting.
London, the 28th day of the eleventh month, 1783, by JOHN ADY, CLERK to the
MEETING.

FINIS.
BOOKS to be sold by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK.
THE Original, and Present State of Man, briefly considered; wherein is shown,
the nature of his fall, and the necessity, means, and manner of his
restoration, through the sacrifice of Christ, and the sensible operation of that
divine principle held forth to the world by the people called Quakers. Some
account of the life, and gospel labors of William Reckett, late of
Lincolnshire in Great Britain: also, memoirs of the life, religious
experiences, and gospel labors of James Gough, late of Dublin, deceased. An
account of the life of that ancient servant of Jesus Christ, John Richardson,
giving a relation of many of his exercises in his youth, and his services in
the work of the ministry, in England, Ireland, America, etc. The Christian, a
poem, in four books. To which is prefixed a preface in prose, in defense of
Christianity; with an address to the people of America. To which is added,
miscellaneous poems. By Charles Crawford. Buchan's family physician: or, a
treatise on the prevention and cure of diseases by regimen and simple medicine,
a late edition, with an appendix containing the method of preparing and
compounding such medicines as are recommended in the book, with addition of
several others of a similar nature; remarks on the doses, uses, and manner of
applying the different preparations. Capt. Carver's three years travels,
through the interior parts of North America, for more than five thousand miles,
containing an account of the great lakes, and all the lakes, islands, and
rivers, cataracts, mountains, minerals, soil and vegetable productions of the
north-west regions of that vast continent; with a description of the birds,
beasts, reptiles, insects, and fishes, peculiar to the country. Together with a
concise history of the genius, manners and customs of the Indians inhabiting
the lands that lie adjacent to the heads, and to the westward of the great
river Mississippi; and an appendix describing the uncultivated parts of
America, that are most proper for forming settlements. Sacred history: or, the
historical part of the holy scriptures of the old and new testaments; digested
into due method, with respect to order of time and place, with observations
tending to illustrate some passages therein. By Thomas Ellwood, 3 vols. A
journal of the life, travels, sufferings, Christian experiences, and labor of
love in the work of the ministry of George Fox. Select works of William Penn,
in 5 vols. octavo. An essay on the treatment and conversion of African slaves.
By James Ramsey, M. A. vicar of Teston, in Kent. Fruits of retirement: or,
miscellaneous poems, moral and divine. By Mary Mollineux. Grounds of a holy
life. By Hugh Turford. Some principles and precepts of the Christian religion,
by way of question and answer. By Samuel Fuller. Memoirs of the life of John
Roberts, alias Hayward. Primitive Christianity revived, in the faith and
practice of the people called Quakers. Written in testimony to the present
dispensation of God through them to the world. By William Penn. To which is
added, select pieces on religious subjects. By Isaac Penington. Select poems,
containing epistles, etc. occasionally written on various subjects. To which is
now added, the history of Elijah and Elisha. By John Ery. The advantages and
disadvantages of the marriage-state, as entered into with religious or
irreligious persons. An epistle to friends, concerning the present and
succeeding times. By Stephen Crisp. Seven discourses and three prayers, and an
epistle to his brethren in religious profession in the islad of Tortola. By
Samuel Fothergill.
STATIONARY.
Imperial, super-royal, royal, medium, demi, and foolscap writing-paper;
medium, demi, and foolscap day-books, journals, and ledgers; counting house
files; Irish and common wafers; Dutch and English sealing-wax; Dutch and
English quills, from 3 s to 18 s per hundred; ivory folders; ink-powder and
ink-cake; pewter and japaned ink-stands; a variety of leather and paper
ink-holders for the pocket; asses skin memorandum books; copperplate copies;
black sand; neat slates; slate pencils; sliding and common black lead pencils,
of a good quality; blank bonds; arbitration do powers of attorney; bills of
lading; apprentice and servant's indentures; conveyances for land warrants;
blank declarations for attorneys at law, etc. etc. etc.


