SCRIPTURAL CAUTIONS AGAINST EMBRACING A RELIGIOUS SCHEME, Taught by a number
of Europeans, who came from England to America, in the Year 1776, and style
themselves the CHURCH, etc. etc.

By BENJAMIN WEST, Who has been deluded by them, to the great injury of himself
and family.

Let no man deceive you by any means, for that day shall not come, except there
be a falling away first, and that MAN of sin be revealed; the son of perdition;
who opposes and exalts himself, above all that is called GOD, or that is
worshipped.

II. These. ii. 3, 4. HARTFORD: Printed and sold by BAVIL WEBSTER, a few rods
South-East of the Courthouse, 1783.

Scriptural Cautions, etc.
AT the earnest request of many serious minded persons, I have undertaken to
present to public view the necessity of their receiving and maintaining
evidences of a saving interest in Christ, by faith and love; accompanied with
practical Godliness,

And, From a discovery of the deplorable state of the inhabitants of our land,
appearing awfully sunk down and involved in sin and disobedience against God,
and the strong delusions pointed out in the scriptures, spreading amongst the
people; and from sorrowful experience of the baneful effects of my own family's
being infatuated with this new, false and strange religion; which is attended
with all deceivableness.

In deep humiliation I would advertise all people, that are desirous of the
knowledge of the truth, that they may be saved from these impending delusions;
with scriptural cautions, against giving their attention to false Christ's and
false Prophets; therefore attend to the words of wisdom, from the wise King of
Israel, against giving attention to, or following after the strange WOMAN, or
her Prosolites: Who flatter with their lips, Proverbs vii. 5, and at times is
loud and stubborn; her feet abides not in her house; therefore let not your
hearts incline to her ways: Go not astray in her paths for she has cast down
many, wounded, yea her house is the way to hell, going down to the chambers of
death, Proverbs vii. 11, 25, 26, 27. She having separated from, and left her
own husband, as I am informed, contrary to divine authority, Matt. xix. 5, 6.
I. Cor. vii. 2, 3, 4, 5. She and her adherents teach others to do the same,
through which means instead of being a crown, to their husbands, they become as
rottenness in his bones; Proverbs xii. 4. She sells families through her
witchcrafts. Mal. iii. 4. for they become tributary to her, as well as involved
in Satan's snare. -- It may be observed that this scheme is carried on and
supported with all deceivableness. II. These. ii. 10. She is subtle of heart
and their ways are movable, they may at first appear with many good words and
fair speeches to deceive the hearts of the simple, repeating those miracles
they have power to do. Rev. xii. 14. And there was unclean spirits to come out
of the mouth of the false prophet working miracles. Rev. xvi. 13, 14. They
often change from this scheme of flattery and appear in a very great fury
calling it the anger of God, against sin, telling persons they are going right
to hell, except they come into relation with that body of Europeans they style
the CHURCH, and subjected in perfect obedience to them; -- hence they wear the
rough garment to deceive, as in Zach. xii. 4. If it be one that is persuaded of
a saving interest in God's salvation, through faith in the blood and right
teousness of Christ; they will very artfully labor to draw a vail between him
and all his former views of redemption by the virtue of Christ's blood; and
tell them it will all avail them nothing, but he is the farther lost from God
for what he has heretofore experienced of light, comfort and consolation;
therefore there is no way to escape hell, but to lay open all the secret sins
of his past life to them for they say God cannot be found any where else but in
that body they belong to; therefore it appears that it is a strange God they
worship, as well as a strange Woman they follow; I am persuaded it is not the
God of the whole universe for he fills heaven and earth, therefore in him we
live move and have our being; since therefore they give their adorations to
such a strange Deity, and adore a poor old Woman as the head and source of
their influences; we may observe they have strange laws, which run counter to
the laws and commands of the true God of Israel; they urge that for men and
their own wives to dwell together according to knowledge in the use of means
for multiplication according to God's appointment, is a damning sin; therefore
the man and his wife must part asunder in that respect and not so much as lodge
in one bed together; -- but the God that made them at the beginning made them
male and female, and tempered them together; commanding them to be fruitful and
multiply, annexing his blessing to them, Genesis i. 28. God saw fit to make the
woman, a help meat for the man, being bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh,
Genesis ii. 23. Again, we may observe God established his covenant with Noah;
after he came out of the ark, when the old world was drowned, and commanded
them to be fruitful and multiply, and bring forth abundantly in the earth, and
multiply therein, Genesis ix. 7, 8 Moreover the superstitious Pharisees came to
our Savior tempting him with this question; whether or no it was lawful for a
man to put away his wife for every cause; observe the answer of that divine
person by whom we were at first formed and who spoke us into being; he answered
the superstitious Pharisees and said unto them; have ye not read that he which
made them at the beginning made them male and female, and said for this cause,
shall a man leave father and mother and shall cleave to his wife, and they
twain shall be one flesh; wherefore they are no more twain but one flesh; what
therefore God has joined together let no man put asunder; -- and tells them,
some for the hardness of their hearts were suffered to put away their wives,
but it was not so from the beginning, and he plainly tells them the
consequences of such procedings is to become adulterers, Matt. ix. 3, -- 10,
therefore Paul wills that the young women marry, bear children, guide their
house, and give no occasion to their adversary to speak reproachfully; hence it
is that marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled; but whoremongers
and adulterers God will judge. I. Tim. v. 14. Heb. xiii. 4. Therefore it
plainly appears from divine authority that the laws and rules coming forth from
the strange Woman and her prosolites, does not correspond with, but runs
counter to the laws and institutions of the God of the true Israel, under both
law and gospel: To blind peoples eyes they urge they must not indulge any of
the works of the flesh; now the apostle tells us the works of the flesh are
manifest, which are these adultry, fornication, idolatry, witchcraft, etc. with
many other wicked practices. But in the catalogue of the works of the flesh he
does not once call in question; men's and women's laboring with their hands in
a lawful way, for the things needful to their bodies nor partaking of those
things for their nourishment and comfort, if it be received with thanksgiving
to the author of their benefits. Neither does the inspired apostle once mention
men and their own wives dwelling together according to knowledge, or lodging in
one bed together, to be the works of the flesh; but the apostle describes the
works of the flesh, Gal. v. 19, 20. Furthermore in this strange religion is
found the generations that Solomon speaks of in Prove. xxx. 11. 12, that curses
their father and does not bless their mother, and are pure in their own eyes,
and never have been washed from their filthiness; if any should deny this
assertion, it is too obvious from their own conduct to be denied, which may be
proved by good authority; what heavier curses can a child denounce against his
parents than to call them devils and tell them they will wake in hell? yet
these poor deluded creatures boast of their holiness, as though none could
convince them of sin; it further appears they are not washed from their
filthiness, from their own testimony, disowning any being born again but those
Europeans, which they call the church; yet they will impose upon the public,
pretending to teach them the way to heaven, and the things of the kingdom. And
yet our Savior testified to Nicodemus, except a man be born again he cannot
see the kingdom of God; consequently they are strangers to the things of that
kingdom, for if they are not born of God, they are of their father the devil.
John, viii. 44. Therefore we may not think it strange if they clash in the face
of God's authority, even to cursing father and mother, and parting asunder
husband and wife; for Christ tells them the works of their father they will do,
for he was a murderer from the beginning and abode not in the truth; they also
countenance and indulge husbands leaving their own wives, and children, and
depriving them of his interest or labor for their maintenance or support,
unless they will embrace with them this strange religion that is attended with
so many glairing absurdities. Wives disown all natural affections to their
husbands and children. Thus women become monsters, and men worse than infidels
in this new and strange religion: but when we consider from whence these new
laws and rules originate, and who stands at the head of their discipline, the
wonder may abate in some degree, for God placed the man next to himself in the
creation, between the woman and himself, and enjoined the woman's obedience to
the man, and said the man should rule over her, Genesis iii. 16. And Paul being
inspired by the same spirit, says, let the women learn in silence with all
submission; but suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the
man, but to be in silence, for Adam was first formed, then Eve. I. Tim. ii. 11,
12, 13. But in this new religion, the men hold themselves in entire subjection
to the woman, and she has the rule over the men to that degree, that it appears
to be the common opinion of her adherents and their foremost leaders, the
oldest of which stands in more awe and fear of her than children do of their
parents.

Under the lead and influence of this government, some being operated upon with
strange persuations, that it is the works of God, acknowledge themselves filled
with blasphemous thoughts against the God of heaven; and at times are under
temptations to murder themselves, and yet are hurried to go forth with the rest
of their company, in their dance as though they were all filled with frolicking
devils. Sometimes they will appear with a strange rising shuddering, and
trembling, as though the hatchways of the bottomless pit were bursted open, and
the infernal spirits had broke in among them; therefore they have many kinds of
charms to affright, or to allure. From these circumstances it may not be
thought strange, if one should conclude their was sorcery and witchcraft in the
cause, since they obey not the truth, Gal. iii. 1. They boast much of their
signs and wonders, but I have not found them exalted above what we read of them
in the II. These. ii. 3, -- 10. And we may see it is above all that is called
God, and with all powers and signs, and lying wonders. Now the spirit speaks
expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, givine
heed to seducing spirits and doctring of devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy,
having their consciences seared with a hot iron, forbiding to marry, and
commanding to abstain from meats which God has created to be received with
thanksgiving. I. Tim. iv. 1, 2, 3.

Furthermore, They urge that a new dispensation has taken place, and that
Christ has come the second time, which they pretend to prove by counting the
mistical numbers specified in the prophesies of Daniel, as well as by their
signs and wonders. But our Lord Jesus Christ advertises us of these great signs
and wonders taking place before his coming; which if it were possible would
deceive the very elect. Matt. xxiv. 24. These things indicate that the time
draws nigh and is even at the doors; but it has pleased God in his wisdom to
reserve the foresight and knowledge of that time to himself, and not reveal it
to men nor angels beforehand; but it shall come sudden, to the great surprise
of Christ's rejectors and gospel dispisers; for it shall come like a thief in
the night, on a sudden as the lightening breaks forth out of the east and
shines unto the west, for the Lord shall descend from heaven with a shout,
etc. Matt. xxiv. 27, 43, I. These. iv. 16, etc. Therefore let all persons that
are infatuated with apprehensions of its being a new dispensation, and so
conclude it may admit of new laws or a new gospel, be alarmed from the
following considerations.

When God had given forth the divine law under the legal dispensation, he
forbid adding thereto or diminishing therefrom. Deuteronomy. xii 32. And at the close
of the divine records, the Lord tells us, that he that shall add to the things
of the prophesies of the book, God shall add to him all the plagues that are
written in the book; and if any man shall take away from the words of this
prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life. Rev. xxii. 18,
19. Therefore says Paul, Though we, or an angel from heaven preach any other
gospel unto you, then that we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. Gal.
i. 8. O then let us all turn our attention from the voice of false prophets and
the influence of seucing spirits, and carefully attend to God's word, by which
we are to try the spirits. -- If there arise among you a prophet or a dreamer
of dreams, and gives thee a sign or a wonder, and the sign comes to pass,
whereof he spoke unto thee, saying, Let us go after other Gods, which thou have
not known, and let us serve them; thou shall not harken to the words of that
prophet or that dreamer of dreams; for the Lord your God proves you, to know
whether you love the Lord your God with your heart and with all your soul; ye
shall walk after the Lord your God, and fear him and keep his commandments, and
obey his voice, and ye shall serve him and cleave unto him, and that prophet or
that dreamer of dreams shall be put to death, because he has spoken to turn
you away from the Lord your God. Deuteronomy. xiii. 1 -- 5. Now let it excite every
one that has named the name of Christ, to prayer and watchfulness, and that
they depart from all iniquity; while we look into this meluncholly scene of
some departing from the faith, and forgeting they were purged from their old
sins, and have become pussed up and vain in their imaginations, having their
understandings darkened, being alienated from the life of God through the
ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their hearts. Ephesians. iv.
18. And being destitute of the principles and powers of spiritual life and void
of natural affectations. What must be the consequence of seeking to witches,
wizards, charmers and those that have familiar spirits, and for children to
curse their parents, husbands and wives to part asunder and become adulterers,
leaving their poor children destitute of any support, and renouncing all
natural affections for each other and their offspring, and speaking blasphemies
against God, and sometimes are under strong temptations to murder themselves,
and yet seem to be fully persuaded they are in the work of God.

And now in order to be deterred from, and guarded against those horrid
absurdities, let us all be allarmed from mount Ebal, and consider the cannons
of God's word are loaded with heavy curses that are pointed against such wicked
conduct, and will be discharged like so many blazeing thunderbolts from the
artillery of heaven, in one eternal storm against all such miserable offenders,
unless timely repentance through the tender mercy and long forbearance of God,
through the blood and righteousness of Christ interpose for their relief; for
it will not avail for any to plead that those things were but the effects of
their strong zeal; it was a very great zeal no doubt in them that caused their
children to pass through the fire to Moloch; They built the high places of
Baal, to burn their sons with fire for burnt offerings unto Baal, which the
Lord says I commanded not, nor spoke it, neither came it into my mind. Jer.
xix. 5.

From hence we learn the necessity of keeping close to the sacred worcester of God as
the man of our counsel; for it is not only flesh and blood that we have to
contend with in the cause, but principalities and powers and spiritual
wickedness in high places; wherefore we need to take the whole armor of God,
that we may be able to withstand temptations in this evil day; let us stand
therefore having on the breastplate of righteousness, above all, taking the
shield of says, wherewith we may quench all the fiery darts of the wicked; and
take the helmet of salvation and sword of the spirit which is the word of God,
praying with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, and watching thereunto
with all perseverance. Ephesians. vi. 11 -- 18. Therefore let every soul be careful
to lay aside all carnal weapons in this case, and use none but them that are
mighty through God to the pulling down the strong hold of sin either in
ourselves or others, and casting down imaginations and every thing that
exalts itself against God, and let every thought be brought into captivity to
the obedience of Christ, and let us ever look to the Captain of our salvation
by faith and prayer, lest while we are watching the motions of the enemy on one
hand, we are caught in his snare on the other, and it being but fleeing from
the bear for the lion to meet us.

With sorrow and grief I must confess I have been much captivated with, and
deeply involved in this new and strange scheme, to the admiration of many of my
former acquaintances, and was extremely zealous, being persuaded, it was the
only way to perfection out of all sin; but alas, the great deception is this,
to be ever going on in a way that never comes to the knowledge of the truth.

For the consideration of inquiring minds, I shall mention a few things which
were conducive to my falling in with this deceiving scheme; the consideration
of which is to be lamented. Not only seeing the encouragible, impenitent, and
open profane, eagerly pursuing every method by which they might express their
absolute contempt both of the authority and goodness of God, (which should have
led them to repentance) as though the floodgates of sin and abomination were
hoisted, and each one was striving to be foremost in the horrid stream leading
down to the black regions of the burning main.

And the professing people of our land, who style themselves Christians, who
ought to have kept the feast with the unlevened bread of sincerity, or rather
been mourning for the abominations of our land in deep humiliation before God.

But the dark aspects that appear from their common conduct, seem to denote a
woeful declension from gospel simplicity, and true faith is scarcely to be found
on earth amongst all its professors, who appear with the mark of infidelity,
coveteousness, pride and wantonness abounding, at a very enormous height,
through which means civil religion appears to be stiffled, and almost fetched
its last gasps in our professing land. The consideration of these things gave
me much exercise for the want of charity; when there was any subjected to the
cross, or had vital union with Christ, or walked humbly with God.

And my mind not being fruitful in the consideration, that at such a juncture
the man of sin or son of perdition would exalt himself and ascend his reign
with the miftry of inquity, spreading itself with all deceivableness.

I therefore having the oppertunity of an interview with those people, who
(...) me, that a new dispersation had taken place; and they appearing with
their fine-spue dress of perfection -- with the appearance or things
supernatural, and with many good words, drew my attention to their enchanting
(...), by which means I soon became prejudiced in their favor, and subjected
to their lead and government, expecting to find them the people they profess to
be.

But alas, I found myself awfully deceived, being landed upon a papist system
attended with its own spirit, and pregnant with its corrupt principles, vending
itself with the attempts of tyranny: as the young asp may act out all the
postures of the old one, before it has power to bite.

Furthermore, When I came to hear false testimonies, to my certain knowledge,
come forth from those that call themselves perfect, as well as from their
prosolites; under these operations and influences deceived by them, which has
not only been productive to break the most tenderest ties of nature between a
man and his wife, but the horrid sin of adultry is carried on amongst those
superstitious perifectioners, that pretend, that it is a damning sin for a man
and his own wife to dwell together according to knowledge in the natural use of
each other.

But since their scheme is carried on, and with all deceivableness, the
circumstances of deception are manisold.

Respecting their dancing, the general representation they give of it, is, that
it is the token of great joy and happiness of the new Jerusalem state, and
denotes the victory over sin; a great deception lies in these pretentions; for
ask those dancers, whether they are born again, and they will say no. Besides
this, the orders from their church, are to labor in their dance to maortify
the lufts of the flesh. Hence they use these expression in their dance: Labor,
labor, mortification before redemption! Thus it evidently appears, that in
order to be born again, they must ware out their constitutions, and reduce
their natures so low, as not to have any of the common seelings of mankind, and
by this they are to judge of their being born again; O miserable Jerusalem
state.

About two years ago, they held up to view, and was often heard to say, if they
persevered in their dispensation, they should never die a natural death; but
after they began to die and numbers had died among them, they grew ashamed of
their doctrine of immortality, and began to deny that they ever held to any
such thing; thus they are known to shist and change, to say and unsay, to carry
and end their scheme.

As to their doctrine, it is well known to all who are acquainted with the
several branches of it, and are also acquainted with the doctrine of the church
of Rome, that there is no essential difference; their doctrine of persection,
celibacy or abstainance, the doctrine of purgatory or prison state, the
doctrine of church oracles, the doctrine of church power to open and shut
heaven to acquit and damn souls, is all Romish doctrine; thus it is very easy
to see who these people are, and to what body or church they belong; and if it
was written of the church of Rome, Mystery, Babylon the great, the mother of
harlots and abominations of the earth; so may it be written of this people,
Mystery, Rome the mother of witchcrasts, etc.

It may also be observed that the exact resemblance of this people appeared in
England in the year 1706 and 1707, brought in by two or three French prophets
(so called,) who went on with their prophesies, shakeings, unknown tongues,
etc. which prevailed for a time, and took in many into the delusive scheme, but
finally worked itself out and died in shame and contempt.

Since therefore we are all exposed and liable to be taken in the snares of
Satan, let it exite one all to sanctify the Lord God in their hearts, and let
him be our fear and our dread, since the fear of the Lord is a fountain of life
to depart from the snares of death. For he spoke thus to me with a strong hand,
and instructed me that I should not walk in the way of this people. Saying, Say
ye not a confederacy to all them to whom this people shall say a confederacy;
neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid; sanctify the Lord of hosts himself,
and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread. And when they shall say
unto you, seek unto them that have famliar spirits, and unto wizards that peep,
and mutter: should not a people seek unto their God: for the living, to the
dead? TO the law and to the testimony: if they speak not according to this
word, it is because there is no light in them. Isaiah, viii. II -- 13, 19, 20.


