THE GOSPEL OF CHRIST No Cause of SHAME: Demonstrated in two Discourses on the
Subject.

By ELHANAN WINCHESTER.

Go ye into all the World, and preach the Gospel to every Creature. Jesus
Christ. PHILADELPHIA: Printed by B. TOWN. 1783.

SERMON I.
For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ; for it is the power of GOD unto
Salvation, to every one that believes, to the Jew first, and also to the
Greek. Romans i. 16.
IT is an unhappy thing that so many professors of Christianity are ashamed of
the gospel of Christ, although the Savior warns all against such an amazing
piece of ingratitude in a most serious manner, saying, "Whosoever, therefore,
shall be ashamed of me, and of my words in this adulterous and sinful
generation, of him also shall the Son of Man be ashamed when he comes in the
glory of his father, with the holy angels." Yet notwithstanding these awful
warnings given by the judge of all, this sin of being ashamed of the gospel of
Christ prevails exceedingly at this day, and professors of Christianity seem
ashamed to have it known in the world, that they have any connection either
with Christ or his gospel, although he has said, "Also I say unto you,
whosoever shall confess me before men, him shall the son of man also confess
before the angels of God;" and again, "Whosoever therefore shall confess me
before men, him will I confess also before my father which is in heaven." What
can be more terrible than to have Christ ashamed of us before his father, and
the holy angels? Or more glorious than to be owned and confessed by him? And
yet we find that satan's children and servants are much bolder in his service
than Christians in general are in the service of their God. The more is the
pity! This is "for a lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation;" I remember
to have heard of a certain Christian who happened in company with some wicked
worldlings, whose conversation was very trifling and profane; he bore it as
long as he was able, and then exclaimed thus, "Gentlemen, you make me ashamed
of myself; you serve such a bad master so faithfully, and I who have so good a
master, even Jesus, am almost ashamed to own him." I believe this reproof may
be taken by professors in general.

St. Paul was so happy that he could say with truth, that he was not ashamed of
the gospel; and oh, that we may all be so blessed as heartily to join him in
the words of my text, and each one say with the heart, mouth, and conduct, "For
I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ; for it is the power of God unto
salvation to every one that believes; to the Jew first, and also to the Greek."

Let us, in the first place, consider what the gospel is:

Secondly, What St. Paul meant by not being ashamed of it:

And lastly, The reasons why none should be ashamed of it.

The gospel signifies good news, glad tidings of great joy; and may be taken in
general to comprehend all the declarations of God's good will toward his poor
creatures; together with all those gracious encouragements, invitations, and
promises, given us in the sacred pages, through Jesus Christ our Savior.

As this subject is very copious, I must beg your patience, while I attempt to
set forth some of the many gracious declarations made in the gospel of our God.

But before I proceed directly to show what the gospel is, give me leave to
remind you, that you are not to attend thereto as scholars or critics, but as
poor, helpless, miserable sinners, who have the greatest need of the real
enjoyment of those rich treasures which it brings; and believe me, that the
gospel will never be of much real service to you, till you feel your need of
it, as a hungry man feels his need of food, or as a thirsty man feels his need
of drink, or a sick man feels his need of health, etc. For it is a truth, that
the glorious blessings of the gospel must be as truly enjoyed by the spiritual
senses of the soul, to be of service thereto, as food and drink must be
received into the body, in order to nourish it.

I shall now proceed to mention some of those glorious truths, which are good
news to men. That GOD takes no pleasure in the death of the sinner, is very
good news, much better than we are commonly taught to believe; for some have
the daring boldness to tell us, that GOD is as much glorified, and pleased with
the damnation as with the salvation of his creatures; which they vainly give as
the reason why the torments of hell shall never end. But let us see what pains
GOD takes to root this belief, of his delighting in the death of a sinner, out
of our minds. He says, "Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die?
says the Lord GOD; and not that he should return from his ways and live?" Here
he first proposes it by way of a question, but in such a manner as implies a
strong negative; have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die? Can it
be supposed that I have any pleasure therein at all? but lest any should answer
the question in the affirmative (as many do) GOD farther says, "For I have no
pleasure in the death of him that dies, says the Lord GOD, wherefore turn,
and live ye." And left any thing should be wanting to confirm this truth, GOD
in the most solemn manner adds his oath, and because he could swear by no
greater, he swore by himself; saying, "Say unto them, As I live, says the Lord
GOD, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; but that the wicked turn
from his way and live: Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil ways; for why will ye
die, oh house of Israel?"

I remember well the senseless cavil I formerly used against the force of this
text; which was, that the death spoken of was a state of captivity in Babylon,
with which God threatened them unless they turned to him, and which he had no
pleasure in inflicting upon them; never considering, that if he took no
pleasure in that short outward calamity, he certainly could take no pleasure in
that dreadful curse of the second death, which will come upon the wicked, or
those who die in their sins.

But now, since God has sworn that he takes no pleasure at all in the death
of a sinner, I think it is safer to believe him, than to believe those who tell
us, that he delights as much in the damnation of the wicked, as in the
salvation of the righteous.

Now if this were all the good news that we could find, it would be very good;
to think that our God takes no pleasure in our death, and even pities us when
we feel the consequences of our transgressions, put the case that he was not
able to help us, would be infinitely more comfortable than to be told, that he
was full of fury against us, and willed our destruction. But, blessed be God,
this is not the only good news the gospel brings us; we are informed that there
is not only compassion, but help, in God for us; "O Israel, thou have destroyed
thy self, but in me is thine help; I have laid help upon one that is mighty;
there is forgiveness with thee; that thou may be feared; the LORD is
gracious, and full of compassion; slow to anger, and of great mercy; the Lord
is good to ALL; and his tender mercies are over all his works."

We are also told in the scriptures, that " God is love;" that "he is in one
mind, and who can turn him? And what his soul desires, even that he does."
God says, "I am the LORD; I change not; therefore, ye sons of Jacob are not
consumed."

The gospel not only assures us that God is love, and unchangeable goodness in
himself, but that he has manifested it in that amazing gift of his son, to be
our savior; this great truth upon which our salvation depends, is abundantly
declared in the sacred pages; "For GOD so loved the world, that he gave his
only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life; for GOD sent not his son into the world to condemn the world
(which was already condemned) but that the world through him might be saved;"
said Christ to Nicodemus. And St. Paul says, "For when we were yet without
strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly; for scarcely for a righteous
man will one die, yet peradventure for a good man some would even dare to die;
but GOD commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners
Christ died for us." And he elsewhere says, "Moreover, brethren, I declare unto
you the gospel, which I preached unto you, which also ye have received, and
wherein ye stand; by which also ye are saved, if ye keep in memory what I
preached unto you, unless ye have believed in vain, for I delivered unto you
first of all, that which I also received, how that Christ died for our sins,
according to the scriptures; and that he was buried, and that he rose again the
third day, according to the scriptures."

If we consider the gospel as the history of the mysterious incarnation, the
wonderful birth, the holy life, the cruel, shameful, and bitter death, the
glorious resurrection, the triumphant ascension, and powerful prevalent
intercession of our dear Redeemer; and then attend to these delightful blasts
of the gospel trumpet, viz. good will, peace, pardon, love, wisdom, power,
redemption, reconciliation, salvation, and then remember that the gospel not
only proclaims a Savior suitable to all our needs, but also brings near to us
a full supply for all our wants, such as life for the dead, strength for the
weak, health for the sick, deliverance for the captives, rest for the weary,
food for the hungry, drink for the thirsty, clothing for the naked, sight for
the blind, cleansing for the polluted, light for them that are in darkness, and
comfort for all that mourn; we shall view such a beauty in the gospel, if we
receive it aright, as will make us to "rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full
of glory;" and cause us to cry out, that we are "not ashamed of the gospel of
Christ; for it is the power of GOD unto salvation, to every one that
believes." Let us then attend briefly to each of these particulars.

The incarnation of Christ, or his taking our nature into union with himself,
is one of the glorious truths of the gospel; of this St. Paul says, "without
controversy, great is the mystery of godliness; GOD was manifest in the flesh;"
and again he says, "GOD sent forth his son, made of a woman, made under the
law." This was according to the prophesy of Isaiah, who said "Rehold a virgin
shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel;" of this
mysterious incarnation the Lord spoke also by Jeremiah, saying "How long will thou go about, oh thou backsliding daughter! For the Lord has created a new
thing in the earth, a woman shall compass a man." A most wonderful thing
indeed! This was joyful news to Mary, and is also to all of us; how did she
rejoice when Christ was conceived in her womb, and said, "My soul does magnify
the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior; for he has regarded
the low estate of his handmaiden; for behold from henceforth all generations
shall call me blessed; for he that is mighty has done to me great things, and
holy is his name; and his mercy is on them that fear him from generation to
generation, etc."

But as the incarnation of Christ is good news, so also is his birth. How did
Isaiah rejoice in it, long before its actual accomplishment! "For unto us a
child is born, unto us a son is given; and the government shall be upon his
shoulder; and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, The Mighty God,
The Everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace." And when Jesus was born, the
angels from heaven proclaimed the good news to the shepherds, and said, "Fear
not, for behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all
people; for unto you is born this day, in the city of David, a Savior, which
is Christ the Lord." This blessed messenger was suddenly joined by a multitude
of the heavenly host, who praised God, and said, "Glory to God in the highest,
and on earth peace; good will toward men."

If angels rejoiced in the good news of a Savior born, how much more ought we,
for whom in a more especial manner he was made flesh, and dwelt among us! This
St. Paul calls the gospel of God, to which he was separated, "Which God had
promised before by his prophets, in the holy scriptures, concerning his son,
Jesus Christ our Lord, made of the seed of David according to the flesh; and
declared to be the son of God with power, by the spirit of holiness, by the
resurrection from the dead."

Thus the birth of the Savior is good news to all people, and belongs to the
gospel, as one of the essential truths of the same. The history of the holy
life of Christ is known in sacred writ, by the name of the gospel; thus there
is the gospel according to St. Matthew, St. Mark, St. Luke, and St. John; and
St. Luke begins the book of the Acts with these words, "The former treatise
have I made, O Theophilus, of all that Jesus began, both to do, and to teach."
The glorious things taught and done by Jesus, are all worthy to be dwelt upon,
as they open a rich treasure to poor souls in the mystery. It is good news to
men, to be told that the Savior passed through life in such a manner as to
have a sympathy with all the sons and daughters of distress; if you are poor,
this was his case; he said, "Foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have
nests, but the Son of Man has not where to lay his head;" his nourishment was
often very coarse, and his fare hard; alas, how little do some professors think
of this, when they complain of every thing, as being too mean for them to eat,
drink, or wear! If you are persecuted and belied, so was he; they said he was
mad, had a devil, was a gluttonous man, and a wine bibber, a deceiver, a
blasphemer, a sabbath breaker, and in fine, that he was both an enemy to God
and man; all this the Savior bore for us; and cannot we bear a little for him?
Are you tempted? So was he, in all points like as we are, yet without sin; and
therefore knows how to succor them that are tempted. Are you forsaken by your
friends for the truth's sake? So was he. Should you be persecuted to death, he
was so too. Should a cruel shameful death be your lot, it was his also. Should
the countenance of the father be hidden from you, it was the case with him.
Thus in every circumstance of life or death, Christ has a sympathy with his
brethren.

The miracles which Christ wrought upon the bodies and souls of mankind, may be
reckoned as glad tidings, not only to those who felt the immediate benefits of
his goodness, but to us also; he healed the sick, and he is able to heal us who
have sickness of soul; he raised the dead to life, and he is able to raise
souls from the death of sin, to a life of holiness; he caused the blind to see,
the deaf to hear, the dumb to speak, the lame to walk, he cleansed the lepers,
he relieved the distressed, he cast out devils, he gave reason to those that
were mad, he fed the hungry with bread, he preached the gospel to the poor; and
all these miracles he is able and willing now to work upon the souls of men;
which is the best of news to those that feel the need of an all powerful
Savior, to do these things in and for them.

As the miracles of Christ are good news to men, so are his words. Oh, what
good news it is to hear, that "God so loved the world, as to give his only
begotten son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life; that God sent not his son into the world, to condemn the
world; but that the world through him might be saved; that all that the father
gives him, shall come to him; and that he that comes shall be in no wise cast
out!"

The rest which Christ has promised to the weary, and the safety to those that
put their trust in him, is good news; as are also all those gracious promises,
which the Savior made in his life; of which time would fail me to make mention.

The death and sufferings of Christ contain glad tidings for men; that he died
for us, is good news, that he died for all men, is better still, and that "he
shall see of the travail of his soul, and be satisfied," is the best of all.

He died for us, who believe in his name; he has opened the way, for us to
follow him through death, into endless life; "He gave himself for us, that he
might redeem us from all iniquity, and might purify to himself a peculiar
people, zealous of good works; that he might deliver us from this present evil
world; according to the will of God, and our father."

But the gospel farther assures us, that Christ died for all, as well as for
his church; "He is the propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, but
also for the sins of the whole world." There are many passages which declare
that he died for all, but never one in all the book of God, that says that he
did not die for all; and indeed if the scripture was silent in the matter,
there is one argument that would be sufficient to convince any candid,
ingenious, unprejudiced mind, that Christ died for all without exception, viz.
Christ died out of love to his poor fallen creatures; not one could be restored
unless Christ died; he must have shed all his blood to redeem but one, or few;
and he could just as easily die for all, as for one, or a small number; it
would cost him no more pain to die for all, than for some only; his blood has
as sufficient virtue to cleanse the sins of ten thousand sinful worlds, were
there so many, as of one soul.

I do not know that any would pretend to deny any part of the argument, and if
all the parts are allowed, it will follow, that it would be reasonable to
suppose (even though the scripture was silent upon the matter) that Christ died
for all, since he could as easily die for all, as for a few. That "he shall see
of the travail of his soul, and be satisfied," is a most glorious truth; he
shall not lose his labor; to him "every knee shall bow, every tongue shall
swear; all things are given to him; but now we see not yet all things put under
him; God has highly exalted him, and has given him a name, which is above
every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in
heaven, things in earth, and things under the earth; and that every tongue
should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father."

The design of God is, "That in the dispensation of the fullness of times, he
might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven,
and which are on earth, even in him; and having made peace through the blood of
his cross, by him to reconcile all things unto himself; by him I say, whether
they be things in earth, or things in heaven." Thus shall the Savior see the
fruit of his labor, in the entire destruction of sin, and the "works of the
devil," and the subjection, and obedience of all things to himself.

Thus the death of Christ is good news to men, in that it was for all; and
shall be effectual to all, for the destruction of the old man, or body of sin
in all.

Next, the resurrection of Christ comes under consideration; this is such good
news, and so much depends upon it, that if it were not true, we should be yet
in our sins; our preaching, faith, and hope, would be in vain; they that are
fallen asleep in Christ, would all be lost; and the gospel would be without a
foundation; but blessed be God, we know that "Christ is risen from the dead,
and is become the first fruits of them that slept; for as in Adam all die, even
so in Christ shall all be made alive." The resurrection of Christ confirmed his
doctrine, proved him the son of God, the Savior of the world, fulfilled the
prophesies that went before of him, laid a firm foundation for our faith and
hope, assures us of the resurrection of our bodies at last, showed his
superiority over death, hell, and the grave, was a certain prelude of the glory
of his kingdom, and of his being victorious at the last over all his enemies;
and to say all in a word, the resurrection of Christ is a full and certain
proof, that all the promises of God, not yet accomplished, shall be fulfilled
in their season; considered in all these points of light, the resurrection of
Christ is one of the greatest, best, and most important pieces of news that
ever was, or ever will be proclaimed to mankind, and which the apostles made
the principal subject of all their discourses.

The ascension of Christ is another of the glorious truths of the gospel;
Christ has "ascended on high, he has led captivity captive, he has received
gifts for men, even for the rebellious also, that God the LORD might dwell
among them." His public ascension shows his heavenly original, for says Christ,
"And no man has ascended up to Heaven but he that came down from Heaven, even
the son of man which is in Heaven; what, and if ye shall see the son of man
ascend up where he was before? In his ascension he "led captivity captive," and
thereby showed "that he had first descended into the lower parts of the earth;
he that descended is the same that ascended up far above all Heavens, that he
might fill all things." The ascension of Christ into the Heavens was a joyful
sight to his apostles, who beheld him go up; then we read, "And they worshipped
him, and returned to Jerusalem with great joy, and were continually in the
temple, praising and blessing God." It is said in the psalms, "God is gone up
with a shout, the LORD with the sound of a trumpet;" and what a glorious day it
was, when Jesus our great forerunner "entered for us into the holy place,
having obtained eternal redemption for us; into Heaven itself, now to appear in
the presence of God for us; who, when he had by himself purged our sins, sat
down at the right hand of majesty on high!"

"Seeing then that we have a great high priest that is passed into the Heavens,
Jesus the son of God, let us hold fast our profession; let us therefore come
boldly to the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help
in time of need; looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith, who,
for the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, despising the shame,
and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God;" who says, "To him that
overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame,
and am set down with my father in his throne."

Thus the ascension of Christ is good news to us; he is gone into Heaven on our
account, is accepted there, and will come again "the second time, without sin
unto salvation."

The intercession of Christ is good news to men; and therefore it is said, "Who
shall lay any thing to the charge of God's elect? It is God that justifies;
who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen
again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for
us; wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost, that come to God
by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them; and if any man
sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous."

It is glorious news that we have such an high priest at the Father's right
hand, who remembers us continually, and who is touched with a feeling of our
infirmities; for he was in the days of his flesh "in all points tempted like as
we are, yet without sin." Christ's intercession should embolden us to draw nigh
to God by prayer and supplication; for he is the angel that offers up "the
prayers of all saints, with much incense upon the golden altar, which is before
the throne;" and he will cause our petitions to come up with acceptance before
God.

Thus the gospel, as it sets forth the incarnation, birth, life, death,
resurrection, ascension, and intercession of Christ, is good news to mankind,
and what we have no reason to be ashamed of; since "it is the power of God to
salvation, to every one that believes, to the Jew first, and also to the
Greek."

The gospel proclaims " good will to men;" God's will respecting us is good, he
wills our life, and not our death; he is gracious, and "long suffering to us
ward, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance;" certainly God has good will toward his creatures, since he "will
have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth; for this
is the will of God, even your sanctification." He has more good will toward us
than we can conceive, since all the good will we have toward each other comes
from him; he is the fountain of kindness; and this good will of God is not only
proclaimed by the gospel, as one of the truths thereof, but it is the very
foundation upon which it stands; for if God had no good will toward us, he
would never have taken the least pains for our salvation, or have sent us any
glad tidings respecting the same.

The gospel also publishes peace; God says "I create the fruit of the lips;
peace, peace to him that is far off; and to him that is near says the LORD;
and I will heal him."

Of Christ it is said, "For he is our peace, who came and preached peace to you
that were afar off, and to them that were nigh;" he is called "The prince of
peace;" and the gospel is called, by way of eminence, "The gospel of peace; as
it is written, How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the gospel of
peace, and bring glad tidings of good things!"

The gospel proclaims Christ, who is the great peace maker; it proclaims peace
for dying rebellious men; it makes proposals of peace to mortals; teaches them
how to make peace with God, by taking hold of his strength; the language of it
to man is "Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at peace; thereby good shall
come unto thee;" and they who obey the gospel shall find "peace with God,
through our Lord Jesus Christ; the peace of God which passes all
understanding, shall keep their hearts and minds through Christ Jesus;" and
they shall have that kingdom within them which is "righteousness, and peace,
and joy in the Holy Ghost." It is said of Christ, "And he shall speak Peace
unto the heathen;" the gospel is the way of his speaking, "I will hear what God
the Lord will speak, he will speak peace unto his people, and to his saints;
but let them not turn again to folly." How often Christ used these words when
he was upon earth, "Peace be unto you!" And the language of the gospel is still
the same to those that believe. The spirit of the gospel is a spirit of peace;
"The work of righteousness shall be peace; and the effect of righteousness,
quietness, and assurance for ever; great peace have they which love thy law,
and nothing shall offend them; thou will keep him in perfect peace; whose mind
is stayed on thee; because he trusts in thee." Christ says to his disciples,
"Peace I leave with you, my Peace I give unto you; these things have I spoken
unto you, that in me ye might have peace." Thus the gospel proclaims peace.

Another of the glorious blasts of the gospel trumpet is pardon, or the
forgiveness of sins; "Be it known unto you therefore, men brethren, that
through this man is preached unto you the forgiveness of sins; and by him all
that believe are justified from all things, from which ye could not be
justified by the law of Moses." The language of the gospel is "Repent ye
therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times
of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord; let the wicked forsake
his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and let him return unto the
LORD, and he will have mercy upon him* and to our God, and he will abundantly
pardon." Christ himself, when he preached the gospel of the kingdom of God,
said, "The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand; repent ye, and
believe the gospel; and the apostles went out, and preached that men should
repent." So that it appears, that the gospel proclaims pardon in connection
with repentance and faith; where these are found, pardoning mercy is nigh.
Christ "was manifested to take away sin, if we confess our sins, he (God) is
faithful, and just, to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness; the blood of Jesus Christ his son, cleanses us from all sin."

Christ is as able now as ever to pardon or take away sins, and to say to the
soul, "Son, or daughter, be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee; thy
faith has saved thee, go in peace; blessed are they whose iniquities are
forgiven, and whose sins are covered."

Alas, we should have but little hope from the gospel, did it not bring us the
glad tidings of pardon; for we have a long black catalogue of sins. Let us
reckon them up. Let us think of them over and over again.

There is the sin of our nature, and there are the sins of our practice;
Our sins of principles, thoughts, words, and actions;
Of hearts, lips, and lives;
Of omission, and commission;
Of childhood, youth, and riper age;
Secret, and open;
Against God, our neighbors, and ourselves;
Against the law, and against the gospel;
Against clear light, and endearing love;
Against vows and promises to better obedience;
Against heaven, and before God.
"The crown is fallen from our head, woe unto us, that we have sinned; oh that
our heads were waters! and our eyes a fountain of tears, that we might weep day
and night for our sins!"

Perhaps some may think the above catalogue tautology, or repetition; but I
fear we have been guilty of a greater tautology in committing sins than I have
in mentioning them; but, blessed be God, the gospel proclaims pardon and
cleansing for them all, through faith in a dear redeemer's name, to the
repenting soul.

I am next to observe that the gospel proclaims love. "Love is (said to be) the
fulfilling of the law," and I am sure that it is the very substance, and
essence of the gospel; for therein a crucified Savior is proclaimed, and the
apostle John says, "Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down
his life for us; in this was manifested the love of God toward us, because
that God sent his only begotten son into the world, that we might live through
him; herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his
son to be the propitiation for our sins; and we have known and believed the
love that God has to us; God is love; and he that dwells in love, dwells
in God, and God in him; behold what manner of love the father has bestowed
upon us, that we should be called the sons of God."

The whole gospel, from beginning to end, appears to be one grand design, of
everlasting, self moved, redeeming, correcting, and restoring love. God himself
being love, and having loved all his creatures when he made them, must love
them still, unless he is changed since, which cannot be; for with him "there is
no variableness, nor shadow of turning;" and therefore it is evident, that his
love seeks the recovery, and restoration of his fallen creatures, and by all
possible methods to bring them back again to himself; for having loved us "with
an everlasting love, with loving kindness, with the cords of love, and the
bands of a man," he has drawn, and will continue to draw us, till we shall all
return again to the ocean of infinite goodness.

Oh my brethren, could we but view that love, which is in God toward each of
us, it would cause us to forsake all things, to be wholly swallowed up therein;
but I am not able to express, or declare the fullness of it to you; "Oh come,
taste, and see that the Lord is good;" sure I am, the love of Jesus is the most
powerful attraction; if this will not draw our souls to God, what will?

But the gospel not only proclaims love, but wisdom too: "We speak the wisdom
of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom which God ordained before the world
unto our glory;" Christ is preached as the wisdom of God; and he "of God is
made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption." The wisdom
of God appears great, in creation; wonderful, in providence; but oh, how will
it for ever shine in redemption! In the cross of Christ, the most consummate
wisdom appears; therefore we preach Christ crucified, "unto the Jews, a
stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness; but unto them which are called,
both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God." God's
wisdom is so great, that not one of his gracious designs shall fail; and the
very ways that his enemies take to frustrate them, shall be the means of their
accomplishment; thus "he takes the wise in their own craftiness." Had the love
of God been ever so great, if his wisdom had not been equal, love would have
been unsuccessful; but love and wisdom joined, are able to do great things;
especially when we consider another thing that the gospel proclaims with them,
even power; love, wisdom, and power, all agree in the salvation of man; what
love desires, wisdom designs, and power performs. The gospel not only proclaims
the power of God, but is itself called in my text, "The power of God unto
salvation to every one that believes;" the glorious gospel proclaims "What is
the exceeding greatness of his power to us ward who believe, according to the
working of his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him
from the dead; for though he was crucified through weakness, yet he lives
through the power of God; for the preaching of the cross is to them that perish
foolishness; but to us that are saved, it is the power of God;" the gospel is
not to be preached with the "enticing words of man's wisdom, but in
demonstration of the spirit, and of power; that your faith should not stand in
the wisdom of men, but in the power of God; for the kingdom of God is not in
word, but in power." The gospel proclaims the power of God, in raising Christ
from the dead, also Christ's power in raising us from the death of sin; as also
the power that is given to him, to subdue all things, and totally to destroy
all the works of sin, death and the devil. "God has spoken once, twice have I
heard this, that power belongs unto God;" and oh, what a comforting thought
is this, that the God of love is also a God of wisdom, and of power, so that
his designs of grace shall not fail!

In the gospel is proclaimed, "The love of Christ, that passes knowledge; the
manifold wisdom of God; and the exceeding greatness of his power."

The gospel publishes redemption to all, through the blood o Christ; "Ye know
that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from
your vain conversation, received by tradition from your fathers; but with the
precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish, and without spot; in
whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according
to the riches of his grace; Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law,
being made a curse for us; that the blessing of Abraham might come on the
Gentiles, through Jesus Christ; that we might receive the promise of the
spirit, through faith; being justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption that is in Christ Jesus; God sent forth his son, made of a woman,
made under the law, that he might redeem them that were under the law; that we
might receive the adoption of sons."

Christ is said in scripture to have "by his own blood entered in once into the
holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us; and for this cause he is
the mediator of the New Testament, that by means of death, for the redemption
of the transgressions that were under the First Testament, they which are
called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance." Thus we see that
redemption through or by the blood of Christ is a scripture doctrine, and
proclaimed in the gospel, and is for all; but there is an order to be observed
therein; for first, we read of a peculiar number, called "The hundred and forty
and four thousand, which had the name of God written upon their foreheads.
These are they which were not defiled with women, for they are virgins; these
are they which follow the lamb whithersoever he goes: These were redeemed from
amongst men, being the first fruits unto God and the lamb; and in their mouth
was found no guile; for they are without fault before the throne of God; and
they sung as it were a new song before the throne, and before the four beasts,
and the elders; and no man could learn that song but the hundred and forty and
four thousand, which were redeemed from the earth; the four beasts, and four
and twenty elders, fell down before the lamb, having every one of them harps,
and golden vials full of odours, which are the prayers of saints; and they sung
a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open the seals
thereof; for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of
every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation; and have made us unto our
God kings and priests; and we shall reign on the earth." Thus we see a
redemption the first born, and first fruits; but does this exclude the rest of
mankind from any share in the redemption of Christ? Far from it; for St. John
says, "After this I beheld, and lo a great multitude, which no man could
number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the
throne, and before the lamb, clothed with white robes, and palms in their
hands; and cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God which sits
upon the throne, and unto the lamb." Here we see a body quite different from
the church of the first born, and first fruits, which yet at last are to share
in the glorious salvation of Christ; these though they came out of great
tribulation, washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the lamb.
But as if this was not enough to prove the redemption of all, St. John says,
"And every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth,
and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I, saying, Blessing
and honor and glory and power be unto him that sits upon the throne, and
unto the lamb for ever and ever." It is impossible to find a single rational
being in the universe excepted in this description; and therefore it is plain
that all shall at last share in the redemption which is proclaimed in the
gospel; which is a redemption, from sin and death, through the all powerful,
all cleansing blood of our glorious redeemer.

Another glorious truth which the gospel publishes, is reconciliation between
God and creatures, without which there could be no possibility of salvation or
restoration for fallen intelligences; and therefore the scripture speaks of
reconciliation often, and the gospel proclaims it to mankind as good news; "For
if when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his son, much
more being reconciled we shall be saved by his life. And all things are of God,
who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and has given to us the
ministry of reconciliation; to wit, that God was in Christ reconciling the
world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them; and has committed
unto us the word of reconciliation; now then we are ambassadors for Christ, as
though God did beseech you by us: We pray you in Christ's stead, Be ye
reconciled to God."

Christ has abolished in his flesh the "Law of commandments contained in
ordinances, for to make in himself of twain one new man, so making peace; and
that he might reconcile both unto God in one body, having slain the enmity
thereby. Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his
brethren; that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest, in things
pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people."

Thus you see that the gospel is called "The word of reconciliation," it
informs us that the blood of Christ has opened a way for an entire
reconciliation between God and us; therein we are kindly entreated to be
reconciled to God, since the alteration must be on our part. Christ by his
death laid the foundation for a perfect reconciliation between Jews and
Gentiles; and the gospel assures us that he will finally reconcile all
creatures to God, himself, and to each other.

"For it pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell; and having
made peace through the blood of his cross, by him to reconcile all things unto
himself, by him I say, whether they be things in earth, or things in heaven;
and you that were sometimes alienated and enemies in your mind by wicked works,
yet now has he reconciled;" and can and will at last reconcile all things to
himself. Oh glorious period, when all enmity, malice, and wrath shall cease out
of the creation, and all creatures shall be reconciled to God and each other,
through Jesus Christ the great reconciler!

Thus the gospel brings us the glad tidings of reconciliation.

The gospel of Christ also proclaims salvation; and this one word includes all
that has been spoken.

The very name "Jesus" signifies "a Savior;" thus said the angel "And thou
shall call his name JESUS; for he shall save his people from their sins:" and
so we read, "And when eight days were accomplished for the circumcising of the
child, his name was called JESUS, which was so named of the angel before he was
conceived in the womb." Every time we read or hear that sweet name JESUS, we
should remember that is always signifies a Savior, and thus the angel said
"For unto you is born this day, in the city of David, a Savior, which is
Christ the Lord." Christ and his salvation is the sum of the gospel, which in
my text is said to be "the power of God unto salvation to every one that
believes, to the Jew first, and also to the Greek."

When Simeon took the child Jesus into his arms he said, "Lord now let thou
thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word; for mine eyes have seen thy
salvation, which thou have prepared before the face of all people; a light to
lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel." This salvation shall
be so universal, that "every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and
hill shall be brought low; and the crooked shall be made straight, and the
rough ways shall be made smooth; and all flesh shall see the salvation of God."
When Christ came into the house of Zaccheus he said, "This day is salvation
come to this house; for the son of man is come to seek and to save that which
was lofts"

Wherever the gospel is received in the love of it, thither salvation comes,
and the blessed effects of it are perceived in the soul; the gospel salvation,
if it prevails in the heart, delivers from the love, reigning power, and guilt
of sin, from the curse of the law, and the wrath to come.

This is called in scripture "The end of faith; even the salvation of souls; of
which salvation the prophets have inquired and searched diligently." This
salvation is wholly ascribed to the grace and mercy of God in Jesus Christ,
"For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves, it is the
gift of God; according to his mercy he saved us by the washing of regeneration,
and renewing of the Holy Ghost. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners;" this is
glorious news indeed, that Christ came into the world to save sinners; if this
is worthy of all acceptance, as doubtless it is, how much more is it so when
we are told he came to save or restore all; as St. Paul says, "This is a
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance; for therefore we both labor
and suffer reproach, because we trust in the living God, who is the savior of
all men, specially of those that believe." Those who believe, and follow
Christ, shall be saved from the second death, "and shall not come into
condemnation;" but the grace of God shall finally extend to the salvation or
restoration of all men, and therefore we are taught to pray for all men; "For
this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, who will have all
men to be saved or restored, and to come to the knowledge of the truth; for
there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus;
who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time." Thus the
salvation proclaimed in the gospel, is a great, a glorious, a powerful, and
universal salvation; "Behold, now is the accepted time, behold now is the day
of salvation," even the gospel day, and while that lasts, the day of salvation
shall last also; for so long as the everlasting gospel shall be proclaimed, so
long shall the everlasting salvation of God be manifested to his creatures.
This salvation is published to mankind, that they may look unto Jesus, who
says, "Look unto me and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth; for I am God,
and there is none else;" but woe to them who reject the gospel, "For if the word
spoken by angels was steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience
received a just recompense of reward, how shall we escape if we neglect so
great salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was
confirmed unto us by them that heard him? See that ye refuse not him that
speaks, for if they escaped not who refused him that spoke on earth, much
more shall not we escape if we turn away from him that speaks from heaven."

But blessed are they that can rejoice and say, "The Lord is my light, and my
salvation, whom shall I fear? The LORD is the strength of my life; of whom
shall I be afraid? Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust, and not be
afraid; for the LORD JEHOVAH is my strength, and my song; he also is become my
salvation; therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of
salvation."

God is frequently called "The God of our salvation. Salvation is of the Lord;
his blessing is upon his people; surely his salvation is nigh them that fear
him; that glory may dwell in our land;" and the Lord says, "And to him that
orders his conversation aright, will I show the salvation of God." Thus we
have seen that the gospel proclaims salvation to men through Jesus Christ; the
whole scripture seems full of this glorious sound salvation; all sorts of
characters are called to attend thereto; God says, "Hearken unto me, ye stout
hearted, ye that are far from righteousness; I bring near my righteousness; it
shall not be far off, and my salvation shall not tarry; and I will place
salvation in Zion, for Israel my glory; hearken unto me, ye that follow after
righteousness, ye that seek the LORD; hearken unto me, my people, and give ear
to me, O my nation; my righteousness is near, my salvation is gone forth; lift
up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon the earth beneath; for the heavens
shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a garment, and
they that dwell therein shall die in like manner; but my salvation shall be for
ever, and my righteousness shall not be abolished: Hearken unto me ye that know
righteousness, the people in whose heart is my law; fear ye not the reproach of
men, neither be ye afraid of their revilings; for the moth shall eat them up
like a garment, and the worm shall eat them up like wool; but my righteousness
shall be for ever, and my salvation from generation to generation." Here you
see there is no exception, all are called to hearken to the joyful news of
God's salvation. This is a most glorious subject, and you that love it, will
not be weary of hearing of "The grace of God that brings salvation, that has
appeared to all men, teaching us, that denying ungodliness, and worldly lusts,
we should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world. This
salvation is the theme of the blessed saints above, and shall be the song of
all men at last, when they shall submit to Jesus; when they come out of great
tribulation, they shall cry and shout aloud, "Salvation to our God which
sits upon the throne, and unto the lamb;" O glorious period, when all shall
experience the salvation of our God! This theme of the salvation published in
the gospel, is so glorious; that no heart can conceive, tongue declare, nor pen
describe its beauties; O that every soul in the universe could hear it, and
feel its blessed effects! How would they rejoice with joy unspeakable! Glory to
God, it shall be testified to all in due time; and its power shall be felt by
the most stubborn hearts. That powerful hand that has laid the foundation,
"shall bring forth the head stone with shoutings, crying, Grace, grace unto
it." O my brethren, let us take the apostle's advice, who says, "Work out your
own salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God that works in you both
to will and to do of his good pleasure." We enjoy a blessed dispensation; a
glorious price is put into our hands to get wisdom with; O let us not
misimprove it, for great will be our condemnation if we do. Let us consider
that Christ came not to save us in but from our sins; and let us constantly
remember that salvation is nothing but a deliverance from sin and its effects;
therefore we should seek continually to be purged and cleansed from "all
filthiness of flesh and spirit, and to be perfecting holiness in the fear of
God, that we may be found of him in peace, without spot and blameless; and let
us account that the long suffering of our Lord is salvation; and to day after
so long a time, as it is said, To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not
your hearts." They who believe in this salvation shall never have occasion to
be ashamed of their confidence, "Israel shall be saved in the LORD with an
everlasting salvation; ye shall not be ashamed nor confounded world without
end." So we see that it is a sure, never failing, full, free, rich, powerful
and universal salvation, which the gospel proclaims; and is worthy of the
attention of all mankind. Let us therefore adore the God of our salvation, "who
has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works,
but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus
before the world began." In the midst of all the delusions, errors and darkness
of our day, which so exceedingly prevail, and shall bring a terrible
destruction upon those who believe not the truth, but have pleasure in
unrighteousness, we may say with the apostle, "But we are bound to give thanks
always to God for you, brethren, beloved of the Lord, because God has from the
beginning chosen you to salvation, through sanctification of the spirit, and
belief of the truth; whereunto he called you by our gospel, to the obtaining of
the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ." We will now conclude this part of the
blessed subject, that we have dwelt upon so long, with the words of David,
"Turn us O God of our salvation, and we shall be turned; cause thy face to
shine upon us, and we shall be saved; will thou not revive us again; that thy
people may rejoice in thee? Show us thy mercy, O LORD, and grant us thy
salvation."

SERMON II.
For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ; for it is the power of God unto
salvation to every one that believes; to the Jew first, and also to the Greek.
Romans i. 16.
THE gospel of Christ proclaims a savior suitable to all our needs, and those
glorious blessings of which it speaks, are brought nigh to us therein; so that
we have no occasion to say in our hearts, "Who shall ascend into heaven? that
is to bring Christ down from above; or, Who shall descend into the deep? that
is to bring up Christ again from the dead;" for the word is nigh unto us, the
blessings of the gospel continually seek to open themselves in our mouths and
hearts, that we might feel the power in our souls, and obey the precepts in our
lives.

The gospel brings near life for the dead; by nature we are dead to the divine
life, we are poor fallen miserable creatures, full of the darkness and fire of
hell, surrounded with a body of gross flesh and blood, which whenever it falls
off (unless we have the life of God revealed in us) leaves us shut up in our
own wrathful fire, which is our proper hell. People may deny being in a fallen
state, but he only who never felt, nor ever shall feel natural hunger, thirst,
sorrow, pain, death, selfishness, envy, pride, wrath, vexation, disappointment,
chagrin, or misery of any kind, can say with truth, that he has no share in
the fall. We feel in us a "carnal mind, which is enmity against God, which is
not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be;" and must therefore be
slain. "For to be carnally minded is death;" and from this dreadful death the
gospel comes to deliver us; "And you has he quickened, who were dead in
trespasses and sins; "Christ says, Verily, verily, I say unto you, the hour is
coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the son of God; and
they that hear shall live:"

"I am the resurrection and the life, he that believes in me, though he were
dead, yet shall he live. He that believes on the son has everlasting life: He
that has the son has life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is
passed from death unto life." The language of the gospel is, "Hear, and your
souls shall live;" and the scriptures of the New Testament often speak of
Christ as our life, as giving himself for the life of the world; and where the
spirit of the gospel is received, it destroys or crucifies the life of the old
man, which consists in selfishness, self righteousness, envy, pride, malice,
wrath, and the works of the flesh; and raises up the life of God in the soul,
which consists in benevolence, humility, meekness, and submission to the will
of God; or as the apostle expresses the matter, the spirit of the gospel brings
forth its own fruit, which is "love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance; against such there is no law; and they
that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts."

The gospel brings strength for the weak; it is said of Christ, "A bruised reed
shall he not break, and smoking flax shall he not quench till he send forth
judgment into victory." It is good to feel our own weakness, that we may be
able to say with St. Paul, "When I am weak, then am I strong; I can do all
things through Christ which strengthens me."

St. Paul had a gracious answer, when he prayed to have the thorn in his flesh
removed, which was, "My grace is sufficient for thee; for my strength is made
perfect in weakness." Upon which St. Paul says, "Most gladly therefore will I
rather glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me."

By receiving the gospel in our hearts, we are enabled to say, "God is the
strength of my heart," for "surely shall one say, In the Lord have I
righteousness and strength."

"Wait on the LORD; be of good courage; and he shall strengthen thine heart; he
gives power to the faint, and to them that have no might he increases
strength; they that wait upon the LORD shall renew their strength; they shall
mount up with wings as eagles; they shall run and not be weary, they shall walk
and not faint; for as thy days, so shall thy strength be." Thus the gospel may
be said to bring strength near to the weak, as it teaches us where all our help
lies, and directs us how to obtain it; and not only so, but the power of God in
the gospel strengthens and enables us to do his will, and to bear those things
which are laid upon us, which of ourselves we could not endure; and thus
through the strength of God revealed in the gospel, "The feeble shall be as
David; and the house of David shall be as God, as the angel of the LORD before
them." What a blessed thing it is, when we are surrounded with many powerful
foes, to know that through the "blood of the lamb, and the word of our
testimony," which is the gospel, we shall overcome them! And when we are called
to do, or suffer the will of God (for which we are not sufficient of ourselves)
to know that our sufficiency is of God, and that the strength which the gospel
brings near, is abundantly sufficient to enable us to do and suffer all that is
required of us!

The gospel brings health for the sick; Christ says, "They that are whole need
not a physician, but they that are sick."

By nature we are all diseased, "The whole head is sick;" but a considerable
part of our misery is that we know it not, or do not consider it; but when a
soul truly comes to be sick of sin, the health brought by the gospel is ready
for its relief. Christ is represented as a physician, and he is more excellent
for the soul than any man is or can be for the body. An earthly physician
though he may have great knowledge of the constitutions and disorders of
bodies, yet knows not all, he may be often ignorant both of the constitution
and disorder; but Christ, the great physician of souls, knows the frame and
temper of every mind, he knows also every disease or disorder that can be found
in fallen creatures; he never can be imposed upon or mistaken in any case.

A physician of the body, though he may have great skill in curing diseases, is
not able to cure all; neither his skill nor his medicines are sufficient at all
times, and for all disorders; but Christ has both wisdom and virtue enough to
cure the dreadful disease of sin, and all that dismal train of evils attendant
upon the same.

The best physician of the body is sometimes without those medicines which are
most suitable for the diseases of his patients; but Christ has a salve for
every sore, a balm for every wound, a cordial for every fainting soul; and in a
word, every thing necessary for the utter destruction of sin, and the salvation
of the poor miserable creatures that are infected thereby.

A physician may be skilful, and have store of medicines, but may not be at
hand when he is needed, and the patient may perish for want of assistance; but
Christ is always nigh to us, he is a God always at hand, all things are naked
to his sight; he knows our needs, and when to apply his mercies to us for our
good; "he is not far from every one of us, if happily we might feel after him and
find him, for in him we live, and move, and have our being. The Lord is nigh to
them that are of a broken heart, and saves such as be of a contrite spirit."

A physician commonly expects a great reward for his attendance and means; but
Christ heals us freely, and his grace is without money, and without price.

A physician may have great love for his patients, may take a tender care of
them, may give them medicines, etc. but few would give much of their blood, if
necessary for their patient's health, and perhaps no^^ would give all their
blood to save the lives of those whom they attended; but Christ saw the
dreadful estate into which we were fallen, he saw and knew that nothing but his
heart's blood could heal our sickness, or cure the dreadful wounds that sin had
given us, and he freely gave his life to destroy our death, and shed his blood
as the powerful medicine to restore our health, and to be in us the principle
of a new life, or heavenly body. Thus the gospel brings health to the sick,
inasmuch as it brings Christ, the great physician, near to our souls; so that
we may say with the prophet, "Is there no balm in Gilead? Is there no physician
there? Why then is not the health of the daughter of my people recovered?"
Because she refuses to apply there for relief, not sufficiently feeling her
need.

The gospel brings deliverance for the captives; freedom for those that are in
slavery, and the opening of the prison doors to those that are bound. By nature
we are captives of Satan, slaves to sin, and prisoners bound in chains of
iniquities, but the glorious gospel brings us deliverance, freedom and
enlargement. Christ is anointed by the spirit of the Lord, and is sent "To
preach good tidings to the meek, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the
opening of the prison to them that are bound, to set at liberty those that are
bruised; to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in
darkness out of the prison house. Shall the prey be taken from the mighty? Or
the lawful captive delivered? But thus says the LORD, Even the captive of the
mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered.
The captive exile hasteneth that he may be loosed, and that he should not die
in the pit, nor that his bread should fail." Christ said to the Jews which
believed on him, "If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed;
and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free;" they could not
admit that they were in bondage, as they were Abraham's seed; but Jesus said,
"Verily, verily I say unto you, Whosoever commits sin is the servant of sin;
and the servant abides not in the house for ever, but the son abides ever; if
the son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed."

The gospel teaches us that the way to be free from the bondage and slavery of
sin is to die thereto, "For he that is dead is freed from sin; being then made
free from sin, ye became the servants of righteousness; for when ye were the
servants of sin ye were free from righteousness; but now being made free from
sin, and having become servants to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and
the end everlasting life." Thus the liberty which the gospel proclaims is not a
liberty or license to sin (as some suppose and even affirm that we say) but a
freedom from sin, which is the only true liberty in the world; for whatever
freedom false teachers may promise mankind, while they themselves are servants
of corruption, the gospel teacher us that true liberty consists only in dying
to sin, and living to righteousness, or in glorifying God in our bodies and
spirits, which are God's. The gospel proclaims that Christ has a power both
over the living and the dead, and he who once descended "and preached to the
spirits in prison, which sometime were disobedient, when once the long
suffering of God waited in the days of Noah; he who has the keys of hell and
death; who opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no man opens;" has
all power to break the chains that hold the creation in the bondage of
corruption, and to bring the whole "into the glorious liberty of the children
of God; and by the blood of his covenant, to send forth his prisoners out of
the pit wherein is no water." Thus the gospel may be truly said to bring
deliverance to the captives, etc. as it proclaims an all powerful savior, with
whom all things are possible.

To you who have been already made free by the power of the gospel, St. Paul's
exhortation is not amiss, "Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ
has made us free, and be not, entangled again with the yoke of bondage; for
brethren ye have been called unto liberty, only use not liberty for an occasion
to the flesh, but by love serve one another." Let us always remember that the
spirit of the gospel is a spirit of true freedom, as the apostle says, "Now
the Lord is that spirit; and where the spirit of the Lord is there is liberty."
Christ makes us free from sin, that we may be engaged in his service, which is
perfect freedom in itself, as a liberty to sin would be the greatest slavery
imaginable.

The gospel brings rest for the weary; "Come unto me, all ye that labor and
are heavy laden, and I will give you rest; take my yoke upon you, and learn of
me; for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto your souls*
for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light," says the glorious redeemer. And
it is a truth, that "we which have believed do enter into rest; for he that is
entered into his rest, he also has ceased from his own works, as God did from
his."

There is a rest into which believers in Christ enter by faith, which is a rest
from their own works of sin, the spirit of the Lord causes them to rest in
peace. And "there is a rest which remains for the people of God," which we
are exhorted to labor after, that we may enter thereinto, and not fall short
through unbelief; this is the rest of the Lord, which shall be glorious; and
happy are they who by the grace of God shall obtain it.

The gospel proclaims the true rest to mankind, saying, "This is the rest
wherewith ye may cause the weary to rest, and this is the refreshing;" yet,
alas, how much is this heavenly rest rejected! But those who sensibly feel the
burden and weight of their sins, and can find no rest in themselves, will hear
the news of rest in Christ with joy, and esteem it as the best of tidings;
Christ to such is "As the shadow of a great rock in a weary land; a refuge from
the storm, a shadow from the heat, when the blast of the terrible ones is as a
storm against the wall; a hiding place from the wind, and a covert from the
tempest." He is all that a weary, trembling, fainting soul can desire, both for
safety, rest, and refreshment.

The gospel brings food for the hungry, and drink for the thirsty: Christ says
"I am the bread of life; he that comes to me shall never hunger, and he that
believes on me shall never thirst; for the bread of God is he which comes,
down from heaven, and gives life unto the world; I am that bread of life; this
is the bread which comes down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and not
die; I am the living bread, which came down from heaven, if any man eat of this
bread, he shall live for ever; and the (...) that I will give, is my flesh
(...) I will give for the life of the (...); verily, verily I say unto you,
(...) ye eat the flesh of the son (...) man, and drink his blood, ye (...) no
life in you; whosoever eats (...) flesh, and drinks my blood, has eternal
life; and I will raise him up at the last day; for my flesh is meat indeed, and
my blood is drink indeed; he that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood,
dwells in me, and I in him: As the living father has sent me, and I live by
the father; so he that eats me, even he shall live by me; this is that bread
which came down from heaven; he that eats of this bread shall live for ever.
It is the spirit that quickens; the words that I speak unto you they are
spirit, and they are life." These are our Savlour's own words, spoken in one
discourse, and show us that our souls must as really and truly feed on him by
faith, to have eternal life, as our bodies must feed on earthly food, in order
for their support.

The language of the gospel is "Ho every one that thirsts, come ye to the
waters, and he that has no money, come ye, buy and eat; yea, come, buy wine
and milk without money, and without price; wherefore do ye spend money for that
which is not bread? and your labor for that which satisfies not? hearken
diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight
itself in fatness."

The language of wisdom to men without understanding is "Come eat of my bread,
and drink of the wine which I have mingled."

Christ said to the woman of Samaria, "If thou knew the gift of God, and who
it is that faith, to thee, Give me to drink, thou would have asked of him,
and he would have given thee living water: Whosoever drinks of the water that
I shall give him shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall
be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life." And the
evangelist John says, "In the last day, that great day of the feast, Jesus
stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink; he
that believes on me, as the scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow
rivers of living water." And St. John elsewhere has these words. "And the
spirit and the bride say, Come; and let him that hears say, Come; and let him
that is athirst come; and whosoever will, let him take the water of life
freely."

St. Peter also exhorts us to lay aside "all malice, and all guile, and
hypocrisies, and envies, and all evil speakings; and as new born babes, to
desire the sincere milk of the word, that we may grow thereby; if we have
tasted that the Lord is gracious;" and the psalmist says, "Oh taste, and see,
that the Lord is good." Now from all these passages, and many more that might
be mentioned, we see that the gospel brings near food to the hungry, and drink
to the thirsty; yea the gospel itself is often compared to food and drink; Job
says, "I have esteemed the words of his mouth more than my necessary food;"
David says, "How sweet are thy words to my taste! yea sweeter than honey to my
mouth;" Jeremiah says, "Thy words were found, and I did eat them;" and Solomon
says, "As cold waters to a thirsty soul, so is good news from a far country."

They who receive the gospel aright, find it as pleasant and useful to their
souls, as food and drink are to the bodies of those who hunger and thirst; yea
Christ has said, "Blessed are they who hunger and thirst after righteousness;
for they shall be filled;" thereby teaching us that spiritual things are as
really the objects of the spiritual faculties, or senses of the soul, as
natural things are of those of the body; and that our desires, or faith, must
go forth, and long for the bread and water of life in order to obtain it, as
really as our bodies hunger and thirst after their food and drink.

Yea our Savior has taught us to ask food for our souls of our heavenly
father, with the same freedom and importunity as children ask food of their
parents; and he has assured us that God will no more deny us, if we hunger,
thirst, ask, seek, and knock aright, that is if our hearts, wills, and
affections go out in longing after spiritual food, than parents would mock the
hunger and requests of their children, with stones, serpents and scorpions.

The gospel brings near clothing for the naked; Christ exhorts the church of
the Laodiceans, saying, "I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire,
that thou may be rich, and white raiment that thou may be clothed, and
that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear." We come into the world naked,
having lost the white garment of innocence and immortality, and are clothed
only with the flesh and blood of the fallen Adam; therefore one great design of
the gospel is to direct us how to obtain the true wedding garment, wherein we
may stand complete before God; this garment is the image of Christ, or the
house from Heaven, which we are exhorted to put on. We become clothed with the
garments of salvation, in the same manner as we are clothed with the flesh and
blood of Adam, viz. by being born again of the water and spirit, as we have
been born of the flesh; by feeding on Christ spiritually, as we naturally feed
on earthly food; and by growing up into conformity to the Savior: and thus we
come to bear the image of the heavenly, in the same manner as we have born the
image of the earthy, viz. by a participation of nature, and proper nourishment,
by which we grow up (...) conformity, to the image either (...) Adam or Christ,
according to the principle that rules in us, be it the earthy or heavenly.

When we come to be completely clothed in the image of Christ, having "put off
the old man with his deeds, and have put on the new man, which is renewed in
knowledge, after the image of him that created him in righteousness, and true
holiness," then we may say with the prophet, "I will greatly rejoice in the
LORD, my soul shall be joyful in my God; for he has clothed me with the
garments of salvation, he has covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a
bridegroom decketh himself with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth herself with
her jewels." Such who in this time obtain this pure garment, shall be admitted
to the marriage supper of the lamb, being arrayed in this "fine linen, clean
and white; for the fine linen is the righteousness of saints; the king's
daughter is all glorious within; her clothing is of wrought gold; she shall be
brought unto the king in raiment of needle work."

The prophet exhorts the church saying, "Awake, awake; put on thy strength, O
Zion; put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem;" and the apostle exhorts us
to "be clothed with humility;" and the language of Christ is, "Behold I come as
a thief, blessed is he that watches and keeps his garments; lest he walk
naked, and they see his shame."

It is said of the church of Sardis, "Thou have a few names even in Sardis that
have not defiled their garments; and they shall walk with me in white, for they
are worthy; he that overcomes, the same shall be clothed in white raiment."

It is a blessed thing "to be clothed upon with our house which is from Heaven,
if so be that being clothed we shall not be found naked; for we that are in
this tabernacle do groan, being burdened; not for that we would be unclothed,
but clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of life."

The gospel teaches us how to obtain that wedding garment, without which none
can be admitted into the kingdom of God, or be received as guests at the
marriage supper of the lamb; and we are exhorted to "put on the Lord Jesus
Christ," that we may stand complete in him at last, "without spot, or wrinkle,
or any such thing." They who come wholly to be clothed with the nature of
Christ here, will be immediately received into his presence with joy; but those
who have even died as martyrs for Christ, before they have thoroughly obtained
this robe (as doubtless many have) are represented in scripture, as having
their souls under the altar, and crying to God to avenge them; and it is said,
"And white robes were given unto every one of them;" also the "great multitude
that no man could number, stood before the throne, and before the lamb, clothed
with white robes, and palms in their hands; these are they which came out of
great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the
blood of the lamb."

All these passages show, that none can be perfectly happy till they have
obtained the white garments of salvation, or have put on righteousness as a
robe, and washed all their stains away in the blood of Christ. Those who
adventure to come to the heavenly feast, without the wedding garment on, will
be found speechless, and be bound hand and foot, and cast "into outer darkness,
where there shall be weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth;" from whence they
never shall come out, till the garment or body of sin shall be totally
destroyed, in order that they may be clothed in white robes, and received into
the presence of God.

The glorious gospel brings near clothing for the naked, and we should make it
our great concern to "be found in Christ, not having our own righteousness, but
that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by
faith."

The gospel brings near sight for the blind; Christ was anointed for the
"recovering of sight to the blind," he was given "for a covenant to the people,
for a light of the Gentiles, to open the blind eyes;" and the prophet speaking
of the kingdom of Christ, says, "Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened;"
and again he says, "Hear, ye deaf, and look, ye blind, that ye may see;" and
Christ sent word to John, saying, "The blind receive their sight, etc." and
there are among the miracles of Christ several very particular instances of his
giving sight to the blind; at one time we read of "two blind men sitting by the
way side, when they heard that Jesus passed by, cried out, saying, Have mercy
on us, O Lord, thou son of David; and the multitude rebuked them, because they
should hold their peace; but they cried the more, saying, Have mercy on us, O
Lord, thou son of David. And Jesus stood still, and called them, and said, What
will ye that I should do unto you? they said unto him, Lord, that our eyes may
be opened. So Jesus had compassion on them, and touched their eyes; and
immediately their eyes received sight, and they followed him." There is a
similar account of one "blind Bartimeus, the son of Timeus, who sat by the high
way side, begging," who called upon Jesus with the same earnestness, and under
the same discouragements, and received his sight in the same manner; this
instance is twice mentioned in the scriptures. There is also that wonderful
relation of the man that was born blind, and healed by Christ, set down at
large by St. John, and which is worthy of our attention; he could say, when
reviled by the Pharisees, "One thing I know, that whereas I was blind, now I
see;" and he bore such a faithful testimony for Christ, and so reproved the
Pharisees, that they cast him out of the synagogue; upon which Christ observes,
saying, "For judgment I am come into this world; that they which see not might
see, and that they which see might be made blind."

As Christ opened the eyes of those whose bodies were blind, so the design of
the gospel is "to open the eyes of the people, and to turn men from darkness to
light: for God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in
our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face
of Jesus Christ."

Christ counsels the Laodicean church, saying, "And anoint thine eyes with eye
salve, that thou may see."

Blindness is one of the greatest natural infirmities that we are subject to,
and spiritual blindness is a criminal disorder, much more terrible: We are by
nature blind to our own character, to the character of the deity, to the
glorious way of salvation by Christ, to the beauties of the gospel, and in
general to spiritual things; "the natural man receives not the things of the
spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned."

We love darkness rather than light, yea we even hate the light, and shut our
eyes against it, because it reproves us; but when we come to be willing to
receive the gospel, and the love of the truth, we then find that "the
commandment of the LORD is pure enlightening the eyes;" and that "the entrance
of his word gives light;" and thus we are saved from our blindness, and
brought to see things as they are, and "with open face, beholding as in a glass
the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image, from glory to glory, as
by the spirit of the Lord."

The gospel proclaims and brings near cleansing for the polluted; we are all
defiled and polluted with iniquity; but there is "a fountain opened for sin and
uncleanness." The great atonement of Christ was intended to cleanse us from
sin, and not to extinguish a wrath in the Deity, as some imagine; hence it is
said of Christ, "When he had by himself purged our sins, he sat down on the
right hand of the majesty on high; for if the blood of bulls and goats and the
ashes of an heifer, sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the
flesh, how much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit
offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works, to
serve the living God? And almost all things are by the law purged with blood;
and without shedding of blood is no remission; it was therefore necessary that
the patterns of things in the heavens should be purified with these; but the
heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these; for it is not
possible that the blood of bulls and goats should take away sins; wherefore
Jesus, that he might sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without
the gate; he gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity,
and purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous unto good works." And we are
told that "the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin," and "that he
was manifested to take away our sins." Surely nothing can be plainer than that
the design of the atonements under the law was to cleanse from ceremonial
pollution, and it is evident that the blood of Christ was shed to cleanse us
from all our filthiness. Oftentimes in scripture God is pleased to promise
cleansing to the polluted, "Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as
white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool: Then
will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean; from all your
filthiness, and from all your idols will I cleanse you; I will also save you
from all your uncleanness." So we read, "If we confess our sins, he is
faithful, and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness:" so that it is evident that one grand design of the gospel is
to bring near cleansing for the polluted. Since none but the pure in heart can
see God; "nothing that defiles can enter into the holy city; nothing that
works abomination, no whoremonger^ nor unclean person has any inheritance in
the kingdom of Christ and of God; know ye not that the unrighteouss shall not
inherit the kingdom of God? be not deceived; neither fornicators, nor
idolators, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with
mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor
extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God; and such were some of you, but
ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, in the name of the
Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God," says St. Paul to the Corinthians;
and to the Galatians he says, "Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which
are these, adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry,
witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies,
envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like; of the which I tell
you before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such
things shall not inherit the kingdom of God;" and Christ himself says, "Out of
the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts,
false witness, blasphemies, covetousness, wickedness, deceit, lasciviousness,
an evil eye, pride, foolishness, all these evil things come from within, and
defile the man." Since then it is evident that we must be cleansed from all
impurity, before we can enter into the kingdom of God, what reason have we to
magnify that rich grace, that brings cleansing for our polluted souls! Let us
therefore apply "to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things than
that of Abel;" that all our pollutions may be washed away, in that fountain
which only is able to cleanse us from all "sin and uncleanness."

The gospel brings near light for them that are in darkness; Christ in the
gospel says "to the prisoners, Go forth; and to them that are in darkness, Show
yourselves." Yea he brings "them that sit in darkness, out of the prison
house;" and says "I will make darkness light before them."

The scripture says, "Who is among you that fears the LORD, that obeys the
voice of his servant, that walks in darkness, and has no light? Let him
trust in the name of the LORD, and stay upon his God;" and the prophet says,
"Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy; when I fall I shall arise; when I sit in
darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me; he will bring me forth to the
light, and I shall behold his righteousness. Light is sown for the righteous;
unto the upright there arises light in the darkness."

As the gospel is compared to light in many places in scripture, it is a very
natural idea of it to suppose that it enlightens those who receive it, and
directs them in the way wherein they should go. David says, "Thy word is a lamp
to my feet, and a light to my path." The gospel is of more use to the souls of
men than the light of the sun is to their bodies; and if Christ's disciples are
called "The light of the world," with how much propriety may his gospel be
called so! Without the gospel, what darkness should we grope in! What ignorance
of God and ourselves would overshadow us! And it is to be lamented, that even
where the gospel shines in its purity, it is hidden to many, "In whom the God
of this world has blinded the minds of them which believe not, left the light
of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto
them;" the fault lies not in the gospel, that men see not, but in that enmity
which causes them to shut their eyes against the light. But where the gospel is
received in the love of it, light is not so dear to the eyes, neither so
pleasant, nor useful to the body, as the knowledge of the truth is to the soul.

The gospel brings near comfort for all that mourn; it is said of Christ that
he is anointed "to comfort all that mourn, to appoint unto them that mourn in
Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the
garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness." Christ says, in that never
enough admired sermon on the mount, "Blessed are they that mourn, for they
shall be comforted." Mourning in its own nature is good for the soul, as it
tends to hinder the rank weeds of pride and vanity from springing up; and for
this reason it is that Solomon says, "It is better to go to the house of
mourning, than to go to the house of feasting; sorrow is better than laughter;
for by the sadness of the countenance the heart is made better; the heart of
the wise is in the house of mourning; but the heart of fools is in the house of
mirth." But the mourning that is most commended in scripture, is a mourning for
sin, as it is against a holy God, and as it has pierced the Savior, and
wounded the soul; thus it is said, "But they that escape of them shall escape,
and shall be on the mountains like doves of the valleys, all of them mourning,
every one for his iniquity; and I will pour upon the house of David, and upon
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications; and
they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him,
as one mourns for an only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one
that is in bitterness for his first born. In that day shall there be a great
mourning in Jerusalem; and the land shall mourn, every family apart; all the
families that remain, every family apart and their wives apart." Now the gospel
proclaims and brings near comfort for such as these; "Comfort ye, comfort ye my
people, says your God; speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her,
that her iniquity is pardoned." And we read in Ezekiel's prophesy where the
Lord said, "Go through the midst of the city, through the midst of Jerusalem,
and set a mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh, and that cry for all
the abominations that be done in the midst thereof." Thus the mourners are
preserved and comforted, for Christ says, "Blessed are ye that weep now; for ye
shall laugh; woe unto you that laugh now, for ye shall mourn and weep". All men
must have a season for mourning, because of their sins, and happy are they who
mourn in time, for they shall rejoice during those long ages of mourning, in
which those that laugh now shall lament, with bitter "weeping, wailing, and
gnashing of teeth." Those who now sorrow after a godly sort do well; "For godly
sorrow works repentance to salvation, not to be repented of;" such who thus
mourn, shall have their consolation abound. The mourning church is frequently
comforted in scripture with such gracious promises as these, "The ransomed of
the LORD shall return, and come to Zion with songs, and everlasting joy upon
their heads; they shall obtain joy and gladness; and sorrow and sighing shall
flee away; for the Lord shall be thine everlasting light; and the days of thy
mourning shall be ended." Yea there are some promises of comfort to all
mankind, but not till they have had their season of wailing and lamentation,
which all fallen creatures must have before they can be the subjects of that
comfort which the gospel brings; and a dreadful season of woe and mourning
there must be for the rebellious, before the Lord "will swallow up death in
victory, and wipe away tears from off all faces;" but a period will certainly
come when "God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no
more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain."
Thus in the fullest sense of the words, the gospel brings near comfort for all
that mourn.

So we have seen that the gospel of Christ is a bundle of GOOD NEWS; and a RICH
TREASURE sufficient to supply all our wants; "But we have this treasure in
earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God, and not of
us." The gospel, viewed in all these points of light, appears to be a most
glorious dispensation of grace, well calculated for the glory of God, the
destruction of Satan's kingdom, and the welfare of mankind; and is so excellent
that we have no reason to be ashamed of it.

Here this sermon may be properly divided.

I Come, secondly, to show what St. Paul meant by not being ashamed of the
gospel.

I. He was not ashamed to believe it as a man; the gospel contains nothing that
any need be ashamed to believe; nothing unjust, unreasonable, mean or trifling;
nothing unworthy of a God, nor contrary to his plan of moral government;
neither does it make void his law, but establishes it.

And is not the description of the gospel here given, worthy to be believed by
every rational creature?

Need any one be ashamed to believe a plan so calculated for the glory of God,
and the good of mankind? Has any thing been laid down contrary to the ideas we
have of infinite wisdom, power, and goodness united, or degrading to the
character of the Deity? If not, we have no reason to be ashamed of believing it.

II. St. Paul was not ashamed to profess, and confess it as a Christian; he was
not ashamed to confess his dear Savior before men; he witnessed a good
profession before many witnesses; before Jews, and Gentiles, Pharisees, and
Sadduces, before the chief captain, and Felix, before Festus, and Agrippa, yea
and before Nero himself; as well as before mankind in general wherever he came.
He was never ashamed to confess his religion (which the Jews called heresy)
plainly and publicly; he cheerfully submitted to be baptized at the bidding of
Ananias, and thereby made an open profession of that faith which he before had
persecuted, and sought to destroy; and to the day of his death he adorned the
doctrine of God his Savior, in all things. Let us imitate him in this respect,
and let us not be ashamed of the gospel before mankind, but be willing to
confess with the mouth what we believe with the heart; "for with the heart man
believes unto righteousness; and with the mouth confession is made unto
salvation."

III. St. Paul was not ashamed to preach it as a minister; and in this sense
more especially he speaks in the words of my text, that he was not ashamed of
it; that is, that having believed it himself, he was not ashamed to proclaim it
to others; and even to those at Rome, where he might expect the greatest
opposition. From the time of his conversion he began to preach the gospel, and
continued in the work steadily to his death; and was perhaps the greatest, most
faithful and successful preacher that ever was, or ever will be till Christ
shall come; he himself says, "I labored more abundantly than they all; yet not
I, but the grace of God which was with me." Yea he says to the Romans, "From
Jerusalem and round about unto Illyricum I have fully preached the gospel of
Christ." And speaking to the elders of the church of Ephesus he says, "The Holy
Ghost witnesses in every city, saying, that bonds and afflictions abide me;
but none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto myself, so
that I might finish my course with joy, and the ministry which I have received
of the Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of the grace of God."

But I must transcribe a considerable part of the New Testament, if I would
give a full account of the labors of this faithful servant of Christ. Passages
enough have been mentioned to show that he was so far from being ashamed to
preach the gospel, that he gloried and rejoiced exceedingly in proclaiming the
free grace of God to mankind, both by word and by writing. Most of the first
gentile churches were planted by him, his sermons doubtless were the means of
converting many thousands, and his writings have conveyed the gospel which he
preached down to this generation, and will to all succeeding ages, till time
shall be no more. Thus it appears that he was not ashamed to preach the gospel;
neither ought any of the ministers of Christ to be ashamed or afraid boldly to
testify (according to the measure given unto them) this good news of salvation,
to mankind of every rank and class.

IV. St. Paul was not ashamed to contend for it as a good soldier of Jesus
Christ; and perhaps that was his meaning when he says, "If after the manner of
men I have fought with beasts at Ephesus, what advantageth it me, if the dead
rise not?" It is likely that he met with great opposition at Ephesus, where he
abode and preached three years, from men so rude and unreasonable that they
might be justly compared to beasts. He desired the Thessalonians to pray that
the apostles might "be delivered from unreasonable and wicked men; for all men
have not faith." Those who deny the gospel, and refuse to believe divine
revelation, pretend to be led by reason, but they are commonly the most
unreasonable and wicked of mankind; and there is no doubt but Paul often had to
contend with such. He contended and disputed with those who sought to force the
Gentile converts to conform to the customs of the Jews; he once even withstood
Peter "to the face; because he was to be blamed;" and he says of those who came
in privily to spy out their liberty which they had in Christ Jesus, "To whom we
gave place by subjection, no not for an hour, that the truth of the gospel
might continue with you," meaning the Galatians.

St. Paul contended with Jews and Greeks, with the philosophers of all sects,
with the Judaizing teachers, with both open and secret enemies, with
"principalities," and "powers," and "the rulers of the darkness of this world."
But though he had so many to contend with, yet he came off a conqueror, yea and
more than a conqueror, through Jesus Christ; and no wonder, for he says, "So
fight I, not as one that beats the air; for the weapons of our warfare are
not carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds;
casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts itself against
the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ."

St. Paul pursued his enemies so well with these weapons, that he could say at
last, "I have fought the good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith;" and as he had done, so he exhorted Timothy, saying, "Fight the good
fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life; thou therefore endure hardness, as a
good soldier of Jesus Christ." Thus we see that the blessed apostle gloried in
being "set for the defense of the gospel;" and we ought none of us to be
ashamed "earnestly to contend for the faith which was once delivered unto the
saints;" but let us remember that "if a man also strive for masteries, yet is
he not crowned except he strive lawfully;" we are exhorted to "stand fast in
one spirit, with one mind, striving together for the faith of the gospel;" but
let us always remember to speak "the truth in love," and avoid contentions, and
strifes "about words to no profit, but to the subverting of the hearers;" yet
let us never be ashamed, when called, to contend for the gospel, as good
soldiers of Jesus Christ.

5. St. Paul was not ashamed to suffer for it as a martyr; and in this respect
he appears as one of the greatest patterns that ever was beheld among mankind;
a volume might be wrote on this subject, but I shall only give a few extracts
out of his own writings upon it, and which he was obliged to mention, in order
to silence the many groundless cavils, and insinuations used against him by
false teachers; or sometimes for the encouragement of those to whom he wrote.
First of all I shall mention a passage in which he includes the apostles in
general, but which applies in a special manner to himself; he says to the
Corinthians, "For I think that God has set forth us the apostles last, as it
were appointed to death, for we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to
angels, and to men; we are fools for Christ's sake, but ye are wise in Christ;
we are weak, but ye are strong, ye are honorable, but we are despised: even
unto this present hour, we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are
buffetted, and have no certain dwelling place; and labor working with our own
hands; being reviled we bless, being persecuted we suffer it; being defamed we
entreat: we are made as the filth of the world, and are the off scouring of all
things unto this day: we are troubled on every side, yet not distressed, we are
perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken, cast down, but not
destroyed; always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that
the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our body: in all things
approving ourselves as the ministers of God, in much patience, in afflictions,
in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in
labors, in watchings, and fastings, by pureness, by knowledge, by long
suffering, by kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned, by the word of
truth, by the power of God, by the armor of righteousness, on the right hand,
and on the left, by honor, and dishonor, by evil report, and good report, as
deceivers, and yet true; as unknown, and yet well known; as dying, and behold,
we live; as chastned, and not killed; as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as
poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing all things."

All this he says of the apostles, including himself; of himself alone he
says (when compelled thereto by the Corinthians and the false teachers) "Are
they ministers of Christ? (I speak as a fool) I am more, in labors more
abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths often; of
the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one; thrice was I beaten with
rods, once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and a day I have
been in the deep; in journeyings often, in perils of water, in perils of
robbers, in perils by mine own countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in perils
in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils among
false brethren; in weariness and painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and
thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness; besides those things that are
without, that which comes upon me daily, the care of all the churches. Who is
weak, and I am not weak? Who is offended, and I burn not? I take pleasure in
infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for
Christ's sake."

We have seen already that his sufferings for the gospel's sake were very
great. Let us now see whether he was ashamed of them, or not; and for this
purpose we must examine some more of his epistles, and we shall find that he
gloried in them.

To the Galatians he says, "But God forbid that I should glory save in the
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I
unto the world; I am crucified with Christ; from henceforth let no man trouble
me; for I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus;" which probably were the
marks of the whippings he had received for Christ's sake.

To the Ephesians he calls himself "Paul the prisoner of Jesus Christ, for the
Gentiles;" thereby glorying in the very name of "prisoner" for the gospel's
sake.

To the Philippians he declared that he had an earnest expectation, and a hope,
that in nothing he should be ashamed, but that with all boldness, as always, so
at that time Christ should be magnified in his body, whether by life or by
death; and he says, "For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only
to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake; having the same conflict,
which ye saw in me, and now hear to be in me; and if I be offered upon the
sacrifice and service of your faith, I joy, and rejoice with you all. I know
both how to be abased, and I know how to abound; every where and in all things
I am instructed both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer
need, for I have learned in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content."

To the Colossians he says, "I Paul am made a minister; who now rejoice in my
sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of
Christ in my flesh, for his body's sake, which is the church." And he desires
their prayers, "That God would open a door of utterance, to speak the mystery
of Christ, for which I am also in bonds," says he. And at the close of his
epistle he says, "Remember my bonds." Thus it is evident that he was not
ashamed of them himself. To the Thessalonians he says, "But even after that we
had suffered before, and were shamefully entreated, as ye know, at Philippi, we
were bold in our God, to speak unto you the gospel of God with much
contention." Thus it appears that he was not discouraged at all. In his first
epistle to Timothy he declares, that they suffered for believing universal
salvation, for he says, "This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance; for therefore we both labor, and suffer reproach, because we
trust in the living God, who is the savior of all men, specially of those that
believe; these things command and teach." Paul tells the Hebrews that they had
compassion of him in his bonds; and he expected Philemon to hearken to his
entreaty the more for his "being such an one as Paul the aged, and now also a
prisoner of Jesus Christ;" and he begins his epistle in a different manner from
any other, with these words, "Paul a prisoner of Jesus Christ;" and he
beseeches him for one Onesimus, whom he had begotten in his bonds; thereby
glorying in them as honorable. In his epistle to the Romans he says, "For I
reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared
with the glory which shall be revealed in us."

But of all his epistles, the second to Timothy, wrote a little before his
death (and which was perhaps the last he wrote) most deserves our
consideration, under this head, for therein he declares his sufferings for the
gospel, and his boldness in the same, in a very particular manner. He says to
Timothy, "Be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me
his prisoner; but be thou partaker of the afflictions of the gospel, according
to the power of God; for the which cause (even for the gospel's sake) I also
suffer these things; nevertheless I am not ashamed; for I know in whom I have
believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have
committed unto him against that day." It was no small part of Paul's sufferings
that his friends forsook him; of this he seems to complain most; this he
mentions to Timothy, saying, "This thou know, that all they which are in
Asia are turned away from me; of whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes. Demas has
forsaken me, having loved this present world: at my first answer no man stood
with me, but all men forsook me; I pray God that it may not be laid to their
charge." These were grievous sufferings. While he is upon this subject, he
mentions, with great respect and gratitude, a person of another spirit, saying,
"The Lord give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus; for he often refreshed me,
and was not ashamed of my chain; but when he was in Rome he sought me out very
diligently, and found me; the Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy of the
Lord in that day; and in how many things he ministered unto me at Ephesus, thou
know very well."

This man's kindness was abundantly repaid by the prayer which the apostle made
for him, and which without doubt was answered.

St. Paul goes on to exhort Timothy to "be strong in the grace which is in
Christ Jesus;" and says, "Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was
raised from the dead, according to my gospel; wherein I suffer trouble as an
evil doer, even unto bonds, but the word of God is not bound; therefore I
endure all things for the elect's sakes, that they may also obtain the
salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory; it is a faithful saying;
for if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him; if we suffer with him,
we shall also reign with him; if we deny him, he also will deny us; if we
believe not, he abides faithful; he cannot deny himself: But thou have fully
known my doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, long suffering, charity,
patience, persecutions, afflictions, which came unto me at Antioch, at Iconium,
at Lystra; what persecutions I endured; but out of them all the Lord delivered
me; yea and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution."

Thus I have considered Paul's sufferings for the gospel, so far as he has
mentioned them, but there is one scene of which he could not write, even his
death, and which I suppose happened soon after he wrote this epistle; but for
this great change he was well prepared. Happy Paul! Oh, who would not rather
envy his situation than that of the greatest monarch or conqueror on earth?
With what calmness did he meet his approaching fate! Hear his dying song! Oh,
could we make it our own! "For I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my
departure is at hand; I have fought the good fight, I have finished my course,
I have kept the faith: henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous judge shall give me at that day;
and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing." Thus we
see St. Paul was not ashamed to suffer for the gospel as a martyr; and why
should we be ashamed to suffer some little reproaches and derisions for its
sake?

Let us remember such a shining example as his, and be followers of him, as he
was of Christ. And let us remember St. Peter's exhortation, who says,
"Forasmuch then as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm yourselves
likewise with the same mind; for he that has suffered in the flesh, has
ceased from sin; rejoice in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings;
that when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy;
if ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the spirit of
glory, and of God rests upon you; if any man suffer as a Christian, let him
not be ashamed; but let him glorify God on this behalf: Wherefore let them that
suffer according to the will of God, commit the keeping of their souls to him
in well-doing, as unto a faithful creator."

Having thus far considered my subject, I come, lastly, to give the reasons why
none should be ashamed of it.

First. The gospel is GOOD NEWS, as has been shown at large; and men are not
commonly ashamed to proclaim good news; Solomon says, "As cold waters to a
thirsty soul, so is good news from a far country;" a man that has cold water,
is not ashamed to carry it to one that thirsts, for he expects that it will be
gratefully received; so a man the most timorous, that has good and acceptable
news, is not ashamed to proclaim it before the greatest multitude. Those who
are known commonly to bring good news, are generally well accepted in company;
David said of Ahimaaz, "He is a good man, and comes with good tidings;" they
who have common good news are bold; and why should any be ashamed of the
gospel, since it is the best news that ever was, or ever can be proclaimed to
men? It is good news from heaven, and contains more glad tidings than can be
found besides, in all the words or writings that ever were, or ever shall be
spoke or written, from the fall of man to the end of time; and therefore none
need be ashamed of it, in any sense that has been, or that might have been
mentioned.

Second. Another reason is, that it is the GOSPEL OF CHRIST, and therefore we
should not be ashamed of it; it proclaims him in all his offices, and in all
his mediatorial fullness, as the complete savior of all; and we ought never to
be ashamed of any thing that tends to represent Christ and his salvation in an
agreeable and beautiful light to mankind, which the gospel certainly does.

Christ was not ashamed to be born for us in a stable, and to be laid in a
manger, to be a poor destitute child, and a despised man, to be without a place
"where to lay his head," to be tempted, ridiculed, reproached, belied,
blasphemed, mocked, whipped, spit upon, crowned with thorns, buffetted,
blindfolded, accused of blasphemy and treason, treated as a fool, as the
greatest sinner (a robber and murderer being preferred or chosen before him)
and to crown the whole, made to bear his cross, stripped entirely naked, and
nailed thereto, then raised up between the heavens and earth, as unworthy of
either, between two thieves, as being the greatest criminal, though perfectly
innocent; there naked was he exposed upon the cross, before the great multitude
gathered to the feast; his dying agonies were made the subject of laughter, and
the bitterest ridicule, his thirst was mocked with gall and vinegar, his
person, miracles, and prophesies, were scorned, contemned, and treated with
scoffs, sneers, disdain, the vilest blasphemies, most insolent jests, and the
most cruel ironical sarcasms. All this and much more he was not ashamed to bear
for us poor sinners. He "for the joy that was set before him, endured the
cross, despised the shame; being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself,
and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross;" the most bitter,
ignominious, and accursed of all deaths; and shall we be ashamed of him, his
truths, ways, works, words, ordinances; and his religion, which is called "The
Gospel?" Shall we be ashamed to believe, confess and profess, defend, proclaim,
and suffer for the same! Oh, let it never be so amongst us! The gospel may be
called Christ's, as it is of him, proclaims him, and is proclaimed by his
authority; and we ought never to be ashamed of any thing belonging to our dear
Savior, since he was not ashamed to die for us.

Third. Another reason why we should not be ashamed of the gospel is, that it
is true and faithful; it is not only good news, respecting Christ and his
salvation, but it is true; other good news may prove false, and he that
proclaims it, and they who believe it, may be ashamed; but "the scripture
says; Whosoever believes on him (meaning Christ) shall not be ashamed;" this
truth is often repeated in scripture; and we are farther told there, that "God
willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise, the immutability of
his counsel, confirmed it by an oath; that by two immutable things, in which it
was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong consolation, who have
fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us; which hope we have as
an anchor of the soul, sure and steadfast, and which enters into that within
the vail." So that it is evident that we have a good foundation (for that "hope
that makes not ashamed") even the word and oath of the great JEHOVAH; and let
us remember that "the strength of Israel will not lie, nor repent; for God is
not a man that he should lie, nor the son of a man that he should repent; has
he said, and shall he not do it? o has he spoken, and shall he not make it
good? yea let God be true, but every man a liar. He that believes not God,
has made him a liar; because he believes not the record that God gave of his
son, and this is the record that God has given to us eternal life; and this
life is in his son; he that has received his testimony, has set to his seal
that God is true." St. Paul says, "As God is true, our word to ward you was not
yea and nay; for all the promises of God in him Christ are yea, and in him
Amen, unto the glory of God by us. God is faithful, by whom ye were called unto
the fellowship of his son Jesus Christ our Lord."

I trust that sufficient passages of scripture have been mentioned under each
head in these discourses, to show that they are founded upon the unerring rule,
the word of truth; and therefore we need not be ashamed of the gospel of Christ
set forth therein, since it is true. Truth never need to hide its head, for
great it is, and shall finally prevail; let us abide thereby, and it will abide
by us.

Fourth. Another reason why we should not be ashamed of the gospel of Christ
is, that it is of infinite importance; it is not only good, and true, but
contains matters of the greatest moment and concern; in comparison of which all
the good news that ever was or ever will be proclaimed, is light and trifling.
What is it to hear of the birth of princes, compared to the glad tidings of the
birth of the son of God, the prince of peace, the savior of the world, the
king of glory? What is it to hear or read of the brave, generous, heroic
actions of the greatest of men in any station, compared with the life and
wondrous works of the son of God while on earth? What is it to hear of the
greatest warlike achievements, battles fought, victories won, triumphs
obtained, nations destroyed, countries subdued, the founding and subverting of
empires, the rise and fall of mighty states, kingdoms, and monarchies, compared
to the wonders of Christ's death, resurrection, ascension, and glorification?
He fought the most dreadful of all battles, performed the most glorious
achievements, obtained the greatest victory and triumph, overturned the mighty
empire of Satan, which he will at last entirely destroy, and has set up his
own, which will finally prevail over all; and he shall not only destroy his
foes, but bring all that have rebelled against him, into a willing subjection
to him again. What is it to hear of and possess temporal happiness, peace,
health, happiness, plenty, liberty, independence, free trade, increase of corn,
wine, oil, silver, gold, precious stones, and riches in general, increase of
learning, arts, sciences, manufactures, etc. compared to the glorious news
which the gospel proclaims, and the rich treasures and blessings which it
brings to mankind. The things of earth are fading and transient; riches,
honors, pleasures, friends, and all earthly enjoyments, may soon leave us, or
we them; not so the things of God and Heaven, which are proclaimed and brought
nigh by the gospel of Christ; they are permanent and unfading, and when we come
once fully to possess them, they never can be taken from us, nor we from them.
The greatest and most perfect enjoyment of earthly things cannot satisfy the
soul; but Christ and his salvation can give solid and never ending contentment.
"The things that are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are
eternal." As much as the soul exceeds the body, and eternal ages exceed
transient moments, and the riches of heaven those of earth, of so much more
importance is the gospel than all the good news besides, that ever was or that
ever will be proclaimed to mankind; which is a sufficient reason why we ought
not to be ashamed of it.

Fifth. Another reason why none ought to be ashamed of the gospel is, that it
is not only of great importance in itself, but concerns all mankind. This can
only be said of the universal everlasting gospel, for upon the supposition that
Christ died only for a few, the gospel cannot be said to be good news to all;
but as it has been proved (if any thing can be proved) from scripture, that
Christ died for all without exception, and that all shall be at last restored
to God through Jesus Christ, and being cleansed in his blood, shall be purged
from all sin; it follows that the gospel concerns all the children of men;
which is a good reason why none should ever be ashamed of it.

Sixth. Another reason (and indeed the very reason that the apostle gives) why
none should be ashamed of the gospel is, that " it is the power of God unto
salvation to every one that believes, to the Jew first, and also to the Greek."

Wherever the gospel is received by faith into the heart, it works such a
divine effect as shows it to be the power of God; the soul by its influence is
brought to renounce sin, the works of the flesh, the world, the service of
Satan, self righteousness, self love, and all things for Christ's sake; and
thus by being conformed to his image, enters into the state of salvation. The
change which the gospel makes in the hearts of those who believe, is great and
glorious beyond description; it causes them to hate sin, love holiness, love
the character of God, his laws, etc. It brings them to submit to Christ, as
their lord and king, their prophet, and priest. It turns "them from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan unto God;" it heals them of their diseases,
and supplies their wants in the manner that has been represented; and thus
produces such a change for the better in them, that we have no reason to be
ashamed of it. It has pleased God oftentimes to attend his word preached with
exceeding great power, whereby multitudes have been suddenly turned to God;
such was the case when Peter preached on the day of Pentecost, three thousand
were then added to the Lord, and to the church. The apostles had oftentimes
great success, "God bearing them witness with signs, and wonders, and with
diverse miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost; according to his own will;" and
thus causing them to triumph over all opposition; for which cause they were
"not ashamed of the gospel of Christ," for they knew that the power of God
would attend the preaching of the same, and that it would work effectually in
those who believed, even unto the salvation of their souls, whether they were
Jews (to whom the gospel was first ordered to be preached) or Gentiles; for
"God is no respector of persons." The gospel shall finally bring all men to
believe, and be the power of God to salvation to them all; for God "works all
things after the counsel of his own will;" and he "will have all men to be
saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth; for there is one God, and
one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus: who gave himself a
ransom for all, to be testified in due time." Wherefore since it is so, we
shall never have any reason to be ashamed of the gospel of Christ.

Seventh. The last reason that I shall mention is, that the gospel is published
by the highest authority; and therefore we need not be ashamed of it. When we
see any political news published by the authority of our rulers, we are not
ashamed to believe and report it; and we certainly ought to glory in the
gospel, seeing it is proclaimed by the authority of him who said, "All power is
given unto me, in heaven and in earth; go ye therefore and teach all nations;
go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every creature. The LORD
gave the word; great was the company of those that published it;" and it is
worthy to be proclaimed from pole to pole; through every land and in every
language; which God grant may speedily be the case.

Many other reasons might be given, and much more might be added upon this
excellent subject, but what has been said is sufficient to show that we have no
cause to be ashamed of the GOSPEL OF CHRIST.


