A LETTER FROM AN AMERICAN, Now resident in LONDON, TO A MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT,
On the Subject of the RESTRAINING PROCLAMATION; AND CONTAINING STRICTURES ON
LORD SHEFFIELD's PAMPHLET, ON THE COMMERCE OF THE AMERICAN STATES.

Said to be written by WILLIAM BINGHAM, Esquire; late Agent for the CONGRESS of
the UNITED STATES of AMERICA, at Martinico.

To which are added, MENTOR's REPLY to PHOCION's LETTER; with some OBSERVATIONS
on TRADE, addressed to the Citizens of NEW YORK.

PHILADELIPHIA: PRINTED and SOLD BY ROBERT BELL, IN Third-Street, M,DCC,LXXXIV.

A LETTER FROM AN AMERICAN, CONTAINING STRICTURES ON COMMERCE.
SIR,
THE secession of so considerable a part of the British Empire, as now
constitutes the United States, and the general acknowledgement of their
independence by the powers of Europe, must point out a very important era in
the history of mankind.

The causes that led to this great revolution, and the operations that insured
it success, will hereafter afford abundant matter for the pen of some able
historian.

The immediate effects that it must have on the System of European Politics,
form a very serious subject of present enquiry and contemplation; especially,
as nations begin to be convinced of the futility of becoming great by conquest,
and more inclined to abandon the cruel system of war, in order effectually to
enrich themselves by pursuing the peaceful line of commerce.

The United States, stretching through such a variety of climates, abounding in
such various productions, and affording such a vast field for the consumption
of European manufactures, must naturally have a very intimate and active
commerce with the different States of Europe.

From adventitious circumstances, peculiarly favorable to Great Britain, no
nation possesses opportunities of so effectually promoting this connection; and
from her dependence on commerce, for the support of her power and importance,
(...) nation is so pointedly interested in the improvement of these advantages.

She has already brought her affairs to the brink of (...), from continuing too
long a slave to imposture and delusion. It is time to recover her from her
lethargy; this perhaps may prove a difficult task, as ignorant and interested
writers are still endeavoring to impose their ill-digested and pernicious
systems on the public mind, and to impress sentiments, which, if adopted into
the politics of this country, would be entirely subversive of a commercial
connection betwixt Great Britain and the United States of America.

I shall submit my opinions on this (...) your consideration, and have little
doubt of a coincidence of s^^^^ment.

You must remember that after the conclusion of the war, a Bill was introduced
into the House of Commons, by Mr. Pit, (then Chancellor of the Exchequer) in
order to serve as a temporary regulation for the trade of the United States. In
perfect conformity with the spirit of this Bill, it was expected a permanent
connection betwixt the two Countries, would be formed by treaty; it had in view
a system of liberal intercourse, and was received in America with universal
approbation, as the harbinger of returning affections.

Under a firm persuasion that Great Britain would persevere in the line of
conduct, that this Bill prescribed, the United States opened all their ports to
British shipping, and received them, without any other restrictions than those,
which vessels belonging to their own citizens, were exposed to.

A change of ministry soon after took place, and likewise a change of measures;
the advocates for the American war composed a part of it; the effects were soon
visible: a Proclamation, virtually restraining all intercourse betwixt the
United States and the West Indies, except in British shipping, made its
appearance.

This measure was in every respect impolitic and unwise, as it was natural to
imagine that it would make unfavourable impressions in regard to the views of
Great Britain, that would remain long, and affect deeply; and would have a
tendency to convince the United States that the same system of infatuated
councils, that severed the two countries asunder, still had an ascendency in
the British Cabinet, and was likely to continue an insuperable barrier to a
free and unrestrained connection.

Much about the same time Lord Sheffield published a pamphlet, which was
intended to justify the prudent precaution of such measures, as essentially
necessary to the future wealth and power of Great Britain; it is said to have
had a very serious effect on the minds of the people in England, the majority
of whom, as in all countries, are more prone to receive the opinions of others,
than be at the trouble of furnishing arguments for themselves.

However, it will not be difficult to prove, that his reasoning is extremely
flimsy and fallacious; entirely remote from the principles of commercial
legislation, and supported on a system of acknowledged error.

Previous to entering on a refutation of his doctrine, it will be necessary to
premise some few reflections, on the advantages that the West India Islands
will derive, from being indulged in an intercourse with the United States, from
which the adoption of Lord Sheffield's system would entirely exclude them.

The soil, the climate, and consequently the productions of the United States,
are so various, that they can furnish almost every article that they can
furnish almost every article that the wants and conveniences of the islands can
require; and from circumstances of local situation, can supply them more
abundantly, more expeditiously on better terms, and less subject to
contingencies, than they can be procured from Europe; insomuch, that the West
India Planters have always regarded a commercial connection with the United
States as essential to the well-being and improvement of the islands, and have
deprecated the loss of it, as a most fatal bl^w to their flourishing existence.

The articles which the Colonist indispensably stands in need of, are flour,
biscuit, Indian corn, rice, beans, peace, potatoes, salt beef, pork, cheese,
butter, beer, cod and other kinds of salt fish, whale oil, candies, tallow,
soap, tobacco, naval stores, horses, poultry, live cattle, bar iron, building
wood of all kinds, frames of houses, masts, spars, hogshead slaves, heading,
shingles, plank both pine and oak, etc.

The United States can, not only abundantly, and at all times, supply these
articles, but can furnish them on far more moderate terms, than they can be
imported from Europe.

Experience has proved, that no food is so cheap and nourishing to the slaves
as Indian corn, of which there must necessarily be a regular and frequent
supply, as it will not keep but a short time, exposed to the extreme warmth of
the climate. Small vessels are generally employed in furnishing these supplies,
as well as live stock and other articles of provisions, which could not afford
to navigate with cargoes of such little value if it was not for the quickness
of the voyage, and the certainty of a return freight of West India produce.
These are not objects of sufficient importance for European vessels; for large
quantities would frequently overstock the market, and consequently be exposed
to perish in the hands of the importer.

But there are particular times when the dependence of the West Indies on the
United States, is more pointedly observable. After a hurricane, that awful and
tremendous convulsion of nature, that so frequently happens in the tropical
climates, that levels with the ground all the buildings and improvements of a
plantation, destroys the provisions, and exhibits throughout the whole country,
the wildest marks of ruin and devastation: Where is the affrighted planter to
look for succor and assistance? How is he to repair his losses, promptly and
effectually?

He must give himself up to despair, if his only reliance is on European
supplies: but he feels a consolation when he considers his vicinity to America,
which, though but a foster mother, acting like a natural parent, flies to his
relief.

After these terrible calamities, which have threatened all the miseries of
famine, he has often found, from experience, that she has poured in such
abundance, as to have reduced the prices of provisions, much lower than they
even were previous to his misfortunes.

The advantages which this commerce presents are founded on the broad basis of
reciprocal interests, and a mutual exchange of necessary commodities.

The United States, in return for the supplies they furnish the islands, will
receive their productions, several of which, such as rum and molasses, may be
called the excrescences of their exports, and without recourse to American
consumption, would be in very feeble demand for the European market.

But should no encouragement be given to the planter, to aid the natural vigor
of the soil, by the facility with which he may procure his provisions; and
should the islands be deprived of the advantages which their local situation
affords, by having the channel through which their supplies are to be procured,
stopped up, or confined in too narrow bounds, they will not only individually
suffer, by being often exposed to a calamitous scarcity; but the Mother Country
must finally be sensible of the pernicious effects of such restrictions. For
the body politic, like the human body, has a sense of feeling, in its remotest
extremities. Nothing suffers singly by itself -- there is a consent of the
parts in the system of both, and the partial evil grows into universal mischief
For in an exact ratio, with the rate of provisions, and other necessaries of
life will the demand for labor keep pace, and the price of West India produce,
and its relative quantity, will rise or fall by these proportions, The planter
consequently cannot afford his productions so low, as to be placed in
competition with the French at a foreign market, except he procures his
necessaries on the best of terms.

On the contrary, should the islands flourish under a State of ease and plenty,
the Mother Country will be proportionably benefited; for it is an invariable
rule in commercial polity, that riches always center in the Metropolis: their
diffusive influence may be compared to the circulation of the blood, which is
dispersed over the whole system, but always returns back to the heart, the seat
of life, and is only sent back by new pulsations.

Should therefore this monopolizing spirit which is a mockery on the industry
of a country, give way to more liberal ideas, the active stimulus of the
planter will no longer be depressed. By being furnished with necessaries on
more moderate and easy terms, he will employ less of his revenue, to defray the
expenses of his estate; he will consequently have a residue left to appropriate
to the the extension of his settlements, clearing and breaking up new grounds,
which when brought into culture, will furnish additional quantities of produce,
to supply the increasing demand.

In the course of attaining these profits to the planter, the State will
greatly benefit in an increase of her revenues, by the duties laid on the
surplus quantity of produce: by the employment of a more extensive commerce and
navigation, which must keep pace with the improving condition of her islands:
and by fixing the balance of trade in her favor in proportion to the
augmentation of her exports.

Another advantage of conspicuous character offers itself; which is their
increasing consumption of manufactures, which improving establishments
naturally occasion; and an increase of manufactures is always accompanied by a
proportional increase of population.

Molded by habit to a particular mode of thinking in regard to the commercial
legislation of the islands, I know it will be difficult, and will require every
effort of sound reasoning, to break through the system of prohibitory laws.
established by the British Government. But, when an increase of population and
of revenue, progressive opulence and strength, are to be derived from the
effects of abandoning this jealous self-obstructing policy; it is to be
expected that the spirit of such contracted establishments will not be
inveterate, and on mature consideration, will no longer be adhered to.

But it is asserted by Lord Sheffield, that regular supplies of provisions and
necessaries may, with proper encouragement, be obtained from the remainder of
the British Colonies on the continent.

These visionary suggestions are almost too ludicrous to be combated, and seem
intended as a political artifice, to blind the eyes of the too credulous
people, and deceive them into a belief, that their remaining territories in
America are of considerable value.

It is well known, that the intenseness of the climate of Canada, with the
difficulty of its navigation will scarcely admit of more than one voyage in the
year to the West Indies, which require a regular and continued supply of
provisions.

As for the inhospitable regions of Nava Scotia, it will be matter of wonder,
and a solace to humanity, if by the unceasing industry of its inhabitants, it
will be able to produce a sufficiency, for their sustenance and support.

The United States must therefore continue to be, what they always have been,
the granary of the British West Indies; and if direct importations into them
are not admitted of, recourse will be had to indirect supplies, through the
medium of the neutral islands. All the additional expense of this circuitous
route, incurred for charges of double insurance, freight, commission, etc. will
fall on the Colonist, as the comsumer, without very materially injuring the
American merchant, who will naturally insure to himself a saving profit on his
exports.

Besides, the British Government must establish a number of guarda costas, well
armed and appointed, to prevent the clandestine trade that will immediately
commence betwixt the United States and their islands. A trade, that will find a
support and protection, in every planter of the country, whose interest will be
so immediately connected with its encouragement, will not easily be suppressed.

Even under the vigorous authority of military government in the French West
Indies, not all the weight of power, exerted for the purpose, could formerly
prevent this species of traffic; much less can it be expected to succeed, where
the reigns of government are relatively so relaxed, as in the hands of the
British Governors.

Besides, Great Britain has learned, by fatal dear-bought experience, impressed
in such strong characters, as not to be soon and easily effaced, that the true
art of governing is not to govern too much; and how difficult it is to rule a
people by laws, that it is their interest to resist, and render nugatory.

But to counteract the force of the foregoing observations, it is asserted by
Lord Sheffield, and what is much more strange, that people are so infatuated as
to believe, that notwithstanding the absolute prohibition on the part of Great
Britain, of admission of American vessels into her islands, still that the
United States will open their ports to British shipping, and freely indulge
them with the liberty of carrying off their produce.

But he must have a poor opinion of the force of his own arguments, which he
has so abundantly furnished to Great Britain, in favor of this selfish system
of monopolizing the carrying trade, if he does not believe, that they will
operate so effectually on the minds of the Americans, as to induce them,
deprived of an equalization of privilege, to adopt the same plan; admitting
that their sagacious clear-sighted politicians had not already discovered them.

His premises therefore are not admissible -- the idea they convey is an insult
on common sense.

I expected that in forming an estimate of the American character, the English
had been fully persuaded, from a view of the progress of their political
affairs, that they were conducted by a people who seldom have so widely
wandered from their interests.

Habituated to the resistance of every oppressive measure, more vigilant over
their national concerns, more intent on connecting the science of politics,
with the elements of commerce, as forming the most important object of the
statesman's attention -- than perhaps any other nation existing, is it to be
expected, they will acquiesce in a system, so derogatory to the honor,
degrading to the spirit, and injurious to the interests of a great people?

A moment's reflection must convince every dispassionate enquirer, that our
legislators are better guardians of the public concerns, than to submit to so
pernicious an intercourse; especially when it is considered, that they are
selected from these, who are the best versed in the interests of the States, as
relative to those of other commercial powers, and who will embrace every
advantage that nature has given, or art can procure, to the improvement thereof.

He may continue to cherish the delusive idea, but I will tell him in prophetic
language, what will be the consequence.

The States from a sense of common danger, and common interest, will more
closely unite together, and form one general system of exclusive navigation, in
regard to Great Britain, established on clear, equal and determinate principles
of commercial retaliation, which will rapidly pervade the whole Union. Already
has a generous competition began to take place, betwixt them, which shall most
cheerfully adopt, and carry into effect, those wise and salutary measures,
recommended by the grand council of the country, in order to make their
foederal union respectable, and the United States, as prosperous in Peace, as
they have been glorious in War.

I acknowledge, that such public spirited arrangements will, for a time, expose
some of the States, to temporary inconvenience and distress; but after all the
sacrifices they have already made, will it be surprising that they should exert
this self-denying virtue; especially as it will eventually become one of the
greatest sources of their future wealth and importance.

Such prohibitions, therefore, on the part of Great Britain, will operate like
a charm throughout the country; they will act like a spur on the industry of
the inhabitants, and compel them to turn their attention more immediately to
the construction of ships, and the increase of their seamen. The eastern and
middle States, which from circumstances of local situation and character, are
more peculiarly calculated for these purposes, will, by vigorous exertion, by
great and increasing encouragement, in a short time, be enabled to furnish a
sufficient supply. Many of their trading inhabitants will be induced to reside
in, and become citizens of the southern States, and form establishments
therein, in order to devote themselves to the business of furnishing the
necessary shipping, for the transportation of their bulky produce.

Such circumstances, fortunately combining in favor of the general interest of
the republic will operate as a bond of union amongst them by occasioning their
respective citizens to continue to mix freely and intimately together.

And by making them mutually dependent on each other for reciprocal services,
will divest them of local attachments, and will irresistibly impel them to
become friends, to the rights and interests of confederated America. For as the
propagation of mankind depends on the intercourse of persons of different
sexes, so do political connections thrive only betwixt such countries, as
furnish different materials for their mutual exchange, and who soon become,
from a sense of each others wants mutually endeared to each other. Yet this
shrewd p^litcian infers, that the States will oppose each other, because their
staples and their climate are different -- forgetting the truth of that
political maxim, that interest unites, from the same cause that it divides.

Therefore this selfish arrangement which appears to predominate, in the
British Cabinet, and which is supposed to be an emanation from the same ill
fated star, which in your political system has been so long looked up to as
your polar direction, will eventually become a great advantage to the United
States; for I am well convinced, that they never will arrive to any eminence as
a naval power, until their inhabitants are reduced to the necessity of being
the exclusive carriers of their own productions, thereby encouraging mercantile
navigation, so as to make it become a nursery of seaman. I say forced, for the
assertion of Lord Sheffield, that our vessels navigate cheaper than those of
Great Britain, is not founded on fact; for when their speedy decay,
comparatively with those of the British, with the scarcity of seamen, the much
higher price of wages, and the necessity of importing most of the building
materials from Europe, are taken into consideration, it will clearly be
inferred, that the latter can afford their freights, at a much easier rate.

But should the United States be compelled to adopt a navigation act, the
prospect will then change, the demands for seamen will greatly increase, their
wages will be encouraging, and it will not be possible to prevent their passing
into the American service; for this class of people, as wavering and inconstant
as the element that wafts them, are attached to change of climate, and are
easily allured by the prospect of greater wages, or kinder treatment.

Under the influence of the above causes it must be clearly evident, that the
fears of our competition in the carrying trade of the West Indies, are entirely
groundless. Besides, it is not probable that the Americans will seek in foreign
countries for freights, when they have not perhaps above one fourth part of the
necessary shipping to supply their own demands, for transporting their produce
to market: How absurd and contradictory then are Lord Sheffield's
apprehensions! for it is, from a presumption of their scarcity of shippiing,
that he affirms that the Americans will not refuse their produce to the offers
of British vessels: he acknowledges likewise, that the French undersell the
British sugars at foreign markets; there can consequently be but little danger
of the Americans being desirous of carrying them to foreign ports; for where
will be the inducement?

In arguing against this selfish contracted system, founded on extreme
cupidity, and in favor of a free unrestrained commerce betwixt the two
countries, I have no view of consulting the advantages of the United States to
the exclusion of those of Great Britain.

I know it would be folly to expect that she would make sacrifices of her
interests, to accommodate the views of the Americans.

But it so happens, that she cannot favor the United States with an
indulgence, for which they are not able to furnish more than a reciprocal
benefit.

It is expedient however to examine still more fully, what the grand leading
argument that Lord Sheffield adduces in favor of the necessity of totally
excluding them from a participation in the British West India trade, amounts
to. He is fearful that they will thereby become the carriers of the produce of
the islands to the place of its consumption, which will create an interference
of foreign vessels, thereby lessening the number of seamen, and consequently
the naval force of the country.

But, if in addition to all that I have already said, I answer, that in return
for this accommodation which he may call indulgent, but which I have clearly
evinced to be the interest of Great Britain, consulting the welfare of her
islands, to grant.

I say, if in return for this accommodation, her subjects may be admitted to a
free ingress and egress to and from the ports of the United States -- What
reply will the advocates for this system make? -- What will become of Lord
Sheffield' reasoning, when weighed in the scale of comparative proportion? I
only wish them to comprehend the magnitude of the advantage. Men of weak or
limited understandings, will be incapable of extending their ideas, so as to
embrace the vast field it opens to an enlightened mind.

In the first place, they will not assuredly deny, that the productions of the
United States, to the transportation of which, from the proposed arrangement,
they are (...) to be admitted, will furnish twice the quantity of bulky
materials, that the exports of the West Indies do, and will consequently employ
twice the quantity of shipping. -- To stamp conviction in regard to the truth
of this assertion, let them take a view of the rice, indigo, and lumber of
Georgia and South Carolina; -- the naval stores, lumber, and tobacco of North
Carolina; -- the tobacco wheat, Indian corn, etc. of Virginia and Maryland; --
the flour, lumber corn, and various provisions of Pennsylvania, Delaware,
Jersey and New York; -- the fish, lumber, live stock, etc. of the New England
States.

Admit the fact to be ascertained with satisfactory precision, will it not be
confessed, that an arrangement, by which both countries are freely admitted to
a participation of each other's trade, will be highly advantageous to Great
Britain.

This is a position, as clear as any mathematical axiom. -- Besides, the
advantages of Great Britain may be deemed increasing, as the exportation of the
bulky produce of the United States, in which her vessels will be employed, will
augment, in proportion to the population of the country; -- a population, that
will probably be productive beyond all examples of former ages, -- multiplying
like the seeds of the harvest.

Whereas, on her part, there is but little room for extension of improvement;
-- on this point her most sanguine friends would compound, for her being fixed
and stationary.

But Lord Sheffield argues, that it would be folly to grant the Americans any
particular privileges and concessions, as the treaties with France, and the
United Provinces, in direct terms forbid the British being put on a better
footing than the inhabitants of those countries.

The faculties of this writer must be strangely perverted, -- or his design
must evidently be to delude the public mind, by giving so false a construction
to this part of the treaties.

Can it be imagined, on the principles of common sense, that if the French and
Dutch exclude the Americans from a share of their West India trade, the United
States will grant to the inhabitants of those countries, the same free
admission into their ports, as to those of Great Britain, who may permit an
unrestrained participation in their commerce? In every contract, there is a
quid pro quo -- openly expressed, or tacitly implied; -- and it is not to be
presumed, that the most favored nation can require a benefit, without granting
a reciprocal return; -- it is contrary to the avowed policy of nations, which,
it is well understood, is founded on the broad basis, of interest and
convenience.

The same reasons will tend to frustrate the hopes of Russia, who cannot, like
the United States, give an equitable equivalent to Great Britain, in return for
such great concessions.

France has hitherto, invariably, by her own internal resources, supplied her
islands abundantly, with many of the necessaries they stand in need of, and is
still in a capacity to do the same.

With respect to other articles, (the produce of the United States,) that do
not interfere with her own exports, she has given free admission to them all
into her West India possessions; -- and in order to gain the advantages of the
rum trade, which the British hitherto have exclusively proposed, she has ceded
particular districts in her islands, for the accommodation of the Americans,
who may choose to erect distilleries thereon, which, for their great
encouragement, are to be exempt from taxes, for a certain number of years. --
The consummate policy of her councils was never more eminently displayed, than
in this measure.

See Proclamation of the General of Martinico, published in the Public
Advertiser.

The astonished planter, in viewing the respective arrangements of the two
countries, will wonder where the genius of Britain, so famed for her commercial
knowledge, has retired.

After having already made it appear that it is the interest of Great Britain
(independent of all other considerations) to adopt the plan of an open
communication between the islands and the United States, and that it is in the
power of the latter to grant more than they receive; -- I will now have
recourse to an argument, that perhaps will have a salutary effect on those, who
are the most difficult to be persuaded; -- I mean, the relative situation of
the two countries, which makes it the interest of Great Britain, more than that
of any other European power, to be pointedly connected with the American States.

Let a moment's attention be paid to this subject, and let the inference be
fairly and dispassionately drawn.

Great Britain, by the superior skill and industry of her inhabitants and some
adventitious circumstances, has carried many of her manufactures to a degree of
perfection and cheapness, which no other country in Europe has arrived at.

Considering the inferior state of her population, compared with some of her
rival nations, and the very limited extent of her territory, it must be
confessed, that a considerable part of her revenues, to support the immense
load of debt she has incured, must be drawn from this source -- from the
industry of her people.

The United State at present offer three millions of inhabitants. rapidly
increasing to numbers, all of whom consume more or less of British
manufactures, -- the productions of art and industry, -- in return for which,
they give the raw materials -- the produce of agriculture, in their native
state.

How sufatueted must the councils of your country be, which could rend but for
a moment, to disturb so beneficial an intercourse; or suspend the sweets of so
lucrative a commerce!

The United States have as yet laid no impositions on the importation of
British manufactures, that can have any tendency to restrain the consumption of
them; -- and many reasons of conspicuous weight and importance continually
offer, in favor of establishing such duties; -- for by operating as a
sumptuary law, such a measure would be of considerable service to a young
country by repressing the desire of foreign luxuries, which have already been
poured into America, in such abundance, that the States begin to suffer, from
not having sufficient produce to remit in payment; -- which turns the balance
of trade greatly against them. ^mdash; Besides, such restrictions wisely
imposed, tend to stimulate and encourage a spirit of industry amongst the
people, to aim at similar improvements. -- December 16th. 1783.

But should the impolitic conduct of Great Britain precipitate the adoption of
this measure by the respective States, where are her growing resources to
counteract the effects of this failure of internal industry? -- for it is
universally agreed, that no country is more dependent on foreign demand, for
the superfluous produce of art and industry; -- and that the luxury and
extravagance of her inhabitants, have already advanced to the ultimate point of
abuse, and cannot be so increased, as to augment the home consumption, in
proportion to the decrease that will take place on a diminution of foreign
trade.

What then will become of all those useful hands, that were employed in
supplying the great demand?

Recollect the cries of suffering thousands, at the time of the non-importation
agreement; -- these people, in their own defense, will emigrate to America.

Such a system of conduct persevered in, will operate in favor of the United
States, as effectually, as the revocation of the edict of Nantes did in behalf
of the protestant countries of Europe -- by holding up America, as the most
desirable refuge for the property, arts, and manufactures of Great Britain to
retire to; -- a country, where civil and religious liberty are upheld in all
their purity, -- where, by the exertion of a few years of nonest industry, an
emigrant is morally sure, of being furnished with the means of becoming an
independent freeholder; -- a country, that has laid no impolitic restraints on
naturalization; -- whose yoke is easy, and whose burthen's light; and which
indulgently holds out its arms for the reception of the weary and heavy laden
of all nations; and which, notwithstanding the attempts of Great Britain to
enslave it, would generously offer an asylum for her persecuted sons, who
impressed with a sense of gratitude, may blush to think their fathers were its
foes.

But Lord Sheffield exultingly advances, that the Americans cannot forego the
British manufactures; -- and that so far from the necessity of courting their
custom, not all the interdicts of Congress, and of the several States, during
the war, could prevent their consumption.

To deduce important inferences, from such faulty premises, would be "leaning
on a broken reed," There may be at present some partiality in the States, for
British manufactures; -- yet this predilection arises from cradle prejudices,
and has greatly decreased during the war; -- and it would be unwise in Great
Britain to place any reliance on a continuation of it: -- for the manufactures
of other countries, if equally good, and afforded cheaper, will, by a continued
competition, be eventually preferred: especially, as there will be a constant
succession of emigrants from different parts of Europe, who have no decided
preference in favor of the fashion or quality of British manufactures, and
who, by mixing with the mass of the people, will gradually effect a change in
their taste. -- Already do the Americans begin to complain, that the British
manufactures are slighted, and inferior in quality to their usual standard; --
and it is well known, that many of the coarse kinds of stuffs, made at Norwich,
Coventry, Spitalfields, and other factories, are shamefully deficient in
length, whilst the Dutch, Flemish, and French, usually give a generous surplus
in their measures.

But if the assertions of Lord Sheffield were founded on truth, what should be
the conduct of Great Britain?

Surely no circumstance can be more favorable to the aggrandizing a nation of
industry, than the possession of a foreign trade with a country, which does not
supply its own wants, and in which, the consumers of manufactures, that she
furnishes, are continually increasing.

Surrounded by rival nations, whose interests are opposed to hers, does she
consider the duties that arise out of such a connection? They should prompt her
to facilitate, by every method in her power the means of making remittances, in
return for the manufactures she furnished; not by prohibiting the sale of
American vessels which are sent to England for the payment of British debts; --
by opening her ports for the importation of American produce free of duty; --
not by laying such heavy impositions thereon, as to oblige the merchant to seek
a more friendly market? and by cultivating an intercourse, pointedly intimate,
with that country; -- for this is the vernal season, when the seeds of future
connection and intimacy with America are to be sown and cultivated; -- not by
showing evident marks of pleasure and satisfaction at every fabricated account
of the distresses of America.

It would be unnecessary to follow Lord Sheffield through the tedious detail of
articles that he has enumerated, as constituting the wants of the Americans,
the greatest part of which, he asserts, they must absolutely procure from
England; -- the fallacy of this account can only be discovered by a person who
is acquainted with the nature of the American trade, and the relative quality
and price of foreign manufactures.

To oppose assertion to assertion, would not be sufficient to operate
conviction on the public mind; -- but surely, one who can seriously place the
articles of silk, laces, and salt, amongst the number of these which Great
Britain can enter into competition with other countries in supplying America
with, must either be very ignorant of his subject, or extremely partial to his
own country.

On a fair and candid consideration of the foregoing reflections, I think you
will be persuaded, that the beautiful prospect that Lord Sheffield has painted
to the eyes of his enraptured countrymen, of the increasing consequence of
Great Britain, from his pleasing Arcadian plans will without great care taken
to prevent it, and by pursuing a system diametrically opposite to what he has
formed, disappear, like the dancing vision of a misty evening.

He reasons, as if the trade of America must irresistbly be confined to its
former channel; whereas I can assure him, that freed from the con^roul of your
Navigation Act, and all the fetters of commercial restraint it will expand
itself, as far as seas can carry, or winds can waft it.

He forgets the energy of this young Country, that he is devoting to such
humiliation restrictions; -- he forgets, that it exhibited, whilst in it^
cradle, such marks of firmness and vigor of constitution, as like young
Hercules to crush the serpent, that wantonly attacked it.

He does not recollect, that it is in the power of the United States, if
provoked to it, to have recourse to recrimination and mutually ill offices, and
to establish restrictions similar to those Great Britain may impose, which will
be relatively far more prejudicial to her trade and commerce.

An impartial dispassionate Englishman, fully weighing the reasons alled^ed
against the adoption of Lord Sheffield's restraining system, and cordially
attached to the interest of Great Britain, will deprecate the fatal measure.

An American, in the same temper of mind, looking forward to the future
prosperity and power of his country, and contemplating the tendency of this
system toward strengthening the union of the States, and making it
indissoluble, will not hesitate to acquiesce without a murmur, to the existence
of these restraining regulations: -- the only objections that can arise, will
come from those, who, too attentive to temporary inconveniences, do not
consider and contrast them, with the many advantages their country will
eventually derive; -- who do not consider, that the more trade and intercourse
the United States will have with Great Britain, the greater will be the
importation of British manufactures, and the more it will tend to impoverish
and weaken them, and in the same proportion, contribute to her aggrandizement
and power.

Harley-Street, Cavendish-Square, December 16th, 1783.
END OF STRICTURES ON COMMERCE.
PREFACE TO MENTOR,
THE Author feels himself constrained to beg his readers indulgence, for the
hasty manner, which the scantiness of his time (not being able to devote but
three evenings to it) has obliged him to observe in preparing the following
address. Indeed this consideration, together with the very different avocations
in which he is engaged, and the disinclination he has to controversial
writings, would have prevented him from undertaking it, were it not that no one
else seemed disposed to do it, and the repeated denials to the importunities of
some friends, made the last alternative most disagreeable.

It has been his study to state the thoughts which occurred in so short a time,
in as plain and simple a manner as he could, and not to puzzle his honest
reader with learned form, or to plague him with frequent quotations from the
works of the dead, to show his own great reading. The case being stated, he
supposes his reader competent to judge for himself, without searching the
records of antiquity for examples of opinionin in like cases.

MENTOR's REPLY TO PHOCION's LETTER.
RAISE a feather in the air, and it will be impossible to determine where it
shall light so it is with a newly raised political sentiment only gran^ing that
there are a few interested, both for and against it, to give it a circulation.

When the letter of Phocion, first made its appearance the doctrines contained
in it stood so opposed to common understanding, that I was very far from
supposing that any consequences arising from them, would make a reply to the
letter in the smallest degree necessary; so far from it, I judged a reply would
carry with it, the appearance of wantonly seizing an occasion to introduce the
author upon the stage of politics; but experience has taught me that passion,
pomp, and plausibility, may pass even upon an enlightened people, for argument
and truth.

This author, while he declaims against "heated spirits." and "inflammatory"
publications, gives us a striking proof that he has, in an eminent degree, that
great disqualification for a statesman an uncontrollable warmth of temper. This
letter affords us an instance of the frailty of human nature. It gives us the
picture of a strong and tolerably well informed mind, which, perhaps having
been flattered by success in the early stage of life, has acquired too much
respect for its own capacity, too much contempt for that of others, and too
much vanity to conceal these effects.

A statesman should be well informed of the nature of that kind of evidence,
which given political opinion; he would then see the possibility of others
having materials to reason from, which the hastiness of his mind may have
overlooked. This would teach him the use of holding in decent respect the
opinion of others, and of his being a dispassionate enquirer into the means
which produced them, I can suppose that Phocion believed himself possessed of
an honest warmth; but want of charity and want of modesty, in one who offers
himself for public inspection, will never fail to raise some bile against him.

But my business is with the political part of Phocion's Letter, not that which
paints the author, and I would apologize for saying this much, if I was not so
strongly courted to it by his illiberality. For in writing and acting, I would
wish forever to separate the statesman or politician, and the man.

The little regard which Phocion had to method in the arrangement of his
arguments, must be my excuse for adopting the same plan. I must take him where
the weight of his arguments seem to rest.

First, then to his construction of the treaty? (which as his pamphlets are in
the hands of most of the people, I will not trouble them with a long extract of
it here) I beg leave to oppose to it the construction in one of the
publications, under the signature of Gustavus, and leave the public to judge
which is fairest.

In the 6th article of the treaty it is provided, that no one shall suffer in
his person, liberty, or property, on account of the part he may have taken in
the war. The 5th article describes the persons provided for, and distinguishes
them into three classes: First, those that are real British subjects. The
second, those that were within their lines, and had not taken arms against the
country. The third class are described by the provision that is made for them,
viz. They shall have liberty to go into any part of the United States, for
twelve months, to solicit a restoration of their estates that may have been
confiscated. This class must be those, who, belonging to America, have taken
arms against their country. The first and second class, it is agreed, that
Congress shall recommend to the states, a restoration of their property. The
third it seems were too infamous for the English minister to ask any
consideration for, except the wretched privilege of asking it for themselves.
But I can find no where, even a request, and that only implied, that any of the
three classes may dwell among us, and enjoy the immunities and privileges of
citizens; for the first class are considered as former subjects, the second and
third as acquired subjects of England.

But Phocion starts another difficulty: He says, to imagine, that by espousing
the cause of Great Britain, they become aliens, is to admit, that subjects may,
at pleasure, renounce their allegiance to the state of which they were members,
and devote themselves to a foreign jurisdiction; a principle, he adds, contrary
to law, and subversive of government."

To this I reply, that it there was nothing more in the case than their
adhering to the then enemies of our country, I would readily join Phocion in
opinion, that this action simply, should not be construed to amount to
alienation; but it should be construed to amount to treason. So, instead of
aliens, I would render them traitors, and as such, put the penal laws in force
against them.

But it is by treaty, that they become aliens or subjects of England. By the
treaty England adopted them as subjects, and by ratifying that treaty, the
states, and this state, from the share she had in it, consented to that
adoption. And this is the great benefit of the treaty to them, which Phocion
says, we would violate; whereas it appears that we, who he dubs heated and
designing men, are the real supporters of it.

Graining them to be aliens, Phocion continues, they cannot hold real property
under our government, their real estates then must be considered as belonging
to the public, this is confiscation, and thereby the treaty is violated. I
answer, that they are aliens, but aliens stipulated for. If in doing this, our
ministers have exceeded the powers given them, and Congress also, by acceding
to what they have done; or, if they agreed to an article in the treaty, which
wars with the nature of government or with the particular genius of ours, let
it be so declared, and also the consequence of the blunder; then we may take up
the subject in another point of view. But till then we must consider it as it
is, and take it for granted that it is right.

But for my own part, I cannot see the inconsistency of it. Suppose the British
East India company had claims to certain lands in America, before her
separation from England, and by an article of the treaty it should be agreed,
that they should have the privilege of selling it, some might doubt the justice
of it, but I think none could doubt the right.

To make it appear, that in removing a number of these people, prosecutions of
some kind or other would be necessary, and which are forbid by the treaty,
seems to be a chief design of Phocion. Beside others which have been observed,
he starts this: How will it be determined, but by prosecution, who have so
adhered to the enemy, as in a legal sense to amount to a crime? I answer, in
the first place, that no question of law arises on the subject.

It is by treaty, and not by law, that we are to judge of them; for the
ratification of that has, in effect, repealed all the laws that stood in force
against them. If the treaty have not this power, then have we played the cheat,
not only with England, but with every power that was represented in that
Congress, which settled the terms of pence. In the second place, that the
treaty itself makes the distinction that otherwise would be wanting; and all
that is necessary for the legislature in this particular is, by an act of grace
to make a distinction of a very different kind; to distinguish and restore to
citizenship, the deserving of those who are by treaty made subjects of England.

I presume it must by this time clearly appear, that the people we are speaking
of are the subjects of England. It then remains to see, what necessity demands,
and what justice and honor will allow to be done with them; and in this
investigation, let us throw aside every passion, but that which is concerned
for the safety and true interest of the state.

Before I proceed, permit me to lay it down as a maxim, that it is a principle
coincident with the very nature of society, that there be a power vested in it,
in some form or other, adequate to the purpose, not only of correcting any
present evil in it, but to prevent a probable future one.

Though I abhor all reasonings which tend to make less heinous the dreadful sin
of taking arms against our country, both as it regards the eternal law of
justice, and also good policy; yet as the country has agreed by a solemn
compact, not to take vengeance of those of this character in America, both our
honor and interest are concerned to preserve this compact inviolate, so upon
this occasion I shall dismiss all that passion arising from a lively
recollection of what this country has sustained from them, would dictate, and
speak of them only as they respect our political safety, as a morbid humor in
our political body, which requires healthy remedies to expel.

After a former has prepared his ground, would he mix cockle with his
seed-wheat to grow up with, and contaminate the wholesome grain? In
establishing a young empire, should we leave the principle of sedition in its
foundation? But Phocion will tell us that this is a bugbear danger. Make it
their interest and they will be good subjects. God forbid, the government
should make it their interest to be its friends; for to do this, would be to
bring the principles of the government to suit them, not them to suit it, The
tory principle, where it has been long entertained, and where it has long beat
unison with the passions, is more fixed and immovable than the best
established government. I speak of those who have been much concerned in
government speculation. Of political opinions, those which respect monarchical
and republican governments, are most opposed of course most irreconcilable;
they beget a contempt for each other, in the members of the two governments.

To show that our fears for the well-being of our government on this occasion,
are founded in reason, and not ideal, beside what has been already said, let us
consider the number and quality of the people, who, I am ashamed to say, are
the subjects of dispute, and the difference between the government which their
principles contend for, and ours.

In a monarchical government, I grant the doctrine of Phocion may obtain. There
fear might make it their interest to be good subjects; the fear of offending
against the government. But, in a republican government, the people are their
own governors. A republican government must take its shape from the opinion of
the people, and is variable, as the opinions of its component parts may vary;
hence the necessity of correcting that evil, which may spring from a corruption
of opinion, and though it may be confined to a few at first, it may communicate
to the overturning of the government. The number of those who are in reality
malcontents in America, are not so small as may be imagined; nor are their
views and hopes so humble as many suppose.

I have said that government has a right to anticipate probable evils. The tory
principle cortains in it a mortal and irreconcilable hatred to our government.
That this principle will be communicated, is too probable, when we consider the
wealth, the art, the perseverance and fashion of many of its present possessors.

On the other hand, let us consider the indigence which the ravages of a long
and accursed war have created in the other party, which must cause them
assiduously to attend torneir own orivate concerns. For though some of them
still preserve a lively attention to the government, yet in many the effect
which I have mentioned, has been wrought; and in a little time the last spasms
of he republican spirit will be over, the meager ghost of poverty with all her
train of evils, being constantly before them, ^very to her consideration will
yield to the spur of necessity. In the m^^n while, the mal-contents are left
with the means, and can afford the leisure to get into administration. Tais,
fellow citizens is the condition of affairs; -- I blush to proclaim it, to
which the writings and sayings of whigs tend to bring you! -- For Phocion tells
you, that he has been an eminent servant of the republic in establishing her
independency. If a revolution is effected in the manner above stated, however
infamous the means, yet ^nen the revolution is completed, it is a just one,
because it must be supposed that a majority of opinions are for it. Therefore I
say, it is importantly the duty of the present government to anticipate such an
evil, by removing the causes of pravity of opinion. But short of a revolution,
a perversion of the principles of our government, which is more easily wrought,
may be as wounding to the upright republican.

With regard to England's renewing her claim to the country, on the supposition
that ill policy abroad, and anar^^y at home, should invite her to it, I am
clearly of opinion it would not be her interest to do it; for, if she should
succeed, the extent and rapid growth of the country would prevent its being
long tributary to that distant island. I am also fully convinced, that the late
and present ministry of England did not, and do not, with for the reunion of
the country upon any other terms than as a farm, from which she is to derive
substantial revenue, without allowing the tenant any vote in the disposition of
it. But we are not to calculate what is only the real interest of a nation,
whose monarch has the right of making peace and war. Suppose the inclination of
the present king should not lead him to reclaim the country; yet, his son, when
he comes to the throne, may be ambitious for the glory of recovering the lost
dominion of his father. And as to the difficulty of obtaining money from
parliament to carry on an unreasonable war, the rapid corruption of that people
will probably soon remove it.

There is no other way of preventing this probable corruption of opinion, but
by removing the cause, which I have asie^^^d to be the mal-contents of America.
Having, as we presume, shown the necessity, let us now, as proposed, enquire if
honor and equity will consent to the measure.

The treaty which justice and honor forbid us to violate, does not, even upon
so liberal a construction, as I believe Phocion himself would give it, debar
the states from making laws that may be salutary to the government, and
advantageous to the people, though in their consequences they may operate
against the interest of the subjects of England. Suppose a line to be drawn,
and the deserving of those, who by treaty are made subjects of England, should
be re-adopted, and invested with all the privileges of citizens; and, after
this, laws should be passed, giving the citizens the exclusive benents of
trade. This law would operate no more against the subjects of England that are
here, than against those who are at home, except in this, the effect of the law
in one case, sends these home, and in the other case, keeps them there, or
rather prevents their coming here as traders.

There was a time when the people of England considered themselves in danger
from a corruption of opinion of another kind -- I mean of religious opinion.
Few protestants complained of it as unjust or dishonorable, that the
government enacted laws to suppress the growth of the Roman Catholic religion.

A government has a clearer right to interfere in checking the promulgation of
depravity in political, than in religious opinion. If the tory principle should
be repressed in this way, it is a remedy used for the health and preservation
of the body politic, and as such no one, not even the tories, can complain of
it as unjust, though they may deprecate the hardship of the measure as applied
to themselves.

In the first case, that is against laws for exclusive trade, it has been
objected, that by removing these people we remove a great part of the silver,
and gold out of the state. With as much propriety it may be argued against the
measure, that we should remove a great part of the writing paper out of the
state.

Money is a convenience, not an article of trade; being such, wherever trade
centers money will. The importance of this city, as a place of trade, is not
owing to the quantity of money that is now in it, or that ever was in it, at
any one time. It is with effects that we trade, and the mercantile consequence
of this town arises from its being central to the effects of this and the
adjoining states, and the convenience of its water communication. Suppose this
city traded only with the effects of this state, then its quantity of trade
would be in exact proportion to the annual produce of the state, though there
should not be an ounce of silver or gold in the place tomorrow.

Another objection still more futile has been made against a law for exclusive
trade. That we prevent the merchants of England from coming over and settling
with us, and their ships from visiting us, which would be a dreadful misfortune
to the trading interest of the state. "Open your arms, or ports," (I do not
remember which) said the writer of a hand bill, "to the ships of foreign
nations."

Unless Congress should have in contemplation to give some particular
privileges to the French nation, and to which I shall have no objection, I
declare I have not a wish ever to see a foreign vessel, or a foreign merchant,
visit this continent, except as a traveller. I would not be understood to wish
a prohibition of foreign vessels to our harbors; but I wish they may be
discouraged, by encouraging ship-building here. With us, who have it in our
power to make vessels and naval stores, articles of export; and who want
articles of export so much, would it be to our interest to carry on our trade
in foreign bottoms? -- With regard to foreign merchants, it is well known that
there are, at present, more adventurers in trade, in America, than there is
trade to support, that is, the spirit of trade is more than in proportion to
its quantity. When foreign merchants migrate to the two Americas, it is
generally with a view to mend or make their fortunes, and to return home and
enjoy them. Can such men feel themselves interested in the welfare of our
government? Is it not more probable that they will still consider themselves of
the nation which they left; and as far as they have influence in the
government, use it for the interest of their own nation, to which they still
feel themselves belonging? Would it then be so essentially our duty to
encourage such settlers to supplant our own traders; and who, if they acquire
fortunes, is it probable they will be used to the benefit of our government?

There is a kind of settlers that I could wish might be encouraged from all
countries; these are husbandmen and manufacturers. When these migrate, they do
it with a view to remain where they settle. Beside these, scientific men of all
kinds should be encouraged to visit us. For, whether they become permanent
residents or not, they are useful while they do stay.

I would encourage husbandmen and manufacturers to come to the country, and
discourage traders, for the same reason that I would encourage articles of
export, and discourage articles of import, by holding out bounties on the one
side, and imposts on the other.

So general is the cry of the balance of trade being against America, that the
blockhead who wants skill to balance his cane, will put on the face o business,
and tell me, "the balance of trade is against us." Will importing foreign
merchants into the country tend to place this balance in its favor. The truth
is, a balance of trade cannot exist against a country longer than a year or
two. For if the imports of this year exceed the exports, the balance must be
paid the next year. If the articles of export should not be so increased, as by
the next year to make up the balance, then the articles of import will be
proportionably diminished. A balance cannot be always due. The imports and
exports must, in the long run, bear an exact proportion to each other. If our
exports are small, our imports must consequently be small.

The nation then cannot abound in foreign productions; they cannot be in a
state of affluence.

This teaches us a plain and simple truth, viz. That the riches of a nation are
derived from the cultivation of its land, and its manufacturies. Merchants are
the agents of the farmers and manufacturers, to exchange their commodities for
those of other countries, which this will not produce.

This is a simple state of the case; I wish I had leisure to enter more fully
into it.

To increase the wealth of our state then, we should invite hushandmen and
manufacturers into the country, and look coldly on traders, for that part of
our community is already too numerous, and will probably cause the temporary
inconvenience which I have mentioned, of placing the balance of trade against
us for a time, which must create a scarcity of foreign commodities for some
time after. Unless greater exertions in cultivating the land should immediately
succeed it and make up the balance.

Phocion's letter being essentially, though not minutely answered, some of his
arguments which are not noticed, depending upon principles which have been
disproved, some not applying at all to the case in question, and some in
reality unexceptionable, I will take leave of my reader, after observing, that
I do not wish the policy of the state to take into consideration the small
sinner from the ignorant. Our government is in no danger: It is the
bell-weathers of the flock that we should guard against.

There is no form of government so delicate in its nature, and which requires
so much attention to preserve, as that which exists in the minds of the people.
While corruption is kept out of it, there is no form of government so
honorable to men, and so happy to the partaker of it; and when corrupted,
there is no government so much to be detested and avoided. Considering things
in this point of view, and considering what it has cost us to establish this
government, what it would have cost us if we had failed in it, I am not willing
to uisle with the acquisition. To risque it from a false notion of generosity,
or because it is easy for Phocion and others to bestow the epithet of
vindictive on the salutary measures that may be proposed for its preservation.

We did at the commencement of the war, and have in the whole course of it,
kept it in view as a debt which we owed to posterity, to bequeath to them that
liberty which we recived from our ancestors. Having got this in our power by an
hazardous and dreadful conflict, to suffer the inestimable acquisition to
perish by neglect, would be not only to betray them but ourselves.

THE END OF MENTOR's, REPLY.
Philadelphia march 30th. 1784
MEMORANDUM. Every Gentleman that has been supplied wit. these two Pamphlets in
their present imperfect situation, are requested to be so very obliging as to
call for their completion at BELL's BOOK STORE, near St. Paul's Church, in
Third-Street, as soon as they are Advertised, and the favor will be gratefully
acknowledged, By their respectful Servant,

ROBERT BELL.

COLONEL HAMILTON's SECOND LETTER, FROM PHOCION TO THE CONSIDERATE CITIZENS OF
NEW YORK, ON THE POLITICS OF THE TIMES, IN CONSEQUENCE OF THE PEACE: CONTAINING
REMARKS ON MENTOR's REPLY.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED and SOLD BY ROBERT BELL, IN Third-Street. M, DCC, LXXXIV.

PHOCION's SECOND LETTER, CONTAINING REMARKS; ON MENTOR's REPLY.
THE little hasty production, under the signature of PHOCION, has met with a
more favorable reception from the public, than was expected. The force of
plain truth has carried it along against the stream of prejudice; and the
principles, it holds out, have gained ground, in spite of the opposition of
those, who were either too angry, or too much interested to be convinced. Men
of this description, have, till lately, contented themselves with virulent
invectives against the Writer, without attempting to answer his arguments; but
alarmed at the progress of the sentiments advocated by him, one of them has at
last come forward with an answer; with what degree of success, let those, who
are most partial to his opinion, determine.

To say, that the answer of Mentor is a feeble attempt, would be no derogation
from his abilities; for, in fact, the cause he espouses, admits of nothing
solid; and, as one of its partisans, he is only to be blamed for not knowing
its weak sides better, than to have been tempted to expose it to the experiment
of a defense.

BUT, before I enter farther into the subject, I shall take occasion to
acknowledge, with regret, the injudicious appearance of warmth in my former
letter; calculated, with many minds, to raise prejudices against the truths it
contains, and liable to be misrepresented into a general censure on that part
of the community, whose zeal, sacrifices and sufferings must ever render them
respectable to the true friends of the revolution. I shall only observe in
apology (as is truly the case) that whatever severity of animadversion may have
been indulged, was wholly directed against a very small number of men, who are
manifestly aiming at nothing, but the acquisition of power and profit to
themselves; and w^^, to gratify their avidity for these objects, would trample
upon every thing sacred in society, and overturn the foundations of public and
private security. It is difficult for a man, conscious of a pure attachment to
the public weal, who sees it invaded and endangered by such men, under specious
but false pretenses, either to think, or to speak of their conduct, without
indignation. It is equally difficult for one, who in questions that affect the
community, regards principles only, and not men, to look with indifference on
attempts to make the great principles of social right, justice and honor, the
victims of personal animosity or party intrigue.

MORE tenderness is indeed due to the mistakes of those, who have suffered too
much to reason with impartiality, whose honest prejudices, grown into habits by
the impressions of an eight years war, cannot at once accommodate themselves to
that system which the public good requires, and whose situations are less
favorable to distinguishing between doctrines invented to serve the turn of a
revolution, and those which must give permanent prosperity to the state.

THESE observations I have thought proper to premise, in justice to my own
intentions, and I shall now proceed, as concisely as possible, to examine the
suggestions of Mentor, interspersing as I go along, some remarks on objections
which though omitted by him, have been urged in other shapes against the
principles of Phocion.

MENTOR proposes to treat the sentiments of Phocion as a political novelty, but
if he is serious, it is a proof that he is not even "tolerably well informed."
They are as old as any regular notions of free government among mankind, and
are to be met with, not only in every speculative Writer, on these subjects,
but are interwoven in the theory and practice of that code, which constitutes
the law of the land. They speak the common language of this country at the
beginning of the revolution, and are essential to its future happiness and
respectability.

THE principles of all the arguments I have used or shall use, lie within the
compass of a few simple propositions, which, to be assented to, need only to be
stated.

FIRST, That no man can forfeit or be justly deprived, without his consent, of
any right, to which as a member of the community he is entitled, but for some
crime incurring the forfeiture.

SECONDLY, That no man ought to be condemned unheard, or punished for supposed
offenses, without having an opportunity of making his defense. See Address of
Congress to the people of Great Britain, September 5, 1774.

THIRDLY, That a crime is an act committed or omitted, in violation of a public
law, either forbidding or commanding it. -- Blackstone, Vol. IV. page 5.

FOURTHLY, That a prosecution is in its most precise signification, an inquiry
or mode of ascertaining, whether a particular person has committed, or omitted
such act.

FIFTHLY, That duties and rights as applied to subjects are reciprocal; or in
other words, that a man cannot be a citizen for the purpose of punishment, and
not a citizen for the purpose of privilege.

THESE propositions will hardly be controverted by any man professing to be a
friend to civil liberty. The application of them will more fully appear
hereafter.

BY the declaration of Independence on the 4th of July, in the year 1776,
acceded to by our Convention on the ninth, the late colony of New York became
an independent state. All the inhabitants, who were subjects under the former
government, and who did not withdraw themselves upon the change which took
place, were to be considered as citizens, owing allegiance to the new
government, This, at least, is the legal presumption; and this was the
principle, in fact, upon which all the measures of our public councils have
been grounded. Duties have been exacted, and punishments inflicted according to
this rule. If any exceptions to it were to be admitted, they could only flow
from the indulgence of the state to such individuals, as from peculiar
circumstances might desire to be permitted to stand upon a different footing.

THE inhabitants of the southern district, before they fell under the power of
the British army, were as much citizens of the state as the inhabitants of
other parts of it. They must, therefore, continue to be such, unless they have
been divided of that character by some posterior circumstance. This
circumstance must, either be

-- THEIR having, by the fortune of war, fallen under the power of the British
army. --

-- THEIR having forfeited their claim by their own misconduct.

-- THEIR having been left out of the compact by some subsequent association of
the body of the state, or

-- THEIR having been dismembered by treaty.

THE first of these circumstances according to the fundamental principles of
government, and the constant practice of nations could have no effect in
working a forfeiture of their citizenship.

To allow it such an effect, would be to convert misfortune into guilt; it
would be in many instances, to make the negligence of the society, in not
providing adequate means of defense for the several parts, the crime of those
parts which were the immediate sufferers by that negligence. It would tend to
the dissolution of society, by loosening the ties which bind the different
parts together, and justifying these who should for a moment fall under the
power of a conqueror, not merely in yielding such a submission as was exacted
from them, but in taking a willing, interested and decisive part with him.

IT was the policy of the revolution, to inculcate upon every citizen the
obligation of renouncing his habitation, property, and every private concern
for the service of his country, and many of us have scarcely ye learned to
consider it as less than (...) to have acted in a different manner, But it is
time we should correct the exuberances of opinions propagated through policy,
(...) from enthusiasm; and while we admit, that (...) who did act so
disinterested and noble a part, deserve the applause and, wherever they can be
bestowed with propriety the rewards of their country, we should cease to impute
indiscriminate guilt to those, who, submitting to the accidents of war,
remained with their habitions and property. We should learn, that this conduct
is tolerated by the general sense of mankind; and that according to that sense,
whenever the state recovers the possession of such parts as were for a time
subdued, the citizens return at once to all the rights, to which they were
formerly entitled.

As to the second head of forfeiture by misconduct, there is is no doubt, that
all such as remaining within the British lines, did not merely yield an
obedience, which they could not refuse, without ruin; but took a voluntary and
interested part with the enemy, in carrying on the war, became subject to the
penalties of treason. They could not however, by that conduct, make themselves
aliens, because though they were bound to pay a temporary and qualified
obedience to the conqueror, they could not transfer their eventual allegiance
from the state to a foreign power. By becoming aliens too, they would have
ceased to be traitors; and all the laws of the state passed during the
revolution, by which they are considered and punished as subjects, would have
been, by that construction, unintelligence and unjust. The idea indeed of
citizens transforming themselves into aliens, by taking part against the state,
to which they belong, is altogether of new-invention, unknown and inadmissible
in law, and contrary to the nature of the social compact.

BUT were this not the case, an insurmountable difficulty would still remain,
for how shall we ascertain who are aliens or traitors, let us call them which
we will. It has been seen that the boundaries of the British lines cannot
determine the question; for this would be to say, that the merely falling under
the power of the British army, constituted every man a traitor or an alien. It
would be to confound one third of the citizens of the state in promiscuous
guilt and degradation, without evidence, or enquiry. It would be to make crime,
which are in their nature personal and individual, aggregate and territorial.
Shall we go into a enquiry to ascertain the crime of each person? This would be
a prosecution; [See proposition 4th.] and the treaty forbids all future
prosecutions. (...). Legislature take the map and make a geographical
delineation of the rights and disqualifications of its citizens? This would be
to measure innocence and guilt, by latitude and longitude -- It would be
condemn and punish, not one man, but thousands for supposed effences, without
giving them an opportunity of making their defense. God forbid that such an act
of barefaced tyranny should ever disgrace our history! God forbid that (...)
body of the people should be corrupt enough to wish it, or (...) submitted it!

BUT here we are informed by Mentor, that the treaty, instead of offering any
obstacle to the views of those, who wish to metamorphose their fellow citizens
into aliens, is precisely the thing which removes the difficulty. Mentor is
thus far right; that if they are aliens at all, it must be by some stipulation
in the treaty, but it requires not a little dexterity to show, that such a
stipulation exists. If it exists at all, it must be collected from the 5th and
6th articles. Let us, by analyzing these articles, try if we can find it out.

THE fifth article speaks in the first clause of real British subjects whose
estates had been confiscated, and stipulates that Congress shall recommend a
restitution.

IN the second clause it speaks of persons resident in districts in the
possession of the British forces, who had not borne arms against the United
States of whose estates, also confiscated, Congress are in like manner to
recommend a restitution.

IN the third clause, persons of every other description are comprehended, who
are to be permitted to remain twelve months unmolested, in any of the states,
to solicit a restoration of their property, which had been confiscated;
Congress recommending, even with respect to them, a restitution, on condition
of their refunding to the present possessors, where there had been a sale, the
bona fiac price given by them for the estates in their possession.

IT is apparent from the dissection of the article, that the inhabitants in the
Southern district, possessed by the British army, are not confounded in one
general mass of alienism, as has been asserted. We find the express words of
descripition are real British subjects, and as contradistinguished from them,
persons resident in districts within the possession of the British arms. These
last, by the letter as well as the spirit of the article are deemed not British
subjects.

THERE is no intelligible medium, between a real British subject, and one that
is not British subject at all. A man either is or is not the subject of a
country. The word real, as applied to the affirmative, is a redundancy. Its
natural contrasts are fictitious or pretended. If we should call the persons of
other descriptions in the article fictitious or pretended British subjects,
instead of justifying, it would exclude the construction given by Mentor. For
if they were only fictitious or pretended British subjects, they must be real
American subjects; or in other words, if they were not real British subjects,
which by necessary implication they are declared not to be, they must of
necessity be American subjects.

THE phrase real British subjects, strictly considered, is innaccurate; but its
practical import, with the help of a little candor, is easily fixed. It is well
known that in this and other states, the property of persons, who had never
been subjects of this country, before or after the revolution, but who had
truly been subjects of Great Britain, had in many instances been confiscated.
Sir Henry Clinton, the late Governor Tryon, Lord Dunmore, are examples among us
of the real British subjects in the contemplation of the treaty. All the rest
are of course American subjects.

To understand the fifth and sixth articles relatively, it is necessary to
remark, that all the different classes described in the fifth article agree in
one common quality; they are all persons whose property had been already
confiscated. I have placed this fact in a pointed view; because it shows
incontestibly, that the persons who are the objects of the fifth article, and
those who are the objects of the sixth, are totally different. The one relates
to persons whose property had been confiscated, and aims at restitution; the
other relates to those whose property had not yet been confiscated, who were
not actually suffering the sentence of the law, and has for object to prevent
future prosecutions, confiscations, or injuries to individuals on account to
their conduct in the war.

THIS distinction solves the seeming contradiction between the fifth and sixth
articles; the former providing for the future residence of persons of a
particular description within the state for a twevle month; the other
prohibiting all future injury or damage to persons, liberty or property. At
first sight, the great extent of the latter provision appears to supersede, and
render absurd, the former; but the two articles are reconciled, by considering
those, who had already suffered the sentence of the law, as not within the
purview of the sixth article, to arrest or remit that sentence; while all
others against whom sentence had not passed, are within the protection of the
sixth article. It does not operate with a retrospective and restorative
influence, but looks forward and stops the futre current of prosecution and
punishment.

To illustrate, in a more striking manner, the fallacy of Mentor's comment upon
the treaty, I shall give a recital of it, with some explanatory additions, the
fairness of which I think will not be disputed.

"IN the sixth article (says he) it is provided that no one shall "suffer in
his person, liberty, or property, on account of the part he many have taken in
the war;" and yet though no one, consistently with the treaty, can hereafter
suffer in either of those respects, yet many, consistently with the treaty, may
be declared aliens, may be stripped of the most valuable rights of citizenship,
and may be banished from the state, without injury to person, liberty, or
property, "The fifth article," though it speaks of none but those who have
already had their estates confiscated, "describes the persons provided for by
the sixth," which indeed says, that there shall be no future prosecutions, nor
confiscations, nor injury to person, liberty, or porperty; but this only means,
that there shall be no future prosecutions commenced against those, who have
been already attainted and banished, nor confiscations made of the estates of
those whose estates have been already confiscated, nor injuries done to the
persons, liberty, and property, of those, who are already to be esteemed dead
in law by attainder and exile; but with respect to all those who have not been
already attainted, banished, and subjected to confiscation, (the only persons
comprehended in the fifth article and provided for in the sixth) we may
prosecute, banish, confiscate, disfranchise, and do whatever else we think
proper. The fifth article stipulates the good offices of Congress for those,
who have been already ruined, and the sixth benignly takes care that they shall
not be ruined a second time; but leaves all others to their destiny and our
mercy. The fifth article, distinguishes, the persons who are the objects of it,
into three classes -- First, those who are real British subjects -- The second,
those (meaning British subjects who were not real British subjects, described
by the appellation of persons resident in districts in the possession of the
British forces) who had not taken arms against the country -- The third class
are described by the provision that is made for them, viz. They shall have
liberty to go into any part of the United States for twelve months to solicit a
restoration of their estates, that may have been confiscated. This class must
be those who belonging to America, have taken arms against their country. The
first and second class it is agreed, that Congress shall recommend to the
states a restoration of their property. The third it seems were too infamous
for the English minister to ask any consideration for, except the wretched
privilege of asking it for themselves, though in fact, with respect even to
them, it is expressly stipulated, that Congress shall recommend a restoration
of their estates, rights and properties, on paying to the present possessors
the bona fide price given for them, where there has been an actual sale. But
(continues he) I can find no where even a request, and that only implied, that
any of the three classes may dwell among us, and enjoy the immunities and
privileges of citizens; for the first class are considered as former subjects;
the second and third as acquired subjects of England, acquired but not real.

THUS we see, by taking the out-lines of Mentor's construction, and filing up
the canvass in a manner suited to the design, the whole is a groupe of
absurdities; or in other words by connecting the consequences with the
principles of his comment, on the treaty, the result is too ridiculous not to
strike the meanest understanding.

IT must appear by this time manifest, that there is nothing in the terms of
the treaty, which countenances the supposition, that those who have been within
the British lines are considered and stipulated for as aliens. One ground, upon
which this idea has been originally adopted, was that it would have been
improper to have stipulated for them at all, if they were not aliens; but I
have shown in my former letter, that a stipulation for subjects, in similar
circumstances, has been far from unprecedented.

A good criterion by which to determine the meaning of the treaty, in this
respect, is to recur to the impressions that it made, on its first appearance;
before there had been time to contrive and substitute an artificial to the
natural and obvious sense of the words. Every man, by appealing to his own
bosom, will recollect, that he was at first struck with an opinion that the
disaffected were secured from every future deprivation and injury whatever; and
however many may have been chagrined at the idea, that they should be admitted
to a parity of privileges with those who had supported the revolution, none
doubted that this was the sense of the treaty. Indeed the principal doubt
seemed to be, in the first instance, whether the sixth article was not so
broad, as to protect even those, who had been attainted, from personal injury,
in case of their return within the state.

I shall not, in this place, revive the question of the power of Congress to
make this stipulation; not only because Mentor appears to have conceded this
point, and to acknowledge our obligation to a faithful observance of the
treaty; but because what has been offered in my former letter on this head,
must continue to appear to me to be absolutely conclusive; until some
satisfactory limits can be assigned to the powers of war, peace and treaty,
vested in Congress, other than those I have mentioned, -- the public safety and
the fundamental constitutions of the society.

WHEN any different and intelligible line shall be drawn -- I will give up the
question, if I cannot show it is inadmissible in practice.

THE common interests of humanity, and the general tranquillity of the world,
require that the power of making peace, wherever lodged, should be construed
and exercised liberally; and even in cases where its extent may be doubtful, it
is the policy of all wise nations to give it latitude rather than confine it.
The exigencies of a community, in time of war, are so various and often so
critical, that it would be extremely dangerous to prescribe narrow bounds to
that power, by which it is to be restored. The consequence might frequently be
a diffidence of our engagements, and a prolongation of the calamities of war.

IT may not be improper, in this place, to answer an objection which has been
made to a position contained in my former letter. It is there laid down as a
rule, that the breach of a single article of a treaty annuls the whole. The
reason of this rule is, that every article is to be regarded as the
consideration of some other article.

THIS has given occasion to observe, that a breach of the treaty on the part of
the British, in sending away a great number of negroes, has upon my principles
long since annihilated the treaty, and left us at perfect liberty to desert the
stipulation, on our part.

THIS admits of an easy and solid answer. The breach of one article annuls the
whole; if the side injured by it chooses to take advantage of it to dissolve
the treaty; [ Vatel page 130 Section 48.] but if its interest dictates a
different conduct it may wave the breach and let the obligation of the treaty
continue. The power of determining whether the treaty has been broken properly
belongs to that body who made it. Congress have wisely taken a different
course, and instead of reviving the state of hostility by declaring the treaty
void, have proceeded upon the presumption of its continuing in force; and by
subsequent acts have given it additional validity and strength. The definitive
treaty has been since concluded, and proclaimed with a remarkable solemnity and
energy for the observance of the citizens of the United States.

THE third mode mentioned, by which the inhabitants of the southern district
may have lost their rights of citizenship, is their having been left out of the
compact by some subsequent association of the body of the state. The fact
however is directly the reverse; for not only the constitution makes provision
for the representation of the people of the southern district in the
Legislature, but during the whole war, by an ordinance of the Convention, who
framed the constitution, an actual representation has been kept up in a manner,
the regularity of which (whatever might have been the expedience of it) was
more than questionable; as all elections were suspended in that part of the
state This circumstance of a constant representation of the inhabitants of the
Southern district in the Legislature, during the war, is in a rational as well
as a legal light a conclusive refutation of the pretended alienism of those
inhabitants by any event of the war, or by any other matter that applies to
them in a collective view antecedent to the treaty of peace. To this it may be
added, that a variety of the laws of the state, in the course of the war,
suppose and treat the inhabitants of the Southern district as subjects; owing
allegiance to the state, and consequently having the rights which subjects in
general enjoy under the government. [See Position 5th]

THE argument is still stronger when we attend to what has been done by the
government since the restoration of its jurisdiction in the Southern district.
We did not wait till a bill of naturalization was passed, to remove the
disabilities of the inhabitants, before we proceeded to elections. We did not
confine those elections to such persons only, as had resided without the
British lines, but left them open to all descriptions of persons, who would
choose to take the oath prescribed for that purpose, by the Council. Few indeed
in this city, besides those who had been absent, did in fact vote at the
elections: but a considerable number did in the counties. And if we should
admit the doctrine of the general alienism of the inhabitants of the Southern
district, either before, or in consequence of the treaty of peace, a curious
question not easy to be solved, would arise as to the validity of the election
of many individuals now holding seats in Senate and Assembly. So far as an act
of government can decide the point in controversy, it is already decided. The
Council for the temporary government of the Southern district in appointing the
mode of election -- the conduct of the legislature since in admitting the
members elected in that mode, are unconstitutional; or the inhabitants at large
of the Southern district, either by the treaty, or any antecedent circumstance,
are not aliens.

I have dwelt the more largely on this head, not only because the idea of a
general alienism of the inhabitants of the Southern district is the ground
Mentor has taken; but because some persons who have it in their power to make a
mischievous use of it, are endeavoring to give it circulation, where, if it
could prevail, it might lead to pernicious consequences. Pressed by the
difficulty of discrimination those, who may have forfeited the rights of
citizenship from those who have not, without a manifest violation as well of
the constitution, as of the treaty of peace, they are willing if possible to
devise some general expedient to evade both; and the one they have hit upon is,
to declare all those aliens, who lived within the British lines during the war,
on the miserable pretense that they are made such by the treaty.

THUS we have another example how easy it is for men to change their principles
with their situations -- to be zealous advocates for the rights of the citizens
when they are invaded by others, and as soon as they have it in their power, to
become the invaders themselves -- to resist the encroachments of power, when it
is in the hands of others, and the moment they get it into their own to make
bolder strides than those they have resisted. -- Are such men to be sanctified
with the hallowed name of patriots? Are they not rather to be branded as men
who make their passions, prejudices and interests the sole measure of their own
and others rights?

THE history of mankind is too full of these melancholy instances of human
contradiction.

HAVING mentioned the oath directed to be prescribed to electors in the
Southern district, by the Council for the temporary government; I shall take
occasion, in this place, with freedom, but with respect, to examine the
propriety of that measure.

THIS measure as founded upon an act of the legislature of of this state passed
in some year declaring, that persons who had been guilty of certain matters
particularized in that act, should be forever after disqualified from voting at
all public elections. I confine myself for the sake of brevity to the general
idea of the act. The embarrassment with the Council, no doubt, was, how to
ascertain the persons who had incurred the disability. As the matters, to which
that disability related, were of a specific nature, it was necessary, they
should be specifically ascertained before the law could have its effect.

THE Council, therefore, could not satisfy that law, by declaring all those
disqualified, who had resided within the British lines during the war. They
would not leave the operation of it to a course of judicial investigation and
decision, because this would be to fly in the save of the treaty, and
appearances were to be preserved. This consideration was strengthened by
another. The course of the law must have been dilatory. The elections were to
be entered upon. It was deemed inexpedient, that the voice of the citizens at
large (which must have been the case if the act of the legislature, in
question, had been left to its natural course) should govern these elections.
If the returning citizens were not at this juncture gratified, tumults were by
some apprehended.

THIS was a plausible step, and on that account the more dangerous. If we
examine it with an unprejudiced eye, we must acknowledge not only that it was
an evasion of the treaty, but a subversion of one great principle of social
security, to wit, that every man shall be presumed innocent until he is proved
guilty: This was to invert the order of things; and instead of obliging the
state to prove the guilt, in order to inflict the penalty, it was to oblige the
citizen to establish his own innocence, to avoid the penalty. It was to excite
scruples in the honest and conscientious, and to hold out a bribe to perjury.

THAT this was an evasion of the treaty, the fourth proposition already laid
down will illustrate. It was a mode of inquiry who had committed any of those
crimes to which the penalty of disqualification was annexed, with this
aggravation, that it deprived the citizen of the benefit of that advantage
which he would have enjoyed by leaving, as as in all other cases, the burden
of the proof upon the prosecutor.

To place this matter in a still clearer light, let it be supposed, that
instead of the mode of indictment and trial by jury, the legislature was to
declare that every citizen who did not swear he had never adhered to the King
of Great Britain, should incur all the penalties which our treason laws
prescribe. Would this not be a palpable evasion of the treaty, and a direct
infringement of the constitution? The principle is the same in both cases, with
only this difference in the consequences; that in the instance already acted
upon, the citizen forfeits a part of his rights, -- in the one supposed he
would forfeit the whole. The degree of punishment is all that distinguishes the
cases. In either justly considered, it is substituting a new and arbitrary mode
of prosecution to that ancient and highly esteemed one, recognized by the laws
and the constitution of the state; I mean the trial by jury.

LET us not forget that the constitution declares that trial by jury in all
cases in which it has been formerly used, should remain inviolate forever, and
that the legislature should at no time, erect any new jurisdiction which should
not proceed, according to the course of the common law. Nothing can be more
repugnant to the true genius of the common law, than such an inquisition as has
been mentioned into the consciencies of men.

A share in the sovereignty of the state, which is exercised by the citizens at
large, in voting at elections is one of the most important rights of the
subject, and in a republic ought to stand foremost in the estimation of the
law. It is that right, by which we exist a free people; and it certainly
therefore will never be admitted that less ceremony ought to be used in
divesting any citizen of that right, than in depriving him of his property.
Such a doctrine would (...) suit the principles of the revolution, which taught
the inhabitants of this country to risk their lives and fortunes in asserting
their liberty; or in other words, their right to a share in the government.
That portion of the sovereignty, to which each individual is entitled, can
never be too highly prized. It is that for which we have fought and bled; and
we should cautiously guard against any precedents, however they may be
immediately directed against those we hate, which may in their consequences
render our title to this great privilege, precarious. Here we may find the
criterion to distinguish the genuine from the pretended whig -- The man that
would attack that right, in whatever shape, is an enemy to whiggism.

IF any oath, with retrospect to past conduct, were to be made the condition,
on which individuals, who have resided within the British lines, should hold
their estates; we should immediately see, that this proceeding would be
tyrannical, and a violation of the treaty, and yet when the same mode is
employed to divert that right, which ought to be deemed still more sacred, many
of us are so infatuated as to overlook the mischief.

To say that the persons, who will be affected by it, have previously forfeited
that right, and that therefore nothing is taken away from them, is a begging of
the question. How do we know who are the persons in this situation? If it be
answered, this is the mode taken to ascertain it, the objection returns, it is
an improper mode, because;e it puts the most essential interests of the citizen
upon a worse footing, than we should be willing to tolerate where inferior
interests were concerned; and because to elude the treaty it substitutes to the
established and legal mode of ivestigating crimes, and inflicting forfeitures,
one that is unknown to the constitution, and repugnant to the genius of our law.

MUCH stress has been laid upon a couple of unmeaning words in the act, to
enforce the penalties of which, the oath was inventted. It is declared, that
the persons, who have done the several things enumerated in the act, shall be
ipso facto disqualified. These words of potent sound, but of little substance,
have been supposed to include wonderful effects. Let us see if we can give them
any definite meaning. If a man commits murder, by the very act ipso facto, he
incurs the penalty of death; but before he can be hanged, we must enquire
whether he has certainly committed the fact. If a man has done any of those
things which are declared sufficient to disqualify him from voting, though by
the very act, ipso facto he incurs the penalty of the law, yet before he can be
actually disqualified, we must enquire whether he has really done the act. From
this we perceive the word ipso facto are mere expletives, which add nothing to
the force or efficacy of the law.

IT has been said too, that an oath to determine the qualifications of
electors, is an usual precaution in free governments; but we may challenge
those who make the assertion, to show that retrospective oaths have ever been
administered, requiring electors to swear that they have not been guilty of
past offenses. In all the violence of party which has at different periods
agitated Great Britain, nothing of this kind has ever been adopted; but even
where religious fanaticism has given an edge to political opposition, and in an
undecided con^^st for the crown, they have never gone further than to prescribe
oaths for te^^ing present dispositions toward the government on general
principles, without retrospection to particular instances of past mal-conduct
The practical notions of legal liberty established in that country by a series
of time would make such an experiment too odious to be attempted by the
government.

^^^men have thought ^oat even there, they have carried the business of oaths
to an exceptionable length; but we who pretend a purer zeal for liberty, in a
decided contest, after a formal renunciation claims by the adverse party, are
for carrying the matter to a still more blameable extreme.

Men, whose judgments and intentions I respect, were promoters of the measure,
which has occasioned this digression; some from the contagion of popular
opinion; others from the too strong impressions of momentary expedience, and a
third class from the insensible bias of some favorite pursuit.

As to the fourth method in which the inhabitants of the Southern district may
have lost their rights of citizenship, a dismemberment by treaty, I have
naturally been drawn, under the third head, into a discussion of this, and I
trust have shown to the full satisfaction of all candid men, that there is not
a shadow of foundation to suppose that such a dismemberment, is in the
contemplation of the treaty. A few short remarks shall conclude what I interd
to say on this article.

IT is a case, without precedent, that a nation in surrendering its
acquisitions in war, to the state from which those acquisitions were made,
should stipulate for the inhabitants of the country given up as for its own
subjects. To do it would be both useless and absurd; useless, because the
country being surrendered, no reasonable advantage could be derived from
retaining the allegiance of its inhabitants; absurd, because the district of
territory surrendered being given up as a part of the state, to which the
surrender is made, it would be contradictory, by the same act, to acknowledge
the right of that state to the part given up, and yet to hold up a claim to the
allegiance of its inhabitants.

THE surrender (for the question does not relate to original cessions) carries
in itself a decisive implication, that the inhabitants of the country
surrendered, are the subjects of the power to which the surrender is made; and
the presumption in this case is so strong that nothing but the most positive
and unequivocal exceptions in the treaty would be sufficient to defeat it.
Labored constructions to give the treaty that complexion are inadmissible; for
if there were room to doubt, the doubt, in just reasoning, should be
interpreted against the position, that the inhabitants of the country
surrendered were the subjects of the power by which the surrender was made.

THE only additional remark I shall make on this head is this: -- Though we are
under great obligations to our ministers for the substance of the treaty, which
comprehends all the essential interests of this country; we must acknowledge
that the language of it is, in many respects, defective and obscure. The true
rule in this case is, not to have recourse to artificial and far-fetched
interpretation; but to admit such meanings as the simple and and popular import
of the words conveys. When therefore it is said in the sixth article. "that
there shall be no future prosecutions commenced, nor confiscations made, nor
damage done to person, liberty, or property, of any person or persons, on
account of the part taken by them in the war," as the natural and obvious scope
of the words presents a full amnesty and indemnity for the future; we should
not torture our imaginations to pervert them to a different sense.

IT has been urged, in support of the doctrines under consideration, that every
government has a right to take precautions for its own security, and to
prescribe the terms on which its rights shall be enjoyed.

ALL this is true when understood with proper limitations; but when rightly
understood will not be found to justify the conclusion, which have been drawn
from the premises.

In the first formation of a government the society may multiply its
precautions as much, and annex as many conditions to the enjoyment of its
rights, as it shall judge expedient; but when it has once adopted a
constitution, that constitution must be the measure of its discretion, in
providing for its own safety, and in prescribing the conditions upon which its
privileges are to be enjoyed. If the constitution declares that persons
possessing certain qualifications shall be entitled to certain rights, while
that constitution remains in force, the government which is the mere creature
of the constitution, can divest no citizen, who has the requisite
qualifications, of his corresponding rights. It may indeed enact laws and annex
to the breach of them the penalty of forfeiture; but before that penalty can
operate, the existence of the fact, upon which it is to take place, most be
ascertained in that mode which the constitution and the fundamental laws have
provided. If trial by jury is the mode known and established by that
constitution and those laws, the persons who administer the government in
deviating from that course will be guilty of usurpation. If the constitution
declares that the legislative power of the state shall be vested in one set of
men and the judiciary power in another; and those who are appointed to act in a
legislative capacity undertake the office of judges, if, instead of confining
themselves to passing laws, with proper functions to enforce their observance,
they go out of their province to decide who are the violators of those laws,
they subvert the constitution and erect a tyranny.

If the constitution were even silent on particular points those who are
incrusted with its power, would be bound in exercising their discretion to
consult and pursue its spirit, and to conform to the dictates of reason and
equity; if, instead of this, they should undertake to declare whole classes of
citizens disfranchised and excluded from the common rights of the society,
without hearing, trial, examination or proof; if, instead of waiting to take
away the rights of citizenship from individuals, till the state has convicted
them of crimes, by which they are to lose them, before the ordinary and regular
tribunal, they institute an inquisition into men's consciences, and oblige them
to give up their privileges, or undertake to interpret the law at the hazard of
perjury; they expose themselves to the imputation of injustice and oppression.

THE right of a government to prescribe the conditions on which its privileges
shall be enjoyed, is bounded with respect to those who are already included in
the compact, by its original conditions; in admitting strangers it may add new
ones; but it cannot without a breach of the social compact deprive those, who
have been once admitted of their rights, unless for some declared cause of
forfeiture authenticated with the solemnities required by the subsisting
compact.

THE rights too of a republican government are to be modified and regulated by
the principles of such a government. These principles dictate, that no man
shall lose his rights without a hearing and conviction, before the proper
tribunal; that previous to his disfranchisement, he shall have the full benefit
of the laws to make his defense; and that his innocence shall be presumed till
his guilt has been proved. These with many other maxims, never to be forgotten
in any but tyrannical governments, oppose the aims of those who quarrel with
the principles of Phocion.

CASES indeed of extreme necessity are exceptions to all general rules; but
these only exist, when it is manifest the safety of the community is in
imminent danger. Speculations of possible danger never can be justifying causes
of departures from principles on which in the ordinary course of things all
private security depends -- from principles which constitute the essential
distinction between free and arbitrary governments.

WHEN the advocates for legislative discriminations are driven from one
subterfuge to another, their last resting place is -- that this is a new case,
the case of a revolution. Your principles are all right say they, in the
ordinary course of society, but they do not apply to a situation like ours.
This is opening a wilderness, through all the labyrinths of which, it is
impossible to pursue them: The answer to this must be, that there are
principles eternally true and which apply to all situations; such as those that
have been already enumerated -- that we are not now in the midst of a
revolution but have happily brought it to a succesful issue -- that we have a
constitution formed as a rule of conduct -- that the frame of our government is
determined and the general principles of its settled -- that we have taken our
station among nations have claimed the benefit of the laws which regulate them,
and must in our turn be bound by the same laws -- that those eternal principles
of social justice forbid the inflicting punishment upon citizens, by an
abridgement of rights, or in any other manner, without conviction of some
specific offense by regular trial and condemnation -- that the constitution we
have formed makes the trial by jury the only proper mode of ascertaining the
del^^quences of individuals -- that legislative discriminations, to supersede
the necessity of inquiry and proof, would be an usurpation on the judiciary
powers of the government, and a renunciation of all the maxims of civil liberty
-- that by the laws of nations and the rules of justice, we are bound to
observe the engagements entered into on our behalf, by that power which is
invested with the constitutional prerogative of treaty -- and that the treaty
we have made in its genuine sense, ties up the hards of government from any
species of future prosecution or punishment, on account of the part taken by
individuals in the war.

AMONG the extravagancies with which these prolific times abound, we hear it
often said, that the constitution being the creature of the people, their sense
with respect to any measure, if it even stand in opposition to the
constitution, will sanctify and make it right.

HAPPILY, for us, in this country, the position is not to be controverted; that
the constitution is the creature of the people; but it does not follow that
they are not bound by it, while they suffer it to continue in force; nor does
it follow, that the legislature, which is, on the other hand, a creature of the
constitution, can depart from it, on any presumption of the contrary sense of
the people.

THE constitution is the compact made between the society at large and each
individual. The society therefore, cannot without breach of faith and
injustice, refuse to any individual, a single advantage which he derives under
that compact, no more than one man can refuse to perform his agreement with
another. If the community have good reasons for abrogating the old compact, and
establishing a new one, it undoubtedly has a right to do it; but until the
compact is dissolved with the same solemnity and certainty with which it was
made, the society, as well as individuals, are bound by it.

ALL the authority of the legislature is delegated to them under the
constitution; their rights and powers are there defined; if they exceed them,
it is a treasonable usurpation upon the power and majesty of the people; and by
the same rule that they may take away from a single individual the rights he
claims under the constitution, they may erect themselves into perpetual
dictators. The sense of the people, if urged in justification of the measure,
must be considered as a mere pretext; for that sense cannot appear to them in a
form so explicit and authoritative, as the constitution under which they act:
and if it could appear with equal authenticity, it could only bind, when it had
been preceded by a declared change in the form of government.

THE contrary doctrine serves to undermine all those rules, by which
individuals can know their duties and their rights, and to covert the
government into a government of will not of laws.

THERE is only one light on Mentor's plan in which the subject remains to be
considered -- the danger to the government, from suffering persons to reside
among us, who have an aversion to our constitution; either by their becoming
auxiliaries to future attempts of the British nation to recover their lost
authority; or by their contributing to corrupt the principles and change the
form of our government.

MY observations on this subject, in my former letter, I believe remain
unshaken, by what Mentor has opposed to them. I shall however add a few others.

THE restoration of British authority in this country, is too chimerical to be
believed even by Mentor himself; though he makes some saint essays to induce
the supposition,

WHY did Great Britain make peace with America? Because the necessity of her
affairs compelled her to it. In what did this necessity consist? In every
species of embarrassment and disorder, that a nation could experience. Her
public debt had almost arrived at that point, when the expenses of a peace
establishment were nearly equal to all the revenues they were able to extract
from exhausting the sources of taxation. Had they carried on the war, 'till
they had exceeded this point, a bankruptcy would have been the inevitable
consequence. We perceive, as it is, the great difficulties that are acknowedged
by every succession of ministers, in devising means to retrieve the affairs of
the nation.

THE distractions of the government, arising from those embarrassments, are
scarcely paralleled in any period of British history. Almost every sitting of
parliament is a signal of a change of ministry. The King at variance with his
ministers -- the ministers unsupported by parliament -- the lords disagreeing
with the commons; the nation execrating the King, minister, lords and commons;
all these are symptoms of a vital malady in 'the present state of the nation,

EXTERNALLY the scene is not brighter: The affairs of the East India
settlements are in the most perplexing confusion, and Ireland seems to be ready
to dismember itself from the British empire.

IT may be said that these are temporary mischiefs, which may be succeeded by
greater tranquillity, prosperity and power. The future situation of Great
Britain is a problem which the wised man cannot solve. In all appearance, it
will be a considerable time, before she can recover from the pressure of the
evils under which she now labors, to be in a condition to form enterprises
against others: When that period may arrive our strength and resources will
have greatly increased -- the habits of men attached to her will have worn out
-- and it is visionary to suppose that she will then entertain a disposition to
renew her attempts upon a country, increased in strength and resources,
exerting its forces under an established constitution, fortified by foreign
alliances, which her acknowledged independence will at all times command; when
she reflects that that country, in the tumolt of a revolution, and in a state
of comparative impotence, baffled all her efforts, in the zenith of her power.

To an enlightened mind it will be sufficient to say, upon this subject, that
independent of our own means of repelling enterprises against us. Europe has
been taught by this revolution to estimate the danger to itself c^an union of
the two countries, under the same government, in too striking a manner, ever to
permit the reunion, or tolerate the attempts of Great Britain toward it.

THE danger, from a corruption of the principles of our government, is more
plausible, butr not more solid -- It is an axiom that governments form manners,
as well as as manners form governments. The body of te people of this state are
too firmly mumber to give a different tone to that spirit. The present law of
inheritance making an equal division among the children, of the parents
property, will soon melt down those great estates, which if they continued,
might favor the power of the sew. The number of the disaffected, who are so,
from speculative notions of government, is small: The great majority of those,
who took part against us, did it from accident, from the dread of the British
power, and from the influence of others to whom they had been accustomed to
look up. Most of the men, who had that kind of influence are already gone: The
residue and their adherents must be carried along by the torrent; and with very
few exceptions, if the government is mild and just, will soon come to view it
with approbation and attachment.

Either the number of mal-contents in the state is small or it is considerable.
If small, there can be no room for apprehensions; if great, then opposition to
the government is only to be overcome by making it their interest to be its
friends, or by extirpating them from the community. A middle line which will
betray a spirit of persecution in the government, but will only extend its
operation to a small number, will answer no other purpose than to disable a
few, and inflame and river the prejudices of the rest; by exhibiting the temper
of government in a harsh and unconciliating light. We shall then in truth have
a considerable faction in the state ready for all innotations.

THE impracticability of such a general extinpation suggests the opposite
conduct as the only proper one.

THERE is a bigotry in politics, as well as in religions, equally pernicious in
both -- The zealors, of either description, are ignorant of the advantage of a
spirit of toleration: It was a long time before the kingdoms of Europe were
convinced of the folly of persecution, with respect to those, who were
schismatics from the established church. The cry was, these men will be equally
the disturbers of the hierarchy and of the state, While some kingdoms were
impoverishing and depopulating themselves, by their severities to the
non-conformis^^, their wiser neighbors were reaping the fruits of their f^lly,
and augmenting their own numbers, industry and wealth, by receiving with open
arms the persecuted fugitives. Time and experience have taught a different
lesson; and there is not an enlightened nation, which does not now acknowledge
the force of this truth, that whatever speculative notions of religion may be
entertained, men will not on that account, be enemies to a government, that
affords them protection and security. The same spirit of toleration in
politics, and for the same reasons, has made great progress among mankind, of
which the history of most modern revolutions is a proof. Unhappily for this
state, there are some among us, who possess too much influence, that have
motives of personal ambition and interest to shut their minds against the
entrance of that moderation, which the real welfare of the community reaches.

Our nerghbours seem to be in a disposition to benefit by our mistakes: and the
time will not be very remote, if the schemes of some men can prevail, when we
shall be ashamed of our own blindness, and heap infamy upon its promoters.

IT is remarkable, though not extraordinary, that those characters, throughout
the states, who have been principally instrumental in the revolation, are the
most opposed to persecuting measures. Were it proper, I might trace the truth
of this remark from that character, which has been the first in
conspicuousness, through the several gradations of those, with very few
exceptions, who either in the civil or military line have borne a distinguished
part. On the other hand I might point out men who were reluctantly dragged into
taking a part in the revolution; others who were furious zealots in the
commencement of the dispute, that were not heard of to any public purpose,
during the progress of it, and others who were fluctuating, according to the
tide of good or ill-fortune, all of whom now join in the cry with a third
class, more imprudent but much more respectable, and endeavor by the loudness
of their clamours to atone for their past delinquencies.

As to Mentor's commercial reveries, I shall decline bestowing many remarks
upon them, not only because they are not immediately connected with the general
subject, but because there is little danger of their making any proselytes;
while men are convinced that the prosperity of the national commerce depends as
much upon the extent of its capital as that of an individal -- that to confine
trade to any particular description of men, in exclusion of others who have
better means of carrying it on, would be, if practicable, to make the people at
large tributary to the avarice of a small number, who were to have the benefit
of the monopoly -- that in the present situation of things, a very small
proportion of those, intended to be benefited, who have the means to avail
themselves of the advantage, would reap all its fruits even at the expense and
to the prejudice of the greater part of those who were meant to be favored --
that the fewer hands trade is confined to the less will be its activity, and
the less the degree of emplovment affordes to other classes of the community;
and, in short, that all monopolies, exclusions and discriminations, in matters
of traffic, are pernicious and absurd.

SINCE writing the foregoing, I have learned, that a bill is depending before
the House of Assembly, for putting various descriptions of persons out of the
protection of government. I have too much respect for the wisdom and virtue of
that body to suppose a measure of this nature can brain the sanction of the
majority -- What is the plain language of the proposal? There are certain
persons, who are obnoxious to public resentment. The treaty forbids us to
proceed against them in a legal way. Let us therefore by an unconstitutional
exertion of power evade the creaty, however dangerous the precedent to the
liberty of the subject, and however derogatory to the honor of the nation. By
the treaty we stipulate, that no person or persons shall suffer on account of
the part they may have taken in the war, any damage to person, liberty, or
property; and yet by taking away the protection of government, which they would
enjoy under the subsisting laws, we leave them to suffer whatever injury to
erther, the rashness of individuals who are the subjects of the state, may
think proper to inflict. What would this be but to imitate the conduct of a
certain General, who having premised that he would not spill the blood of some
prisoners, who were about to surrender by capitolation, after he had them in
his power, had them all strangled to death? Words in every contract are to be
construed so as to give them a reasonable effect. When it is stipulated, that a
man shall not suffer in person, liberty, or property, it does not merely mean,
that the state will not inflict any positive punishment upon him; but also that
it will afford him protection and security from injury. The very letter as well
as the spirit of the stipulation imports this -- He shall not suffer any
damage, are the words of the treaty.

The scheme of putting men out of the protection of the law, is calculated to
transfer the scepter from the hands of government to those of individuals -- it
is to arm one part of the community against another; it is to enact a civil
war, If unhappily for the state, this plan could succeed, no man can foresee
the end of it. But the guardians of the rights of the community will certainly,
on mature deliberation reject it.

(...) for the honor of the state, if expulsions must take place, if the
constitution and the faith of the United States, must be sacrificed to a
supposed political expedience. I had much rather see an open avowal of the
principles upon which we acted, than that we should cloth the design with a
vile of artifice and disguise, too thin not to be penetrated by the most
ordinary eye.

I SHALL now with a few general reflections conclude.

THOSE, who are at present entrusted with power, in all these infant republics,
hold the most sacred deposit that ever was confided to human hands. It Is with
governments as with individuals, first impressions and early habits give a
lasting bias to the temper and character. Our governments hitherto have no
habits. How important to the happiness not of America alone, but of mankind,
that they should acquire good ones.

IF we set out with justice, moderation, liberality, and a scrupulous regard to
the constitution, the government will acquire a spirit and tone, productive of
permanent blessings to the community. If on the contrary, the public councils
are guided by humor, passion and prejudice; if from resentment to individuals,
or a dread of partial inconveniences, the constitution is slighted or
explained away, upon every frivolous pretext, the future spirit of government
will be feeble, distracted and arbitrary. The rights of the subject will be the
sport of every party vicissitude. There will be no settled rule of conduct, but
every thing will fluctuate with the alternate prevalency of contending factions.

THE world has its eye upon America. The noble struggle we have made in the
cause of liberty, has occasioned a kind of revolution in human sentiment. The
influence of our example has penetrated the gloomy regions of despotism, and
has pointed the way to inquiries, which may shake it to its deepest
foundations. Men begin to ask every where, who is this tyrant, that dares to
build his greatness on our misery and degradation? What commission has he to
sacrifice millions to the wanton appetites of himself and the few minions that
surround his throne?

To ripen inquiry into action, it remains for us to justify the revolution by
its fruits.

IF the consequences prove, that we really have asserted the cause of human
happiness, what may not be expected from so illustrious an example? -- In a
greater or less degree, the world will bless and imitate?

BUT if experience, in this instance, verifies the lesson long taught by the
enemies of liberty; -- that the bulk of mankind are not fit to govern
themselves, that they must have a mastter, and were only made for the rein and
the spur: We shall then see the final triumph of despotism over liberty -- The
advocates of the latter must acknowledge it to be an ignis fatuus, and abandon
the pursuit. With the greatest advantages for promoting it, that ever a people
had, we shall have betrayed the cause of human nature.

LET those in whose hands it is placed, pause for a moment, and contemplate
with an eye of reverence, the vast trust committed to them. Let them retire
into their own bosoms and examine the motives which there prevail. Let them ask
themselves this solemn question -- Is the sacrifice of a few mistaken, or
criminal individuals, an object worthy of the shifts to which we are reduced to
evade the constitution and the national engagements? Then let them review the
arguments that have been offered with dispassionate candor; and if they even
doubt the propriety of the measures. they may be about to adopt, let them
remember, that in a doubtful case, the constitution ought never to be hazarded,
without extreme necessity.

THE END OF PHOCION's REPLY.
New BOOKS, and PAMPHLETS, Manufactured in Philadelphis, and now selling at the
BOOK-STORE, near St. Paul's Church, Third-Street, by ROBERT BELL, Printer,
Bookseller, Book-Auctionier, and PROVEDORE to the SENTIMENTALISTS in AMERICA.

1 MEMOIRS of the Life Travels and Adventures of Edward Wortley Montague,
Esquire, Son to the most famous Traveller, Lady Mary Wortley Montague;
exhibiting his very eccentric Transactions in England, France, Spain, Italy,
Turkey, Arabia, Egypt, and the Holy Land: With remarks on the Manners and
Customs of the Oriental World, 2 vols. two thirds of a dollar. 2 The Sorrows
and Sympathetic Attachments of Werter, a German Story in 75 Letters, 2 vols.
two thirds of a dollar. 3 Lord Sheffield's Obsevations on Commerce, half a
dollar. 4 Emma Corbelt's Life, exhibiting, the Power of Love, and the Miseries
of War, in 145 Letters, 3 vols. one dollar. 5 Man of the World his Adventures,
by Mackenzie 3 vols. dol. 6 Letters by Lord Lyttleton, half a dollar. 7
Dodsley's New and Original Fables, also the Fables of Esop, with Oriental
Stories, two dollars. 8 Moore's View of Society and Manuers, in France,
Switzerland, Germany, and Italy, during his four Years Travels, with his Grace
the present Duke of Hamilton, 4 volumes neatly bound in two, Price four
dollars. 9 Captain Cook's Last Voyage, the Voyage in which he was killed, 2
volumes neatly bound in one, Price two dollars.
MEMORANDUM. For more particulars in the American Book-World, please to
enquire, for BELL's SALE CATALOGUE, of NEW and OLD BOOKS, with the lowest price
printed to each BOOK, consisting of several Thousand Volumes, in ARTS,
SCIENCES, and ENTERTAINMENT, for persons of all DENOMINATIONS.

Price a quarter dollar.


