AN ADDRESS FROM THE COMMITTEE APPOINTED AT MRS. VANDEWATER's On the 13th Day
of September, 1784. To the PEOPLE of the STATE of NEW YORK.

NEW YORK Printed by SHEPARD KOLLOCK. opposite the COFFEE-HO^^^ M,DCC,LXXXIV.

AN ADDRESS, etc.
To the PEOPLE of the State of New York.
Fellow Citizens,
IT is the happiness of people who live in a free government, that they may
upon every occasion, when they conceive their rights in danger, from whatever
cause, meet, consult and deliberate upon the proper mode of relief, and address
their fellow citizens; pointing out the dangers which they apprehend, and
inviting them to concur in measures for their removal.

In the exercise of this privilege, a number of the free citizens of New York
did assemble, and having appointed us their committee, gave it in charge to us
to address you on the subject of a late decision of the Mayor's court, in this
city, on the law commonly called the Trespass Law, in a case brought to issue
in that court between Rutgers and Wuddington.

This action was founded on a law of this state, entitled, 'An act for granting
more effectual relief in cases of certain Trespasses,' passed in March, 1783;
by which it is declared, that it shall and may be lawful for any person or
persons who are or were inhabitants of this state, and who by reason of the
invasion of the enemy, left his, her or their place or places of abode, and who
have not voluntarily put themselves respectively in the power of the enemy
since they so left their places of abode, etc. to bring an action of trespass
against any person or persons who may have occupied, injured, or destroyed,
his, her or their estate, either real or personal within the power of the
enemy. And that no defendant or defendants shall be admitted to plead in
justification any military order or command whatsoever for such occupancy.

The plaintiff charged the defendant for the use and occupancy of a certain
brew house and malt-house, in the city of New York, the property of the
plaintiff.

To this charge the defendant plead, that the premises in question were
occupied part of the time under the British army, who took possession thereof
by virtue of permission from the commander in chief of said army, and the
remainder of the time by virtue of license and permission granted by the said
commander in chief to a certain person, under whom the defendant held; which
licenses and permissions the said commander had authority to give by the law of
nations.

The defendant further plead, that by the treaty of peace, all right, claim,
etc. which either of the contracting parties, and the subjects and citizens of
either of them might otherwise have to any compensation, etc. whatsoever, for,
or by reason of any injury or damage, whether to the public or individuals
which either of the said contracting parties, and the subjects or citizens of
either, might have done, or caused to be done to the other, in consequence of,
or in any wise relating to the war between them, from the commencement to the
determination thereof, were mutually and reciprocally, virtually and
effectually relinquished, renounced and released to each other; and further
averred, that the defendant was, from the time of his birth, and at all times
since has been, a British subject.

The plaintiff to the first plea of the defendant, namely, that the premises
were held by virtue of authority and permission from the commander in chief of
the British army, replied, that she ought not to be barred of her action by
reason of that plea; because the law under which she brought her suit did
expressly declare, that no defendant or defendants should be admitted to plead
any military order or command whatsoever for the occupancy.

As to the further plea of the defendant, namely, the treaty of peace, the
plaintiff demurred, or denied its sufficiency in the law.

This cause, as above stated, was argued on the 29th of June past, before the
Mayor's court, and on the 27th of August judgment was given.

The two points which presented for the court's determination upon, arising
from the two pleas of the defendant, were,

1st. Whether permission and authority from the commander in chief of the
British army, agreeably to the law of nations, was a sufficient justification
to the defendant for the use and occupancy of the premises in question;
notwithstanding the act of the legislature declares, 'that no defendant or
defendants shall be admitted to plead in justification any military order or
command whatsoever.'

2dly. Whether the treaty of peace includes in it such an indemnity as to
justify the defendant for his use of the premises.

With respect to the first point, the judgment of the court was, that the plea
of the defendant was good for so much of the time as he held the premises under
the immediate authority of the British commander in chief; or in other words,
notwithstanding the law declares that no defendant shall be allowed to plead in
justification any military order or command whatsoever, yet the authority and
permission of the British commander in chief shall be deemed a sufficient
justification; because in the opinion of the court a liberal construction of
the law of nations would make it so, and because the court could not believe
that a repeal of, or an interference with the law of nations entered into the
scheme of the legislature.

The second plea, namely, the Treaty of Peace, the Court declared insufficient.

From this state of the case it appears, that the Mayor's Court have assumed
and exercised a power to set aside an act of the state. That it has permitted
the vague and doubtful custom of nations to be plead against, and to render
abortive, a clear and positive statute; and military authority of the enemy to
be plead against the express prohibition of our legislature.

This proceeding, in the opinion of a great part of the citizens of this
metropolis, and in our opinion, is an assumption of power in that Court, which
is inconsistent with the nature and genius of our government, and threatening
to the liberties of the people.

We think the controversy, notwithstanding the immense learning and abilities
which we are told have been displayed in it, lies within a narrow compass, and
within the reach of every common understanding.

It is reducible to the two following questions, Does the plain and obvious
meaning of the statute prohibit the pleading of any military orders, commands,
permission and authority of the enemy in justification of any trespass for
which a suit can be brought under it?

Can a Court of Judicature, consistently with our constitution and laws,
adjudge contrary to the plain and obvious meaning of a statute?

If these questions are answered in the negative, authorities from Grotius,
Puffendorff, Wolsius, Burlamaqui, Vattel, or any other Civilians, are no more
to the purpose than so many opinions drawn from sages of the Six Nations.

If they are answered in the affirmative, then there can be no disputing
against the opinion of the Court.

With regard to the meaning and intention of the Legislature, it may be
inferred from the very enacting of the law; for in doing that they suppose that
as laws before stood, actions could not lie in cases of this nature; to remedy
this, they make it lawful for persons described in the act, to bring actions of
trespass against, etc. and declare that no military authority whatsoever of the
enemy shall be plead, or evidenced in justification of the trespass.

No point of controversy can arise on the case but must turn upon the propriety
or impropriety of the law itself; not upon its construction. For the plain
language of the law is this, that the military power of Great Britain, by
taking possession of these estates, and giving authority, permission, order or
command to persons for occupying and improving them, should not excuse the
occupier from being considered as a trespasser, and thereby not liable to pay
damages to the owner. We can hardly conceive it possible for the legislature to
have chosen words that would make the intention of their law more clear.

If what we have stated be not the true meaning of the law, then we conceive
that it has no meaning.

The time of passing the law, and the evident grounds of it, show the intention
of the legislature, and put it beyond a doubt that the spirit and literal
construction of it are the same. To give a remedy to those citizens who had
abandoned their estates on the approach of the enemy, and who had adhered to
the fortunes of their country in all its vicissitudes; most of whom had
suffered very great loss of personal property, and many of them reduced from
affluence to penury and want. The real estates which they owned in the Southern
district, it was well known, had been greatly injured; most of them irreparably
so.

We were then at the close of the war. The legislature had certain accounts
that the preliminary articles of peace were signed. The time was considered as
just at hand, when the exiles, the greater part of whom had expended all their
loose property, were to be put in possession of their real estates, from which
they had suffered voluntary banishment for more than seven years. The bad
condition of their estates, and their incapacity to improve them, made the
case, which the legislature thought proper to afford relief in by the law.

It is well known that most of these estates were at that time held, or
pretended to be held by virtue of authority from the British Commander in
Chief. The law of nations was the same then as at this time, and the immutable
principles of justice have not changed. Yet the wisdom and supreme authority of
the state did declare that no military order or command of the enemy should be
plead, or given in evidence. The law being thus plain and explicit, it was
never apprehended that its operation would be defeated by the plea of authority
from the enemy

Impressed with a belief of its complete and entire operation, many of the
persons themselves who held the estates of exiles under the British, abandoned
the place with them to avoid paying the damages which would accrue from it.

The gentlemen of the law, we are confident, almost universally considered it
as expressed in plain and unequivocal language that could not be misunderstood
or explained away. In short, no doubt was entertained of the meaning of the
law, until the case of Rutgers and Waddington was agitated, and then there was
no way left for the Defendant to justify himself, but by inventing distinctions
where there was no difference, and introducing matter which the law prohibited.

From what has been said, we think that no one can doubt of the meaning of the
law. It remains to enquire, Whether a Court of Judicature can consistently,
with our constitution and laws, adjudge contrary to the plain and obvious
meaning of a statute.

That the Mayor's Court have done so in this case, we think is manifest from
the foregoing remarks.

That there should be a power vested in courts of judicature, whereby they
might control the supreme legislative power we think is absurd in itself. Such
power in courts would be destructive of liberty, and remove all security of
property. The design of courts of justice in our government, from the very
nature of their institution, is to declare laws, not to alter them.

Whenever they depart from this design of their institution, they confound
legislative and judicial powers.

The laws govern where a government is free, and every citizen knows what
remedy the laws give him, for every injury. But this cannot be the case, where
Courts, if they deem a law to be unreasonable, may set it aside.

Here, however plainly the law may be in his favor, he cannot be certain of
redress, until he has the opinion of the Court.

It may be expressed generally, and only say, that all persons in certain
circumstances shall recover in certain cases. But it may not by name bar every
objection that might possibly be argued against it, where interest and
inclination hold invention upon the rack.

It may not particularly describe the man, say what country he is to spring
from, or what his occupation is to be, and being thus generally expressed, it
cannot be from the nature of things, but it will admit of some exceptions, and
as it may admit of some exceptions, it must receive a reasonable and liberal
interpretation from the Court, however arduous the task may be. Now the
reasoning of the Court and the reasoning of the legislature may lead them to
very different conclusions, and as the Court reason last upon the case, it is
utterly impossible for any man to guess when he brings a suit, however exactly
it may apply to the law, until by a tedious and expensive process, he obtains
the opinion of the Court whether he shall recover or not.

It is not our intention to enter into a particular consideration of the evils
which would result from the exercise of such a power in our courts; much less
to consider all the arguments used to vindicate the decision in the case of
Rutgers and Waddington. We are addressing an enlightened people, who are awake
to every thing that may affect their dearly attained freedom; who know that the
consequences which would flow from the establishment of such a power, would be
of the most serious and pernicious kind; rendering abortive the first and great
privilege of freemen, the privilege of making their own laws by their
representatives. For if the power of abrogating or altering them be assumed by
our courts, and submitted to by the people, then, as far as liberty and the
security of property are concerned, they become as useless as other opinions
which are not precedents, and from which judges may vary.

It is to be observed that the principal judges are in most cases appointed to
act within the limits of a certain age, or during good behavior, We do not
wish to lessen their independency; -- for while they are content to move in
their proper sphere, while they speak the plain and obvious meaning of the law,
and do not presume to alter it, or explain it to mean any thing or nothing.
While in the duties of their real province they cannot be too independent; nor
ought they to be liable to a remove but for misbehaviour. But if they are to be
invested with a power to overruled a plain law, though expressed in general
words, as all general laws are and must be. When they may judge the law
unreasonable, because not consonant to the law of nations, or to the opinions
of ancient or modern civilians and philosophers, for whom they may have a
greater veneration than for the solid statutes and supreme legislative power of
the state. We say, if they are to assume and exercise such a power, the
probable consequence of their independence will be, the most deplorable and
wretched dependency of the people.

That the laws should be no longer absolute, would be in itself a great evil;
but a far more dreadful consequence arises; for that power is not lost in the
controversy, but transferred to judges who are independent of the people.

These being our apprehensions, we have, in compliance with the request of our
fellow-citizens, and from a conviction of its propriety, briefly stated to you
our ideas on this important affair.

In a free government people should be informed of the conduct of their rulers
and magistrates. It is a knowledge that is absolutely necessary to the
preserving of their freedom.

Power presents so many charms to mankind, that there are very few indeed, even
of the best of men who have their avarice and ambition so perfectly under the
correction of virtue and true wisdom, as not to feel an inclination to surmount
the limits assigned them; especially, when the additional temptation of
ignorance or inattention on the side of the people prompt to it.

A private and individual case would not justify the measures which we have
taken. But we consider the decision in the case of Rutgers and Waddington as an
adjudication which may be drawn into precedent, and eventually affect every
citizen of this state. It therefore merits the attention of us all.

To prevent this mischief, we do not advise our fellow-citizens to measures
which are unconstitutional; nor do we mean to use them ourselves. The mode of
redress which our excellent constitution points out is, First, by an appeal to
the supreme court, where this cause will be carried by Writ of Error. We feel a
confidence from the characters of the gentlemen who preside in that court, that
the law will have its operation restored in its plain and obvious meaning. But
if we should be disappointed, the cause is of too much consequence to rest
here. Its importance will grow with the difficulties and defeats it may meet
with; for each of these will make a new discovery of the strength of its
opponents; each defeat will create a new triumph over freedom, and give
additional courage and importance to her adversaries, and all call upon us the
more earnestly to support that cause, to defend that ground upon which the
standard of liberty is erected, and which, if ever surrendered, we should be
prepared to surrender with it every less and consequent privilege, whereby we
might be allowed better terms, from despotism, than we should by discovering
our wretchedness and imbecility in a contest which the first defeat will have
rendered vain and hopeless.

The next mode pointed out by the constitution, is an appeal to the court of
Errors, one part of which the Senate constitute. Preparatory to such an event,
we exhort you to be cautious in your future choice of members, that none be
elected but those on whom, from long and certain experience you can rely, as
men attached to the liberties of America, and firm friends to our law and
constitution. Men who will spurn at any proposition that has a tendency to
curtail the privileges of the people, and who at the same time, that they
protect us against judicial tyranny, have wisdom to see the propriety of
supporting that necessary independency in courts of justice, both of the
legislature and people, without which the fear of dismission from office on the
one hand, and of personal violence on the other, might steal into their
decisions, and render them interested and corrupt.

Having confined ourselves to constitutional measures, and now solemnly
declaring our disapprobation of all others, and having solely for our object,
the support of our excellent constitution, and the absolute and entire
operation of our laws, we feel a freedom in sounding the alarm to our fellow
citizens.

If that Independence and freedom which we have obtained at a risque which
makes the acquisition little less than miraculous, was worth contending for
against a powerful and enraged Monarch, and at the expense of the best blood in
America, surely its preservation is worth contending for against those among
ourselves, who might impiously hope to build their greatness upon the ruins of
that fabric which was so dearly established?

That the principle of decision in the case of Rutgers and Waddington is
dangerous to the freedom of our government, and that a perseverance in that
principle would leave our Legislature nothing but a name, and render their
sessions nothing more than an expensive form of government, the preceding
remarks must evidence.

Permit us, upon this occasion, earnestly to entreat you, to join us in a
watchfulness against every attempt that may be used, either violently and
suddenly, or gently and imperceptibly, to effect a revolution in the spirit and
genius of our government; and should there be-amongst us, characters to whom
the simplicity of it is offensive; let our attention and perseverance be such,
as to preclude the hopes of a change. For even if our government was less
excellent than it is, it would be better for us to be reconciled to a few
inconveniences, than by a hasty and ill-judged revolution, to put to the
hazard all that we now enjoy under the present.

Frequent changes or even alterations in government, where the people have so
lately come to the exercise of one, may produce an instability in them that
will be more disagreeable than trifling inconveniences in the one already
established.

Melancton Smith, Peter Ricker, Jonathan Lawrence, Anthony Rutgers, Peter T.
Curtenius, Thomas Tucker, Daniel Shaw, Adam Gilchrist, jun. John Wiley.



