A CHURCH HISTORY OF NEW ENGLAND.

VOL. II.

Extending from 1690, to 1784. INCLUDING A concise View of the AMERICAN WAR,
and of the Conduct of the BAPTISTS therein, with the present State of their
CHURCHES.

By ISAAC BACKUS, Pastor of a Church in Middleborough.

Thou shall remember all the Way which the Lord thy God led thee these forty
Years in the Wilderness, to humble thee, and to prove thee, to know what was in
thine Heart, whether thou would keep HIS Commandments, or no.

Deuteronomy. viii. 2. PROVIDENCE: Printed by JOHN CARTER, and sold by PHILIP FREEMAN,
in Union-Street, Boston. 1784.

PREFACE.
THE powers of thinking and choice are so essential to all rational spirits,
that without them no idea can be formed of their existence. A desire of the
knowledge and enjoyment of the best good, also appears essential to their
nature. Therefore as finite knowledge is limited, finite spirits would ever be
liable to err, if they had not some sufficient guard against it. And the best
guard we can conceive of, is a clear fixed persuasion in the heart, that God is
the only fountain of all good; and that every desirable good is to be obtained
and enjoyed in the way of obedience to his revealed will, and nowhere else.

THAT he is the absolute proprietor, and the sovereign ruler of the worlds he
has made, is a truth too evident for any but madmen to deny. All nations have
been forced to appeal to him, to avenge injustice and perjury, in order to
establish any government among themselves: Yet how far have they been from a
willingness to be governed entirely by him! He made man upright; but they have
sought out many inventions. Objects of worship, and forms of worship, even
without number, have been invented by mankind; the folly whereof God has
exposed in all his dispensations: Yet self-conceit, self-seeking, and
self-dependence, are still the ruining errors of the world.

HIS design in all his dispensations, in every age and every country, is
undoubtedly the same in nature with that declared to Israel, in the passage
which adorns our title page. Three things deserve particular notice therein. 1.
That it is the Lord who leads his people through all the changing scenes of
life, in this wilderness world. At different times and places their
circumstances vary exceedingly; yet he orders or overrules in all, so that a
sparrow cannot fall to the ground, nor an hair from their head, without him. 2.
All his dealings are calculated in infinite wisdom, for their trial and
humiliation; to discover what is in their hearts, whether they will keep HIS
commandments, or not. Therefore, 3. He requires them to remember all the way
wherein he leads them, for this end.


CHRISTIANITY, the only true religion, has its name from CHRIST, the
foundation, lawgiver, and only head of his church. And one of the greatest
historians of our age gives us the following account of its primitive order and
government. Says he, "The rites instituted by Christ were only two in number,
and these designed to continue to the end of the church here below, without any
variation. These were baptism and the holy supper; which were not to be
considered as mere ceremonies, nor yet as symbolical representations only, but
also as ordinances, accompanied with sanctifying influence upon the heart and
affections of true Christians." Of those who heard and believed the preaching
of John the Baptist, he says, "They were initiated into the kingdom of the
Redeemer, by the ceremony of immersion or baptism." And during the first
century, he says, "The sacrament of baptism was administered without the public
assemblies, in places appointed and prepared for that purpose, and was
performed by immersion of the whole body Mosheim's eccl. hist. vol. 1, p. 32,
91, 96. Dublin edition
." This was the primitive way of admission into the Christian church; and of
its government our author says, "The people were, undoubtedly, the first in
authority; for the apostles showed by their example, that nothing of moment was
to be carried on or determined without the consent of the assembly, Acts i. 15,
vi. 3, xv. 4 xxi. 22. -- A bishop, during the first and second century, was a
person who had the care of one Christian assembly, which, at that time, was,
generally speaking, small enough to be contained in a private house. In this
assembly he acted not so much with the authority of a master, as with the zeal
and diligence of a faithful servant." And he assures us, that until about the
middle of the second century, "The churches were entirely independent; none of
them subject to any foreign jurisdiction, but each one governed by its own
rulers, and its own laws." And that an alteration was then made, by
industriously propagating the opinion, that Christian ministers succeeded to
the rights and privileges of the Jewish priesthood Ibid. p. 70, 76, 77, 139.
Heathen philosophy was also called in to interpret the scriptures by; from
whence teachers adopted this maxim, viz. "That it was an act of virtue to
deceive and lie, when by that means the interests of the church might be
promoted." To which they added, in the fourth century, under Constantine, the
use of temporal penalties, and corporal tortures, for the same end Page 155,
314.


IN the mean time a controversy arose about bringing infants to baptism. In the
beginning of the third century, Tertullian, who is the first writer that
mentions it, opposed it, saying, "What need is there that the godfathers
should be brought into danger? because they may either fail of their promises
by death, or they may be mistaken by a child's proving of a wicked
disposition." But not long after Origin appeared for the practice, and said,
"Let it be considered what is the reason, that whereas the baptism of the
church is given for the forgiveness of sins, infants also are, by the usage of
the church, baptized. -- It is for that reason, because by the sacrament of
baptism the pollution of our birth is taken away, that infants are baptized
Clark against Gill upon baptism, p. 105, 111.
." Origin is the first man that any have produced, who pleaded for infant
baptism; and he also held that the torments of the damned will have an end; and
that Christ will be crucified in the next world to save the devils Mosheim,
vol. 1, p. 476.
Now when heathen philosophy was set up as a rule to interpret scripture by;
when the shadows of the old testament were taken to draw a veil over the truth,
and church order described in the gospel, and teachers pretended to confer
renewing grace by their administrations, before the subjects were taught or
believed; and also called in the secular arm to enforce their measures by
temporal penalties and corporal tortures, what could be expected but the
Antichristian apostasy! Oh, how dark was the night that followed!

YET God did not leave himself without witnesses in the darkest times, some of
whom I will name. Peter de Bruys, during a ministry of twenty years, made the
most laudable attempts to reform abuses, and to remove the superstitions that
disfigured the beautiful simplicity of the gospel, and had a great number of
followers, in Languedoc and Provence in France; and he was burnt therefore at
St. Giles, in the year 1130. His disciples were called Petrobuscians; and a
leading article of their faith was, "That no persons whatever were to be
baptized before they came to the full use of their reason." Soon after another
minister, whose name was Henry, traveled from Switzerland through various
parts of France, preaching the gospel with great success, until he came to the
city of Thoulouse; where the Pope and his creatures raised great opposition
against him, and cast him into prison in 1148; and he ended his days there not
long after. He was thus dealt with because "He rejected the baptism of infants;
censured with severity the corrupt and licentious manners of the clergy, and
treated the festivals and ceremonies of the church with the utmost contempt
Vol. 2, p. 437 -- 439
."

THIS account is given by a very learned Lutheran author, who was strongly
prejudiced against the modern Baptists, because he held that the Christian
church was in its minority, when it was governed in the manner above described;
and that in its mature age, "The regulation of it was, in some measure, to be
accommodated to the time, and left to the wisdom and prudence of the chief
rulers, both of the state and of the church Vol. 1, p. 63 -- 70.
;" which opinion the Baptists have ever opposed. He freely owns, that the
peculiarities of their churches in Germany and Holland are derived from a maxim
of reformation, which was held by the Waldenses, Petrobuscians, Wicklifites,
and Hussites, long before Luther's day; which is, "That the kingdom of Christ,
or the visible church he had established upon earth, was an assembly of true
and real saints, and ought therefore to be inaccessible to the wicked and
unrighteous, and also exempt from all those institutions, which human prudence
suggests to oppose the progress of iniquity, or to correct and reform
transgressors." This maxim he declares to be the source of all their
peculiarities. In 1525, and in 1533, a few men who were called Anabaptists,
took the lead among mixed multitudes, that had taken up arms against cruel
tyrants, in hopes of recovering both civil and religious liberty thereby; but
they perished in the attempt: A sight of which carried the Baptist churches in
that country so far into the other extreme, as not to allow their members to be
magistrates, to use the sword, or to take an oath Vol. 3, p. 524, 525, 549
; which are now the sentiments of the German Baptists in Pennsylvania. But the
English Baptists, both in Europe and America, has carefully avoided each of
these extremes, for these hundred and fifty years; yet those scandals in
Germany have been constantly cast upon them, even down to this day; not because
they ever had the least concern therewith, but because this has been found to
be a powerful engine to prejudice the populace against allowing equal religious
liberty, and for forcing people into religious covenants, before they can
choose for themselves.

ALL the reformation that ever took place, in any age or country, was produced
by the word of truth, enforced by the spirit of truth, upon each heart and
conscience. And the admission of unsanctified communicants into the Christian
church, and of the inventions of men to govern it, have caused endless
confusions; as thereby three opposite interests have been set up. The interest
of religious teachers, of civil officers, and of the people. The two former
have conspired together to enslave the latter; and yet have been far from an
entire harmony betwixt themselves. Their contests for pre-eminence have been
long and tedious in this country; but a great and effectual door is now opened
for terminating these disputes, and for a return to the primitive purity and
liberty of the Christian church. To trace out the evil effects of the apostasy,
and to promote, as much as may be, such a return, is the great design both of
this and the former volume; in the compiling whereof a large number of records,
books and papers, have been searched, and much pains taken to set principles
and actions in as clear light as possible. And the author is so far from
desiring indulgence in any mistakes, that he earnestly requests the help of all
to correct them.

Middleborough, August 2, 1784.
A general INDEX to both Volumes.
[i. signifies the First, and ii. the Second. The Figures refer to the Pages in
each.]

A
AMERICA, her war with Britain, ii. p. 287, 414. Reasons why the Baptists
joined therein, ii. p. 299, 371. Anabaptists, a name of repro^^^ i. p. 9, 45,
56, 383. Yet imposed by law, ii. p. 193. Laws made to banish them, i. p. 150,
407. Andros, a tyrant, i. p. 517, 525. Antichrist, how he arose, ii. preface,
p. 6, book, p. 26, 403. Way now preparing for his fall, ii. p. 404, 406.
Antinomians, i. p. 79, 117, ii. p. 408. Arians, ii. p. 63. Arminians, i. p. 33,
463, ii. p. 219, 224, 230, 340, 357. Ashfield, cruelly oppressed, ii. p. 246.
B
Baptism, what it is, ii. preface, p. 4, book, p. 17, 189, 401. Baptists, at
Providence, i. p. 105, 248, ii. p. 395. Newport, i. p. 149, 215, 255, 442, 505,
ii. p. 109, 397. Swanzey, i. p. 350, 435, ii. p. 43, 69, 384. Boston, i. p.
335, 380, 398, 404, 414, 480, 507, ii. p. 33, 43, 50, 149, 386. Rehoboth, i. p.
213, 253, ii. p. 116, 121, 385. Westerly, i. p. 416, 434, ii. p. 175, 400.
Martha's Vineyard, i. p. 437, ii. p. 83, 375. New London, i. p. 437, ii. p. 89,
400. Groton, ii. p. 31, 400. Wallingford, ii. p. 125, 136, 219. In the Country
of Plymouth, ii. p. 215, 378. Barnstable, ii. p. 378. Bristol, ii. p. 384.
Suffolk, Essex and Middlesex, ii. p. 261, 386. Worcester and Hampshire, ii. p.
124, 261, 387. Berkshire, ii. p. 301, 389. New Hampshire, ii. p. 265, 390. Our
Eastern Coasts, ii. p. 263, 279, 391. Rhode Island, ii. p. 395. Connecticut,
ii. p. 400. Their faith and order, i. p. 143, 208, 222, 255, ii. p. 334, 372.
Sufferings therefore, i. p. 214 -- 245, 353 -- 406, 413, 480, 489, 502, ii. p.
68, 88, 191, 239, 246, 279. Blaxton, i. p. 84. Bradford, i. p. 41, 74, 214,
338, 534.
C
Chamberlain, his letters, i. p. 476, 485. Christianity, its nature and
influence, ii. preface, p. 4, book, p. 331, 369, 401. Clarke, a father of
Rhode Island Colony, i. p. 88, 105, 268, 274, 440. Chauncy, of Cambridge, held
baptism to be immersion, i. p. 115, 145, 284, 334, ii. p. 17. Chauncy, of
Boston, against the power of godliness, ii. p. 132, 152, 229. But is
self-condemned, ii. p. 246, 270, 327, 354. Cleaveland, expelled from college,
ii. p. 168. But graduated there afterward, ii. p. 229. College, at Cambridge,
i. p. 101. New Haven, ii. p. 92. Providence, ii. p. 236, 301, 419. Comer, ii.
p. 66, 111, 121, 124. Constitution, of government, ii. p. 322, 329. Cotton, of
Boston, i. p. 46, 57, 77, 99, 103, 157, 239, 246, 472. Covenants, their nature,
ii. p. ^^6. With death and hell, ii. p. 349. Keeping covenant, ii. p. 21, 417.
Cromwell, his letter i. p. 302.
D
Declensions, much lamented, i. p. 387, 391, 405, ii. p. 20, 129. Devenport
John, i. p. 335, 388, 399. Devenport James, ii. p. 134, 144, 156. Dogs, who are
justly called so, ii. p. 346, 349. Dominion, many held that it was founded in
grace, i. p. 337, 341, ii. p. 235. Door, opened for a great reformation, ii. p.
235, 352, 404. Dunstar, i. p. 116, 282, 320.
E
Ecclesiastical, establishments by human laws very pernicious, i. p. 49, 62,
66, 71, 99, 185, 190, 249, 309, 319, 372, 483, 501, 537, ii. p. 11, 87, 246,
327, 366. Edwards, ii. p. 128, 135, 142, 188, 356, 415. ^^il measures to others
requited, i. p. 299, 517, ii. p. 178 -- 183, 219 -- 222, 305.
F
Finley, persecuted, ii. p. 155. Forgery, against the Baptists, i. p. 410, ii.
p. 238.
G
Gill, a learned advocate for believers baptism, ii. p. 149, 238. Gorton, i. p.
118, 141, 192, 299, ii. p. 95. Government, described, i. p. 28, 39, 165, 168,
297, 513, ii. p. 157, 325. Grace, its true nature, ii. p. 230, 361, 370, 394.
The name unjustly put to the covenant of circumcision, ii. p. 235, 342. Yet
many who do so, refuse to profess they have grace, ii. p. 191, 343.
H
Halfway covenant, i. p. 334. This name now disowned, ii. p. 343. Hingham, a
riot there, ii. p. 381. Hollis, his donations, ii. p. 33, 64, 83. His letter,
death and character, ii. p. 78, 118. Holmes, his faith, and sufferings, i. p.
208, 229, 253, 256. Hutchinson, banished and slain, i. p. 118, 148, 471.
Hutchinson, Governor, his high claims of power, ii. p. 275, 290, 414.
I
Independence, ii. p. 308. Independent, church so on the State, ii. preface, p.
5, book, p. 157, 404. Infidelity, greatly promoted by corrupt ministers, ii. p.
354, 402. Yet directly against reason, ii. p. 413, 414. Inventions, of men very
pernicious, ii. preface, p. 3, book, p. 413.
J
Jennings, ii. p. 51. Johnson, his history, i. p. 49, 79, 129, 267, 540.
K
Kingdom, of Christ not of this world, i. 165, 222, ii. p. 157, 325, 352. But
an infinite blessing thereto, ii. p. 331, 373. Knollys, i. p. 101, 490, ii. p.
43.
L
Laws, of men set above the laws of God, i. p. 79, ii. p. 179. Against true
liberty, ii. p. 139, 153, 193, 227, 239, 250, 254, 281. Laud, a great
oppressor, i. p. 63, ii. p. 283. Liberty, of conscience, i. p. 95, 118, 170,
189, 22^, 246, 291, 348, 521, ii. p. 48, 157. Of will, ii. p. 356. Consistent
with necessity, ii. p. 339, ^57, 359, 414.
M
Massachusetts, first charter, i. p. 59, 487, 517. Second charter, i. appendix,
p. 4, ii. p. 7. New constitution, ii. p. 322, 329. Mather Increase, his noble
testimony for purity and liberty, ii. p. 23, 49. Taught it by experience, i. p.
519, 521. Mather Cotton, not self-consistent, ii. p. 50, 7^, 77. Maykew,
against sovereign grace, ii. p. 219, 227, 338. Yet very angry at being
detected, ii. p. 228, 341.
N
Narragansets, i. p. 73, 91, 122, 192, 280, 299, 306, 338, 348, 419. Necessity,
consistent with liberty, ii. p. 339, 357, 359, 414. New England, first
principles thereof, i. p. (...) 43, ii. p. 2, 13, 336, 400. Declensio^ (...)
from, ii. p. 26, 33. List of their ruler (...) Newlights, cause of the name,
ii. p. (...)
O
Oaths, dispensed with, and new o^^ (...) 61, 62. This evil requited (...)
Olney, the second minister (...) 92, 112. Ordination, and dismission of
minister^ (...) p. 273, 350, 403.
P
Pepperell, a riot there, ii. p. 323. Pequots, war with them, i. p. 75, 102,
121, 338. Philip, his war, i. p. 299, 306, 415. Pharaoh, imitated in
New England, ii. p. 87. Plymouth, how planted, i. p. 34, 40, ii. p. 240.
Providence, how planted and named, i. p. 71, 89, 94. Purgatory, held at Boston,
ii. p. 354.
Q
Quakers, arrival at Boston, i. p. 130, 307. Their sufferings, i. p. 141, 307,
482. Dispute with Williams, i. p. 108, 445.
R
Rebellion, resistance to tyranny so called, ii. p. 182, 283, 309, 365. Rebels,
distinguished from subjects, ii. p. 415. Regeneration, essential to
Christianity, ii. p. 23, 369, 400, 408. Religion, what it is, ii. p. 132, 157,
326, 352. Cannot be supported by force, p. 246, 327, 367, 404. Rhode Island,
their several forms of government, i. p. 96, 118, 198, 280, 345, 347, 512, 529.
Ridicule, a cruel kind of persecution, ii. p. 95, 345. Robbins, persecuted, ii.
p. 136, 178, 223. R^binson, an eminent father of New England, i. p. 2, 35, 51,
493, ii. p. 13, 37, 336, 401. Rogerenes, i. p. 473, 486, ii. p. 105. Rul^rs,
the exact limits of their power, ii. p. 157, 371, 401.
S
^^^^ties, who are such, i. p. 388, ii. p. 50, 164, (...), 405. (...) p. 145,
164, 175, 346. (...) p. (...), 475, 512, ii. p. 398. (...) p. 338, 35^. Proved
to be (...). 301, 3^^, ^07. (...) ^^^^n com^^^^^ ^^^^re, ii. p. 36. (...) the
word of God in (...) ^^^med rebellion, ii. p. 179, 182. (...) ^^^ds mankind,
ii. p. 86, 222, 246, 327. (...) new sect, ii. p. 410. ^ge, controversy about
their discipline, ii. (...) ^2. ^^^^rd, the nature and effects of his doctrine,
ii. p. 26, 33, 129, 188. ^^ods, four of them, i. p. 83, 190, 333, 387, 483, ii.
p. 77.
T
Tares, of the field, i. p. 26, 161, 521, ii. p. 169, 191, 347. Taxes, for
ministers, imposed by the church on the world, i. p. 98, 100. Which was tyranny
and robbery, i. p. 311, 521. Since by the world on the church, which is simony,
ii. p. 8, 24. In both cases partiality was established by law, ii. p. 10, 154,
208, 241, 242. It was taxing people where they were not represented, which
measure has been awfully required, ii. p. 11, 285, 305, 366. Tempt, is to claim
God's promises, without regard to his precepts, ii. p. 358. Tennent, a powerful
preacher, ii. p. 133, 142. Truth, how held in unrighteousness, ii. p. 406.
Type, how confounded with antitype, i. p. 389, ii. preface, p. 6, book, p. 368.
V
Vane Henry, i. p. 76, 91, 118, 148, 155, 175, 198, 286, 288, 352.
W
Wallin, his letters, ii. p. 53, 58, 81, 119. Walton, against Clark, ii. p.
113, 123. Wheelwright, banished, i. p. 81, 157. Whitefield, a powerful
preacher, ii. p. 130, 170. Witchcraft, at Salem, ii. p. 5. Williams, was for
keeping church and State distinct, i. p. 53. Banished therefore, i. p. 57, 62,
66, 70, 156. Plants Providence, i. p. 71. Requites good for evil, i. p. 75, 88,
155, 193, 339. Forms the first Baptist church in America, i. p. 106. Goes to
England and procures a charter for a free government, with the sign of an
ANCHOR on its public seal, i. p. 148, 154, 198, 349. Various pieces of his, i.
p. 200, 204, 256, 285, 289, 293, 297, 421, 441, 513. His death and character,
i. p. 515, 516. His mistakes, i. p. 453, ii. p. 94. Winslow, a Governor at
Plymouth, i. p. 43, 65, 74, 204, 338, 556. Winthrop, the first Governor at
Boston, i. p. 45, 56, 67, 82, 137, 146, 499, 539. Witnesses, of the two in
Revelations, ii. p. 406.
NOTE, the chapters in the second volume begin in the following pages, viz. p.
1, 20, 44, 68, 93, 109, 127, 144, 160, 184, 200, 217, 231, 246, 265, 282, 299,
322, 338, 355, 375, 395, 416; and the contents of each chapter are at the
beginning of it.

A CHURCH HISTORY OF NEW ENGLAND
CHAP. I.
1. A first Principle of these Churches. 2. Of Witchcraft. 3. Unjust Attempts
to turn it against the Baptists. 4. Oppressive Laws. 5. Effects thereof. 6.
Plymouth Proclamation. 7. Their Church Order. 8. Evils of denying it. 9. First
Ministers of Middleborough and Dartmouth. 10. Of Plymton.

1. THE fathers of New England came much nearer to the apostolic order of the
church, than most other reformers had done. Dr. Cotton Mather published a
specimen thereof in the year 1690. Says he, "A church (as the Greek name for it
allows us to think) is to consist of a people called out from the ways of sin,
by the powerful and effectual work of God upon their souls. Regeneration is the
thing without which a title unto sacraments is not to be pretended. Real
regeneration is the thing which before God renders men capable of claiming
sacraments; and visible and expressed regeneration is that which before men
enables us to make such a claim Companion for communicants, p. 29, 30, 37.
." From the first planting of the country to 1662, none were allowed to come to
the ordinance of the supper, nor to bring their infants to baptism, without
such a profession. The synod of that year opened a door for the children of
church members to bring their infants upon a lower profession; though in the
Massachusetts a profession of regeneration was still held to be necessary, in
order for coming to full communion, or having a vote in the government, either
of church or state. This was essential to the nature of their plan, of a holy
government, in imitation of the church of Israel. And for the church to govern
the world, for good men to govern bad ones, seemed much more rational and
scriptural, than for the world to govern the church about soul-guides, as they
have done since: Previous to which the country was involved in most deplorable
circumstances. Their charter lost; their seacoasts infested with privateers
and pirates, and their frontiers with savage enemies. An attempt to take Quebec
in 1690 was defeated, which enraged the enemy the more against them, and also
involved the country in a heavy debt; to discharge which paper money was first
made here, the effects whereof were very pernicious. Officers and people were
greatly divided in their minds about the causes of these calamities, and about
what was the best way to remove them. And in this juncture they were alarmed
with an apprehension that the powers of hell were let loose upon them, which
amazed and confounded them inexpressibly. The scene was introduced in the
following manner:

II. A VARIETY of books, concerning witchcraft, had been published in London
and Boston, which were dispersed in New England. And near the close of 1691, a
young daughter and a neice of Mr. Samuel Parris, minister of Salem village (now
Danvers) with two other girls in the neighborhood, made such complaints of
distress and injuries upon their bodies, that a physician pronounced them
bewitched. Hereupon an Indian woman, from New-Spain, that lived at the
minister's house, tried some experiments to find out the witch, which she
pretended to have been used to in her own country. This coming to the knowledge
of those children, they accused her of being the witch; of appearing to them,
and pinching, pricking and tormenting of them. Teachers, rulers and people,
were so much affected with this calamity, as to keep days of fasting and prayer
for its removal; first at said minister's house, next in the village, and then
through the Colony. Such notice being taken of and pity shown to those
children, they increased their complaints; and others advanced like
accusations, not only against the Indian woman, but also against two other old
women in the place, so that all the three were committed to prison on March 1,
1692. And this noise increased, and such accusations spread, till about an
hundred persons were imprisoned on that account. In the midst of which
distress, on May 14, Sir William Phips, the Governor, arrived at Boston with
their new charter, in company with Dr. Increase Mather, who procured it. The
Governor and Council were so much concerned to purge this growing evil from the
land, that they did not wait for the meeting of the legislature, to whom the
constituting of Courts of Justice belonged, but constituted one themselves,
whereof Lieutenant Governor Stoughton was President, and by their sentence one
woman was hanged on June 10; and by September 22, they executed seven men and
thirteen women; after which that Court was dissolved. And by the time that a
Court of Oyer and Terminer was constituted according to charter, rulers and
ministers were so far convinced that they had acted upon wrong principles, and
had also admitted the testimony of accusers without sufficient care and
caution, that all the rest of the accused were either acquitted upon trial, or
pardoned by authority. A first principle that they acted upon in those
condemnations was, that God in his providence would not suffer the devil to
appear to and afflict any in the shape of an innocent person. And they admitted
one accuser to one instance, and another to another, of those spectoral
appearances, to make up two witnesses. They also who would confess themselves
to be witches, were admitted as witnesses against others. And, says a gentleman
who was a careful observer of those transactions, "These confessors, by their
plausible confessions and accusations of others, begetting credit, have been a
great, if not the greatest engine of Satan to carry on the accusing and
apprehending of others, until this matter came to such a height, that, if it
had not been stopped, might have brought the best Christians in the country
under the imputation of that abomination, and have involved all in confusion
and blood A modest enquiry into the nature of witchcraft, by John Hale,
minister of Beverly, 1697. p. 78.
." Deplorable indeed was the case of New England at that time; though we are
assured, by men who have searched fully into the matter, that a greater number
of persons were executed for witchcraft in only one county in England, even in
the loose reign of Charles the second, than all that were put to death here;
and also that these executions were under the influence of laws and precedents
from thence Hale, p. 25; 2^* 69. Hutchinson, vol. 2, p. 16, 22, 69.
But this being a new country, it was more taken notice of, and was more
severely felt than there.

III. WE cannot find that the Baptists had any hand in those confused and
bloody proceedings; yet much pains have been taken to turn the same against
them. A late minister of Danvers, the place where those delusions began, says,
"It is reported of witches, and those that hold unlawful commerce with evil
spirits, that in order to their entering into confederacy with them, they are
solicited to renounce their baptism, even though received in infancy; which
shows, that such a renunciation of baptism, which Dr. Gill pleads for and
commends, is matter of great impiety Clark against Gill, 1752, p. 33.
." What Dr. Gill pleaded for, was the renouncing of infant sprinkling, and the
practicing of believer's baptism, according to primitive institution. But how
far was that from the witchcraft at Danvers or Salem! The plainest instances of
any mention of baptism therein were as follow. In the examination of a woman
before authority, July 21, 1992, were these questions and answers, viz. "Q.
Goody Lacey! how many years ago since they were baptized? A. Three or four
years ago, I suppose. Q. Who baptized them? A. The old serpent. Q. How did he
do it? A. He dipped their heads in the water, saying they were his, and that he
had power over them. Q. Where was this? A. At Falls River. Q. How many were
baptized that day? A. Some of the chief, I think there were six baptized. Q.
Name them. A. I think they were of the higher powers." Also Capt. Osgood's
wife, of Andover, was made to confess, that she with others had been carried
through the air to a certain pond, where the devil dipped her face in the
water, and made her renounce her former baptism. But she, with five others in
prison, gave in a retraction of their confessions to the Court, wherein they
declared that they were amazed and affrighted out of their reason, by some
gentlemen who told them they knew they were witches, and therefore they
assented to what was suggested to them, as the only way they had left to save
their lives; but when they came to be better composed, they professed that they
were innocent and ignorant of such things. And fifty-three of their neighbors
gave in a written testimony to the Court, that they believed this to be an
honest retraction; one of whom was Dudley Bradstreet, Esquire Mr. Parris and other
ministers were very officious in those examinations of persons accused of
witchcraft Hutchinson's history, vol. 2, p. 31, 36, 40 -- 44.
; and sixty years after Mr. Clark must bring up the same, to prove that
"Renouncing of his early dedication must appear such an instance of impiety, as
to a considerate person were enough to put a stop to his proceedings, how
inclinable soever he might be to those principles on other accounts Against
Gill, p. 33.
." Such methods have they taken to frighten people from seeing with their own
eyes, and from acting according to their own judgments, in the great concerns
of the soul and eternity.

IV. THE second Massachusetts charter, which was dated October 7, 1691, allowed
equal liberty of conscience to all Christians, except Papists. The first
General Court under it met a Boston June 9, 1692, to whom Dr. Cotton Mather
delivered a sermon, wherein he said, "The civil Magistrate is most properly the
officer of human society, and a Christian, by nonconformity to this or that
imposed way of worship, does not break the terms on which he is to enjoy the
benefits of human society." And ten years after he published this and other
passages, in his history of New England, and said he would thereby stop the
noise about persecution therein Magnalia, b. ^. p. 28, 29.
But how could that be done? for he said, "The General Assembly may, by their
acts, give a distinguishing encouragement unto the religion which is the
general profession of the inhabitants Account of his father's life, p. 141.
." That is, may empower some to judge for others about worship, and to enforce
their judgments with the sword; which is the root of the worst persecutions in
the world. He knew that such acts as he spoke of could not take place here
without the royal assent; yet said he "I am verily persuaded, that the nearness
of our dependence on the crown will be found one of our most glorious
advantages." His reason therefore is, its giving them a greater security in
future shaking times. But experience has now demonstrated, that it is better to
trust in the Lord than to put confidence in Princes. He in that sermon called
Cambridge college. "A river, the streams whereof made glad the city of God Said
sermon, p. 57, 66, 87.
;" which method of applying those words of divine revelation to human schools,
is doubtless a perverting of them; and is a way which has done much hu^^ to
mankind. Christians are required to withdraw from such as suppose that gain is
godliness; yet now a freehold worth forty shillings a year, or other estate
worth fifty pounds (which was soon after reduced to forty) gave every
inhabitant a right to vote for legislators; and an Assembly so elected, in
their session at Boston, October 12, 1692, enacted, -- "That the inhabitants of
each town within this Province shall take due care, from time to time, to be
constantly provided of an able, learned and orthodox minister or ministers, of
good conversation, to dispense the word of God to them; which minister or
ministers shall be suitably encouraged, and sufficiently supported and
maintained, by the inhabitants of such town. And all contracts, agreements and
orders, heretofore made, or that shall hereafter be made, by the inhabitants of
any town within this Province, respecting their ministers or schoolmasters, as
to their settlement or maintenance, shall remain good and valid, according to
the true intent thereof, the whole time for which they were or shall be made,
in all the particulars thereof, and shall accordingly be pursued, put in
execution, and fulfilled. And where there is no contract and agreement made in
any town, respecting the support and maintenance of the ministry, or when the
same happens to be expired, and the inhabitants of such town shall neglect to
make suitable provision therein, upon complaint thereof made unto the Quarter
Sessions of the Peace for the county where such town lies, the said Court
shall, and hereby are empowered to order a competent allowance unto such
minister, according to the estate and ability of the town, the same to be
assessed upon the inhabitants, by warrant from the Court, directed to the
Select-Men, who are thereupon to proceed to make and apportion such assessment
in manner as is directed for other public charges, and to cause the same to be
levied by the constables of such town, by warrant under the hands of the
Select-Men, or of the town clerk by their order.

"BE it further enacted, that where any town shall be desti^ute of a minister
qualified as aforesaid, and shall so continue by the space of six months, not
having taken due care for the procuring, settling and encouragement of such a
minister, the same being made to appear upon complaint unto their Majesty's
Justices of the General Sessions of the Peace of the county, the said Court
shall and hereby are empowered to make an order upon every such defective town,
speedily to provide themselves of such a minister as aforesaid, by the next
sessions at the furthest; and in case such order be not complied with, then the
said Court shall take effectual care to procure and settle a minister qualified
as aforesaid, and order the charge thereof, and of such minister's maintenance,
to be levied on the inhabitants of such town.

"AND it is further enacted, that the respective churches, in the several towns
within this Province, shall at all times hereafter use, exercise and enjoy, all
their privileges and freedoms respecting divine worship, church order and
discipline; and shall be encouraged in the peaceable and regular profession and
practice thereof.

"AND further it is enacted, that every minister, being a person of good
conversation, able, learned and orthodox, that shall be chosen by the major
part of the inhabitants of any town, at a town-meeting duly warned for that
purpose (notice being given to the inhabitants fifteen days before the time of
such meeting) shall be the minister of such town; and the whole town shall be
obliged to pay toward his settlement and maintenance, each man his several
proportion thereof."

THEY had here entered upon a new and untried scence; and the glaring
contradiction betwixt the two last paragraphs of this law, with their finding
that some towns had more than one church therein, as also that Boston would not
submit to it, caused the Assembly, in their next session of February 8, 1693,
to repeal those two paragraphs, and in addition to the rest of that law to
enact, "That each respective gathered church, in any town or place within this
Province, that at any time shall be in want of a minister, such church shall
have power, according to the directions given in the word of God, to choose
their own minister;" yet not to settle him without the concurrence of the
majority of voters in town affairs, who usually meet therewith for worship; but
that being obtained, then "all the inhabitants and rateable estates lying
within such town, or part of a town, or place, limited by law for upholding the
public worship of God, shall be obliged to pay in proportion toward the
minister's settlement and support. Provided, that nothing herein contained is
intended, or shall be construed to extend, to abridge the inhabitants of Boston
of their accustomed way and practice, as to the choice and maintenance of their
ministers."

V. HERE it is to be noted, that like causes may ever be expected to produce
like effects. One of our most essential rights is not to be taxed where we are
not represented. And it is most certain, that a civil legislature are not our
religious representatives; and in order then to tax the country to religious
teachers, they were obridged of the rights which Boston would not part with. So
when Governor Hutchinson was pursuing the scheme, in 1769, of having America
taxed by Britain, he said, "there must be an abridgement of what are called
English liberties." But the bloody effects of that attempt, are a loud warning
to all after ages. The Assembly went on, in said law, to empower the rateable
inhabitants of any town where no church was gathered, to call and settle a
minister, by the advice and direction of three neighboring ordained ministers,
who should be supported as others were; and also to enact, that if any town or
place neglected to obey these laws, their Select-Men, or other officers, should
be convented before their county Court, and, upon conviction of such neglect,
be fined Forty Shillings for the first offense, and Four Pounds for every after
conviction. As a fruit of which, a warrant was sent from Bristol Court,
"requiring the town of Swanzey to choose a minister according to law." The town
met upon it August 28, and adjourned to October 17, 1693, when they concluded
to report to the Court, that Elder Samuel Luther was their minister Swanzey
town records.
He was ordained pastor of the first church there, July 22, 1685, by the
assistance of the Elders Hull and Emblen, of Boston. And the rulers of Plymouth
Colony had publicly owned him in that office; one instance whereof take as
follows.

VI. AT a Court of Assistants held at Plymouth, the first Tuesday of August,
1690;
it being manifest that the Lord our God calls his poor people in this
wilderness to great humiliation and mourning, for those awful tokens of his
displeasure that are upon us, and our manifold sins, the procuring cause
thereof, the Governor and Council do therefore commend it to all the churches
of God and people in this Colony, to set apart and observe the last day of this
instant as a day of solemn fasting and prayer, wherein to deprecate those heavy
judgments impending, and to entreat the Lord to take away all our iniquities,
and receive us graciously: Particularly that God would prosper the Agents of
the country in their weighty negotiation in the other England; that our address
may be accepted with our Lord the King, and we may have a settled establishment
of our ancient liberties and privileges, sacred and civil; that God would call
back the commission he has given to the sword of the enemy to be drawn among
us, and direct and manage all the counsels of his servants in this dark and
difficult day of war, and give success in the destruction of our adversaries,
and restore peace to us; that contagious and afflictive distresses may be
removed; that the necessities of the poor may be supplied, and the judgment of
scarcity and famine prevented; and that God would bless the labors of our
hands, and give both seedtime and harvest; and that in a way of humiliation and
reformation we may be prepared to meet God, and wait for him in the way of his
judgments, and that mercy may be the latter end of all his dispensations to us.

Per order of the abovesaid Court, SAMUEL SPRAGUE, Recorder.

To Mr. Samuel Luther, Elder of the church of Swanzey, for him to communicate
to the church and congregation there.

VII. THIS I carefully copied from the original, preserved in Elder Luther's
family; and Bristol Court could not be ignorant of his being thus owned as the
settled minister of Swanzey; yet this attempt must be made for the other
denomination, though they have never been able to set up their worship in that
town to this day. A second Baptist church was formed therein, and Mr. Thomas
Barnes was ordained pastor of it in 1693. It may be serviceable to enquire into
the reason of their being so much better treated when under Plymouth
government, than they were after they were incorporated with the Massachusetts.

PLYMOUTH people were taught in Holland, that the church was the school wherein
Christ trained up his ministers; though they were far from despising human
learning in its place. One of their proofs was the 14th chapter of the first
epistle to the Corinthians; upon which their learned pastor, Mr. Robinson, made
the following remarks. Says he, "That the Apostle in this chapter directs the
church in the use of extraordinary gifts, is most evident: Neither will I deny
but that the officers are to guide and order this action of prophesying, as all
other public business, yea, even these wherein the brethren have greatest
liberty: But that he intends the establishing of, and so takes order, and gives
direction for an ordinary constant exercise in the church, even by men out of
office, I do manifest by these reasons. (1.) Because the apostle speaks of the
ministration of a gift or grace, common to all persons, as well brethren as
ministers, ordinary as extraordinary, and that at all times, which is love; as
also of such fruits and effects of that grace, as are no less common to all
than the grace itself, nor of less continuance in the churches of Christ, to
wit, of edification, exhortation and comfort, ver. 3, compared with 1 These. v.
11, 14. (2.) In ver. 21, he permits all to prophesy, and speaks as largely of
prophesying as of learning, and receiving comfort. But lest any should object,
may women also prophesy? the apostle prevents that objection, and it may be
reproves that disorder amongst the Corinthians, ver. 34, by a flat inhibition,
enjoining them expressly to keep silence in the church, in the presence of men,
to whom they ought to be subject, and to learn at home of their husbands, and
not by teaching men to usurp authority over them, 1 Timothy ii. 11, 12, which men
in prophesying do lawfully use. (3.) Now in that Paul forbids women, he gives
liberty to all men, gifted accordingly, opposing women to men, sex to sex, and
not women to officers, which were frivolous. And again, in restraining women,
he shows his meaning to be of ordinary, not extraordinary prophesying; for
women immediately and extraordinarily inspired might speak without restraint,
Exodus xv. 20, Judge. iv. 4, Luke ii. 36. (4.) The prophets here spoken of were
not extraordinary, because their doctrines were to be judged by other prophets,
and their spirits to be subject unto the spirits of others, ver. 29, 32;
whereas the doctrines of the extraordinary prophets were neither subject to nor
to be judged by any; but they, as the Apostles, being immediately inspired,
were the foundation upon which the church was built, Jesus Christ himself being
the chief corner stone, Ephesians. ii. 20, and iii. 5. (5.) The apostle makes a
prophet and a man spiritual all one, whom he further describes, not by any
extraordinary gift, but by that common Christian grace of submission unto the
things he writes, as the commandments of the Lord: Unto whom he opposes a man
wilfully ignorant, ves. 37, 38, teaching us, that he does not measure a
prophet, in this place, either by the office of ministry, or by any
extraordinary prophetical gift, but by the common Christian gift of spiritual
discerning. (6.) It is the commandment of the Lord by the apostle, that a
bishop must be apt to teach, and that such elders or bishops be called as are
able to exhort with sound doctrine, and to convince the gainsayers. Now except
men, before they be in office, may be permitted to manifest their gifts, in
doctrine and prayer, which are the two main works requiring special
qualification in the teaching elders, how shall the church (which is to choose
them) take knowledge of their sufficiency, that with faith and good conscience
they may call them, and submit unto them for their guides Robinson against
Bernard, p. 236, 237.
?"


VIII. Now, as the church of Plymouth had always acted upon these principles,
it was easy for them to look upon Elder Luther as a minister of Christ, whose
church was of the same mind about that point of gospel order. But a minister of
chief note among the Massachusetts says, "That custom, of the prophesying of
private brethren, was not observed in any of the churches of New England
besides themselves: The ministers of the respective churches there not being so
well satisfied in the way thereof as Mr. Robinson was. The most judicious and
leading elders among said churches, as Mr. Cotton, etc. that were not
absolutely against the thing, were yet afraid that the wantonness of the
present age would not well bear such a liberty as that great light of these
churches expressed, to a person of great quality, to whom he bore no small
respect, a few hours before he departed this life Hubbard.
." But Mr. Robinson says, "It is apparent, both in the scriptures and
ecclesiastical writers, that not only pride and contention, but heresy, and
almost all other evils, have sprung from the officers and governors of the
church. And surely nothing has more in former days advanced, nor does at this
day more uphold the throne of Antichrist, than the people's discharging
themselves of the care of public affairs in the church, on the one side, and
the priests and prelates arrogating all to themselves on the other Robinson, p.
204.
."

IX. Two brethren of Plymouth church were ordained pastors of other churches in
1694. One of them was Mr. Jonathan Donham, who was ordained at Edgarton, on
Martha's Vineyard. The other was at Middleborough, fourteen miles west of
Plymouth. About sixteen families began to plant here a little before Philip's
war; who moved away when the war broke out, and returned again after it was
over; and Mr. Samuel Fuller preached to them till a church was constituted
among them this year, and he was ordained their pastor. The settlement of
Dartmouth began about the same time with Middleborough, and their first teacher
was also from Plymouth, but not in the same way. His name was John Cook, who
was a deacon in Plymouth church for some years; but was cast out of it in the
latter part of Mr. Reyner's ministry there, who left them in November, 1654. It
is said that Cook was excommunicated for having been the author of much
dissension and division, and for afterward running into sectarian and
Anabaptistical principles. And also that Reyner's removal was partly occasioned
by the unsettledness of the church, "Too many of the members being leavened
with prejudices against a learned ministry, by means of sectaries then
spreading through the land Plymouth register, p. 4, 12.
." Some light concerning them may be gathered from the following facts.
Plymouth church took much pains to obtain learned pastors, if they were
otherwise well qualified; but they refused to be confined to human schools for
ministers, or to compel the world to support them. They labored hard to get
the learned Mr. Charles Chauncy to settle as a colleague with Mr. Reyner; but
Mr. Chauncy could not consent to it, because gospel baptism appeared to him to
be dipping, and that sprinkling for baptism was unlawful, as their church
records witness. In 1650 a separation commenced at Rehoboth, because Mr.
Newman, their minister, with six others, assumed all the power of church
government to themselves, under the name of "The church representative Clarke's
narrative, p. 24.
." For this usurpation a number of the church withdrew, and set up worship by
themselves; and the ministers tried hard to move Plymouth Court to suppress
them by force, but could not prevail therein. These people soon after became
Baptists; and one of them was most shamefully and cruelly persecuted the next
year at Boston. By searching into these matters, Mr. Dunstar, President of
Harvard college, was brought openly to renounce infant baptism. And seeing the
temper which was discovered in the Massachussetts, he removed into Plymouth
Colony, the very year that Reyner moved out of it; as several other ministers
also did about that time, because they could not bring Plymouth rulers into the
use of tax and compulsion for their support. (Vol 1, p. 282 -- 284, 320.) And
though Reyner excommunicated Cook, yet, not being able to bring the church
into all his measures, he left them, and robbed them of their church-records,
which they never recovered; so that what records Plymouth church now has, were
afterward collected from memory and private writings. These facts may help the
reader in forming a judgment of what Cooke's sectarian principles were, and
also how he came by them. His posterity inform me, that he was a Baptist, and
that he preached the doctrine of election, with the other doctrines of
sovereign grace, in Dartmouth for a number of years. And it appears by Mr.
Samuel Hubbard's letters, that a Baptist church was formed upon the west
borders of Dartmouth, in the year 1685, wherein Hugh Mosier and Aaron Davis
were principal leaders; which church is continued by succession to this day;
though the Quakers are the most numerous of any one sect in that town.

X. ON August 24, 1695, the church of Middleborough was bereaved of their
beloved pastor, aet. 66; "A great loss to the place, said Mr. Cotton, he being
a sincere godly man, and useful preacher." Mr. Isaac Cushman, another member of
Plymouth church, was invited to succeed him; but having a call at Plymton
(betwixt here and Plymouth) at the same time, he accepted it; and was ordained
there in School Mr. John Cotton, above referred to, was son to the famous
minister of that name in Boston. He was minister at Plymouth about 30 years,
till contentions about the above points of church order occasioned his
dismission, by advice of a council in 1697, and the next year he went and
gathered a Congregational church in Charlestown, South Carolina, where he died
much lamented September 18, 1699. Plymouth register, p. 21, 22.
; and was continued a great blessing to them for about forty years. But
thirteen ministers, in and near Boston, published a letter of advice to the
churches, dated December 28, 1699, in the 8th page of which they represent it
to be a jesuitical principle for any to hold, "That illiterate men may be
serviceable and admirable preachers." This with other things moved their
churches to look only to colleges for ministers for a long time after. In the
mean while, as the empowering the world to control the church in the choice of
pastors was an untried path to them, it took them three years to find out what
to do, when a parish did not concur with the church therein. But when the
Assembly met at Boston, May 29, 1695, they enacted, that in such a case the
church should call a council of three or five neighboring churches, who should
decide the controversy thus: If the council approved of the person elected, the
parish must submit and support him; if not, then the church must give up their
choice, and call another minister, and in this method they have proceeded ever
since. And it may be serviceable to hear the judgment of a number of their most
eminent men, about the state of religion in New England in those times.

CHAP. II.
1. Declensions described and lamented, by Mr. Prince. 2. Willard and Torrey.
3. Mitchel. 4. Mather. 5. Willard. 6. Stoddard's Errors. 7. Episcopal Society
incorporated. 8. Arbitrary Laws and Proposals. 9. Quakers Attempts against
them. 10. Some Revival, and some Baptist Letters. 11. Other Churches corrupted.
12. And enslaved. 13. Opposition thereto at Norwich. 14. A few Things
concerning the Baptists.

1. THE learned and pious Mr. Thomas Prince says, "The second generation rising
and growing thick on the stage, a little after 1660, there began to appear a
decay; and this increased to 1670, when it grew visible and threatening, and
was generally complained of and bewailed bitterly by the pious among them; and
yet much more to 1680, when but few of the first generation remained." One of
his proofs hereof is what Mr. William Stoughton delivered in an election sermon
at Boston, April 29, 1668; when he said, "The death and removal of the Lord's
eminent servants, in one rank and in another, has manifested the lie in many
of us. Whilst they lived, their piety and zeal, their light and life, their
counsels and authority, their examples and awe, kept us right, and drew us on
in the ways of God, to profess and practice the best things. But now they are
gone, ah! how does the unsoundness, the rottenness and hypocrisy of too many
among us make itself known, as it was with Joash after the death of Jehoiada
Christian hist. vol. 1. p. 94, 95. In 1671 Mr. Stoughton was elected into the
Council, and he died there Lieut. Gov. in 1702.
!" Other of his proofs are in vol. 1. p. 405, 406.

II. IN 1680 Mr. Willard said, "Be sure, when the glory of God and the
spiritual good of your brother requires it, that you carry on your reproofs to
conviction. There are some things that arise only from sudden passion, and
there a transient rebuke may be enough: Other things may be deliberate, and men
are led into them more gradually; they may also be eminently reproachful to
religion, and a dangerous snare to the souls of them that are tempted; our
connivance in such cases may not only blemish our profession, but be a great
hazard to it also. At such times, and in such case, you break your covenant if
you suffer sin in your brother, without using all the means which Christ has
prescribed, and in the order he has prescribed them, till the end be obtained.
If private admonition followed with gentleness and patience will not gain, but
they still persist in evil courses, or are not humbled for such faults, you
must proceed by steps as far as Christ has bid you. And I believe there is no
one thing wherein the covenant is more universally broken, than in neglect of
this duty; and if the use of these ordinances shall once come to cease among
the churches, and the sins of church members be not regularly suppressed, by
reason of the unfaithfulness of brethren, religion will languish, and the power
of godliness fail. It is not the extending of the covenant to Christians (as
some dream) but the neglect of covenant duties toward them, that is like to be
the bane of our profession, if any thing. Eli indulged his sons, and one
professor indulgeth another; and it is to be feared, that if this were searched
to the bottom, it would be found that the original of it is self-indulgence,
and that when men wink at scandals in their brethren, it is because they expect
the like in way of retaliation: And if things once come to this pass, let any
sober and prudent man conjecture whether this be not the way to cherish
apostasy." Dr. Increase Mather, in the preface, gave a special recommendation
of this passage Willard on covenant keeping, p. 110, 111.
Three years after another of their fathers, who was minister at Weymouth,
delivered a sermon before their Legislature, which he called, A plea for the
life of dying religion; wherein he said, "There is already a great death upon
religion, little more left than a name to live. -- Consider we then how much it
is dying respecting the BEING of it, by the general failure of the work of
CONVERSION; whereby ONLY it is that religion is propagated, continued, and
upheld in being among any people. As converting work does cease, so does
religion die away; though more insensibly, yet most irrecoverably. -- How much
is it dying, respecting the visible profession and practice of it, partly by
the formalty of churches, but ^more by the hypocrisy and apostasy of formal
hypocritical professors Torrey's election sermon at Boston, May 16, 1683, p 11.
?"

III. THE life of Mr. Jonathan Mitchel was published in 1697; and Dr. Increase
Mather dedicated this work, which his son had compiled, to the church and
college at Cambridge; to whom he said, "Dr. Owen has evinced, that the letting
go this principle, that particular churches ought to consist of REGENERATE
PERSONS, brought in the GREAT APOSTASY of the Christian church. The way to
prevent the like apostasy in these churches, is to require an account of those
that offer themselves to communion therein, concerning the work of God on their
souls, as well as concerning their knowledge and belief. -- Mr. Mitchel says,
the over-enlarging of full communion, or admission of persons thereto, upon
slight qualifications, without insisting upon the practical and spiritual part
of religion, will not only lose the power of godliness, but in a little time
bring in profaneness, and ruin the churches, these two ways. 1. Election of
ministers will soon be carried by a formal looser sort. 2. The exercise of
discipline will by this means be rendered impossible.
Discipline falling, profaneness rises like a flood; for the major part
wanting zeal against sin, will foster licentiousness. It is not setting down
good rules and directions, that will salve it; for the specification of
government is from men, not from laws. Let never so good a form of government
be agreed upon, it will soon degenerate, if the instruments that manage it be
not good Said dedication, p. 16, 17.
When Mr. Mitchel wrote this, about 1664, he had no idea of pastors being
elected in New England by any others but communicants; and gives these weighty
reasons against admitting such upon slight qualifications, which Dr. Mather,
then President of the college, endeavored to enforce.

IV. IN the year 1700 Mather published another book, which he dedicated to the
churches of Christ in New England; to whom he said, "The Congregational church
discipline is not suited for a worldly interest, or a formal generation of
professors. It will stand or fall as godliness, in the power of it, does
prevail, or otherwise: That there is a great decay of the power of religion
throughout all New England is lamentably true; if that revive, there will be no
fear of departing from the holy discipline of the churches of Christ. -- If the
begun apostasy should proceed as fast, the next thirty years, as it has done
these last, surely it will come to that in New England (except the gospel
itself depart with the order of it) that the most conscientious people therein
will think themselves concerned to gather churches out of churches." He goes on
to caution and warn them against many evils; one of which is a dull formality
in relations of experiences, in order for admission to communion. And he then
says, "There are reports, as if in some churches persons have brought written
relations, first to the minister and then to the church, which were not of
their own dictating, but devised by others for them. I hope these reports have
nothing of truth in them; but if they have, I am sure that such liars to the
Holy Ghost have exceedingly provoked the Lord." Another evil which he warns the
churches against, is admi^^ing any but communicants to vote for ^as^ers; and he
ci^es Acts i. 26, vi. ^ -- 5. xiv. 23, ^o prove that God has plainly given this
privilege "To the brethren of particular churches;" and declare, it to be "
Simonical to affirm, that this sacred privilege may be purchased with money
Vindication of the order of the gospel in New England, p. ^, ^^, 38, ^7, 68
." This testimony was then given by one of the most eminent ministers in the
land, who had been President of Harvard college about twenty years; but by
unfair means he was removed from that office the next year His life, p. 173.
.

V. MR. Willard also published a discourse in the year 1700, entitled, The
perils of the times displayed; in which he said, "That there is a form of
godliness among us is manifest; but the great enquiry is, whether there be not
too much of a general denying of the power of it: Whence else is it, that there
be such things as these that follow to be observed? that there is such a
prevalency of so many immoralities among professors? that there is so little
success of the gospel? how few thorough conversions to be observed, how scarce
and seldom? -- It has been a frequent observation, that if one generation
begins to decline, the next that follows usually grows worse, and so on, until
God pours out his spirit again upon them. The decays which we already languish
under are sad; and what tokens are on our children, that it is like to be
better hereafter? God be thanked that there are some among them that promise
well; but alas, how does vanity abound among them! How do young professors grow
weary of the strict profession of their fathers, and become disputants for the
things which their progenitors forsook a pleasant land for the avoidance of?"
And forty years after Mr. Prince said, "We have been generally growing worse
and worse ever since Christian history, vol. 1. p. 100, 101, 108.
."

VI. THE greatest evils that our fathers came here to avoid, were the mixture
of worthy and unworthy communicants in the churches, and the tyranny of secular
and ministerial Courts over them; but these evils were now coming in like a
stood upon New England. A church was formed in Brattle-street, Boston, in 1699,
with a professed design of not requiring such a strict profession of
communicants as their fathers did. And Dr. Coleman, their minister, was judged
to have the chief hand in publishing an anonymous answer to President Mather's
vindication of their former order. And a discourse was printed in London, in
1700, wrote by Mr. Solomon Stoddard, of Northampton, wherein he blends the
Jewish and Christian dispensations together, in such a manner as to hold, that
as all who were circumcised were obliged to keep the passover, so that all who
were baptized ought to come to the Lord's supper, yea, "Though they know
themselves to be in a natural condition." And by confounding the work of Jewish
and Christian officers together, he asserted that the power of admitting,
censuring, and restoring of members, is wholly invested in the elders, so that
"The brethren of the church are not to intermeddle with it." When any of them,
though they were unjustly dealt with, they might appeal to a classical,
provincial and national judicature. And says he, "A national synod is the
highest ecclesiastical authority upon earth. -- Every man must stand to the
judgment of the national synod, Deuteronomy. xvii. 12 Stoddard on instituted churches,
p. 12, 2^, 29, 33.
."

THESE are the words of a minister of great note in New England, whose doctrine
has had an extensive spread therein ever since. Yet these are some of the main
principles that formerly brought on the Antichristian apostasy; and no text in
the bible could be more aptly turned to favor their bloody persecutions, than
the one here brought to prove his last point. For it says, The man that will do
presumptuously, and will not hearken unto the priest, or unto the judge, even
that man shall die. The priest was to explain God's law, and the judge was to
carry the same into execution. This is the very passage that the ministers
brought in 1668, to prove that the Baptists in Boston ought to be banished
(vol. 1. p. 385.) But Dr. Owen, in his piece upon toleration in 1648, truly
observed, that as God was the head and lawgiver of that nation, idolatry,
blasphemy, or seducing of others from his worship, were capital crimes; and
that applying of those laws to cases of worship or discipline in other nations,
with the infliction of any other punishment than death, was nothing but
arbitrary proceedings. To which I may add, that Jesus Christ, and souls who are
born again, are all the priests that are named in the new testament, 1 Pet. i.
23, ii. 5, and the name is never applied therein to officers, in distinction
from other saints. Men who have tried to take the power of church government
out of the hands of the saints, in particular churches, have never been able to
fix any rational bounds to it elsewhere. A synod of each nation is the bounds
that Mr. Stoddard proposed in this piece, but would exclude the English bishops
therefrom, because they are not chosen by the church, but the State Ibid. p. 30.
; but they were for other measures.

VII. WHEN his book was published in London, a small Episcopal society in
Boston was the only one of that denomination in all New England. But on June
16, 1701, a charter was procured, to incorporate a society to propagate (what
they called) the gospel in foreign parts. And they sent over missionaries, and
got their matters in such forwardness, in about twelve years, as to obtain an
order from the Crown to bring a bill into Parliament, to establish Episcopacy
in America; and its speedy accomplishment was expected, when Divine Providence
prevented it by the sudden death of Queen Anne, August 1, 1714. And the two
succeeding Princes did not see cause to revive that scheme Chandler's appeal,
1767, p. 50 -- 54.
In 1701 the two eldest ministers in this Province published their testimony
for the ancient order of these churches, and against growing declensions and
corruptions, namely, Mr. John Higginson, of Salem, aged 85, Mr. William Hubbard
The historian so often quoted.
, of Ipswich, aged 80, wherein they give their particular approbation of
President Mather's vindication of that order See Wise's works, p. 68 -- 7^.
In 1702 Mather published another book, entitled, The glory departing from
New England; wherein he says, "Alas! what a change is there in that which has
been our glory! What a glorious presence of Christ was there in all his
ordinances! Many were converted, and willingly declared what God had done for
their souls; and there were added to the churches daily such as should be
saved. -- There is sad cause to fear, that greater departures of the glory are
hastening upon us: Neither our civil nor ecclesiastical state is ever like to
be what it once was Christian history, vol (...), p. 102, 103.
."

VIII. THE Massachusetts Legislature, who met October 15, 1702, made a long
preamble about some irreligious towns, that refused or neglected to receive and
support orthodox ministers; upon which they added another law to empower the
County Courts, after fining such assess^rs as did not fulfill their orders, to
appoint others to do it, and then to procure a warrant from two Justices of the
Quorum, requiring the constables of delinquent towns or districts to collect
such taxes, upon the same penalty as for other taxes: And the fines imposed
upon delinquent officers were to go to pay these new assessors for their
service; and the ministers, who were thus supported, were then contriving to
get a classical judicature established over the churches. They drew up
proposals for associations to be formed in each county, who should have the
power of licencing candidates for the ministry, and of directing particular
societies, in the call and settlement of ministers; to which was to be added a
standing Council, whose sentence should be final and decisive, but not without
the concurrence of the majority of the pastors present. A number of ministers
signed these proposals November 5, 1705, an hundred years to a day after the
gunpowder plot was to have blown up the Parliament in Westminster. They were
sent round for others to sign, in order to their being presented to the
Legislature. But Mr. John Wise had been so well taught, by the briers and
thorns of tyranny (vol. 1, p. 518) that, instead of signing them, he wrote a
sharp answer to them; and though he was forced to send into another Colony to
get it printed, yet their design was defeated thereby. The ancient church of
Plymouth changed their way of receiving members, from verbal to written
relations, in this month of November, 1705 Plymouth register, p. 31.
.

IX. DARTMOUTH and Tiverton, where the Quakers were the majority, were put to
trouble, from time to time, because they did not receive and support such
ministers as others called orthodox; and they also met with ill treatment
elsewhere. An old law was in force in Connecticut, entitled, HERETICS, which
forbid any town or person to entertain any Quaker, upon penalty of Five Pounds
a week, and required that they should be imprisoned and sent out of the Colony:
That none should hold unnecessary discourse with them, upon penalty of Twenty
Shillings: That none, except rulers and ministers, should keep any Quaker
books, upon penalty of Ten Shillings, and that all such books should be
suppressed; and that no master of any vessel should land any Quakers, without
carrying them away again, under the penalty of Twenty Pounds. And though this
law was not rigorously executed, yet it was not repealed; therefore their
friends in London made application, in 1704, to the Presbyterian,
Congregational, and Baptist ministers there, desiring that as they would show
themselves friends to equal liberty, they would use their influence in their
favor, and apply to the Queen for a repeal of said law. This was thought not
to be so agreeable, as to try for a reformation in New England; and therefore
said ministers in London wrote, to some ministers of influence here, a letter
to be communicated to others, wherein they said, "We cannot but judge it
disagreeable with the spirit and principles of the gospel, and an encroachment
upon the DIVINE PREROGATIVE and the undoubted rights of mankind, to punish any
for their conscientious and peaceable dissent from the established way of
religion, ^^^ile they are not justly chargeable with any immorality, or what is
plainly destructive of civil society Calamy's abridgement, p. 671.
." But as that law was not repealed here, the Queen and Council repealed it
October 11, 1705; a copy of which act was published by John Rogers, of
New London, soon after; and the same is in a late history Douglass, vol. 2, p.
340.
.

X. IN the beginning of the year 1705; such a revival of religion was granted
in Taunton, in the county of Bristol, as turned the minds of the people there
in general from vain companies, and many immoralities, to an earnest attention
to religious worship and conversation Christian history, vol. 2, p. 108 -- 112.
. Some things of like nature appeared in Boston, and in several other places.
About the same time Elder Valentine Wightman, from North-Kingstown, went and
settled at Groton, seven miles north of New London, where he became pastor of
the first Baptist church in Connecticut. For some years they were oppressed by
the ruling party; but in his latter days they enjoyed liberty, and also much of
a divine blessing. He ministered there to good purpose for more than forty
years, and died June 9, 1747, as his son who succeeds him informs me. Their
brethren at Boston, being destitute of a pastor, wrote again to England for
help, from whence a number of ministers sent them the following answer.

To the church of Christ, baptized on profession of their faith, in Boston,
New England.
Dear Brethren, London, March 17, 1706-7.
WE are heartily concerned for you, since we have heard of your being destitute
of a pastor: and are so much the more troubled, because we cannot think of a
minister, who is at liberty, proper for you. We are glad to hear that you find
so much kindness among the ministers of another denomination, that they are
willing to assist you, and should more rejoice to hear you had a minister well
qualified of your own persuasion; but at present we can serve you no otherwise
than to pray for you that you may have an agreeable settlement: That you may
increase both in knowledge and grace, and may adorn the doctrine of our God and
Savior, by a holy conversation. So pray, dear brethren, your brethren and
servants in the gospel of Jesus Christ,

Nathaniel Wyles, Richard Parkes, Joseph Stennett, Nathaniel Hodges, Joseph
Masters, Richard Adams, John Piggott, Benjamin Stinton. Richard Allen."



THE Baptist church which was formed at Kittery in 1682 (vol. 1, p. 505)
returned again to their connection with the church at Boston, and Mr. Drown
moved there, whose son Shem was long serviceable in the office of Deacon among
them. Elder Screven went to South Carolina, to whom the church at Boston now
wrote; and on June 2, 1709, he returned an answer, wherein he said,

Dearly beloved, this may inform you, that I have many thoughts of heart about
you, and am much concerned for you; and hope I may say, my prayers are to God
for you, though I am not with you; no^ can I come as I was inclined to do, our
help being taken from us; for our minister who came from England is dead, and I
can by no means be spared. I must say it is a great loss, and to me a great
disappointment, but the will of the Lord is done. I have longed to hear that
you was supplied with an able minister, who might break the bread of life among
you; but if the Lord do not please to supply you in the way you expected, your
way will be to improve the gifts you have in the church. Brother Callender and
Joseph Russell I know have gifts that may tend to edification, if improved: I
think you should call one or both of them to it." They did so to Mr. Callender,
as appears by a letter from Charlestown, South Carolina, to him, of August 6,
1708, which mentions it; and the letter closes thus: "I have been brought very
low by sickness; but I bless God I was helped to preach and administer the
communion last Lord's day, but am still weak. Our society are for the most part
in health, and I hope thriving in grace. We are about ninety in all. I rest
your affectionate brother and fellowlabourer, in the best of services, for the
best reward,

WILLIAM SCREVEN.


XI. WE must now consider how error had a further spread in this country. Mr.
Stoddard published a sermon from Exodus xii. 47, 48, wherein he says, "A
minister who knows himself unregenerate, may nevertheless lawfully administer
baptism and the Lord's supper. Men who are destitute of saving grace may preach
the gospel, and therefore administer and so partake of the Lord's supper."
President Mather answered him in 1708, when he said of this passage, "I am
mistaken if in this logic there is not sophistry." But the misery of both of
them was, an entanglement in an inconsistent scheme. The advocates for the
halfway covenant in 1662 said, we know of no stronger argument for infant
baptism than this, that church members are to be baptized (vol. 1, p. 335) and
now Stoddard says, "The sacrament is a converting ordinance to church members
only, and not for other men. The children of God's people should be baptized,
which are generally at that time in a natural condition." Upon which his
opponent says, "We are to judge as charitably of the child as we do of the
parent: We baptize them as being disciples and believers, and visibly belonging
to the kingdom of heaven: Dr. Good. vi^ says, the infants of believers are the
purest part of the church Said sermon, p. 13, 27. Mather's answer, p. 67, 68.
."

How imperfect is human knowledge! Stoddard published a reply in 1709, wherein
all his arguments turn upon these points, viz. "That if unsanctified persons
might lawfully come to the passover, then such may lawfully come to the Lord's
supper; -- and they who convey to their children a right to baptism, have a
right themselves to the Lord's supper, provided they carry inoffensively Appeal
to the learned, p. 50, 89.
." He could plainly see that there was no half way in the Jewish church; and
his opponent could see as plainly, that fruits meet for repentance were
required in order for baptism, even of such as were in the covenant of
circumcision. But as tradition had taught them both to build the Christian
church upon that covenant, neither of them could act consistently thereon;
though they were two of the most eminent ministers then in New England. Most of
their successors have held fast their errors, but not their virtues. And as
these things show how the churches were corrupted, so what follows discovers
how they were enslaved.

XII. THE third Governor Winthrop died Nov. 27, 1707, upon which a special
meeting of the Assembly of Connecticut was called on December 17, to choose
them another Governor. By a law then in force, he was to be elected out of a
certain number of men in previous nomination; but they broke over those limits,
and elected an ordained minister of New London for their Governor; who, when
they sent (...) account of it to him, readily qui^^ed the solemn charge of
souls, for worldly promotion, and was sworn into his new office Jan. 1, 1708,
after which they repealed the law that they had before broken, and enacted that
for the future the Governor might be chosen out of any of the freemen. Mr.
Gurdon Saltonstall, son to a Massachusetts magistrate, and a graduate of
Harvard college, was the Governor thus chosen, and by annual elections he was
continued in that office for sixteen years. He was a great politician, and he
exerted all his influence to raise ministerial power as high as possible. He
took the proposals of 1705, and presented them to their Legislature, where its
unscriptural form was soon taken notice of; for there was not a text of
scripture in the whole scheme. Perceiving that it could not be received so, it
was withdrawn without much noise, and the following method was taken to carry
his point; an act was passed by the Assembly that met at Hartford, May 13,
1708, which says, "This Assembly, from their own observation, and from the
complaint of others, being made sensible of the defects of the discipline of
the churches of this government, arising from the want of a more explicit
asserting the rules given for that end in the holy scriptures, from which would
arise a firm establishment amongst ourselves, a good and regular issue in cases
subject to ecclesiastical discipline, glory to Christ our head, and edification
to his members Church and State are here confounded together; as if a being
members of the civil community, made men members of Christ, and he their head.
, has seen fit to ordain and require, and it is by authority of the same
ordained and required, that the ministers of the churches, in the several
counties of this government, shall meet together at their respective county
towns, with such messengers as the churches to which they belong shall see
cause to send with them, on the last Monday in June next, there to consider and
agree upon those methods and rules for the management of ecclesiastical
discipline, which by them shall be judged agreeable and conformable to the word
of God; and shall at the same meeting appoint two or more of their number to be
their delegates, who shall all meet together at Saybrook at the next
commencement to be held there, where they shall compare the results of the
ministers of the several counties, and out of and from them to draw a form of
ecclesiastical discipline," which should be presented to the Assembly for their
acceptance, and the expense of those meetings was to be borne out of the Colony
treasury. This order was obeyed; and the ministers who met at Saybrook,
September 9, 1708, adopted the confession of faith that was composed at the
Savoy in London, 1658, and the heads of agreement entered into between
Presbyterians and Independents in London, 1690, and then added fifteen articles
concerning church discipline, which were the proposals of 1705 new modeled,
with scripture references annexed to each article: Though a gentleman of that
day observed, that the text which speaks of Balaam's saddling his ass would
have been as much to the purpose as many they brought. Their second article,
which contains a summary of the whole scheme, is in these words, viz.

"THAT the churches, which are neighboring each to other, shall consociate for
mutual affording to each other such assistance as may be requisite, upon ALL
OCCASIONS ECCLESIASTICAL: And that the particular pastors and churches, within
the respective counties in this government, shall be one consociation (or more
if they shall judge meet) for the end aforesaid, Psalm cxxii. 3-5, cxxxiii. 1,
Eccl. iv. 9-12, Acts xv. 2, 6, 22, 23, 1 Timothy iv. 14, 1 Cor. xvi. i."

THE first of these texts speaks of Princes on their thrones, and not of church
officers. And when we come to the antetype of Aaron and David's line, we find
none therein but Jesus Christ, and regenerate souls. Officers, as distinguished
from other saints in the Christian church, are never called priests nor Kings
in the new testament. And said an eminent father of New England, "The order of
officers in the church is an order of servants, and the order of saints an
order of Kings (which is the highest order in the church) sitting upon the
thrones of David for judgment, whom the ministers are to serve, in guiding and
going before them in, and ministering of their judgments Robinson against
Bernard, p. 227.
." Their second proof refers to the unity of brethren under our great High
Priest, who most explicitly excludes all striving about who shall be the
greatest from his kingdom. Neither is the third text any more to their purpose.
The fourth gives an account of the meeting of one church, at the request of
another two hundred miles off, upon a special occasion, and not of the meeting
of neighboring churches upon all occasions ecclesiastical. The two last treat
of gifts received by prophecy, and of orders given to the churches by apostolic
authority; and until ordinary ministers can prove that they, as such, are
Princes on their thrones, and are endowed with apostolic authority over the
churches, we may safely conclude, that the above application of scriptures was
a perverting of them from their genuine meaning and design. Yet thereby two
kinds of judicatures were set up over the churches. The one called
consociations, consisting of ministers meeting in their own persons, and
churches by their messengers, whereof each church may send one or two, though
the want of them is not to invalidate the acts of any Council; but none of
their acts are esteemed valid without the concurrence of the majority of the
pastors present. They are the standing council within each circuit upon all
occasions ecclesiastical, though in cases of special difficulty they may call
the next consociation to sit and act with them. They are to have a new choice
of messengers and moderators once a year, if not oftener, and the last
moderator is to call a new meeting when it is judged proper. Their sentence is
to be final and decisive. Their other judicatures are called associations,
which are meetings of ministers by themselves in each circuit, as often as they
think proper, to hear and answer questions of importance, to examine and
license candidates for the ministry, to receive complaints from individuals or
societies, and to direct to the calling of the Council to try the same, when
they judge proper; to direct destitute churches in calling and settling of
pastors, and to make complaint to their Legislature against such as they judge
to be negligent of their duty in that respect. And each association sends a
delegate or two to a general association once a year, from all parts of that
government.

THIS scheme was not introduced without glaring ^eceit: For their fourth
article says, "That according to the common practice of our churches, nothing
shall be deemed an act or judgment of any Council, which has not the major
part of the elders present concurring, and such a number of the messengers
present, as makes the majority of the Council." Whereas this practice was so
far from being common, that it was an innovation then made, directly subversive
of the fundamental principles of the New England churches; as we are assured by
Mr. Wise, Dr. Mather, and others. No man knew better what those principles were
than Mr. Thomas Hooker, the first minister of Hartford; and he is full in it,
that though it is expedient on special occasions to call councils or synods,
yet that elders act therein as commissioners sent, and not as pastors; and that
other messengers sent have equal power with them Survey of church discipline,
part 1. p. 119.
Says he, " God has set officers in the church, 1 Cor. xii. 28, therefore the
church is before officers Page 91.
." And from Matt. xviii. 15, and 1 Cor. v. 12, he concludes, "That each man and
member of the society, in a just way, may be directed, censured, reformed, or
removed, by the power of the whole, and each may and should judge with the
consent of the whole: This belongs to all the members, and therefore to any
that shall be in office, if they be members. They are superior as officers,
when they keep the rule; but inferior as members, and in subjection to any when
they break the rule. Christ gave some to be pastors, some to be teachers. He
alone, out of his supreme and regal power, does furnish them with graces and
abilities, appoints the work, lays out the compass thereof, the manner of
dispensing, and the order and bounds of their dispensation." And he observes,
that to remove the power of censure from a particular church, leads into
endless disputes; because no general Council was called in the three first
centuries, and no man can tell as there will ever be another Page 188, 190,
232, 238.
. Says he, "The truth is, a particular congregation is the highest tribunal,
unto which the grieved party may appeal in the third place, if private council,
or the witnesses of two, have seemed to proceed too sharply. If difficulties
arise in proceeding, the Council of other churches should be sought to clear
the truth; but the power of censure rests in the congregation where Christ
placed it. The churches sent them, and therefore are above them Part 4, p. 19,
47.
." Yet now the churches were not allowed the power to say whether their
ministers should meet at Saybrook, or not; and the result of their meeting
being laid before the Legislature of October 14, 1708, they said, "This
Assembly do declare their great approbation of such a happy agreement, and do
ordain that all the churches within this government, that are or shall be thus
united, in doctrine, worship and discipline, be, and for the future shall be
owned and acknowledged established by law. Provided always, that nothing herein
shall be intended and construed, to hinder or prevent any society or church,
that is or shall be allowed by the laws of this government, who soberly differ
or dissent from the united churches hereby established, from exercising worship
and discipline in their own way, according to their consciences." Thus artfully
was this new scheme established, and all others declared to be no more than
allowed or tolerated.

XIII. MR. John Woodward, another Cambridge scholar, was then minister of
Norwich; and he soon got and read off to his congregation the first part of
this act, but without the proviso. Richard Bushnel and Joseph Backus, Esquires,
who had opposed that scheme in the Assembly, informed their church of the
liberty they had to dissent from it; but the minister carried a major vote
against them; therefore those representatives, and other fathers of the town,
withdrew from that tyranny, and held worship by themselves for three months.
For this the minister and his party censured them; an account of which being
sent to the next meeting of the Assembly, they were expelled thereform. Hereby
we may see how far corruption had prevailed in our land. For in 1641, three
years after the first taxing law for ministers was made in New England, a law
was made at Boston, which said, "No church censure shall degrade or depose any
man from any civil dignity, office or authority, he shall have in the
Commonwealth Massachusetts law-book, printed 1672, p. 44.
." How much more equitable was this, than another law in Connecticut? which
said, "Whatsoever persons shall on the Lord's day, under any pretense
whatsoever, assemble themselves together in any of the public meeting houses,
provided in any town, parish or society, for the public worship of God, without
leave or allowance of the minister and congregation for whose use it was
provided, and be thereof convict, every such person shall incur the penalty of
Ten Shillings for every such offense. Nor shall any persons neglect the public
worship of God in some lawful congregation, and form themselves into separate
companies in private houses, on penalty of Ten Shillings for every such
offense." This part concerning separate meetings caused sore exercises to many
serious minds, and great difficulties in procuring civil offiers; yet it was
never repealed until October, 1770. But not long after Norwich minister had
censured their representatives, he consented to refer the matter to a Council;
and they followed it, with Council after Council, for about six years. Governor
Saltonstall came there himself upon one of those occasions; and Mr. Stoddard of
Northampton was moderator of the last but one of those Councils. My grandfather
went a journey as far as Boston and Ipswich, an hundred and thirty miles, to
consult with Mr. Wise and the two Mather's upon these affairs. At last, by
advice (...) a Council that met August 31, 1716, said minister was dismissed,
and the church in Norwich determined to abide upon their ancient foundation.
And it was known, that when the church was constituted at Saybrook in 1660,
with the approbation of other ministers, Mr. James Fitch was ordained their
pastor, by the laying on of the hands only of their two deacons, as a token
that the power of ordination is in the church as a body. They came and planted
Norwich the same year; and Mr. Fitch was continued one of the most useful
ministers in Connecticut for near fifty years. The church in East-Windsor,
under the care of Mr. Timothy Edwards, father of Mr. Jonathan, also refused to
receive the Saybrook platform. And the temper of those who introduced it
farther appears by the incorporating act of the town of Killingly, passed in
May, 1708; which says, "No person now inhabiting on said lands, or any other
persons dwelling without this Colony, who have purchased any lands within the
said township, that shall not give due obedience to all the laws of this Colony
for the upholding the worship of God, and paying all public charges, shall have
any benefit by this act." At the same time they gave their Governor two hundred
acres of land therein. This account is carefully taken from their public
records and laws, and other authentic vouchers.

XIV. A FEW things concerning baptism shall close this chapter. An aged and
honorable gentleman near Piscataqua river informed me, that about the year
1710, a number of people in Dover Mr. Hansard Knollys was minister there, from
the spring of 1638 to the fall of 1641, vol. 1, p. 101.
were so fully persuaded that they ought, in a literal sense, to be buried in
baptism, that on a Lord's day, and the day after, Mr. Pike, their minister,
baptized nine persons in that way, in a branch of that river. But such a noise
was made, and opposition raised against it, as prevented any further
proceedings therein. About the same time a Baptist meeting was set up at
Situate, in the county of Plymouth, where President Dunster spent his latter
days to good purpose (vol. 1, p. 320.) Mr. John Pierce preached to them for
some time, until he and others removed to Swanzey, in or about 1711, and on
October 19, 1715, he was ordained a pastor of the second church there,
colleague with Elder Joseph Mason, who was ordained in July, 1709. And they
continued in good esteem in their offices, until Elder Mason died, May 19,
1748, and Elder Pierce September 8, 1750, being each of them near 90 years old.
On March 16, 1714, Dr. Cotton Mather wrote the letter to the Baptist church in
Boston, which is in vol. 1, p. 522; subscribed thus, viz. "To my worthy friend,
Mr. Ellis Callender, elder of a church of Christ in Boston." He joined to it in
1669; was a leading member of it when the Court nailed up their meeting house
in 1680; and he was continued a great blessing to them until he died in a good
old age, after the year 1726.

CHAP. III.
1. Arbitrary Claims and Proceedings. 2. Moody and White against them. 3. A
cruel Law. 4. Liberty in Rhode Island. 5. Mather for it. 6. Is friendly to the
Baptists. 7. Jennings joins to them. 8. Wallin's Letters. 9. Arian Heresy. 10.
Hollis's Donations. 11. Some Revival of Religion. 12. Comer converted.

I. GOVERNOR Lyndon informed me, that, when the Quakers were hanged at Boston,
a view of the cruelty then exercised toward them, and of their behavior under
their sufferings, moved Peter Wanton to join with that people. And his son
Joseph was a teacher among them in Tiverton for many years, whose daughter
Richardson told me, that, during Governor Dudley's administration, her father
was frequently sent to Boston, to defend his town against the arbitrary claims
of other ministers; and that the Governor privately favored him therein. Some
extracts from the records of the Quaker society show, that in 1707 a cow, worth
Three Pounds, was taken ^^om John Packom, of Little-Compton, for a ministerial
tax of Six Shillings and Twopence. And that their monthly meeting on
Rhode Island, in the seventh month, 1708, sent Joseph Wanton with an address to
Governor Dudley, "Desiring relief from sufferings for priests rates, by a
repeal of those laws;" informing him that if it was not done here, they thought
it their duty to address the British Court upon it. A like application was
afterward made by the hand of Ebenezer Slocum, who reported to a meeting in
1709, that the Governor appeared kind and friendly; but as no relief was
granted, they then sent to England upon those matters. By the same records we
are informed, that in 1716, five cows and calves, worth Twenty-five Pounds,
were taken from Peleg Slocum, and twenty-four sheep, worth Eight Pounds Eight
Shillings, from John and Abraham Tucker, all upon Slocum's Island, and near all
for "A demand of Priest Holmes, of Chilmark," to which town said island
belonged, although the great channel betwixt the main and Martha's Vineyard
must be crossed to get to it. However, ministers were far from being content
with all the power they had yet obtained, and therefore presented a petition to
their Legislature, that they would call a general synod; doubtless to revise
and carry into effect the proposals of 1705. The Council voted to grant their
petition, but it was not concurred with by the other branches of the
Legislature Douglass, vol. 2, p. 378.
. And two excellent ministers had such a sight of their danger, as to write the
following letter to Mr. Wise.

Gloucester, March 25, 1715. II. Reverend Sir,
WE have had the favor and satisfaction of reading, and according to our
measure considering, the transcendent logic, as well as grammar and rhetoric,
or your reply to the proposals, by which our eyes are opened to see much more
than ever before we saw of the value and glory of our invaded privileges: and
are of opinion, that if your consent may be obtained to a new edition, it may
be of wonderful service to our churches, if God shall please to go forth with
it. However it will be a testimony that all our watchmen were not asleep, nor
the camp of Christ surprised and taken before they had warning. We are,
Reverend Sir, full of dutiful respect and gratitude, your sons and servants,

SAMUEL MOODY, JOHN WHITE.


IT was reprinted accordingly; and, with Mr. Wise's other works, it had two
editions more in 1773, upon an occasion which will then be mentioned. These two
ministers lived to see and rejoice in the glorious work of divine grace, which
was granted in New England, in and after the year 1740. Mr. Moody was minister
at York, beyond Piscataqua river. He preached without notes, and refused to be
supported by tax and compulsion; and was the most powerful and successful
preacher of almost any in the land in those days. Such opposition was raised
against Governor Dudley, that he was removed, and never acted with our
Legislature after August, 1715; and when they met again November 23, with the
pliant Lieutenant Governor Tailor in the chair, the following act was added to
their other taxing laws, viz.

III. "An act for maintaining and propagating of religion.

"WHEREAS the laws of this Province have made good and wholesome provision,
that every town within the same be constantly supplied with an able, learned,
orthodox minister or ministers, of good conversation, to dispense the word of
God unto them; and that such minister or ministers be suitably encouraged, and
sufficiently supported and maintained, by the inhabitants of such towns: For
the rendering the said laws more effectual, and to prevent the growth of
atheism, irreligion and profaneness, Be it enacted and ordained by the Lieut.
Governor, Council and Representatives, in General Court assembled, and by the
authority of the same, that the Justices of the Court of General Sessions of
the Peace, within the several counties, at the opening of their Courts from
time to time, do give in special charge to the Grand Jury, to make diligent
enquiry and presentment of all towns and districts within such county, that are
destitute of a minister, as by law is directed; and of such towns and districts
that neglect to fulfill their contracts and agreements, and do not make suitable
provision for the support and maintenance of their minister or ministers
accordingly. And upon such presentment, complaint or information, in any other
manner, the Court are directed and required vigorously to put the laws in
execution, for the redressing of all defects and neglects of that kind From
scripture and all experience it plainly appears, that ministers have been as
often guilty of defects and neglects as the people; but they made no law to
punish ministers therefore: Which partiality promoted atheism and irreligion,
instead of preventing it.
, and forthwith to make the necessary orders to that end, as by law they are
empow^ed. And in case their orders so made be not d^^^ observed, or by the
contrivance and practice of (...) men be eluded and rendered ineffectual; for
the speedy remedying and reforming of so great an evil, the Justices of such
Court are to represent and make report of their proceeding unto the next
session of the General Court or Assembly." Upon which the Assembly were to send
a minister, recommended by three others, to every such town or district, and to
provide for their "Honorable maintenance," by adding a sufficient sum for the
purpose to the Province tax upon such places; and were to do the like to each
place that neglected to fulfill former contracts with ministers; as also to
"Supply and support a minister in places that are destitute, where the Justices
neglect their duty." All which sums their ministers were to draw out of the
Province treasury. This act was made for seven years, and then was revived and
continued till 1730; and that method of charging the Grand Jury has been
continued ever since.

IV. RHODE ISLAND Colony was now ruled by Governor Cranston, and
Deputy Governor Jen^ks, in conjunction with other worthy men, under whose
administration they enjoyed the greatest peace, for above thirty years, that
they ever did since they were a distinct government. And for the continuance of
the same, and to prevent any society or sect from trying for any pre-eminence
in the government, their Assembly of May 2, 1716, enacted, "That what
maintenance or salary may be thought necessary by any of the churches,
congregations, or societies of people, now inhabiting, or that hereafter shall
or may inhabit within the same, for the support of their respective minister or
ministers, shall be raised by free contribution, and no otherways." Which law
is still in force; and we shall presently hear a number of ministers commending
the good fruits of these measures, which yet they were very unwilling to come
into.

V. PRESIDENT Mather published another piece in 1716, wherein he says, "For
ministers to pretend to a negative voice in Synods, or for Councils to take
upon them to determine what elders or messengers a church shall submit unto,
without the choice of the church concerned, or for ministers to pretend to be
members of a Council without any mission from their churches, nay, although the
church declares that they will not send them, is prelatical, and essentially
differing not only from Congregational, but from Presbyterian principles. And
now that I am going out of the world, I could not die in peace, if I did not
discharge my conscience, in bearing witness against such innovations and
invasions on the rights and privileges belonging to particular congregations of
Christ Disquisition concerning Eccl. Councils, preface, p. 13.
." Yet all these innovations and invasions were made in the Saybrook scheme.
And to show that brethren, when chosen by the church, have a right to equal
votes in Councils with elders, he says, "There are mechanics, who although they
do not excel in that which is called human learning, are well versed and
learned in the scriptures, spending much time in consulting those oracles of
God, and being men of great piety, and excellent natural accomplishments, they
may be very useful in Synods."

ECCLESIASTICAL historians give a remarkable account of what happened in the
Nicene Synod. "A pious old man, who was no clergyman, nor exercised
philosophical notions, by his plain discourse did more toward the conviction
of an heretical philosopher, than all the learned bishops in the Council could
do Disquisition, p. 19.
."

VI. THESE things naturally led him and his brethren into another sort of
behavior toward the Baptists, than when he was scribe of the Synod of 1679,
who declared that they were setting up their posts by God's posts; which moved
the Court to nail up the doors of the Baptist meeting house. For Elder
Callender's son Elisha was added to the church under his care, on August 10,
1713; after which he was educated at Harvard college, and called into the
gospel ministry; and as President Mather had expressed his willingness for such
a thing to Elder Callender, his church called the President, his son, and Mr.
John Webb, to assist in ordaining Mr. Elisha Callender, as pastor of the
Baptist church in Boston, May 21, 1718. And Dr. Cotton Mather, in the
ordination sermon, said, "It is very sadly true, that many ecclesiastical
communities, wherein piety has its votaries, yet are guilty of this evil, that
they impose terms of communion which many that have the fear of God are by just
exceptions kept from complying withal. Now in this unhappy case what is to be
done? do this, let good men go as far as they can without sin in holding
communion with one another. But where sinful terms are imposed, there let them
make their stops; there a separation becomes a duty; there the injunction of
heaven upon them is, be ye separate says the Lord, and touch not the unclean
thing, and I will receive you. The imposers are the schismatics. There have
been many attempts to unite people in forms and terms, that are not the pure
maxims of living unto God; and so to build the tower of Zion on a foundation
which is not the tried stone and the precious, and so not the sure foundation.
There has hitherto been a blast from heaven upon all these attempts; they have
miscarried, as being rather calculated for the tower of Babel. New England also
has in some former times done something of this aspect, which would not now be
so well approved of; in which, if the brethren, in whose house we are now
convened, met with any thing too unbrotherly, they now with satisfaction hear
us expressing our dislike of every thing that looked like persecution in the
days that have passed over us." (See vol. 1, p. 523 -- 525.)

VII. THE case of a member, who soon after joined to that church, I think
proper here to mention. Samuel Jennings, Esquire was born in Sandwich, in the
county of Barnstable, February 19* 1685, where he lived till he was above 18
years old, and then went a voyage to sea, where he was pressed on board a man
of war. But meeting with very ill treatment there for five months, he in the
evening of March 26, 1704, the ship being in a bay at Barbados, attempted to
make his escape therefrom by swimming; but by the way he was seized and halled
under water by a shark; a terrible case indeed! yet as he cried to God for
help, the venomous creature let him go, and his life was preserved, with the
loss only of part of a foot and an arm. He returned, married, and lived in good
repute in his native town, which he represented several times in our
Legislature. after he had served them two years in that office, he wrote as
follows concerning his soul affairs. Says he, "Though I had heard much
preaching, and read many books, to support the baptizing of infants, and had
never read any books, or discoursed on that head with any that were against it,
yet I found so much in the scripture to the contrary, that I could not believe
it to be right. Notwithstanding I went to several ministers, and discoursed
them on that point to get light, and also prayed to God to direct me in the
right way; yet still it appeared to me unscriptural and erroneous. Then I went
to Mr. Callender, the Baptist minister at Boston, who not only discoursed with
me, but lent me books set out by those of his persuasion, to support the truth
thereof; which when I had read, I found so agreeable with the scriptures, and
with the apprehensions I before had from them, that I quickly fought to be
admitted into the communion of that church at Boston. And having made a verbal
profession, before the church and congregation, I was baptized (that is dipped
in the water) by Mr. Elisha Callender, minister of the gospel, on the 9th day
of June, 1718, in the 34th year of my age. And truly I may say, as is said of
the Ethiopian eunuch, that I came away rejoicing. In a short time after I
arrived to a considerable degree of bodily health, which I had lacked for eight
years before." He served his town afterward as their representative, and in
other offices; and, without his seeking, a commission of Justice of the Peace
was sent him, which, for some reasons, he chose not to accept. He continued a
member of said church in Boston till his death in 1764.

VIII. SOON after Mr. Callender was ordained, he opened a correspondence with
friends in London, which, with other means, had very great and extensive
effects. Thomas Hollis, Esquire one of the most liberal men upon earth, had some
acquaintance with President Mather, when he was agent for this Province in
England I. Mather's life, p. 170.
, and now receiving accounts of the tranfactions and catholic sentiments that
were delivered at the ordination of a Baptist minister in Boston, who was
educated at Harvard college, he became the greatest benefactor thereto that
they have ever had to this day.

"Nor yet to Harvard all his views confined;
"His active soul still nobler work designed.
"A kingdom's welfare dwelt on every thought;
"For general good his heavenly candor wrought;
"To public peace his prudent schemes invite,
"Faction to quell, and clashing sects unite Rudd's poem on Hollis's death, p.
29.
."
WITH or near his first donation to the college, came the following letter from
a minister of his acquaintance to his friend in Boston.

London, March 9, 1720. Much esteemed Brother Callender,
I THANK you kindly, for the particular account you gave me in your last; and I
cannot but lament the sad consequences of sin, and the great degrees of it
which remain, even in God's own people; for surely the greatest part, if not
all those who suffered so much for their religion at home, and at last left
their native country, and run such great hazards as they did, for the sake of
their consciences, must, in the judgment of charity, be esteemed the faithful
servants of Christ. But when I consider the methods which these who differed
from them in matters not fundamental, I cannot but wonder at the depth of folly
which remains with us, that any body of men should so soon and so zealously
pursue those very methods which they had so justly condemned, and so greatly
suffered by! It is a consideration enough to check the reasonableness of the
apostolical advice, let him that thinks he stands take heed lest he fall;
for I think we are but too subject to the lesser degrees of this temper and
carriage, in almost every station of life. For though there is so good an
understanding among the three denominations of dissenters, viz. Presbyterians,
Independents and Baptists; yet we have too many who are whisperers and
backbiters, who by magnifying the weaknesses, or diminishing the real worth and
usefulness of those who differ from them, show that this spirit, as much as it
is destroyed, is yet too much alive, and, were it clothed with power, would
soon be formidable. But our wise and gracious GOVERNOR makes the weaknesses and
wrath of men to praise him, and the remainder thereof he does rastrain.

As I heartily rejoice that the Lord has preserved the baptized church, at
Boston, through so many difficulties, so I am glad he has raised up to them
one so able and willing to promote the public good among them. May the Lord
succeed you, my dear brother, that so peace and truth may spread and flourish
in your days! I am indeed troubled at the paucity Fewness in number.
of those of our denomination, in New England; though I cannot wonder at it,
considering the treatment they have generally met with. I am grieved that any
who profess the plain scripture baptism should bring it into contempt, by
holding with it such wild and antiscriptural opinions; but so it has been with
us, and yet remains; though I thin^ the number of such is diminisned, within a
few years last past. But although we have but few soul-sleepers or
Sabbatarians, etc. yet the number of those that plead for general redemption,
and some other of the distinctive notions of Arminius, seem to increase among
us: However, they seem not quite so rigid and uncharitable as formerly, and
there is, I hope, the greatest number of our denomination free from these
things. As to the method of educating youth among you, it must be allowed, that
the design seemed to be well laid for promoting useful knowledge; and I hope
your college will be improved to a very great advantage; but I find you have to
lament, what we are not strangers to, viz. that those things which in
themselves are good, and tend to fit persons for more extensive usefulness, are
made necessary for a person in order to the ministry, or should be thought, at
any time, to be a sufficient qualification for so great a work. Surely a man
blessed with a good natural genius, who has been brought to a true sense of
sin, and the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ, though he should want the
advantage of human literature, must be better capable than one that has it, and
is destitute of the other, to guide souls into the ways of salvation; because
as he knows something of the deceitfulness of sin, and the wiles of Satan, so
he is more capable to comfort poor souls in distress, with the comforts
wherewith he himself has been comforted of God. Therefore, though I have a high
esteem for human learning, and wish every minister had the advantage of a good
degree of it, yet I conceive it is far from being necessary to a man's being
employed in the public ministry, and much less do I think it in itself a
qualification sufficient for so weighty an undertaking. You will excuse me for
so freely declaring my mind upon this head.

BEFORE this comes to hand, I hope you will have received a letter, subscribed
Thomas Hollis. This worthy gentleman is my very good friend, and one who, with
his plentiful estate, has done much good among poor ministers and churches
here; and I hope New England will find yet more happy effects of his
liberality, and that, with your kind assistance in finding and procuring proper
objects, something may be done by him for the particular encouragement of our
denomination. For, in conversing with him upon this head, he desired me to
intimate to you, that he shall be well pleased, if you can find a proper person
of the Baptist persuasion, for him to recommend to the governors of the
college; and I doubt not but he will give some further encouragement to such an
one, who is desirous to be qualified for public usefulness. I entreat you
therefore to turn your thoughts to this subject, and give me a line, so soon as
you have found a fit person, that so good a work as this may be began. I am
ready to believe, that, besides Mr. Hollis's interest with the governors, in
behalf of a hopeful young man, who is of our persuasion, he may be prevailed
upon to allow Ten Pounds per annum, of your money Mexico silver was then about
Thirteen Shillings per ounce, in our money. Douglass, vol. 1, p. 494.
, toward defraying the charges of the college; which will be some
encouragement for one, who, with promising natural parts, is desirous to devote
himself to study, in order to fit himself for public usefulness, but is not
well able to go through the charge. I leave this with you, and pray God to
direct you. You will find a copy of Mr. Hollis's to you; to which I have added
a catalogue of the chest of books therein mentioned; and if any are not
disposed of to the college library, yourself, etc. that then you would use your
interest to obtain some of them for Mr. Daniel White Who came over from Mr.
Wallin's church two years before, and was then preaching at Newport. Mr. Neal's
history first came over this year.
. When you have read Mr. Neal's history of New England, I desire you to give me
your thoughts of it in general; and if you find any thing in it which deserves
to be taken notice of, in order to be altered in a second edition, pray freely
communicate it to me, and I will do the same to the author, who is a very
honest gentleman, and will be glad to be set right, in any thing wherein he may
have been mistaken. Just now a gentleman has been with me, whose name is
Spurier, who has brought some hundred tons of silver ore from New England, and
desires me to assist him in presenting a petition to the government, for
encouragement Great fraud and iniquity was practiced in the nation, about such
things, in the year 1720.
. If you have heard any thing of any late discoveries made of silver mines with
you, or any thing of the character of the man, or what notion the people have
of it, and will please to give me a line, it may be of use to me; for as I
would willingly serve any honest man, according to my ability, so I would
gladly know the persons I move for. I am now obliged to conclude at present,
and with all my heart commend you to God and the word of his grace, which is
able and I hope will build you up in all things. May the Lord be with you, and
the church of Christ under your care, causing all blessings to abound toward
you in all things. So rest your cordial friend, and unworthy brother in the
Lord's vineyard,

EDWARD WALLIN.


BEFORE this came to hand, our friends here had sent a letter, directed thus:
"The church of Christ at Boston, in New England, of the faith and order of the
gospel, baptizing visible believers, upon the profession of their faith, and
believing the principles of a particular election of a certain number, who
shall continue in the perseverance in grace; unto the several churches of
Christ that are in the same faith and order of the gospel, in London, do
heartily desire your increase and growth in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus,
and in all the graces of his holy spirit." They go on to give an account of the
first rise of their church, which say they "Several wise and learned men
endeavored, but could not accomplish it; however, God was pleased to succeed
the endeavors of our brethren, who were not so accomplished with acquired
parts and abilities, by enduring, and to appear for them under all their
troubles, so that we continue, through rich grace, a church unto this day." By
those wise and learned men, I suppose they intended President Dunster and some
with him, who did not accomplish what Elder Gould and his brethren did. One
design of this letter was to request some assistance in enlarging and repairing
their meeting house; and it occasioned the following answer:

London, August 3, 1720. Dear and honored brother Callender,
"I received the honor of the church's and your letter together, by Capt.
Lawrence. After I had a little considered the contents of both, I waited upon
our honored friend, Mr. Thomas Hollis, with the case, with whom I left it; and
some little time after he told me, that himself and brother, Mr. John Hollis,
would advance some money to repair your meeting house, upon condition I would
prevail with my brethren, concerned in our little fund, to make a present to
Mr. Callender, as a token of our Christian respects to him. The motion pleased
me well: I willingly undertook my part, and happily accomplished it, though it
were out of the common way of our exhibitions; and by the time this comes to
hand I hope you will find remitted by Mr. Hollis what I hope will fully answer
the church's request, together with a small present, which I hope will not be
unacceptable, to my brother Callender himself, and show at least our concern
for the good of the baptized interest in Boston, though we may not be capable
to promote it in that measure we heartily desire.

CONCERNING the state of the Arian controversy with us, and our minister's
concern therein, I shall briefly relate the whole as follows. Some few years
ago one Dr. Clark, of the established church, a gentleman of deserved
reputation, wrote a book, entitled, The scripture doctrine of the Trinity; in
which he endeavors (after very high expressions of the dignity of the
Redeemer's person and nature) to deny him to be a necessary self-existent
being; which is construed by his adversaries as a consequential denying his
proper divinity, and a degrading our Savior into a subordinate God,
notwithstanding all he has offered in honor to this hope of a true Christian.
This made a great stir, and set many pens to work; some for and some against
the Doctor's notions, among several of note in the church of England, and
others; some of whom I think carried the point much further than the Doctor
appears to have designed. I wish the contest had always continued in the
established church; but a little time carried it among the dissenters, and one
Mr. Pierce, a Presbyterian minister, of ingenuity and considerable note, among
others, espoused Dr. Clark's notions openly (if he went no further.) The
debates, pro and con, began to be managed with warmth, not only in the city,
but in diverse parts of the country. But Mr. Pierce being a man of so much note,
and a minister in the city of Exeter, where the Presbyterian interest is in
much credit, he was the first person who was very publicly noted among the
dissenters. His people (after some considerable time, and several methods used
to accommodate matters) proposed parting with him, as a man not sound in the
faith. This occasioned each party to advise with their friends in the ministry,
and others, what to do in the case. Some of the persons wrote to upon this
account (which were not a few) thought that Mr. Pierce had given too much cause
for his people to believe that he had departed from the orthodox faith, in
relation to the doctrine of the Trinity. Others, though they did not deny this,
yet apprehended his people had not dealt so kindly by him in this matter as
they ought to have done, by a man of his character and usefulness.

THE case was some time before a committee of ministers and gentlemen of the
three denominations in London, to see if they could find a way to accommodate
matters at Exeter, and prevent divisions upon the same account in other places;
but they were not all of one mind. Then the whole body of ministers in and
about London was called together, and a paper of advices proposed to be
considered of in order to sign, for accommodating matters at Exeter. Some of
the ministers, who were zealously concerned for the doctrine of the Trinity, at
the same time proposed, that a declaration of our faith, with respect to that
important doctrine of the Christian religion, should be signed, and sent down
with the advices; but, upon a division of the ministers, it was rejected by a
majority of about five persons. It was then agreed at the next meeting to
consider the paper of advices, paragraph by paragraph; at which meeting were
about one hundred and thirty ministers of the three denominations, who placed
your poor friend in the chair. That part who were against signing a declaration
of faith, as above, earnestly in^isted upon proceeding directly to read the
paper of advices, as supposing it to be the immediate work of the meeting; the
other side proposed that article in the church of England which relates to the
doctrine of the Trinity, and those answers in the assembly's catechism to the
same purpose, to be subscribed by the London ministers, before they proceeded
to consider the paper of advices. Warm debates there were indeed for two or
three hours, when on a sudden those brethren who resolved to subscribe those
articles withdrew into the gallery; which, however just their zeal might be for
the truth contended for, was not looked upon as a sufficient reason for the
breaking up the meeting at that time. So, after some messages sent from the one
part to the other, those above proceeded to subscribe those articles, as
containing their sentiments of the doctrine of the ever-blessed Trinity; and
the other proceeded to consider the paper of advices, and drew up a general
article of their faith as to that doctrine, which was signed by their moderator
by appointment. This they sent to Exeter; while the others drew up another set
of advices, and sent down with the articles they had subscribed, and
henceforward we came under the distinguishing characters of subscribers and
non-subscribers, which distinction I fear will be too long remembered by us,
for the common benefit of true religion.

SOME of the too warm among the non-subscribers would fain fix the odious
charge of persecution on the other, while they again, with full as much warmth,
would fix the charge of Arianism upon them. But this severity is not allowed,
by the greatest part of either side of the question; and I hope time will
produce a better temper in both parties; but at present the matter is not
accommodated, nor so good a harmony among the ministers as could be heartily
wished. As I am satisfied that some among the non-subscribers are gone too far
into some of the distinctive notions of Arius, so I think some of the
subscribers have given too much ground of jealousy, that they intended to set
up those forms as a test of arthodoxy, and the signing of them as necessary to
persons being acceptable and useful in the ministry. But I dare say, for the
much greater part of both sides, that they intended no evil to their differing
brethren; and that it was a zeal for the doctrine of the Trinity, and the real
divinity of our Savior, which made some subscribe the articles, and not any
desire to impose upon others; and that those who refused the subscription, did
it with a design to maintain Christian liberty, rather than any design to
encourage or promote Arianism. There is no great difference in the number of
either side; but I think there are not so many of our denomination among the
non-subscribers as are on the other side; and though I cannot say that there
are none of our ministers who too much favor the new scheme, yet I may venture
to say in general, that our ministers, especially those of the particular
denomination i. e. holding to particular election.
, are sound in the faith, as to the real divinity of Christ, and the true
doctrine of the blessed Trinity. Therefore those who upbraid you with their
being contrary, act either from prejudice or misinformation. But such have been
the visible consequences of this difference, that brotherly love and charity,
that indispensable ornament of the Christian religion, have been greatly lost
in the debates. May the Lord increase light and love, as well as zeal and
faithfulness, among all the disciples of our blessed Redeemer. So I must have
done. The Lord be with you and yours.

EDWARD WALLIN.


IX. MR. James Pierce, above referred to, was ejected from his church, in
March, 1719; but a party followed him, and built another meeting house for him,
in the city of Exeter; to encourage whom, he declared his expectation, that by
what they suffered, "The spirit of imposition and persecution would be rendered
more odious." And he accused that church of attempting to set up an
INQUISITION, only because they brought on such a trial as constrained him to
own his new opinions, which caused his removal from a profitable living His
works, printed 1728, p. 11^, 136.
. Mr. Benjamin Wallin, son and successor in office to Mr. Edward, published an
excellent little volume upon the SONSHIP OF CHRIST in 1771, wherein he informs
us, that ever since the above mentioned time, creeds and catechisms have been
cried down, and a regular Christian education much neglected, under a pretense
of reason and liberty. And America has been much infected with the same
distemper. But it is not all traditions and human creeds that such men reject,
as the following extract from Pierce plainly shows. Under an appearance of a
great regard to the scriptures, he published a catechism, wherein the answers
were in scripture words; part of which say, "Q. How many Gods are there? A.
There is one God. Q. Who is this God? A. Though there be that are called Gods,
whether in heaven or in earth (as there be Gods many and Lords many) yet to us
there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we for him. One
God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all, 1
Cor. viii. 5, 6, Ephesians. iv. 6." Which creed is so far from delivering any from
the tyranny of human inventions, that where the scripture puts no more than a
semicolon between the mention of the Father and the Son, Pierce puts a period,
and three pages in his book. And when he comes to speak of the Son, he picks
out words that speak of his subjection and obedience to the Father; excluding
those which assert his equality with him, which are many Peirce's works, p.
352, 418 -- 422.
. Whereas, if we leave out the succession of time, and the mode or manner
wherein earthly relations commence, which have no place in the Deity, it is
easy to conceive of a Father and Son of equal capacity and excellency; with
such an oneness in nature, and peculiarity of relation, as no others have: And
also that one may, by voluntary contract, subject himself to another for wise
purposes, and take upon him the form of a servant, and yet remain perfectly
equal in nature. How unreasonable then are those great pretenders to reason,
who profess to take the scriptures as their rule, and yet reject all those
truths therein, which cross their darling notions! Those who are convinced of
the infinite evil of sin, see the necessity of infinite merit to remove their
guilt, and infinite power to change their hearts and lives, and to guide them
to glory. We are told, that by openly owning these doctrines, Mr. Hollis gave a
check to some, who had no great opinion of them Rudd's poem, p. 23.
.

X. THE Baptists in Boston received from him and his brother 135 l. 2 s. for
repairing their meeting house, for which a letter of thanks was returned. And
in Harvard college Mr. Thomas Hollis founded a professorship of theology, with
a salary of Eight Pounds per annum to the professor, and an exhibition of Ten
Pounds a piece per annum to ten scholars of good character, four of whom should
be Baptists, if any such were there. As also Ten Pounds a year to the college
treasurer, for his trouble, and Ten Pounds more to supply accidental losses, or
to increase the number of students Neal's history of New England, vol. 2, p.
220, 221.
. And as by charter the ministers of Boston for the time being were constituted
a part of the overseers of the college, Mr. Hollis moved that Mr. Callender
might have a seat among them. And in a letter to Mr. Callender of February 8,
1721-2, Mr. Wallen said, "I congratulate my friend upon his admitment to the
honor of an overseer of the college. I pray God that truth and Christian love
may more and more abound." But we are informed by the late Mr. Condy, that Dr.
Sewal, at the head of other ministers, positively denied him a seat there. Yet
how often have such men accused the Baptists of being much more rigid than
themselves? and there was not a word in their charter to exclude him.

XI. DECLENSION and stupidity had long prevailed in the land, till a revival in
several places was granted in 1721. Windham had so large a share of it, under
the ministry of Mr. Samuel Whiting, as to add eighty communicants to their
church this year; for which they kept a special day of thanksgiving to God. One
curious event then happened there which I shall mention. The word preached was
such a looking-glass to one man, that he seriously went to Mr. Whiting, and
told him he was very sorry that so good a minister as he was should so grossly
transgress the divine rule, as to tell him his faults before all the
congregation, instead of coming to labor with him in private. The minister
smiled, and said he was glad that truth had found him out, for he had no
particular thought of him in his sermon. Norwich, ten miles from thence,
enjoyed a considerable measure of this blessing the same year, from whence my
pious mother dated her conversion. Many young people in Boston were turned to a
serious regard for religion also in 1721. The smallpox coming there in April,
and prevailing most terribly through the year, had a deep effect upon many
souls. It was thought that not more than a quarter of the inhabitants had
passed through that distemper before, and none of them who were under 18 years
Christian history, vol. 1, p. 130. vol. 2, p. 375.
. One of them deserves particular notice here.

XII. JOHN COMER was born in Boston, August 1, 1704, and sat under the ministry
of the two Mather's. Having a great inclination for learning, he, by President
Mather's influence, was taken from an apprenticeship to a trade, and put to
school, in December, 1720. Serious turns of concern about his soul had been
frequent with him for several years; which greatly increased for seventeen days
after he had taken that infection. "Nothing, says he, but the ghostly
countenance of death unprepared for was before me, and no sight of a reconciled
God, nor any sense of the application of the soul-cleansing blood of Christ to
my distressed soul: I remained in extreme terror until November 22. All the
interval of time I spent in looking over the affairs of my soul; and on that
day I was taken sick. As soon as it was told me that the distemper appeared,
all my fears entirely vanished, and a beam of comfort darted into my soul, and
with it satisfaction from these words, Thou shall not die but live, and declare
the works of the Lord. Yea, so great was my satisfaction, that immediately I
replied, to my aunt who informed me, then I know I shall not die now; but gave
no reason why I said so." He recovered, and afterward became a Baptist
minister; and his ingenious diary and papers have furnished many valuable
materials for our history. Ephraim Crafts, one of his young brethren, was
baptized and added to that church in Boston, January 27, 1723, John Dabney,
from London, had been received by them December 4, 1720, and Richard Bevens,
from Wales, the next August, who were members of Baptist churches before they
came here. Other members from Europe were added to them, both before and since.

CHAP. IV.
1. Ill Treatment about Worship at Swanzey. 2. At Freetown. 3. Tiverton and
Dartmouth. 4. Some Relief from England. 5. Ministers Attempts for more Power
defeated. 6. Hollis and Wallin's Letters. 7. Further Donations, and Springfield
Affairs. 8. First exempting Laws from ministerial Taxes. 9. Sufferings at
Rehoboth. 10. The Lyme Dispute. 11. Connecticut Laws, and Yale College.

I. EQUAL religious liberty, by virtue of a special act, was enjoyed in Boston;
but was so much denied in the country, that most of the Baptists had no heart
to send their sons to Harvard college; though a few of them did so, whereby
they made some use of Mr. Hollis's donations there. Great pains were taken to
compel every town to receive and support such ministers as the Court called
orthodox. A law was also made at Boston, in the May session of 1718, to tax all
to the building and repairing of parish meeting houses. In 1717 the pious and
judicious Elder Luther fell asleep, leaving the care of the first church in
Swanzey to Elder Ephraim Wheaton, who had been a colleague with him about
thirteen years. The second church in Swanzey had then two ordained pastors; yet
in April, 1719, their Select-Men were convented before Bristol Court, "For not
having a minister according to the law of the Province." But upon proving that
Elder Wheaton was their lawful minister, they were dismissed. "Paying costs
Bristol Court records.
." His meeting house stood near the borders of Rehoboth; and he and many of his
people who lived therein were taxed to Pedobaptist ministers of that town, of
which we shall hear more presently.

II. FREETOWN, which lies on the east side of the great river against Swanzey,
met with worse treatment than they did. For on September 9, 1717, they made
choice of Thomas Craghead, a minister from Ireland, for their pastor; and he
accepted of their call: But instead of an amicable agreement with them about
his support, he went in January, 1718, and procured an act of Bristol Court, to
compel Freetown to pay him a salary of Sixty-five Pounds a year, to begin from
the day he was chosen their minister. And for refusing to pay it, about
fourteen of the inhabitants were seized and imprisoned at Bristol; one of whom
was Benjamin Chase, a member of a Baptist church in Newport. In April, 1719,
each party carried witnesses about these matters to Bristol Court; but the
Court dismissed them all, and required the town to obey their former order. In
1720 Thomas Gage and George Winslow, their Select-Men, were fined Forty
Shillings a piece for not assessing Craghead's salary. At last he was defeated
in a trial at law, and was forced to quit the town; but these broils produced
great and lasting evils therein. Little-Compton had settled a legal minister;
and as Elder Tabor owned some land in that town, he was taxed to him; for which
a riding-saddle was taken from Tabor, as a person informed me who saw it.

III. TIVERTON and Dartmouth were the only remaining towns in the Province
which had not yielded to the ruling party about worship. When orders for that
purpose had come from their Courts, they had reported, that Joseph Wanton was
the minister of Tiverton, and Elder Tabor the minister of the west part of
Dartmouth, and another man for the east part. But as the Court did not esteem
them to be orthodox, a complaint against those towns was presented to their
Legislature in 1722; who annexed such sums as they thought proper for the
purpose to their Province tax. This being heard of, their Select-Men refused to
assess it; for which two of them out of each town were seized on May 25, 1723,
and were imprisoned at Bristol. Hereupon Thomas Richardson, who married friend
Wanton's daughter, was sent over to London; and with Richard Partridge, Agent
for Rhode Island Colony, presented a memorial to the King in Council; wherein
they observed, that our charter allows equal liberty of conscience to all
Christians except Papists; and that neither the charter nor any law had
established any test of orthodoxy in this Province, only as Presbyterians and
Independents had set up their major votes as such; whereby dissenters from them
were frequently brought under great sufferings; from which no redress could be
obtained here, "The Assembly always opposing whatever the Governor and Council
were at any time disposed to do on that behalf." And as the King, at his
accession to the throne, promised protection and liberty of conscience to all
his dissenting subjects without exception, they prayed that he would denounce
his negative upon those laws or parts of laws among us, that interfered
therewith, and also order those prisoners to be released. A committee was
appointed upon the case, whose report with the act of Council thereon are as
follow:

IV. To the King's most excellent Majesty.
MAY it please your Majesty, in obedience to an order in Council, from the late
Lords Justices, during your Majesty's absence abroad, bearing date the 24th day
of October last, we did make a representation upon an act passed in the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England, in 1722, entitled, An act
for apportioning and assessing a tax of L 6232 13 11; since which time another
act, mentioned in the said order of reference, passed the 29th day of May,
1723, entitled, An act for apportioning and assessing a tax of L 6205 15 7, is
come to our hands; by which act a tax is laid in express terms upon the
inhabitants of Dartmouth and Tiverton, for the support of a Presbyterian, whom
they call an orthodox minister, which falls almost entirely upon the Quakers,
there being very few inhabitants of any other persuasion in those two towns The
memorial says, "The greatest part of the inhabitants of the said towns being
Quakers, or Anabaptists, or of differing sentiments in religion from
Independents and Presbyterians." Quaker records.
. But as by the charter granted to this Province a free and absolute liberty of
conscience to all Christians (except Papists) was intended to have been their
foundation and support, and as by several laws passed there, it seems to have
been laid down as a just and equitable rule, that the majority of each town
congregation should have the choice of their own teachers, we cannot see why
the Quakers should be refused this liberty, in the towns where they are so
great a majority, and be obliged to maintain a teacher of a different
persuasion. Wherefore we humbly propose to your Majesty, that this act may be
repealed; which is most humbly submitted.

Whitehall, May 6, 1724. WESTMORELAND, T. PELHAM, M. BLADEN, EDW. ASH.



At the Court at St. James's, 2d day of June, 1724.
PRESENT, "The King's most excellent Majesty, his royal highness the Prince of
Wales, A. B. of Canterbury, Lord Chancellor, Lord President, Lord Privy Seal,
Lord Chamberlain, Duke of Roxburg, Duke of New Castle, Earl of Westmoreland,
Lord Viscount Townsend, Lord Viscount ^orrington, Mr. Speaker of the House of
Co^^^ns, Mr. Vice-Chamberlain, William Pultn^^^ ^sq

UPON reading this day at the board ^^^port from the Right Honorable the Lords
of the Committee of Council, upon the petition of Thomas Richardson and Richard
Partridge, on behalf of Joseph Anthony, John Sisson, John Akin, and Philip
Tabor, prisoners in the common gaol at New-Bristol, in his Majesty's Province
of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England, for not assessing the inhabitants of
the towns of Dartmouth and Tiverton the additional taxes of L 172 11, imposed
upon them by an act passed there in the year 1722, which appears to be for the
maintenance of Presbyterian ministers, who are not of their persuasion; and
also in behalf of their friends called Quakers in general, who are frequently
under great sufferings for conscience sake in that government: By which report
it appears that their Lordships are of opinion, that it may be advisable for
his Majesty to remit the said additional taxes, so imposed on the said two
towns, and to discharge the said persons from gaol. His Majesty in Council
taking the said report into consideration, is graciously pleased to approve
thereof, and hereby to remit the said additional taxes of One Hundred Pounds,
and Seventy-two Pounds Eleven Shillings, which were by the said act to be
assessed on the said towns of Dartmouth and Tiverton. And his Majesty is hereby
further pleased to order, that the said Joseph Anthony, John Sisson, John Akin,
and Philip Tabor, be immediately released from their imprisonment on account
thereof. And the Governor, Lieutenant Governor, and Commander in Chief for the
time being, of his Majesty's said Province of Massachusetts Bay, and all others
whom it may concern, are to take notice, and yield due obedience hereunto.

TEMPLE STANYAN.

BEFORE this, I find Mr. Wallin, in one of his letters, saying of King George
the First, "Without any partiality to him as our reigning Prince, I believe he
is the greatest man, and the most fit for government, of any Prince in the
Christian world." And his son and successor, then Prince of Wales, was not
inferior to him. By the above act our friends were released from a thirteen
months imprisonment. And as Jacob Tabor and Beriah Goddard, of Dartmouth, were
imprisoned for not assessing said tax of 1723, Henry Howland, their other
assessor, laid their case before the Assembly at Boston, who on November 26,
1724, passed an act to release them, "To signify their ready and dutiful
compliance with his Majesty's declared will and pleasure." Anthony and Sisson
were of Tiverton, the rest were of Dartmouth, and Philip Tabor was a Baptist
minister therein; These things were far from affording any satisfaction to the
ministerial party here, as the following facts will show. For at the annual
convention of their ministers at Boston, May 26, 1725, they drew up an address
to their Legislature, which says,

V. CONSIDERING the great and visible decay of piety in the country, and the
growth of many miscarriages, which they fear may have provoked the glorious
Lord, in a series of various judgments, wonderfully to distress us: Considering
also the laudable example of our predecessors to recover and establish the
faith and order of the gospel in the churches, and provide against what
immoralities may threaten to impair them, in the way of general Synods convened
for that purpose; and considering that about 45 years have now rolled away
since these churches have seen any such conventions; it is humbly desired, that
the Honorable General Court would express their concern for the interest of
religion in the country, by calling the several churches in the Province to
meet by their pastors and messengers in a Synod, and from thence offer their
advice upon that weighty case which the circumstances of the day do loudly call
to be considered What they wanted was to recover and establish the power which
ministers claimed; and, like the Synod of 1670 which they refer to, to
represent to rulers and people that the judgments of heaven would follow them,
if that was not granted, vol. 1, p. 483.
: What are the miscarriages whereof we have reason to think the judgments of
heaven upon us call us to be more generally sensible, and what may be the most
evangelical and effectual expedients to put a stop unto those or the like
miscarriages? This proposal we humbly make, in hopes that, if it be prosecuted,
it may be followed with many desirable consequences, worthy the study of those
whom God has made, and we are so happy to enjoy, as the nursing fathers of our
churches.

COTTON MATHER, in the name of the ministers assembled in their General
Convention Hutchinson, vol. 2, p. 322.
."


ON June 3 the Council voted to grant their petition; but the Representatives
voted to defer the matter till their next session, which the Council concurred
with, and Lieutenant Governor Dummer consented thereto. June 11th, a committee
of the General Court, whereof Samuel Sewal, Esquire was chairman, appointed upon
the affair of ministers salaries, brought in a report, to have a law made to
compel every parish to make up to their ministers their several salaries, equal
to what they were when their contracts were made; and for the Judges of their
county Courts to determine how much their currency had depreciated. This report
was not accepted; but instead of it a resolve was passed, recommending it to
every town, precinct and parish in the Province, to make up to their respective
ministers their salaries equal to what money was when their contracts were
made; which resolve they ordered to be read to each congregation the next
Lord's day after it was received, and also in their parish meetings the March
after Massachusetts records.
. Episcopalians sent an account to the Bishop of London of the said petition
for a Synod, who laid the same before the Lords Justices of the Regency; from
whom a sharp reprimand was wrote to Mr. Dummer, October 7, 1725, for giving any
countenance to said petition, and for not sending over an account thereof
immediately after it was presented and acted upon. They declared that enquiry
had been made by proper authority, and they could not find that there was any
regular establishment of a national or provincial church here, so as to warrant
the holding Synods of the clergy; but that if there were, it was the King's
prerogative to call them, which therefore was invaded by the General Court when
they intermeddled therewith. And if such a Synod was called, and should be
sitting when their letter arrived, they required Dummer

To cause such their meeting to cease, acquainting them that their assembly is
against law, and a contempt of his Majesty's prerogative, and that they are
forbid to meet any more; but if, notwithstanding such signification, they shall
continue to hold such an assembly, you are then to take care that the principal
actors therein be prosecuted for a misdemeanor; but you are to avoid doing any
formal act to dissolve them, lest it be construed to imply that they had a
right to assemble.

CHARLES DELAFAYE.


MR. Dummer, in a letter to the Board of Trade, endeavored to excuse himself,
by observing, that a like vote of the Council upon a like petition was passed
in 1715, which was never censured from home as he knew of Douglass, vol. 2, p.
337, 378.
. But then it was not countenanced by the other branches of the Legislature, as
this was. The minister who, in behalf of the rest, signed the above petition
for a Synod, published a book in 1726, wherein he promises a faithful account
of the discipline of the New England churches. Much of it was written many
years before, and an attestation was prefixed to it by Dr. Increase Mather,
dated December 10, 1719. After sixty-six years labor in the great work of the
ministry he fell asleep, August 23, 1723, ^^t. 85. Though he was a friend to
Councils and Synods, yet he testified against giving them such power as his son
and many more wanted. But he and others being removed, their children renewed
their attempts for that power. His son had a strong affection for the proposals
of 1705, and for Gov. Saltonstall, who procured the establishment of that
scheme in Connecticut; even so that when Saltonstall died in 1724, Mather
preached a funeral sermon for him at Boston, an hundred miles off, and got it
printed at New London. He also now discovered his resentment against Mr. Wise,
for writing against said proposals Ratio disciplinae fratrum Nov. Anglorum, p.
184.
. And having declared that four Synods had been called by authority in the
Massachusetts, he says, "The Synods of New England know no weapons, but what
are purely spiritual. They have no secular arm to enforce any canons; they ask
none, ^hey want none. And they cannot believe, that any Protestant secular arm
would, upon due information, any more forbid their meetings, than they would
any of the religious assemblies upheld in the country Ibid. p. 172, 173.
." Had this been true, we have no reason to think that their meetings would
have been forbidden. But plain facts show, that the immediate effect of the
first of those Synods was the dissolving of a House of Representatives (who
would not punish such as the Synod had condemned) and the calling of another;
who disfranchised, disarmed and banished a considerable number of persons. And
their second Synod declared it to be the duty of the magistrate to put forth
his coersive power against schismatics; the effects whereof were the fining,
imprisoning, scourging, banishing and hanging of those they so called: And the
result of the fourth Synod caused the nailing up of the Baptist meeting house
in Boston (vol. 1. p. 83 -- 86, 190, 218, 236, 329, 379, 387, 483:) And are all
these weapons purely spiritual! His meaning no doubt was, that their Synods
only informed rulers of what was their duty, which they were to do out of
regard to God, and not to them. But the most horrid persecutions that ever were
practiced were done under such pretenses. And this author was in earnest to
have their order of ministers supported by taxes, imposed and collected "In the
King's name." To justify which he says, "If the most of the inhabitants in a
plantation are Episcopalians, they will have a minister of their own
persuasion; and the Dissenters, if there be any in the place, must pay their
proportion of the tax, for the support of this legal minister Page 21.
." He knew that such an instance had not then taken place in New England; and
we know that every thing of that nature has been earnestly opposed therein ever
since. And he then commended some of his party, for involving a salary for
their ministers in a general rate for all town charges, "Where Quakerism was
troublesome Page 22.
;" which he might have said was likewise done to the Baptists in Rehoboth, if
he had been willing the whole truth should be known. Mr. Hollis's ideas of the
nature of religion, and of the state of this country, appear in the following
letter to Elder Wheaton.

VI. London, March 13, 1723.
Dear Sir, I HAVE newly received, under covert of Mr. Elisha Callender, your
long looked-for letter, dated the 25th of December, and give you thanks for the
account you give me of the affairs of your church, your circumstances, and your
neighbors. I am glad the books sent you are of use unto you; by the same hand
you will have another forwarded, which I value, and suppose you will. I rejoice
in the success of your ministry, and increase of your church, which will
naturally increase your cares with your joy. I mourn because of the ignorance
of your sleeping Sabbatarians: Let us be thankful for our light, pity them and
pray for them, and endeavor in love to lead them into the light also. God,
that has shined into our hearts by his gospel, can lead them from the Sinai
covenant and the law of ceremonies, into the light of the new covenant and the
grace thereof. I pity to see professors drawing back to the law, and desire to
remember that our standing is by grace; and therefore not to be high-minded
over them, but fear, remembering our Lord's words, watch and pray, lest ye
enter into temptation. Every word of God is precious; the saints love it; and
they that honor him he will honor; and in keeping of it there is present peace,
and a promise of future reward: We now live by faith and not by sight; he that
endures to the end shall be saved. Go on, Sir, sowing the seed, looking up to
him whose work alone it is to give the increase, whoever be the planter or
waterer; and as you do abound in your labors, and do find him multiplying seed
unto you, may you yet abound more and more to the end, which is my sincere
wish. Let no man rob us of our comfortable hope, that when we cease to be here
we shall be present with the Lord, in whose presence the saints believe is
fullness of joy in a separate state, and expectation of greater in the
resurrection, when it shall be fully manifested how he loved them. Let none
jeer us out of our duty now to lisp forth his praises with our tongues, since
we expect hereafter to sing in a better manner the song of the Lamb, with a
much more noble chorus. In reference to your poll-tax and other taxes, which
are necessary for support of the government and society, are not to be esteemed
a burden; it is giving tribute or tithes to whom tribute is due, unless the
taxes do oppress you unequally, because you are Baptists and Separatists; if
so, then let me know (who profess myself a Baptist) and I will endeavor to
have a word spoken for you to the Governor, that you may be eased. You know
that our profession is not mody in your country nor ours; few if any of the
great men submitting to plain institution; and as we profess ourselves
disciples of Christ, it is our duty to take up our cross with patience, and pay
parochial duties where we live, and voluntarily maintain our own charge, and be
thankful for our liberty as men and Christians to our good God, who in his
providence has inspired many magistrates and ministers in your Province with a
truer spirit of catholic charity than formerly. You have heard, or may be
informed by Mr. Callender, of my foundation in Harvard college, and the
provision I have made for Baptist youth to be educated for the ministry, and
equally regarded with Pedobaptists. If you know any as may be duly qualified,
inform me, and I shall be glad to recommend them for the first vacancy. And to
close; while we profess to worship God nearer to the rule of primitive
institution and practice of our great prophet and teacher, the Lord Jesus
Christ and his apostles, let our light so shine before men in all holy
conversation, that such whose inclinations may be ready to speak evil of our
way may be ashamed. May serious religion and godliness in the power of it
flourish among us; every thing that goes in to make up the true Christian.
Where the image of Christ is formed in any, I call them the excellent of the
earth; with such I delight to associate and worship, whatever particular
denomination they may go by among men; and this I would do till we all come
into the unity of the faith, etc. Acts xx. 32.

Your loving friend, THOMAS HOLLIS.


THIS I copied from the original letter; and would just observe upon it, that
the generality of parish rates here were only for the support of one way of
worship, and not for the government, as he supposed. And further light about
the conduct of that day may be gained from the following letter.

London, February 18, 1724-5. Dear Brother Callender,
I HAD the pleasure of yours by Capt. Lawrence, and am glad to hear of your
welfare. May the Lord preserve your health and usefulness. I rejoice at the
increase of your members, and the good prospect you have of more being added to
your church, even of such who shall be saved. It is sweet encouragement to a
poor labourer in Christ's vineyard, to find the Lord works with him; and some
visible instances of sovereign grace and love among his people make his
drooping spirit revive and sing. May you have more of these, especially among
the rising generation; for it is a particular pleasure to see young ones look
Zionward, and truly remember their Creator in the days of their youth; though
in this case we have always reason to rejoice with trembling, because so many
who seemed to run well for a time, have been turned aside by youthful lusts
(which war against the soul) to the wounding the hearts of their ministers, and
the dishonor of Christ. I am sorry you have so much cause to complain, with us,
of the great decay of the power and purity of religion. I am afraid this
inquisitive age of professors spend too much time, and almost all their zeal,
about matters of speculation, and neglect the closet and inward experimental
religion too much. I observe by some letters and papers, by Capt. Lawrence,
that there is a number of young men formed into a society at Boston, who have
taken upon them the name of the Barean Society. It is a noble design to be
wholly governed by scripture, and wish every professor had such a resolution.
They seem to be in earnest about what they propose, and if any of their zeal,
for any particular point in dispute among Christians, should flame too high, I
am glad they are under your conduct, by which I hope they will be directed for
their mutual edification, and the honor of truth. They will have some books
contained in the catalogue sent soon, when I hope to write more particularly on
this head. I met Capt. Lawrence at our honored friend Mr. Thomas Hollis's,
where we had some particular discourse about your place and people, and how his
bounty to your church was laid out. From the whole I apprehend Mr. Hollis was
not displeased, but approved of what you had done, and has been so good as to
order the remaining part of the money for your own use; besides which he has
been pleased to send you a present of books. I have often, my dear friend,
adored the divine goodness, in disposing this gentleman's mind to so much
service for the interest of Christ in general, in New England as well as Old;
but especially for the providence by which such a gentleman came to the
knowledge of our small interest in those Colonies, who had such a love to
despised truth, as to own and encourage it in the face of so many and powerful
opposers. It is this good providence, I apprehend, has occasioned some persons
to look favorably toward the baptized interest in Boston, and gives an
encouraging view of greater advantage in years to come. His favors to you and
yours has doubtless been ungrateful to some of your neighbors, and perhaps
some have been unkind and weak enough to design you a prejudice by some
accounts given; but be in no pain for that, for Mr. Hollis is no stranger to
the weaknesses which good men are liable to; nor will he be easily persuaded
into hard thoughts of any, notwithstanding their many weaknesses, who in their
general conduct have acquitted themselves like Christians and honest men; nor
do any who attempt to draw his displeasure upon another person without good
reason, do himself the least service thereby with Mr. Hollis. That the good
will of him that dwelt in the bush may be with you and yours, is the hearty
desire of your sincere friend and unworthy brother,

EDWARD WALLIN.


VII. IN addition to his other donations, Mr. Hollis founded a professorship of
the mathematics and experimental philosophy in Harvard college, in 1726, with a
salary of Eighty Pounds a year to the professor; and he sent over an apparatus
for the purpose, which cost about One Hundred and Fifty Pounds sterling,
besides large additions to the college library. Neal, vol. 2, p. 220, 221.
. And by a letter to Mr. Callender, from Gayhead, on Martha's Vineyard, of
September 11, 1727, I find Jonas Horswet, an Indian minister, sending so some
of the books he had received, and also mentioning Thomas Sekins, another Indian
preacher at Nantucket, (see vol. 1, p. 438.) About this time four Baptists were
seized for ministerial taxes in the country, and were cast into prison at
Boston; but were soon released again by the special order of
Lieutenant Governor Dummer Proctor's remonstrance in 1754.
. Near the same time there came a letter from Springfield, signed by thirty
men, directed to the Baptist church in Boston, requesting that their pastor
might be sent up to labor among them. He went accordingly, and on July 23,
1727, baptized John Leonard, Ebenezer Leonard, William Scott, Abel Leonard, and
Thomas Lamb, of Springfield, and Victory Sykes and Marcy Lawton, of Suffield. A
letter to him dated July 19, signed Daniel Brewer, Ebenezer Devotion, Stephen
Williams, Samuel Hopkins, Nehemiah Bull, blames him for not first coming to
them, and says, "We cannot think, that preaching to or treating with particular
persons in a private manner, to instill into them doctrines that we think are
not according to truth and godliness, to be so Christian like; and we assure
you is not what we expected from Mr. Callender, whatever we might have feared
from some others." Mr. Devotion was minister in Suffield, and Bull in
Westfield; the other three were of Springfield. When Mr. Callender went there
again the next year, the three Springfield ministers wrote to enquire whether
he came prepared for and expecting a public dispute about baptism. His answer
was in these words:

Springfield, September 17, 1728. Reverend Sir,
IT is not my custom and manner to go about the country to dispute and debate
and wrangle with those that differ from me in opinion. It is well known that I
am for peace with all men, and for Christians to live in love and charity, and
for every man to act as he is fully persuaded in his own mind. But if you will
not be quiet and easy, and will insist upon it that your people must hear what
is to be said in opposition to what I think contrary to truth and godliness,
you may inform, Sir, your humble servant,

ELISHA CALLENDER.

To the Reverend Mr. Daniel Brewer.

VIII. I FIND no answer to this. -- Upon the receipt of their second charter,
Dr. Cotton Mather said, "Religion is forever secured; a righteous and generous
liberty of conscience established. And the General Assembly may, by their acts,
give a distinguishing encouragement unto that religion which is the general
profession of the inhabitants Account of his father's life, p. 141. He himself
died February 13, 1728, a^t. 65.
." And for thirty-six years they made no act to exempt either Baptists or
Quakers from taxes to his party of ministers. The great earthquake was in the
evening of October 29, 1727; and the Assembly that met the 22d of the next
month passed the first act of exemption therefrom, that they ever did for any
denomination. It was to empower every settled Episcopal minister to draw all
the money which was assessed upon any of his society, who lived within five
miles of his meeting, if they usually attended worship there; who were also to
be exempted from taxes for building or repairing of meeting houses for the
established way. But it required each parish to make up to their ministers,
within two months, all the money that might by their means be taken from them.
The five mile limitation was dropped afterward; and by an act in 1742, the
minister and churchwardens were required to give certificates to each parish
treasurer, where any of their society lived, in order for their drawing said
money.

NOTHING is more amazing among men, than the influence which the love of power
and gain has to blind their minds. The admission of the houses both of Orange
and Hanover to the British throne, was upon the principle that government is
founded in compact. And the most essential article of the national compact was,
that none should be taxed but by their own representatives. Yet because the
representatives in this government refused to put it out of their power to give
or withhold the salary demanded by the Crown, for Governors that they could
have no choice in appointing or removing, an attempt was made in England to
bring the case before the Parliament, and to take away our second charter. But
Mr. Jeremiah Dummer, brother to the Lieutenant Governor, published in London
such a defense of our charter-rights in 1721, as, with other things, prevented
it. Though in 1725 an explanatory charter was added, which deprived the
representatives of power to put their own Speaker into office, without the
consent of the Governor. These things were justly complained of, by those who
daily practiced a like iniquity themselves. For it is not more certain that
America is not represented in the British Parliament, than it is that a
quantity of money does not give any men a right to judge for their neighbors
about soul-guides, and to enforce their judgments with the sword. Yet this was
daily practiced to support teachers, that many who were taxed to them had no
more voice in choosing, than said representatives had in their Governors. But
as h^^ contentions still continued about the Governor's salary, and other
dangers hung over them, when their Assembly met at Boston in May, 1728, they
made a law,

" -- THAT from and after the publication of this act, none of the persons
commonly called Anabaptists, nor any of those called Quakers, that are or shall
be enrolled or entered in their several societies as members thereof, and who
allege a scruple of conscience as the reason of their refusal to pay any part
or proportion of such taxes, as are ^om time to time assessed for the support
of the minister or ministers of the churches established by the laws of this
Province, in the town or place where they dwell, shall have their polls taxed
toward the support of such minister or ministers, nor shall their bodies be at
any time taken in execution, to satisfy any such ministerial rate or tax,
assessed upon their estates or faculty: Provided that such persons do usually
attend the meetings of their respective societies, assembling upon the Lord's
day for the worship of God, and that they live within five miles of the place
of such meeting." The way prescribed for their being known, was for each county
Court, at their next session after the first of June annually, to appoint meet
persons of those societies, "To bring in a list, upon oath or solemn
affirmation, of all persons within their respective towns or precincts, that
profess themselves to be Anabaptists or Quakers, and usually attend their
meetings as aforesaid, after which the clerk of the peace of the county shall
give in to the assessors of each town or precinct a list of their names."

IX. HERE we may see that arbitrary power is always the same in nature, in
every age, and every country. Go ye, serve the Lord; only let your flocks and
your herds be stayed, said Pharaoh. Let their polls be exempted, but their
estates and faculties be taxed, said the Massachusetts. Herein they imitated
him; but in two other points they went beyond him. Go not very far away, said
Pharaoh; go but five miles, said the Massachusetts; though many of their own
parishioners, from that day to this, must go much further than that to meeting.
Neither did Pharaoh require a list of the people upon oath, as these did.
Little did Mr. Hollis know how his brethren here were treated. His friend
Wheaton, who, as was before observed, with many of his society, lived within
the bounds of Rehoboth, now hoped for some relief; and for that end applied to
their next county Court; but were told by the judges, that said law did not
take place that year. And for refusing to pay that year's tax to John Greenwood
and David Turner, ministers of that town, twenty-eight Baptists, two Quakers,
and two Episcopalians Obadiah Bowen, Azriakim Pierce, Jonathan Thurber,
Jeremiah Ormsbee, Souire Wheeler, Daniel Bu^lock, Samuel Goff, Joseph Bowen,
James Hicks, Seth Guerns^y. Edmund Ingalls, Benjamin Ingalls, Ephraim Martin,
Miel Pierce. Samuel Thurber, William Wheeler, Philip Wheeler, Gideon Hammond,
Jeremiah Ormsbee, jun. Ephraim Martin, jun. John Jones, James Lewis. Thomas
Horton, Richard Round, Jotham Carpenter, Samuel Bullock, Richard Bullock,
Ephraim Wheaton, jun. Baptists; Henry Finch and John Hicks, Quakers; Samuel
Carpenter and John Bowen, Episcopalians. Philip Wheeler was Colonel of the
militia in that county afterward. Wheaton was son to their minister.
, were seized and imprisoned at Bristol, by Jonathan Bosworth and Jacob
Ormsbee, constables of Rehoboth; the main of them on March 3, 1729. Hereupon
they sent a petition to Governor Burnet in Council; wherein they claimed
charter rights, and mentioned the late declaration from England, that there was
no national or provincial church established here, and the release of prisoners
upon that footing; and that if relief was not granted to them, they soon
expected the imprisonment of several Baptists and Quakers, of Taunton and
Norton, on the same score. The Governor and Council, on March 8, gave their
opinion, that said law did take place the preceding year; and ordered Seth
Williams, Esquire Chief Judge of that county, to convene a number of Justices at
Bristol, and to do all they lawfully could for the release of those prisoners.
He convened some of them, but gave no relief to those men. Mr. Comer came and
preached to them March 11. And as no other way appeared of deliverance from a
nauseous place which had injured their health, but paying said taxes and costs,
this was soon after done by their friends. However, lest further complaints
should be carried to England, the Assembly at Boston, November 19, 1729, added
an act to exempt their estates and faculties also; but ".Under the same
conditions and limitations that their polls were before." And it was not to
exempt from any tax that was made, and then in collectors hands, nor to
continue in force any longer than their May session, 1733.

X. AFTER the death of Governor Saltonstall, the Connecticut Assembly of
October 8, 1724, elected Joseph Talcott, Esquire in his stead; under whose
administration they enjoyed more liberty for seventeen years, than they had
under his predecessor. Stephen Gorton was ordained, at New London, pastor of
the second Baptist church in Connecticut, November 28, 1726, by the assistance
of their elders, Wightman of Groton, and Comer of Newport. And as Wightman was
called to preach in Lyme, Mr. John Bulkly, a learned minister of Colchester,
came and held a public dispute with him at Lyme, June 7, 1727, upon baptism and
ministers support. The question concerning the latter point Wightman stated
thus: "Whether ministers of the gospel ought to be maintained in the least, by
goods taken away by force from men of contrary persuasions?" And he gave these
reasons against that practice: "1. Because there is no precept nor precedent
for so doing in the new testament. 2. Because so to do is what we would not be
done unto ourselves. 3. Because the Lord requires only volunteers, and not
forced men in his service." But Bulkly refused to dispute upon this footing,
and shifted the question, to whether their way was lawful or not? And, after
going far about, he said, "Lawful authority have a right to determine the
undetermined modes of moral duties." To which Wightman said, "1. But they must
always determine the mode in the order of morality, and so they may do to
others, as they would they should do to them in like case. Now would you have
the superior powers of England so to determine for you, that you may have
liberty and only bear your own charges in this affair? 2. This point I think is
not undetermined in scripture, which shows us no other way for the support of
the gospel ministry, but what is from the free will offerings of the people."
And as Bulkly raked together many scandalous things that had been published
against the Baptists, and then said, "They are but of yesterday, and so
consequently the truth cannot be with them, as being not known in the world
till about two hundred years past;" Wightman replied and said, "I never read of
a Presbyterian longer than the said term; how then can the way of truth be with
them? If you say, there were men of your principles many years before, I
answer, that there were men professing the doctrines maintained by us long
before that time Bulkly, p. 132, 176. Wightman, p. 25, 28, 41.
."

XI. THE May session of Connecticut Legislature, in 1729, passed an act in
favor of Quakers, to exempt all from ministerial taxes, "Who do attend the
worship of God in such way as is allowed, and shall produce a certificate from
such society, of their having joined themselves to them, and that they do
belong unto their society." At an association of Baptist churches at
North-Kingstown, September 6, 1729, they drew a petition to the General
Assembly of Connecticut, that their brethren who were scattered up and down in
that Colony might be exempted from taxes to ministers and meeting houses that
they dissented from; which was signed by Richard Sweet, Valentine Wightman,
Samuel Fisk, John Comer, elders, Timothy Peckom, Joseph Holmes, Ebenezer Cook,
Benjamin Herenden, and other brethren, to the number of eighteen, one of whom
was Thomas Durkee of Windham; to which was afterward added these lines, viz.

We the subscribers do heartily concur with the memorial of our brethren on the
other side, and do humbly request the same may be granted, which we think will
much tend to Christian unity, and be serviceable to true religion, and will
very much rejoice your honors friends, and very humble servants,

JOSEPH JENCKS, Governor, JAMES CLARK, Elders. DANIEL WIGHTMAN, Elders.


Newport, September 10, 1729.

HEREUPON the Assembly, who met at New Haven, October 9, 1729, passed an act to
allow the Baptists the same privileges as were granted to the Quakers the May
before; both of them being perpetual laws, and not such temporary acts as the
Massachusetts have perplexed themselves and others with. President Styles
informs me, that the Baptists in Saybrook were the first who took the benefit
of this act. And a concise account of the affairs of the college he presides
over shall close this chapter. Connecticut Legislature first granted a charter
for it in 1701. It was then intended to be at Saybrook; but after hot
contentions, wherein a large and valuable part of their library was lost, it
was settled at New Haven in 1718. Elihu Yale, Esquire Governor of the East India
Company in London, made large donations to it, upon which it was called Yale
College. In 1719, Mr. Timothy Cutler, minister at Stratford, was chosen Rector
of it. But in September, 1722, he resigned that office, and went to England for
Episcopal ordination, from whence he also received the title of D. D. and was a
missionary many years in Boston. After his departure, Mr. Samuel Andrew,
minister at Milford, presided at their commencements, until Mr. Elisha
Williams, of Wethersfield, was chosen their Rector in 1725; which office he
sustained with honor to himself, and advantage to others, till he resigned it
on October 31, 1739, and removed back to Wethersfield; which town he often
represented in their Assembly, and was serviceable in other offices; one of
which was to go over as a special Agent for his Colony to England. Mr. Thomas
Clap, of Windham, succeeded him in the college; the government of which, by
their first charter, was in the Trustees, who chose the Rector and Tutors. But
by a more ample charter from their Legislature, dated May 9, 1745, their order
was changed to that of, The President and Fellows of Yale College, in
New Haven; whose number is twelve. The eleven Fellows are all settled
ministers, who elect the President, and also their own members, when any of
them resign, die, or are displaced; seven of the Corporation being a quorum
Douglass, vol. 2, p. 183 -- 188.
.

CHAP. V.
1. A general View of the Affairs of Rhode Island Colony. 1. Of particular
Errors therein. 3. Their civil State concisely described. 4. Their Order
commended by Massachusetts Ministers. 5. Remarks thereon. 6. Account of the
Rogerenes. 7. The same instructive to others.

I. SINCE the disorders in Rhode Island Colony have often been recurred to, as
a prevailing argument for supporting worship by tax and compulsion, the evil
effects of which have had a great influence in continuing some of those
disorders, an humble attempt shall here be made to search this matter to the
bottom. And in the first place we are to remember, that the existence of that
Colony, as a distinct government, was long an eyesore to many of their
neighbors; who tried a variety of mean and cruel methods to divide and conquer
it. And Solomon says, surely oppression makes a wise man mad; and none will
pretend that all the inhabitants of the Colony were wise men: Yet all the
madness of their wise men, and all the ignorance and folly of others, have been
industriously held up to the world, as a convincing proof of the necessity of
an established religion by human laws. And as the terms learned and orthodox
have been connected in this argument, colleges and persecution have grown up
together in the ideas of multitudes; and in not a few Calvinism, family
worship, and a religious regard to the Christian sabbath, have gone into the
same connection. Notwithstanding it is most certain, that Mr. Williams, the
founder of said Colony, and Mr. Clarke, who procured their second charter, were
men of superior learning, and held strictly to the doctrines of sovereign
grace, and to the duties of private and public worship; as many other fathers
of the Colony also did. But their children, as well as others, have been more
ready to retain their errors than their virtues; some of which I will name.

II. DAILY prayer to God for what we need, and praises for what we receive, are
duties taught by reason as well as revelation; and every person is inexcusable
that neglects the immediate practice of those duties, Psalm cvii. 8, 15, 28,
43, Acts xvii. 27, Romans i. 20, 21. But the ordinances of special communion in
the Christian church, are only known by pure revelation, which requires
previous personal qualifications before any may partake therein. But Mr.
Williams, about the time of his banishment from the Massachusetts, blended
these two kinds of duties so much together, as to oppose the inculcating of
prayer upon the unregenerate, as well as the immediate practice of church
communion: As if a criminal might not petition for help and mercy, nor give
thanks for what he received, any more than to act in fellowship with his Prince
before he was pardoned and reconciled. And casting off fear, and restraining
prayer before God, is so exceeding natural to men, that great numbers have held
fast this error. Above three years after Mr. Williams was banished, he also
stumbled upon another error, which many who reproach him are still tenacious
of; namely, the opinion that ministerial authority must be derived by an
external succession from inspired men. The confounding of the Jewish priesthood
with the gospel ministry, is the source of this error. Upon their return from
Babylon, those priests who could not produce a register of their succession
from Aaron, were not suffered to officiate as such, until a new mission should
be given from above, Ezra ii. 62, 63. And not finding a like register from the
apostles, caused Mr. Williams to refrain from church communion in his latter
days, though not from public worship. And how ready have many been from hence
to excuse themselves in a careless neglect of all religion? To which Gorton's
teaching and influence added great force. He had a singular knack at turning
the scriptures into mist and allegory, under a pretense of great spirituality;
and also at running down his opponents with satyr and ridicule; arts that have
been very bewitching in latter ages. The coming and sufferings of Christ he
held to be mystical, and not literal; and he treated the doctrine of visible
instituted churches with the utmost contempt. Says he, "Such Pharisaical
interpreters, who erect churches as true churches of God, that admit of decay,
and falling from God, in whole or any members thereof, are they who have
deceived and undone the world, from the foundation thereof unto this day, and
are the proper witches of the world which the scripture intends." And he
construed the mint, anise and cummin of the Pharisees, as applicable to all who
practice the external administration of baptism, breaking of bread, and church
censures Gordon's antidote against Pharisaical teachers, p. 42, 52.
. He was a leader in public worship at Warwick for sixty years, by way of
teaching, prayer and singing; but having no successor, furnished with his art,
a neglect if not a contempt of public worship and of other religious duties has
greatly prevailed in those parts, enforced with the remembrance of former
cruelties shown to their fathers under religious pretenses. And as Calvinism
was the general plan of orthodoxy among their oppressors, the opposite
sentiments more easily prevailed in most of the Baptist churches, though it was
an apostasy from the doctrines they were founded upon. And running into
extremes, on other accounts, increased their unhappiness. Being hardly accused
with the want of valid administrators, moved seven Baptist churches, who met in
London in 1643, to declare it as their faith, that by Christ's commission every
disciple, who had a gift to preach the gospel, had a right to administer
baptism, even before he was ordained in any church Crosby, vol. 1, appendix, p.
21.
. But it is to be observed, that Philip was an ordained officer in the church
before he baptized the young believers at Samaria; while none but apostles laid
on hands after baptism, both there and at Ephesus; and which was attended with
extraordinary effects in each place, Acts viii. 14, 17, xix. 6. Yet Mr. Samuel
Hubbard informs us, that in 1652 the practice was adopted, first at Providence,
and then at Newport, of gifted disciples administering both baptism and laying
on of hands, who were not ordained officers in any church; which practice was
continued by some for many years after. In 1725 the second church in Swanzey
voted to make laying on of hands a term of their communion: Perhaps others had
done so before. Many contentions and divisions were caused by these things,
which greatly obstructed gospel order in their churches. But as the Christian
church is the pillar and ground of the truth, and baptism is the initiating
ordinance thereof, it surely must belong to her, especially at ordinary times,
to set men apart to administer it.

INTERNAL right, and an external warrant to exercise it, are distinct things.
Every renewed soul has an internal right to the special privileges of the
church of Christ; and those to whom he has given special gifts ^or the
ministry, have an internal right to improve ^^^m; but a person must be received
as an orderly member of a particular church in order to his acting as such; and
those who are qualified for officers ought to be set apart as such before they
baptize others. This is now generally allowed. Both scripture and reason
plainly show, that actions may be done in extraordinary cases, which ought not
in ordinary times.

III. As to their civil affairs, the first charter of Providence Colony
extended to the Pequot river and country, that is, into the heart of New London
county; and it was given eighteen years before Connecticut charter. And the
second charter to Rhode Island Colony was given by the same authority which
gave that of Connecticut; and this authority fixed the line betwixt them in a
most explicit manner: Yet Connecticut made a practice of violently crowding
over that line for above sixty years after they received their charter. In 1720
Governor Jencks was sent over Agent to England for help against them. At
length, on September 27, 1728, Roger Wolcott, James Wadsworth, and Daniel
Palmer, Commissioners for Connecticut, and William Wanton, Benjamin Ellery, and
William Jencks, for Rhode Island, signed a settlement of that line. The south
part is exactly according to Rhode Island charter; the north part bears a
little east thereof. Plymouth Colony was only a voluntary combination among
themselves, as to government; though they were allowed to continue so till the
revolution. And Rhode Island charter was given twenty-eight years before
Plymouth was incorporated with the Massachusetts; yet the line on that side was
never established, until it was done by a special commission in 1741, according
to the oldest charter Douglass, vol. 1, p. 400, vol. 2, p. 51
; which gave Rhode Island the towns of Little-Compton, Tiverton, Bristol,
Warren, Barrington, and Cumberland, that they had not enjoyed before (vol. 1,
p. 347, 350.) The history of their civil government may properly be divided
into four periods. Before the revolution of 1688, parties both on secular and
religious accounts caused much unhappiness. From thence to 1732 their
government was in wise and steady hands; so that they had but two Governors in
thirty-four years. Afterward a depreciating paper currency, with bribery in
elections, produced many and great evils; a sight of which moved the two
competitors for the office of Governor amicably to give up their pretensions,
and to prevail with a very peaceable gentleman to accept the chair in 1769.
Since then bribery and party influence have been better guarded against. And
can any or all of these things afford the least reason against equal liberty,
or for the use of compulsion in the support of worship? Yea, have not our
opponents given evidence to the contrary in that Colony? The first
Congregational church therein was formed at Newport, and Mr. Nathanael Clap,
from Dorchester, was ordained their pastor, November 3, 1720. He was a man of
eminent piety, who began to preach there in 1695, and was a great blessing
among them till his death, on October 30, 1745, aet. 78; for whom Mr. John
Callender preached and printed a funeral sermon. Mr. Clap was a hearty friend
to the primitive order of their churches: But Mr. John Adams, a young teacher
of the modern stamp, gained the affections of a large part of his church; and
because Mr. Clap could not consent to his settling as colleague with him, nor
break bread to a number of the members, a party council divided the church, and
the young minister was ordained over a majority, April 11, 1728; so that Mr.
Clap was shut out of his meeting house, and his people built another for him.
The third Congregational church in that Colony was constituted at Providence,
over which Mr. Josiah Cotton was ordained, October 23, 1728 Comer's diary and
papers. In less than two years Adams was dismissed by his church, and not
recommended.
. Some things previous to this last event call for a place in our history.
After considerable labors in Providence for it, the Massachusetts ministers
sent them the following letter.

"IV. To the Honorable Joseph Jencks, Esquire late Deputy Governor, William
Hopkins, Esquire Major Joseph Williams, Joseph Whipple, Esquire Colonel Richard
Waterman, Arthur Venner, Esquire -- Wilkinson, Esquire Philip Tillinghast, Esquire Capt.
Nicholas Power, Capt. Thomas Harris, Capt. William Harris, Andrew Harris, Esquire
-- Brown, Esquire John Burton, Jonathan Sprague, jun. Esquire and to the other eminent
men in the town of Providence I am well informed, that Jencks (newly returned
from his agency in England) Hopkins, Williams, Venner, Tillinghast, Power,
Richard Brown, and Sprague, were all Baptists; Whipple, an Episcopalian;
Waterman, Samuel Wilkinson, Burton, and the Harris's, were Friends.
: Pardon our ignorance, if any of your honorable Christian names, or if your
proper order be mistaken.

HONORABLE GENTLEMEN,
WE wish you grace, mercy and peace, and all blessings for time and eternity,
through our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. How pleasing to Almighty God and our
glorious Redeemer, and how conducible to the public tranquillity and safety, an
hearty union and good affection of all pious Protestants of whatsoever
particular denomination on account of some differences in opinion would be, by
the divine blessing, yourselves as well as we are not insensible. And with that
peace and love societies of different modes of worship have generally
entertained one another in your government, we cannot think of it without
admiration; and we suppose, under God, it is owing to the choice liberty
granted to Protestants of all persuasions, in the royal charter graciously
given you; and to the wise and prudent conduct of the gentlemen that have been
improved as Governors and Justices in your Colony. And the Rev. Mr. Greenwood,
before his decease at Rehoboth, was much affected with the wisdom and excellent
temper, and great candor of such of yourselves as he had the honor to wait
upon, and with those worthy and obliging expressions of kind respect he met
with, when he discoursed about his desires to make an experiment, whether the
preaching of our ministers in Providence might not be acceptable, and whether
some who do not greatly incline to frequent any pious meeting in the place, on
the first day of the week, might not be drawn to give their presence to hear
our ministers, and so might be won over (by the influence of heaven) into
serious godliness. And although God has taken that dear brother of ours from
his work in this world, yet it has pleased the Lord to incline some reverend
ministers of Connecticut, and some of ours, to preach among you Mr. Moody, of
York, with as much power as any.
; and we are beholden to the mercy of heaven for the freedom and safety they
have enjoyed, under the wise and good government of the place, and that they
met with kind respect, and with numbers that gave a kind ^eception to their
ministrations among them. Th^se things we acknowledge with all thankful^ess;
and if such preaching should be continued among your people (designed only for
the glory of God and Christ Jesus in chief, and nextly for the promoting of the
spiritual and eternal happiness of immortal souls, and the furtherance of a
joyful account in the great day of judgment) we earnestly request, as the Rev.
Mr. Greenwood, in his lifetime, did before us, that yourselves, according to
your power, and the interest and influence that God has blessed you with, will
continue your just protections; and that you add such further countenance and
encouragement thereunto, as may be pleasing to the eternal God, and may,
through Christ Jesus, obtain for you the greater reward in heaven. And if ever
it should come to pass, that a small meeting house should be built in your
town, to entertain such as are willing to hear our ministers, we should count
it a great favor, if you all, gentlemen, or any of yours, would please to
build pews therein, i^ which you and they (as often as you see fit) may give
your and their presence and holy attention. And we hope and pray, that ancient
matters (that had acrimony unhappily in them) may be buried in oblivion; and
that grace and peace, and holiness and glory, may dwell in every part of
New England; and that the several Provinces and Colonies in it may love one
another with pure hearts fervently. So recommending you all, and your ladies,
and children, and neighbors, and people, to the blessing of heaven, and humbly
asking your prayers to the divine throne for us, we take leave to subscribe
ourselves your friends and servants,

PETER THATCHER, Committee of the Association Ministers in Boston, Dorchester
and Dodham.
. JOHN DANFORTH, Committee of the Association Ministers in Boston, Dorchester
and Dodham.
. JOSEPH BELCHER, Committee of the Association Ministers in Boston, Dorchester
and Dodham.
.

Dated October 27, 1721.

V. THE town of Providence sent them an answer, dated February 23, 1722, signed
in their name by Jonathan Sprague; wherein they say, "We take notice how you
praise the love and peace that dissenters of all ranks entertain one another
with, in this government. -- We answer, this happiness principally consists in
their not allowing societies any superiority one over another; but each society
supports their own ministry, of their own free will, and not by constraint or
force, upon any man's person or estate; and this greatly adds to our peace and
tranquillity. But the contrary, that takes any man's estate by force, to
maintain their own or any other ministry, it serves for nothing but to provoke
to wrath, envy and strife. And since you wrote this letter, the constable of
Attleborough has been taking away the estates of our dear friends and pious
dissenters, to maintain their minister; the like has been done in Mendon. Is
this the way of peace! Is this the fruit of your love! Why do you hug the
iniquity of Eli's sons, and walk in the steps of the false prophets, to bite
with your teeth, and cry peace, but no longer than men put into your mouths but
you prepare war against them? -- You desire that all former injury, done by you
to us, may be buried in oblivion. We say, far be it from us to revenge
ourselves, or to deal to you as you have dealt to us, but rather say, Father
forgive them, they know not what they do. But if you mean, that we should not
speak of former actions, done hurtfully to any man's person, we say, God never
called for that, nor suffered it to be hid, as witness Cain, Joab and Judas,
are kept on record to deter other men from doing the like." A reply hereto was
printed at Boston, dated September 7, 1722, which did not pretend to deny the
facts here mentioned; but made a great flourish upon a word, which was not in
their first printed letter, but was the error of the press in a second edition;
and then took occasion from what they said about recording hurtful actions to
publish a copy of a sentence of Court against Sprague in Boston, April 28,
1674, "For reproaching and scandalizing the magistrates, and for lascivious
carriage." And it insinuated that their complaints about persecution were
because of such sufferings as this.

SENSIBLE how the populace had been deceived by such arts, Sprague wrote a
rejoinder, dated January 24, 1723, in which he makes some apology for taking
notice of such an anonymous reviling piece, which profanely sets the Court
records of Boston upon a level with God's infallible record concerning Cain and
Judas; and informs us that one of the two witnesses against him, in that case
at Boston, was afterward brought to repentance, and joined to the Baptist
church he belonged to in Providence; when she asked and received his
forgiveness, for wronging him in her testimony in that case. He also observes,
that the affair was in his early days, before he made a profession of religion,
when he really was a vile sinner. And for the satisfaction of serious people he
says, "My youthful walk I Will not commend,
Nor go about it to defend;
But to God's glory do confess,
I lived in sin and wickedness.
Until God's love to me appeared,
His dreadful wrath I greatly feared*
But when I heard Christ's lovely voice,
My heart within me did rejoice,
That he for sinners freely died,
That sinners might be justified;
That all such sinners he would save,
As mercy of him humbly crave;
And do obey his holy will,
As it is declared in his gospel;
So on his grace do I now rest,
And so must all that shall be blessed*


"BUT lastly, why do you strive to persuade the rising generation, that you
never persecuted nor hurt the Baptists? Did you not barbarously scourge Mr.
Obadiah Holmes, and imprison John Hazel, of Rehoboth, who died and came not
home? And did you not barbarously scourge Mr. Baker, in Cambridge, the chief
mate of a London ship? Where also you imprisoned Mr. Thomas Gould, John Russel,
Benjamin Sweetser, and many others, and fined them Fifty Pounds a man. And did
you not take away a part of the said Sweetser's land, to pay his fine, and
conveyed it to Solomon Phips, the Deputy Governor Danforth's son-in-law, who
after, by the hand of God ran distracted, dying suddenly, saying he was
bewitched? And did you not nail up the Baptist meeting house doors, and fine
Mr. John Miles, Mr. James Brown, and Mr. Nicholas Tanner? -- Surely I can fill
sheets of paper with the sufferings of the Baptists, as well as others, within
your precincts; but what I have mentioned shall suffice for the present." Mr.
Sprague preached for many years to a small society of Baptists in that which is
now the east part of Smithfield; and died in January, 1741, aet. 93. Mr. Comer
knew him, and speaks of him as a very judicious and pious man.

VI. AS a further proof on the evil effects of coercive measures about
religious worship, I shall here add some account of John Rogers, of New London,
and his followers, who are briefly described in vol. 1, p. 473 -- 480. He
intermixed a number of precious truths, with may things of a contrary nature.
Governor Leete well observed, in a letter there published, that if Rogers and
his party had been Governors in Connecticut, it might be doubted whether they
would have allowed people so much liberty in keeping the first day of the week
as a sabbath, as the government there allowed to him and his followers in the
opposite way. For Rogers imagining that the law which required the keeping of
that day established idolatry, was as zealous to pull it down, as the Jews were
against idols in old times. And the sufferings which he met with, for his zeal
about this and other religious matters, seemed to be his life; until, to show
how strong his faith was, he went to Boston, and among the infection of the
smallpox there; but catched it, came home and died with it, and caused the
death of some others thereby. This many might think was quite enough to open
the eyes of his followers; but it was far from doing it. Perhaps they might
think he was taken away in judgment to them, for their coldness and negligence.
Certain it is that Joseph Bolles now published a second edition of Rogers's
book, entitled, "A midnight cry from the temple of God to the ten virgins
slumbering and sleeping; awake, awake, arise, and gird your loins, and trim
your lamps, for behold the ^ridegroom comes, go ye therefore out to meet him!"
Bolles wrote a preface to it, in which he says of the author, "For his religion
he lost his wife and children, and suffered continual persecution, being near
one third of his lifetime, after his conversion, in prisons. And in the 73d
year of his age, he died in his own house, at New London, 1721." Hereupon his
son, and others of that sect, set out afresh in zealous attempts to pull down
the i^^l-sabbath; and as a number of them came into Norwich, in their way to
Lebanon, on a first day, having things with them to discover that they were
upon worldly business, and meant to appear against having that day kept as a
sabbath, they were seized by authority; and on July 26, 1725, they were brought
before Joseph Backus, Justice of the Peace, who fined them according to law;
and refusing to pay it, they were whipped.

VII. GOVERNOR Jencks being informed of their sufferings, and that it was
because they were going to Lebanon to worship, and to administer baptism, wrote
a paper, giving some account thereof, as a warning to people against the
Presbyterian sect, and set it up in a public place in Providence. The Justice
having obtained a copy of that paper, published an answer to it; a manuscript
reply to which, in the Governor's own hand writing, is before me. He does not
pretend to reply to it all; for says he, "Such unchristian-like behavior, in
giving them disturbance when at their public worship, if true, may justly be
condemned by all sober people, and is that which never entered into my thoughts
to justify in John Rogers, or any other man." But says the Governor, "It is
very well known, to all the elderly inhabitants of Providence, that the
Presbyterian governments in New England in general, and Connecticut in
particular, have for a long time been using their utmost skill and endeavors
to bring the greatest part if not all this little Colony under their rule and
government. But finding themselves disappointed in the several measures they
have hitherto taken, they are now (as is supposed by many others as well as
myself) about to try one artifice more in order to obtain their desire; and
that is by sending in their ministers among us, under a pretense of doing good
to souls; whereas the design chiefly is, to gain such a party as may be
sufficient to over-vote us in our elections, and so to gain the rule over us."

EXPERIENCE has since given much greater light about these things than was then
enjoyed in the country. In 1758 the Rogerenes published an abstract of the
history of ancient persecutions in New England, with high encomiums upon those
Quakers who returned and were hanged at Boston, after they had been banished on
pain of death; and a reproof to their own society and others for their
declension from that temper and spirit. Many were hereby stirred up to travel
from town to town, and to interrupt others in their worship, especially in the
year 1763. But when they did so, at Norwich and other places, the authority
removed them away until their worship was ended, and then released them,
without fine or correction; which had a much better effect than their former
punishments. Indeed in New London, where most of them lived, Mr. Mather Byles
was so uneasy at their surrounding his gate, and calling him a hireling, that
in 1768 he made a bitter complaint that their laws were not put in full
execution against said people; and for this and other reasons he resigned his
pastoral charge there, and went off to Episcopacy. About which time, a number
of the Rogerenes were seized in a clandestine way, and were scourged in a most
barbarous manner; for which may all the actors or abettors thereof be brought
to true repentance! An instance or two of late suicide among the members of the
Rogerene church, gave a great shock to the rest; and a number of their children
are now become agreeable members of other communities. And if all persons and
societies were impartially protected by authority, and none but spiritual
weapons were made use of, and they with due faithfulness, to propagate and
support the Christian religion, who can tell how happy the effects would soon
be?

CHAP. VI.
1. The Succession of Ministers in Newport. 2. Comer becomes a Baptist, and is
successful there. 3. Attempts for a like Reformation in Providence. 4. Villainy
detected at Swanzey. 5. Hollis and Wallin's Death. 6. State of the Baptist
Churches. 7. New ones formed, with the Ordination and Decease of sundry Elders.

1. SOME revival of religion among the Baptists, as well as opposition thereto,
is now to be described. Mr. John Clark was a chief leader in forming the first
Baptist church in Newport, in 1644; and he continued their pastor until his
decease, April 20, 1676. Mr. Obadiah Holmes succeeded him in that office, and
died October 15, 1682. Near three years after Mr. Richard Dingley, from Britain
by the way of Boston, became their pastor. An address of his to the church is
before me, wherein he describes the duty of a pastor to his people, and of a
people to their pastor, in a clear scriptural light. About 1694 he left that
church and went to Boston, and from thence to South Carolina. After his
departure they had only occasional supplies till 1710, when they elected Mr.
William Packom for their pastor, in whose ordination Elder Luther of Swanzey
assisted. In 1718, Mr. Daniel White, from Mr. Wallin's church in London, was
chosen for a colleague with Elder Packom: But as he was a strict Calvinist,
disputes soon arose about doctrines, which were greatly increased by a leader
in the church, who was an assign of Mr. Clark's estate, and unfaithful in his
trust. Councils were called from Boston and Swanzey upon it; and the
Legislature of the Colony were moved to put him out of that office, and to put
another man into it; though upon further search they saw that this was not in
their power. Therefore in 1721 they made a law, which requires all men who are
entrusted with charitable donations annually to give an account of their
proceedings therein to their Town-Council, which is still in force. But a
separation took place in that church, and White administered to one party for
several years, till it dissolved, and he went to Philadelphia in 1728. A
difference in sentiments about laying on of hands, and some other things,
caused the rise of the second church in Newport, about the year 1656; and Mr.
William Vaughan was their first minister, who died in 1677, and was succeeded
by Thomas Baker, and he by John Harden. who died in 1700. In 1701 James Clarke
was ordained their pastor, by the assistance of the Elders Pardon Tillinghast
and John Brown of Providence. In 1704 Daniel Wightman was ordained a colleague
with him; and they were successful, and much esteemed in their places to old
age.

II. MR. Comer, before mentioned, being at school at Cambridge, joined to the
first church there in February, 1723. Ephraim Crafts, his intimate friend, had
joined to the Baptist church in Boston just before. This Comer thought was a
very wrong action, and took the first opportunity he had to try to convince him
of it: But, after a considerable debate, Comer was prevailed with to take and
read Stennett upon baptism, which gave him quite other views of the subject
than he ever had before. However he concluded to be silent about it; and as
education was the cheapest at New Haven, he went and entered the college there
in September, 1723. and continued a member of it until October, 1724; when
infirmity of body caused his return by water to Boston; and a terrible storm at
sea, with the death of a peculiar friend just as he arrived, brought eternity
so directly before him, as to spoil all his plausible excuses for the neglect
of baptism. He informs us that those words of Christ, Whosoever shall be
ashamed of me, and of my words, in this adulterous and sinful generation, of
him also shall the Son of Man be ashamed when he comes in the glory of his
Father, with the holy angels, had such, influence upon him, that, after proper
labors with those he was previously connected with, he was baptized and joined
to the Baptist church in Boston, January 31, 1725; and concluded to pursue his
studies in a private way. Four months after he was called to preach the gospel;
and on May 19, 1726, he was ordained a pastor of the first church in Newport,
colleague with Elder Packom; and a great blessing was granted upon his ministry
in that town. Their first church had but seventeen members when he came there;
to whom thirty-four were added in less than three years. And says Comer, "There
was no public singing until I came, and by the blessing of heaven introduced
it." Neither had they any church records, before he got a book, and collected
into it the best accounts that he could obtain of their former affairs He was
very curious and exact also in recording other events, He observes that the
year 1727 was a year of many remarkable occurrences. It was so for the death of
rulers. King George I. died June 11; and in Rhode Island Colony the Hon. Edward
Thurston, one of their Council [father of the present pastor of the second
church in Newport] died in April; Governor Cranston April 26; Deputy Governor
Nichols, who was elected in May, died in July. From July 28 to August 7 the
heat was so intense as to cause the death of many. Through the three first
nights in August the lightnings were constant and amazing. On September 26 was
a terrible hurricane; and a more terrible earthquake October 29, which was
followed with a smaller one in the morning of January 28, 1728. He first
mentions the northern lights, in the evening of July 16, 1728, which were much
greater on October 2 following. Dean Berkley arrived at Newport January 23,
with whom Comer had an interview July 14, 1729. Governor Burnet came to
Newport, in his way to Boston, July 12, 1728, and died at Boston September 7,
1729. Several persons were baptized by way of immersion by Episcopalian
ministers, as Mr. Carpenter by Mr. Usher of Bristol, January, 1725. Nathaniel
Brown, and four others at Rehoboth, by Mr. Piggot of Providence, in July, 1726.
A woman at Newport, by Dr. M'Sparran, of Narraganset, in November, 1728.
. Out of a manuscript written by their first pastor, he transcribed the
confession of faith mentioned in our vol. 1, p. 255. For his support he
received L 85 in 1726, L 93 12 4 in 1727; but not a third part of this last sum
in 1728, because two leading members of the church, who disliked his close and
searching ministrations, had influence enough to turn a great part of the
society against him. At length Comer gave them an occasion, which they eagerly
made use of, to crowd him out of his office in that church; for, without giving
them any previous notice, he on November 17, 1728, preached up the laying on of
hands upon every member as a Christian duty, though not as a term of communion.
Upon the close of that year he says, "This has been a year of great exercise to
me. I have been as it were in the furnace of affliction. The difficulty in my
flock has been heart-wounding, and sometimes almost confounding: But I see
God's grace is sufficient for me. I am fully and clearly convinced that I
should have fallen into many hurtful evils, if sovereign grace had not
wonderfully prevented. Bless the Lord O my soul. -- About this time I found my
people so uncomfortable that we must divide from each other, which was
exceeding grievous to me."

JANUARY 8, 1729, Mr. Comer was dismissed from said church; and the next day he
says, "I passed under hands by Mr. Daniel Wightman, and offered for transient
communion until spring, or till I saw how God in his holy providence might
dispose of me." A revival of religion in that second church in Newport began
the fall before; and as Elder Clarke was above 80, and unable to preach, Mr.
Comer was received to preach one half of the Lord's days with Elder Wightman
for two years. And above forty members were added to that church before he left
it; which was the greatest increase they had ever received in such a length of
time, at the close whereof they had one hundred and fifty communicants, being
the largest church in the Colony. For Comer's support the society gave him L
129 in 1729, and L 144 12 10 in 1730. As Newport was the head town of the
government, Governor Jencks went and lived there, in order more conveniently to
attend upon the duties of his office; where he joined in worship and communion
with said church; wherein Mr. Comer also now introduced regular records, which
they lacked before. And as Mr. John Walton, a young gentleman of a liberal
education, was invited to preach at Providence, where a like reformation might
be hoped for, in the church whereof the Governor was a principal member, and
opposition was raised against it, he wrote the following letter to Mr. James
Brown, their pastor.

III. Newport, March 19, 1730. Beloved Brother,
I AM heartily sorry to hear of the difference in our church at Providence,
about Mr. Walton's coming to settle there; as also for the unkind treatment he
there met with from some, especially considering he came not there with a
design to impose himself upon the church, but at the request of several of the
brethren. And why his coming there should be so strenuously opposed, as I
understand it is, I cannot conceive. As to his singing of psalms, I have heard
him say, he would not urge that as a duty upon the church. And if it were for
that he might expect some allowance, by way of contribution, for his support,
it most certainly is an error in those who oppose that as a thing unlawful: For
I think the scriptures are very clear in that point, that it is not only lawful
for a minister or elder that preaches the gospel to receive (by way of
contribution) a competent maintenance, but also the duty of the church,
according to their ability, to afford it to him; and this I doubt not but I can
fully prove by scripture against all contradiction. And I believe there are
several of my brethren who can remember, that Elder Tillinghast (in his
lifetime) who was a man exemplary for his doctrine, as well as of an
unblemished character, did several times in his teaching declare, that it was
the duty of a church to contribute toward the maintenance of their elders, who
labored in the word and doctrine of Christ; and although for his own part he
would take nothing, yet it remained the church's duty to be performed to such
as might succeed him. And as to what Mr. Walton holds with respect to laying on
of hands upon believers as such, I do not understand by him that he opposes it
any other ways, than if it be performed for the obtaining the extraordinary
gifts of the Holy Ghost: But he thinks it ought not to be any bar to communion
with those who have been rightly baptized. And as I have been informed, by one
or more of the ancient members of our church at Providence, that such was the
opinion of the Baptists, in the first constitution of their churches,
throughout this Colony; and that such as were under laying on of hands
continued their fellowship with those that were not, until one who was in great
repute for wisdom amongst them did in his teaching declare, that the doctrine
of laying on of hands was a doctrine of devils, upon which a separation was
made: And as I was informed when in England the separation there was upon some
such like occasion. But further, as to Mr. Walton's receiving, by way of
contribution, if the church in Providence can freely hold fellowship with him,
and do account he may be serviceable to them in preaching, as well as
instrumental of doing good to others; I cannot imagine why any one should
oppose his receiving some allowance for his labor, from such as are free to
give it, none being under any compulsion; for I think it highly rational, if he
leaves his own home, where he can, by overseeing the management of his farm,
live honorably, and removes to Providence purely to serve his brethren, that
they should consider him accordingly.

I am, with due regard, Sir, your affectionate Christian Brother, JOSEPH JENCKS.


ELDER Brown was of his mind; but Deacon Samuel Winsor took the lead of a
party, who were resolutely set against what the Governor had proposed. A
Council was called there, September 3, 1731, who advised them not to divide
upon it; but at a meeting in October, Winsor and his party were for censuring
Walton as a transgressor, for joining in prayer with Baptists who were not
under hands. Elder Brown reasoned with them upon it, and said, "If we admonish
brother Walton and set him apart, what will you do with others who hold that
point as he does, as Elder Clarke, Elder Wightman, the Governor, and some
others?" Their answer was, "That we must go through with it." And Elder Peter
Place, of Smithfield, came and assisted in making an open separation in
Providence church upon these points. And Winsor taught publicly, "That all
those who took any thing for preaching were like Simon Magus." This account is
taken from original writings of Elder Brown and others, now before me. And as
he died October 28, 1732, aet. 66 He was grandson to Chad Brown, one of the
first planters of Providence; and son to John Brown, who was elected into their
Council in 1665, and was afterward an elder in Providence church. From Elder
James Brown's son James sprang the four brothers who are now very noted traders
in Providence, and great promoters of learning, and of the Baptist cause there.
Said elder's son Elisha was Deputy Governor of the Colony in 1765, and his son
Andrew was Justice of Peace in the State, and long an exemplary Christian in
the Baptist church in Gloucester, until he died in peace, 1782.
, Winsor's party prevailed, and ordained him as the minister of that church.
Walton quitted the ministry, and followed other employments, whereby many were
confirmed in their prejudices against him and his sentiments.

IV. PERHAPS a concise account of a piece of villainy, which was now detected
at Swanzey, may be of service, to warn all others against doing the like. That
town was first granted to five men, three of whom were Baptists; and they laid
out sundry parcels of land, which they called pastors and teachers lots. They
had a large and curious book of church records, which was brought from Wales;
and the surveys of those lots were recorded therein. Barrington was originally
included in Swanzey, and when it became a distinct town, they had their share
of those lots for Pedobaptist ministers. In 1718 Richard Harden became both a
deacon and the clerk of the first church in Swanzey; and was encouraged to
build and make improvements upon one of those lots, near their meeting house;
and he was also a leading man in town affairs. Having such advantages, he was
tempted with a notion, that by destroying the records of those lots, he could
obtain that whereon he lived as common land. And behold! all the records of
Swanzey church, betwixt 1663 and 1718 were taken out of the book, and have
never been recovered since! When the church came to know it, as the government
was in the hands of Pedobaptists, they invited Barrington to join with them in
suing for their rights, with an offer, that if they would be at proportionable
expense, they should have two fifths of what they recovered. The offer was
accepted, and Harden was sued by a writ of ejectment, at the County Court, in
July, 1730, and was cast. He appealed to the Superior Court in September; but
was also cast there. By a reference the next year he obtained L 125 for what he
had done upon the land, and was obliged to quit it; and he took to keeping
loose company, and drinking to excess. Elder Wheaton, and a large part of his
church, had been desirous of settling Mr. Comer with him, before Comer went to
Newport, but Harden's influence prevented it. O what is man when left to
himself!

V. THE pious and liberal Mr. Hollis died in 1731: When the news of it arrived,
Dr. Coleman preached a funeral sermon for him, before the General Court at
Boston, April 1^; which was published by their order. The two Professors upon
his foundations in the college each published a discourse upon the occasion,
and President Wadsworth wrote a preface thereto. Professor Wigglesworth says,
"By his frequent and ample benefactions, for the encouragement of theological
as well as human knowledge among us, who are Christians of a different
denomination from himself, he has set such an example of a generous, catholic
and Christian spirit, as has never before fallen within my observation, nor,
so far as I now remember, within my reading." Dr. Coleman says, "That which is
singular in the piety and benefits of Mr. Hollis, unto these churches, was,
that though he was not strictly of our way, nor in judgment with us in the
point of infant baptism, yet his heart and hand was the same to us, as if we
had been one in opinion and practice with him. And in this let him stand a
teaching pattern and example to us, of a noble, Christian, apostolic spirit of
love; which makes those that differ in lesser matters to receive one another to
the glory of God, and a shining testimony against a narrow party spirit, which
is so much the disgrace and detriment of the Protestant interest, and which so
early began among the apostles of Jesus, and was rebuked by him, even in John
himself, that apostle of love and charity afterward, who once said to Christ
in a fret of zeal, Master, we saw one casting out devils in thy name, and he
follows not us, and we forbid him, because he follows not us: But Jesus
said, forbid him not Crosby, vol, 4, p. 213 -- 229.
." We shall have occasion to remember this hereafter. In the mean time, the
last letter that I have seen from Mr. Hollis's intimate friend discovers so
much of the views and comforts of Christianity, in a near sight of mortality,
that I shall annex it to the foregoing account. It was directed to Mr. Elisha
Callender.

London, November 10, 1732. Dear Sir,
I READILY own that it was my turn to have wrote to you long before now; but
the long and threatening illness under which I have labored, for more than
twelve months past, have so reduced me, both in flesh and spirit, that I have
been incapable great part of the time of writing; which will I hope plead my
excuse with you. I am, through divine goodness, able to preach once a day on
Lord's days, but hardly ever expect to get over my indisposition. It is a
wonder to the doctors, and all others who saw my case, that I am alive. I could
not for several months but expect to be removed; but blessed be the Lord, I had
a comfortable prospect of another world, and was rather grieved than pleased at
the view of a return into this. Here methinks is nothing pleasant to the mind,
but rather every thing sullying and discomposing: Why then should not those who
have tasted divine grace, long to stretch and swim in the immense ocean? How
sweet is a drop here, therefore how ravishing must the full enjoyment be! But
Lord grant faith and patience, to wait thy time, even thy time, O Lord. I am
glad to hear the baptized interest thrives, and wish that the power of religion
were in a more flourishing condition with you than it is with us; for surely
Jacob is small and low. We have many controversies agitated, which seem to put
a stop to the growth of pure religion and the power of godliness among us.
National vice gains strength, but vital religion is declined to a mere
skeleton; yet the Lord's arm is not shortened. Humble service attends you, from
your affectionate, though at present afflicted friend and servant,

EDWARD WALLIN.


VI. ALL his letters that I publish are carefully copied from the originals now
in my hands. He finished his course with joy, in his 55th year, June 12, 1733
Ibid. page 394.
. To return to our own history, I would observe, that Rhode Island Colony was
first divided into three counties, in June, 1729; and in February, 1730,
Providence was divided into the towns of Providence, Smithfield, Gloucester,
and Situate. There were thirteen Baptist churches, most of them small, who now
held annual associations to promote discipline and communion among them, upon
the six principles in Hebrews vi. viz. one in Providence, the second in
Newport, two in Smithfield, the second in Swanzey, and one in each of the towns
of Dartmouth, Warwick, North-Kingstown, South-Kingstown, Situate, Groton,
New London and New York. The two in Connecticut had introduced singing in
public worship, to promote which their Elder Wightman published a little
pamphlet; but it was opposed by many among other churches. One church in
Newport held the keeping of the seventh day sabbath as a bar of communion, and
refused to assist in ordaining Mr. Comer in 1726, on that account. Mr. Mumford,
who first led them into that principle, introduced singing among them in 1677.
In that, and in their sister church at Westerly, Comer says were now about one
hundred and forty communicants; and also that general redemption was held by
the majority of all those fifteen churches. The first church in Newport had now
about fifty members, the first in Swanzey two hundred, and their sister church
in Boston eighty. These held to particular election, and did not make laying on
of hands a bar of communion, and sang in public worship; and the above named
were all the Baptist churches then extant, north of New Jersey.

VII. MR. Comer had held a correspondence by letter with ministers in
New Jersey for several years; and in March, 1731, he went there by water, and
visited their churches in Middletown, Piscataqua, Cohansey, etc. He went as far
as Philadelphia; and upon his return declared great satisfaction, in the sight
he had of the faith and order of those churches. On July 3 he said, "I desired
and obtained a dismission from the church where I had preached more than two
years, because I was never settled there, and found that some could not bear my
preaching the doctrines of grace." In August he removed to Rehoboth, where on
January 1, 1732, he said, "I begin a new year, in a new place, but not in a new
employment; for my delight of soul is in serving my dear Redeemer in the sacred
work of the ministry; which I prefer and esteem above and beyond every thing
else; though I acknowledge unfit and unworthy in myself. Lord, who is
sufficient for these thing! My sufficiency is alone of God, in whom I rest and
rely continually. January 20, a Baptist church was gathered in Rehoboth; and
January 26 I was publicly installed pastor of it. Elder Ephraim Wheaton of
Swanzey preached from 1 Thessalonians. v. 12, 13, and gave me the right hand of
fellowship." And a precious number of souls were hopefully converted under his
ministry there. In June he visited Sutton and Leicester, and baptized Thomas
Richardson, Daniel Denny, Esquire brother to Mr. Prince's wife of Boston, and six
more. In July he preached and baptized a man in Middleborough. November 30 he
baptized fifteen persons at home, who were chiefly seals of his ministry.

Two learned ministers were now settled in Newport. Mr. John Callender, nephew
to their minister in Boston, who had enjoyed the benefit of Mr. Hollis's
donations in Harvard college, was ordained a pastor of the first church in
Newport, October 13, 1731, colleague with Elder Packom, who died three years
after. Mr. Nicholas Eyres, who was born in Wiltshire, August 22, 1691, and
educated in the city of Bristol, became a Baptist after he came over to
New York; and he was ordained pastor of a small Baptist church there in 1724,
by the two Elder Wightman's. A collection was made in Newport, Providence, etc.
to help them in building a meeting house in that city. But in 1730 the church
became much broken; Eyres says, "Some of them deserted, under a pretense of
love to the principles of absolute election and predestination." Therefore he
came and settled at Newport in October, 1731, colleague with Elder Wightman.
Elder James Clarke, of that church, died December 1, 1736, aet. 88, much
esteemed by those who knew him.

MR. James Bound, a sensible Baptist, came over from England, and dwelt a while
in Salem village, now Danvers, where Mr. Peter Clark was minister; who could
not be content with personal dispu^es, but also frequently preached against the
Baptist principles, when there were no others in the place, that held them.
Bound told him that it was an unfair way of treating mankind; but he persisted
in it, until he turned a number of his people from his own way, who removed,
and began a Baptist society in Sutton. Mr. Bound's son John married a member of
Mr. Clark's church, and removed to that town, where the preaching of Sutton
minister for infant baptism turned her from it; and when Clark heard thereof,
he wrote her a long letter upon the subject. This she communicated to Mr.
Walton, and he wrote an answer thereto, and sent it in a sealed letter to Mrs.
Bound. But by some means Clark got it into his hands, and published both
letters, with animadversions thereon, in 1732. She told me that she never saw
Walton's letter to her, till she ^aw it in print. How well this agrees with the
gentleman, or the Christian, the reader will judge.

IN December, 1731, an act was passed in Boston, for the Quakers only; which
left out the affirmation, and five mile limitation, and required the assessors
in each parish, where any Quakers lived, to take an annual list of them, and to
deliver it to their parish clerk by the 20th of July; and if any of them should
happen to be omitted therein, two principal members of the Quaker society might
certify the same to the assessors by the 10th of August; and they should also
be exempted from taxes to the established worship. As the exempting laws for
Baptists expired in 1733, Mr. Comer's people were immediately taxed to other
teachers; and some of them were imprisoned therefore. But upon application to
their Legislature they were released, in 1734; and a like law was made for the
Baptists as had lately been for the Quakers; though no penalty was laid upon
their assessors, for breaking those laws, which they frequently did.

THE Baptist churches in Swanzey and Rehoboth met with sore bereavements in
1734; when Elder Wheaton died April 26, aet. 75; and Mr. Comer the 23d of May
following, before he had completed his 30th year. But how much did he do in a
little time! A decline immediately followed, from which neither of those
churches have sully returned to this day; though the first of them has lately
done so in a great measure. On September 16, 1735, a Baptist church was
constituted at Sutton; and September 28, 1737, Benj. Marsh and Thomas Green
were ordained joint pastors of it. The former was from Salem, and the latter
from Malden; being an early planter in Leicester. And September 28, 1738, by
mutual agreement, the brethren at Leicester became a church by themselves, and
Green their pastor. May 16, 1736, Eld^^ Wightman, of Newport, baptized the w^^e
of Mr. Nathanael Mather, a Presbyterian mi^^^^ of Long Island (...)'s re^ister.
. November 4, 1736, a Baptist church was formed in Brimfield; and on November
4, 1741, Ebenezer Moulton was ordained their pastor He married the above named
John ^ound's, widow.
; who descended from a member of the first house of Representatives at Boston,
in 1634, but who was a sufferer from the ruling party there three years after,
(vol. 1, p. 87.)

MARCH 24, 1738, a century after the deed of Rhode Island was given, by the
Narraganset Indians, Mr. John Callender delivered a sermon at Newport, which he
published, with enlargements, containing the best history of that Colony then
extant. But his uncle at Boston was taken ^om his beloved flock the last day of
that month; and he finished his course in the following happy manner. March 21
he said, "When I look on one hand, I see nothing but sin, guilt and
discouragement: But when I look on the other, I see my glorious Savior, and
the merits of his precious blood, which cleanses from all sin. I cannot say I
have such transports of joy as some have had, but through grace I can say I
have gotten the victory over death and the grave." Being asked what word of
advice he had for his church? he earnestly replied, "Away with lukewarmness!
Away with such remissness in attending the house of prayer, which has been a
discouragement to me, and I have been faulty myself!" The Boston Evening-Post,
of April 3, says, "Friday morning last, after a lingering sickness, deceased
the Reverend Mr. Flish^ Callender, minister of the Baptist church in this town;
a gentleman universally beloved by people of all persuasions, for his
charitable and catholic way of thinking. His life was unspotted, and his
conversation always affable, religious, and truly manly. During his long
illness he was remarkably patient, and in his last hours (like the blessed
above) pacific and entirely serene; his senses good to the last. I shall said
he, sleep in Jesus, and that moment expired."

MR. Jeremiah Condy, who took his first degree at Harvard college in 1726,
after preaching a while in this country, went over to England; but he was now
sent for from thence, and was ordained pastor of the Baptist church in Boston,
February 14, 1739. The third Baptist church in Connecticut was constituted and
origanized the same year in Wallingford. By reading Delaune's plea for the
nonconformists, and other means, a number of people there were brought to
embrace their sentiments, and joined to the Baptist church in New London; but
ordinarily met for worship at Wallingford, from 1731 till they had a regular
dismission on August 20, 1739; and after being formed into a distinct church,
ordained Mr. John Merriman for their pastor. Mr. Edward Upham, of Malden, son
to a member of the Baptist church in Boston, took his first degree at Harvard
college in 1734; and after preaching at Springfield about two years, a church
was constituted there October 14, 1740, and the next day he was ordained their
pastor, by the assistance of Mr. Condy, and Mr. John Callender.

THE exempting law for Baptists had again expired, and their church in
Rehoboth, being afraid of further trouble, requested the town to vote them
clear. This was considered of at a town-meeting January 24, 1740, when it was
declared that they could not lawfully do it; yet at another meeting February
13, they voted, "That they were willing to grant or agree upon a salary for the
minister of the Baptist church the present year, in case the said elder will
accept thereof." For this they had no more law than the other, and it was
evidently done to ensnare them if possible. In May following said exempting law
was revived, to continue seven years.

CHAP. VII.
1. A Review of past Darkness. 2. Of Light at Northampton. 3. And extensively
through the Land. 4. The Nature of the Work described. 5. How far it prevailed.
6. Writings for and against it. 7. Classes against it. 8. And Courts also. 9.
Where the real Blame lies.

I. A VERY great change is before us, which some have called the great
reformation, and others great confusion; which diversity of opinion is no new
thing. Concerning the founder of Christianity, some said he is a good man;
others said, nay, but he deceives the people. In 1680 a sermon was delivered
before the corporation of the city of London, wherein the dissenters were
accused of obstructing the cause of reformation, because they would not conform
to the national worship; and recourse was had to the severities, of
Congregationalists in New England, against the Baptists and others, to justify
the severities that were exercised toward dissenters in England. Therefore Dr.
Owen published a book in 1681, wherein he observes, that all the reformation
that has taken place since the rise of Antichrist, was produced entirely by
these three principles, viz. taking the holy scriptures as their only perfect
rule in all religious matters; allowing each rational person to judge of their
meaning for himself; and holding that all the power of office and government in
the church of Christ is derived from him, by his word and Spirit, to each
particular church, and not by a local succession from any other power in the
world. And so far as any have declined from this last principle, he assures us
that therein they have rejected a main reason of separation from the church of
Rome Original of evangelical churches. p. 291 -- 297.
. If so, then New England was involved at this time in darkness that might be
felt. Very few of the common people had any idea, that a person could have a
right to the gospel ministry without a degree from college, any more than the
Israelites could to the priesthood, who were not of the seed of Aaron. And so
great and good a man as Mr. Jonathan Edwards warned ministers against breaking
over this line; even in the same book wherein he says, "It has certainly
sometimes been so with our colleges, that instead of being places of the
greatest advantage for true piety, one cannot send a child thither, without
great danger of his being infected as to his morals. Edwards's thoughts, 1742.
p. 266, 350.
." A professor and a tutor of Harvard college, a little before this time, were
convicted of gross immoralities Hobby's defense of Whitefield, p. 20.
. And in 1738 a minister at Eastham, on Cape-Cod, was deposed from his office
for heterodoxy in principles; which affected others who were of his sentiments
so much, that Dr. Charles Chauncy published a sermon upon liberty of conscience
in 1739. And on June 9, 1740, he met with ten other ministers at Salem, and
signed a paper in favor of that deposed minister; who owned to the world, that
his belief was, "That men can do that, upon the doing of which they shall
certainly be saved; and that men's obedience is a cause of their justification
Osborn's letter to the Convention at Boston, July 7, 1743. p. 6, 23.
." And a minister of the capital town in New Hampshire says of the state of the
churches at this time, "No serious Christian could behold it without a heavy
heart, and scarce without a weeping eye; to see the solid substantial piety,
for which our ancestors were justly renowned, having long languished under sore
decays, brought so low, and seemingly just ready to expire and give up the
ghost. How did not only Pelaginism, but Arianism, Socinianism, and even Deism,
and what is falsely called Free-thinking, here and there previal! The instituted
means of salvation, in many places, were but lightly esteemed, and a horrid
contempt was put upon the ministry of the word Shurtleff's defense of
Whitefield, p. 4.
." And in England Bishop Butler said in 1736, "It is come, I know not how, to
be taken for granted, by many persons, that Christianity is not so much as a
subject of enquiry; but that it is now at length discovered to be fictitious;
and accordingly they treat it as if in the present age this were an agreed
point among all people of discernment, and nothing remained but to set it up as
a principal subject of mirth and ridicule, as it were by way of reprisals, for
its having so long interrupted the pleasures of the world Whitefield's life,
chap. 2.
."

II. BUT God ever works like himself, even so as to demonstrate to all, that
our help is in him, and not in any arm of flesh. Mr. Stoddard's doctrine had
greatly prevailed in this country before his decease, February 11, 1729. His
grandson Edward was settled a colleague with him two years before; who has
since been a chief instrument of reformation in our times. A revival of
religion began under his ministry, near the close of 1733, which arose to such
an height in the spring of 1735, that he entertained hopes of about thirty
conversions among his people in a week, for six weeks together; so that scarce
a grown person in the place remained unaffected, and many children were
effectually called. Our elder Clark of Wilbraham dates his conversion there, at
that time, when about twelve years old. This work was powerful in several
adjacent towns; and they had a less degree of it in a number of towns in
Connecticut. Edwards's narrative of that work was much esteemed in London,
where a preface was wrote to it, by Dr. Watts and Dr Guyse. In the mean time
two scholars were converted in the university of O^^^rd, in 1733, who were
furnished with such gifts, as one of them with his tongue, the other by his
pen, were greatly instrumental of reviving doctrinal and experimental
Christianity, through the whole British empire. Mr. George Whitefield, the
first of them The other was Mr. James Hervey, who was born near Northampton, in
England, February 26, 1714. And after a very pious and useful li^e in the
ministry, and many excellent publications in the cause of true religion, he
died near the place of his birth, December 25, 1758.
, was ordained by the bishop of Gloucester, June 20, 1736; embarked for Georgia
in December, 1737; returned through Ireland to England a year after; embarked
again for America in August, 1739; and traveled and labored with great
success, as far northward as New York.

III. THESE things being heard of at Boston, where religion was at a very low
ebb, earnest invitations were sent him to come over and help them. He therefore
sailed from South Carolina, and landed at Newport, September 14, 1740, where he
labored three days to good purpose; and then traveled to Boston, and as far
eastward as York, to see the aged and pious Moody, who received him joyfully.
After his return to Boston, he went up an hundred miles westward to
Northampton, to visit our excellent Edwards; and from thence down by Hartford
to New Haven, and away through the southern Colonies, until he embarked from
Delaware Bay, December 1; when he said, "O my soul, look back with gratitude on
what the Lord has done for thee in this excursion. I think it is the
seventy-fifth day since I arrived at Rhode Island. My body was then weak, but
the Lord has much renewed its strength. I have been enabled to preach, I think,
one hundred and seventy-five times in public, besides exhorting frequently in
private. I have traveled upwards of eight hundred miles, and gotten upwards of
Seven Hundred Pounds sterling, in goods, provisions and money, for the Georgia
orphans. Never did God vouchsafe me greater comforts. Never did I see such a
continuance of the divine presence in the congregations to whom I have preached
Collection of his journals, p. 437. He was born in the city of Gloucester,
December 16, 1714; and after a life of incessa^^ labors, in Europe and
America, he died at Newbury-Po^t, in New England, September 30, 1770. Mr.
Tennent was born in Ireland, February 5, 1703. His father came over with his
family, and was a Presbyterian minister at Neshaminy, in Pennsylvania; where he
kept an academy, wherein a number of excellent ministers were educated. Gilbert
was ordained in 1720, and after a very useful life he died at Philadelphia,
July 2^, 176^, and President Finley published some account of him.
." As he went through New Jersey he prevailed with Mr. Gilbert Tennent to take
a tour into this field, which was then white unto the harvest; who came to
Boston in December, and labored in these parts through the winter. In their
preaching, both of them laid open the dreadful evil and danger of hypocrisy as
well as profaneness, and spoke as plainly against unconverted teachers and
professors as any other sort of sinners, and the effects were exceeding great
and happy.

IV. SOME indeed tried to persuade the world, that the great change then made
in the land was chiefly owing to the mechanical influence of their terrible
words, gestures, and moving ways of address. Dr. Chauncy took much pains to put
this color upon things. But Mr. Thomas Prince says, "As to Mr. Whitefield's
preaching, it was, in the manner, moving, earnest, winning and melting; but the
mechanical influence of this, according to the usual operation of mechanical
powers, in two or three days expired, with many in two or three hours; and I
believe with most as soon as the sound was over, or they got out of the house,
or in the first conversation they fell into. But with the manner of his
preaching, wherein he appeared to be in earnest, he delivered those vital
truths which animated all our martyrs, made them triumph in flames, and led his
hearers into the view of that vital, inward, active piety, which is the mere
effect of that mighty supernatural operation of a DIVINE POWER on the souls of
men; which only will support and carr^ through the sharpest trials, and make
meet for the inheritance of the saints in light." Of Mr. Tennent Mr. Prince
says, "In private converse with him, I found him to be a man of considerable
parts and learning; free, gentle and condescending; and from his own various
experience, reading the most noted writers on experimental divinity, as well as
the scriptures, and conversing with many who had been awakened by his ministry
in New Jersey, where he then lived, he seemed to have as deep an acquaintance
with the experimental part of religion as any I have conversed with; and his
preaching was as searching and rousing as ever I heard. He seemed to have no
regard to please the eyes of his hearers with agreeable gestures, nor their
ears with delivery, nor their fancy with language; but to aim directly at their
hearts and consciences, to lay open their ruinous delusions, show them their
numerous, secret, hypocritical shifts in religion, and drive them out of every
deceitful refuge wherein they made themselves easy, with a form of godliness
without the power Christian history, vol. 2, p. 384 -- 387.
."

V. MARCH 2, 1741, Mr. Tennent preached his farewell sermon at Boston, and came
round by Plymouth, Middleborough, Bridgewater, Taunton, Newport and Providence,
and so returned home through Connecticut; in all which places his labors had
some good effect. Religion was much revived in Boston, Northampton, and places
adjacent, in the fall and winter. In February and March, it was so in
New Haven, Hebron, and Lebanon-Crank. At their general election in May, Mr.
Jedidiah Mills preached in a powerful manner at Hartford, from whence his fame
spread extensively. Proceeding eastward in his labors, Dr. Benjamin Lord, of
Norwich, hearing when he was to preach at Lebanon, ventured to appoint a
lecture for him in his own pulpit on Tuesday, June 2; but Mr. Mills was
otherways engaged, and Mr. Wheelock came and preached it; and Mr. Mills came
and preached there twice the Friday following. These were the first that I
heard of those itinerant ministers. Such darkness had prevailed before, and
many spoke so freely of the light they now received, that the name of NEWLIGHTS
was soon can upon them. But an old saint, who was converted under Mr. Flavel's
ministry in England, but now lived at our Norwich, being asked what she thought
of them? readily replied, "Newlights! It is new to such as never saw it before;
but it is what I knew above fifty years ago." The work prevailed very
powerfully in Norwich through the summer. In August Mr. James Devenport from
Long Island came there, where Mr. Eleazer Wheelock and Mr. Benjamin Pomroy met
him, and they labored incessantly for three days, and a great reformation was
wrought in the town; and in this and the following year, that glorious work of
divine grace prevailed, in a greater or less degree, in most parts of
New England, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and many other places. A
measure of it was granted to the Baptists in Boston, Leicester, Brimfield,
Newport Betwixt March and August, 1741, forty-eight persons were baptized, and
joined to the second church in Newport.
, Gorton and Wallingford; but as the work was begun and carried on almost
wholly by Pedobaptists, from which denomination their fathers had suffered
much, most of the Baptists were prejudiced against the work, and against the
Calvinian doctrine by which it was promoted. Though I find that Elder Robert
Feke, of Oysterbay, on Long Island, wrote to his brethren in Newport, November
29, 1741, and said, "God has begun a glorious work among us, and I hope he will
carry it on. There have been seventeen added to our little band in about three
months." And the work was powerful among the Baptists in New Jersey and
Pennsylvania.

VI. ALL allow that many imperfections attended this revival of religion; but
the great difficulty has been to determine what they were, so as to encourage
what was right, and to guard against all that was not so. Mr. Edwards delivered
a sermon upon this subject at New Haven, in September, 1741, which he enlarged
and published, with a preface by Mr. William Cooper, of Boston; and it
circulated through the nation, and was much esteemed. But an anonymous answer
to it was published at Boston This answer was commended, it not wrote, by Dr.
Chauncy. See Chauncy's thoughts, p. 332.
, which condemned Mr. Cooper's saying "Some of the learned and knowing among
men have had those things revealed to them of the Father in heaven, which flesh
and blood does not teach." This writer said he could not guess who they should
be. To which it may be replied, that Mr. William Hobby, of Reading, one of the
eleven signers to the paper in favor of Osborn's Arminianism, Mr. Daniel
Rogers, a tutor at Harvard college, and a number more of their teachers, freely
confessed that they were blind guides, until they were savingly enlightened
under Mr. Whitefield's preaching. Said writer discovered a great dislike of
Cooper's saying "These fruits do not grow on Arminian ground:" And also of What
Edwards wrote against unregenerate ministers. As no law could take place in the
Massachusetts, without the consent of Episcopalians, Presbyterian ministers
could not carry their power so far there as in Connecticut, where the whole
power of making laws was in one denomination, who therefore improved their
power in the following manner.

VII. GOVERNOR Talcot died in October, while their Assembly was sitting, who
then elected a Cambridge scholar in his stead, who was strongly attached to
their Saybrook establishment. And, by an order from their legislature, a
general Consociation from all the counties of that Colony met at Guilford,
November 24, and drew up sundry resolves; in one of which they say, "That for a
minister to enter into another minister's parish, and preach or administer the
seals of the covenant, without the consent of or in opposition to the settled
minister of the parish, is disorderly." Mr. Robbins of Branford had done so at
New Haven before, for which other ministers had reproved him, and he had made
some concessions to them therefore. In December he received a written request
from the Baptist minister in Wallingford, informing him, that Dr. Bellamy had
preached in their society to mutual satisfaction, and desired that he would
come and do the like. This request appeared agreeable, and he appointed a
meeting for the purpose, January 6, 1742. But, two days before the time, a
deacon from Wallingford brought him two letters, the one signed by forty-two
men of that town, the other signed by Jacob Hemenway and Isaac Styles,
ministers who lived by the way, requesting him not to go and preach to those
Baptists, without giving any reason against it, but only their desire. This did
not appear to him a sufficient reason for him to violate his promise, and to
disappoint a people who were desirous of hearing the gospel. He therefore went
and preached two sermons there, with an evident good effect. Yet for so doing
he was complained of as a disorderly person, to the Consociation of New Haven
county, in their meeting of February 9. He enquired wherein the disorder lay,
seeing he preached in a particular society, at the written request of their
pastor? It was answered, that said society was not a lawful society, but a
disorderly company. He replied, that Governor Talcot had advised Wallingford
collectors not to distrain ministerial taxes from them; and the authority sent
them annual proclamations for fasts and thanksgivings, as to other societies.
But as the Consociation thought themselves better judges of those matters than
civil rulers were, they expelled Robins from their classical court for
preaching to those Baptists His narrative, p. 1 -- 6.
. A son of Wallingford minister was then a tutor in Yale college, of which
David Brainard was a member; and the tu^or having prayed more pathetically than
usual with the scholars, one of Brainard's intimates asked him what he then
thought of the tutor? He has no more grace than this chair, said Brainard. The
sentence was overheard, and carried to the rulers of the college; though the
accuser could not tell who it was against. However they extorted this from his
friends, and expelled Brainard out of the college just about the time that
Robins was expelled from their Consociation Brainard's life, p. ^0.
. And more effectually to guard against such disorders for the future, a
draught of a law was made, and ministers conveyed it into the Legislature at
Hartford, in their session of May 13; who were not only prevailed with to pass
it, but also to direct the heads of their college not to suffer any scholars
therein who refused to obey it See their reasons for expelling the Cleavelands,
in 1744. Col. Hezekiah Huntington told me, that this law was prepared and sent
in by ministers.
.

VIII. "An act for regulating abuses, and correcting disorders in
ecclesiastical affairs.
WHEREAS this Assembly did by their act, made in the seventh year of the reign
of her late Majesty Queen Anne, establish and confirm a confession of faith,
and an agreement for ecclesiastical discipline, made at Saybrook Anno Domini
1708, by the reverend elders, and messengers delegated by the churches in this
Colony for that purpose; under which establishment his Majesty's subjects,
inhabiting in this Colony, have enjoyed great peace and quietness, until of
late sundry persons have been guilty of disorderly and irregular practices;
whereupon this Assembly, in October last, did direct to the calling of a
General Consociation, to set at Guilford in November last, which said
Consociation was convened accordingly; at which Convention it was endeavored
to prevent the growing disorders amongst ministers, that have been ordained or
licenced by the Associations in this government to preach; and likewise to
prevent divisions and disorders among the churches and ecclesiastical
societies, settled by order of this Assembly. Notwithstanding which, diverse of
the ministers, ordained as aforesaid, and others licenced to preach by some of
the Associations allowed by law, have taken upon them, without any lawful call,
to go into parishes immediately under the care of other ministers, and there to
preach to and teach the people Beside those before named, Mr. Samuel Buell
traveled and labored successfully through the country, who has since enjoyed
great blessings in his pastoral labors at East Hampton, on Long Island. Mr.
James Sprout, born in Middleborough, since minister in Philadelphia, was
another of those itineran: preachers.
; and also sundry persons, some of whom are very illiterate, and have no
ecclesiastical character or authority whatsoever to preach or teach, have taken
upon them publicly to teach and exhort the people in matters of religion, both
as to doctrine and practice; which practices have a tendency to make divisions
and contentions among the people in this Colony, and to destroy the
ecclesiastical constitution established by the laws of this government, and
likewise to hinder the growth and increase of vital piety and godliness in
these churches, and also to introduce unqualified persons into the ministry;
and more especially where one Association does intermeddle with affairs that by
the platform and agreement abovesaid, made at Saybrook aforesaid, are properly
within the province and jurisdiction of another Association; as by licencing
persons to preach, and ordaining ministers. Therefore,

BE it enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives in General Court
assembled, and by the authority of the same, that if any ordained minister, or
other person licenced as aforesaid to preach, shall enter into any parish not
immediately under his charge, and shall there preach or exhort the people,
shall be denied and secluded the benefit of any law of this Colony, made for
the support and encouragement of the gospel ministry, except such ordained
minister or licenced person shall be expressly invited and desired so to enter
into such other parish, and there to preach and exhort the people, either by
the settled minister and major part of the church in said parish, or, in case
there be no settled minister, then by the church or society within such parish.

AND it is further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any Association
of ministers shall undertake to examine or license any candidate for the gospel
ministry, or assume to themselves the decision of any controversy, or as an
Association to counsel or advise in any affair that by the platform or
agreement above mentioned is properly within the province and jurisdiction of
any other Association, then and in such case every member that shall be present
in such Association, so licencing, deciding or counselling, shall be each and
every of them denied and secluded the benefit of any law in this Colony, made
for the support and encouragement of the gospel ministry.

AND it is further enacted, that if any minister or ministers, contrary to the
force, intent and meaning of this act, shall presume to preach in any parish
not under his immediate care and charge, the minister of the parish where he
shall so offend, or the civil authority, or any two of the committee of such
parish, shall give information thereof in writing, under their hands, to the
clerk of the parish, or society where such offending minister does belong,
which clerk shall receive such information, and lodge and keep the same on file
in his office; and no Assistant or Justice of the Peace in this Colony shall
sign any warrant for the collecting any minister's rate, without first
receiving a certificate from the clerk of the society or parish where such rate
is to be collected, that no such information as is above mentioned has been
received by him, or lodged in his office.

AND it is further enacted, that if any person whatsoever, that is not a
settled and ordained minister, shall go into any parish, and without the
express desire and invitation of the settled minister of such parish, if any
there be, and the major part of the church, or if there be no such settled
minister, without the express desire of the church or congregation within such
parish, publicly preach and exhort the people, shall for every such offense,
upon complaint made thereof to any Assistant or Justice of the Peace, be bound
to his peaceable and good behavior until the next County Court, in that county
where the offense shall be committed, by said Assistant or Justice of the
Peace, in the penal sum of One Hundred Pounds lawful money, that he or they
will not again offend in like kind; and the said County Court may, if they see
meet, further bind the person or persons offending as aforesaid to their
peaceable and good behavior, during the pleasure of said Court.

AND it is further enacted, that if any foreigner or stranger, that is not an
inhabitant within this Colony, including as well such persons that have no
ecclesiastical character or license to preach, as such as have received
ordination or license to preach by any Association or Presbytery, shall presume
to preach, teach or publicly exhort, in any town or society within this Colony,
without the desire and license of the settled minister and the major part of
the church of said town or society, or at the call and desire of the church and
inhabitants of such town or society, provided that it so happen that there is
no settled minister there, that every such preacher, teacher or exhorter, shall
be sent as a vagrant person, by warrant from any one Assistant or Justice of
the Peace, from constable to constable, out of the bounds of this Colony.

IX. THE reader may here see how catholic those ministers were, and how
concerned to preserve union and order in every part of that Colony, and it
doubtless would have extended much further, had their power been equal to their
inclinations. But there were three things which lay much in their way. They
could not command the thoughts of the people, nor the p^^s of ministers in
other governments, and were unable to move their own rulers to carry violence
so far as they did their censures. The second itinerant minister, whom they
accused of making divisions and disturbances, published a sermon this year,
which had an extensive circulation; wherein he says, "The proper cause of
sinful divisions, is the enmity against God and holiness, which is in the
hearts of natural men, of every order; being stirred up by the devil, and their
own proud and selfish lusts. And very often natural men, who are the proper
cause of such divisions, deal with God's servants as Potipher's wife did by
Joseph; they lay the blame of their own wickedness at their doors, and make a
loud cry." And as their common talk was, that to go over parish lines to
meeting was going out of God's way, so that if any thought they got good
thereby, they were deceived, Mr. Tennent says, "There are three monstrous
ingredients in this objection, namely, a begging the question in debate, rash
judging, and limiting of God." For they who would confine religious worship to
lines which men have drawn, assume a power which is justly questioned, and
thereby attempt to limit God; and how rash is it to judge all those to be
deceived who refuse a tame submission to such usurpations Tennent's sermon on
the great danger of an unconverted ministry, p. 16, 18.
! Mr. Edwards also now observed, that, "If ministers preach never so good
doctrine, and are never so laborious in their work, yet if at such a day as
this they show to their people that they are not well affected to this work,
they will be very likely to do their people a great deal more hurt than good;
for the very fame of such a great and extraordinary work of God, if their
people were suffered to believe it to be his, and the example of other towns,
together with the preaching they might hear occasionally, would be likely to
have a much greater influence upon the minds of their people, to awaken and
animate them in religion, than all their labors with them. And we that are
ministers, by looking on this work, from year to year, with a displeased
countenance, shall effectually keep the sheep from their pasture, instead of
doing the part of shepherds, by feeding them; and our people had a great deal
better be without any settled minister at all, at such a day as this. -- Those
awful words of Christ to the Jewish fathers should be considered by us, Mat.
xxiii. 13. Woe unto you, for you shut up the kingdom of heaven; ye neither go in
yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in. The times of
Christ's remarkably appearing in behalf of his church, to revive religion, and
advance his kingdom in the world, are often spoken of in the prophecies of
scripture, as times wherein he will remarkably execute judgment on such
ministers or shepherds as do not feed the flock, but hinder their being fed,
and so deliver his flock from them; as Jer. xxiii. Ezekiel. xxxiv. Zech. x. Isai.
lvi. etc Edwards's thoughts, 1742, p. 133 -- 135.
."

How weighty and solemn are these considerations! yet the imperfections and
mistakes of the real servants of Christ, and the hypocrisy and apostasy of
others, have often been catched at as a shield against the authority of truth
in these respects; as the following facts will further show.

CHAP. VIII.
1. Mistakes and Enthusiasms of learned Ministers. 2. The Use that was made
thereof against true Religion and Liberty. 3. Ill Treatment of the Baptists. 4.
And of the late Work in general. 5. Which Treatment was carried to the greatest
Height in Connecticut. 6. Stars swept down thereby.

I. MR. Devenport derived his descent from the first minister of New Haven, and
was son of a minister of Stamford, in Fairfield county. He and Mr. Daniel
Bliss, a lively minister at Concord, took their first degrees at Yale college
in 1732, as Mr. Wheelock and Mr. Pomroy did theirs in 1733, and Timothy Allen
his in 1736; who all dated their conversions before these times. Allen was
ordained at West-Haven; but upon uttering some unguarded expressions, about how
unprofitable the scriptures were to the unregenerate, their Consociation
deposed him from his office. Devenport was an instrument of great awakenings in
many places; and no man before him ever labored to so good purpose as he did,
among the Mohegan and Nyantic Indians; from whence also sprang a great work
among the Narragansets The Commissioners at Boston, for sending out and
supporting missionaries among the Indians, sent Mr. Joseph Park to Westerly,
upon that business, in 1733. In 1738 the east part of that town, where the
Narragansets chiefly resided, was set off by the name of Charlestown. But in
nine years, he was not able to bring one English family, in those two towns, to
set up family worship; nor above a dozen Indians to attend on his ministry:
Until, being greatly enlightened himself, by means of those itinerant
ministers, a revival began among his people, and a church of 14 English members
was formed in May, 1742; which was succeeded with so great a work among the
Indians the next year, as brought many of them into that church, and an hundred
of them usually to attend on his ministry. Christian history, vol. 1, p. 202 --
210. Mr. Park died there March 1, 1777.

Stephen Babcock, a member of that church, became the pastor of a Baptist
church in 1750, and continued so until his death in 1775.


. But having always lived among ministers who claimed a like power in the
Christian church, as the seed of Aaron had in that of the Jews; and being
deeply sensible of the mischiefs which unconverted teachers do to precious
souls, he imbibed a strong persuasion, that it was his duy to examine the
ministers wherever he came, and to warn the people against hearing such as he
judged to be blind guides. For these things he was taken up and brought before
Connecticut Legislature, who sent him out of their Colony. Separations were
hereby caused at New London, New Haven, and Milford. And it was impressed upon
sundry minds, that they must go their way forth, and erect a shepherd's tent at
New London, to educate persons in for the ministry. Such a school was therefore
opened, to which a number resorted, wherein Allen presided. And though he was
once imprisoned for preaching, and others suffered much, it did but animate
them the more. And Devenport must needs go and preach to the great metropolis
of New England. Upon his arrival he had long conferences with the ministers of
Boston and Charlestown; until on July 1, 1742, most of them signed a
declaration, wherein they said, "He appears to us to be truly pious, and we
hope God has used him as an instrument of good to many souls; yet we judge it
our duty to bear testimony against the following particulars. 1. His being
acted much by sudden impulses. 2. His judging some ministers in Long Island and
New England to be unconverted; and thinking himself called of God to demand of
his brethren, from place to place, and account of their regenerate state, when
or in what manner the Holy Spirit wrought upon and renewed them. 3. His going
with his friends, singing through the streets and highways, to and from the
houses of worship, on Lord's days and other days In this way of singing he was
almost entirely singular, even from those who were otherwise engaged with him
in the general cause.
. 4. His encouraging private brethren to pray and exhort in assemblies gathered
for that purpose. We judge it therefore our present duty not to invite him into
our places of public worship, as otherwise we might have readily done." But
this did not prevent his going to examine each of them, and then declaring
publicly against them; naming some as unconverted, and comparing others to
Jehosaphat in Ahab's army, and calling the people to separate from them
Christian history, vol. 2, p. 406 -- 408.
. He proceeded farther eastward in this way, and upon his return to Boston in
August he was imprisoned and brought upon trial in Court, for slandering their
ministers, but the jury judged him to be non compos mentis, and so acquitted
him Chauncy's thoughts, p. 164. 165.
. Separations hereupon took place in Boston, Ipswich and Newbury. After his
return to Long Island, he was brought over to New London; where he and others
were carried so far, under a notion of purging away all error, as to burn a
considerable pile of books, that in their view were erroneous, near the town
wharff, on Lord's day, March 6, 1743, just as people were returning from public
worship. Norcott upon baptism was cast into the pile, but was catched out by
another hand. The next day, under a conceit of destroying idolatry, they
collected a large heap of fine clothes and ornaments, but were hindered from
burning of them, partly by a gentleman's coming to Devenport, and assuring him,
that if all he had idolized must be burnt, he must burn him first. Great
confusion was caused by these things, and the shepherd's tent broke up soon
after M^^ (...) Prince and (...) for began a weekly publication, and continued
it for two years, under the name of The Christian History; which is very
serviceable in ours.
.

II. THOSE who teach God's fear by the precepts of men, watch for iniquity,
Isaiah xxix. 13, 20. And they had now got so much of it, as emboldened them to
appear very openly against the work in this land. The annual convention of
ministers at Boston, May 25, published their testimony upon this subject; and
especially against "The spirit and practice of separation, from the particular
flocks to which persons belong, to join with and support lay-exhorters or
itinerants Chauncy's thought^. p. 2^^
." This moved some friends to the late revival to publish an invitation, in the
Boston papers, to all ministers who had favorable thoughts of that work, to
meet there the day after the ensuing commencement at Cambridge, to give their
minds concerning it; and such as could not well come, were desired to send in
their thoughts in writing. In answer to this request, about ninety ministers
met at Boston, July 7, and elected a committee, to draw, up a testimony and
letter of advice to the churches, to be laid before them next morning. But
twenty of them went off, and did not stay to hear it. Of those who stayed,
forty-four signed it without reserve; wherein they testify, that a glorious
work of divine grace had been wrought in this land, in the three preceding
years; but advise, "That laymen do not invade the ministerial office, and,
under a pretense of exhorting, set up preaching; which (say they) is very
contrary to gospel order, and tends to introduce errors and confusion into the
churches. That ministers do not invade the province of others, and, in ordinary
cases, preach in another's parish without his knowledge, and against his
consent." Fifteen more signed it, with an exception in these words, viz. "We
concur with the testimony, for the substance of it, excepting that article of
itinerancy, or ministers and others intruding into other ministers parishes
without their consent, which great disorder we apprehend not sufficiently
testified againt therein." At the head of these was Dr. Colman; who twelve
years before called it a fret of zeal, and a narrow party spirit, in the
apostle John, to desire our Savior himself to forbid others, because, said
John, they follow not us. The other signers to this exception were Checkley and
Eliot of Boston, Foul of Hingham, Baxter of Medfield, Carpenter of Hull,
Bradstreet of Marblehead, Abbot and Prentice of Charlestown, Turell of Medford,
Dorr of Mendon, Parkman of Westborough, Eells of Situate, Bass of Hanover, and
Maccarty of Kingston. On the other hand, nine ministers were sensible that in
many cases ministers might preach in the parishes of others without their
consent, and that, "This liberty cannot be invaded or denied, without inhumanly
invading the essential rights of conscience." These were Sewall and Prince of
Boston, Diman of Salem, Chipman of Beverly, Emerson of Topsfield, Emerson of
Malden, Goddard of Spencer, Weld of Attleborough, and Cotton of Providence
Christian history, vol 1, p. 155 -- 166, 198.
Others were so much set against that liberty, as to procure the publication of
the before-cited Connecticut law in a Boston news-paper Chauncy's thoughts, p.
41.
And it was evidently the want of power, that prevented the enacting of such
laws in the Massachusetts; notwithstanding all the obligations they were under
to the Hollis family. Mr. Isaac Hollis, a pious Baptist minister near London,
was now sending over liberal communications, toward christianizing the
Stockbridge Indians; as Dr. Colman himself informs us Christian history, vol.
1, p. 150.
Yet how were Baptists treated here!

III. MR. James Bound, John Dabny, and Thomas Boucher, from Britain, which John
Proctor, a town schoolmaster in Boston, members of the Baptist church there,
withdrew from it, and began another church in July; and Mr. Ephraim Bound (son
to James) was ordained their pastor, September 7, 1743. The reasons of their
withdraw were because Mr. Condy taught Arminian doctrine, contrary to the
original principles of the church, and also opposed the late work of God in the
land. Philip Freeman, member of a Baptist church in London, came over to
Boston, and joined to that new church; who sent an account of their principles
and conduct to Dr. John Gill, which obtained his approbation, and a
considerable present was sent them from London. The increase of the Baptists in
New Jersey soon after moved Mr. Jonathan Dickinson, the first President of
their college, to write a dialogue upon infant baptism. It was printed both at
New York and Boston in 1746, but without any name to it. Mr. Freeman sent one
of them to Dr. Gill, with a request that he would answer it. He did so in 1749,
and began with these words, viz. "Many being converted under the ministry of
the word in New England, and enlightened into the ordinance of believers
baptism, whereby the churches of the Baptist persuasion at Boston and in the
country have been increased, has alarmed the Pedobaptist ministers of the
Colony; who have applied to one Mr. Dickinson, a country minister, who, as my
correspondent informs me, has wrote with some success against the Arminians, to
write in favor of infant sprinkling." In 1752 Mr. Clark (who wrote against
Walton twenty years before) published a reply to Gill, wherein he said, "In
this introductory passage, there are several gross mistakes in fact, or
manifest untruths." And he takes up above five pages, in trying to prove this
charge; thinking, undoubtedly, that if he could prove him to be a false man in
his introduction, his book might more easily be answered, in the opinion of
most; who generally have men's persons in admiration because of advantage. He
allows that Dickinson wrote against the Sectaries, and names as such the
Quakers, Anabaptists, Arminians and Antinomians; not mentioning that himself
was one of the eleven signers of the paper in favor of Osborn's Arminianism in
1740. The proofs for his charge against Gill consist in limiting his words to
the Massachusetts, instead of all New England, and denying any great increase
of the Baptists, so as to alarm the ministers; or that any in or near Boston
sent to Dickinson to write upon that subject, [which was not affirmed.] But
what shall we think of Clark? Gill was never here, and therefore might easily
mistake the geography of the country; but his accuser was born and educated in
it; and he says of that new church, "They have set up an illiterate teacher. To
this separate society there have been, indeed, some few enthusiasts and
separatists from some churches in Boston, and from the adjacent parts of the
country, who have joined themselves. -- Besides -- I know of no other Baptist
church, except at the out-skirts of the Province toward Rhode Island and
Providence, where I am informed there are two or three societies that call
themselves Baptist churches Clark against Gill, p. 1 -- 6.
Whereas, at the time when he wrote thus, there were two Baptist churches in
Boston, two in Swanzey, two in Rehoboth, and one in each of the towns of
Bellingham, Sutton, Leicester, Sturbridge, Brimfield and Springfield. And how
guilty must a man be, thus to misrepresent the state of his own Province, in
order to fix an odium upon a gentleman who never was in it! He unjustly accused
him of holding conversion to be to a particular sect; but how many reproachful
names does himself cast upon dissenters from his own sect? Arminians is one of
those names; whereas the largest addition to said church in Boston, that they
had received from any one town in the country, was of a number of judicious
Christians in Medfield, who refused to join in the settlement of an Arminian
minister there, who has since been forced to resign his office, because of his
having a child by his maid. After the great earthquake November 18, 1755, Mr.
Bound's lectures were flocked to from all parts of the town; and such a
blessing was granted upon his ministry, that they had an hundred communicants
in that church. His life was unblemished and exemplary, until he died with
great peace in his own soul, and much lamented by others, June 18, 1765.

IV. IN 1742, Mr. Edwards published his thoughts, in five parts; showing that
the work going on in the land was a glorious work of God; the duty of all to
acknowledge and promote it, and the great danger of the contrary; wherein its
friends had been injuriously blamed; what ought to be corrected among them, and
what positively ought to be done to promote the work. Upon a view of which Dr.
Chauncy set off and traveled through New England, New York and New Jersey, to
collect matter for an answer to him, which was published this year, with the
names of three Governors, two Lieut. Governors, many Counselors, and in all
above seven hundred men as subscribers for it. Above 300 pages in the book are
taken up upon things that he said were of a bad and dangerous tendency in the
land. He ranks them under eight heads, namely, itinerant preaching, great
terrors, sudden light and joy, censuring of others, impulses, confounding of
many exercises together, and a spirit of error. Under which last head, eight
particulars are named, viz. Holding that unconverted ministers could not
convert others, separations, presumptuous depending upon the assistance of the
Spirit, assurance of conversion, and of the time of it, vilifying good works,
and not allowing sanctification to be an evidence of justification. And lest
all the bad stories he had raked together, from every part of America, should
fail of clothing those points with a garb sufficiently odious, a number are
added thereto from Europe, and some from the dregs of Popery. A touch upon what
he says, about itinerant preaching, and rash judging, may give some idea how
strong his arguments were. -- Against the former he brings 2 These. iii. 10-15,
1 Pet. iv. 15, and 2 Cor. x. 12-17; which condemn the eating of other men's
bread for naught, acting as busy-bodies in other men's matters, and the
commending of themselves, and going into another man's line, of things made
ready to our hands. But by whom is this line drawn? by God or man? Teachers who
are fond of support by tax and compulsion, and promote the use of violence
toward such as follow not them, most evidently fall under the ^ash of these
scriptures. According to Chauncy, rash and uncharitable judging was begun in
these parts by Mr. Whitefield, "Who seldom preached, but he had something or
other in his sermon against unconverted ministers." And why was this
uncharitable? Because Dr. Cotton Mather said, "No man becomes a minister or a
communicant in our churches, until he has been severely examined about his
regeneration, as well as conversation (...)
." When was it so? This testimony was given in 1696; and how clearly does it
prove, that their practice remained the same in 1740! His other arguments are
alike conclusive.

V. CONNECTICUT had a more powerful way of reasoning. In October, 1742, they
forbid the erection of any public place of education, without license from
authority; and also debarred all teachers from any benefit of their laws for
their support, who had not been graduated by some Protestant college. And on
February 16 they issued a proclamation for a general fast, to be on April 1^,
174^, to deprecate the judgments of heaven, for them iniquities; "Particularly
the great neglect and contempt of the gospel and the ministry thereof, and the
prevailing of a spirit of error, disorder, unpeaceableness, pride, bitterness,
uncharitableness, censoriousness, disobedience, calumniating and reviling of
authority, divisions, contentions, separations and confusions in churches;
injustice, idleness, evil-speaking, lasciviousness, and all other vices and
impieties which abound among us Ibid, p. 295, 296.
:" Which was issued early enough to have influence in the choice of their
Legislature. Col. Hezekiah Huntington had been a member of their Council for
three years; but at their election at Hartford, May 12, he was left out of it;
and John Bulkley, Esquire was chosen in his stead, who sent Zebulon Waterman and
others, of Colchester, to Hartford gaol the summer before, for teaching and
exhorting at a religious meeting. Waterman was soon after ordained the pastor
of a Baptist church in Colchester. It was well known that Huntington was much
engaged in the late revival of religion in the land, and that he openly
testified against the persecutions therein. King William's act of toleration
was adopted in Connecticut, in May, 1708, just before their Saybrook scheme was
formed. But because it had been extended, by their County Court, to the
dissenters in New Haven and Milford, it was now repealed, with a declaration,
"That those commonly called Presbyterians or Congregationalists shall not take
benefit of said law." And it was enacted, that none of other denominations
should, for the future, be allowed the privileges of dissenters, but such as
should "Before the Assembly take the oaths and subscribe the declaration
provided in the act of Parliament, in cases of like nature." And as Mr. John
Owen, of Groton, was complained of, for having in April before preached against
such proceedings, an order was given out to bring him before the Assembly, to
answer therefore, at their next session. In the mean time a Presbyterian
minister came from New Jersey, and preached at Milford; for which he was taken
up on a Saturday. And as they spoke of confining him until Monday, he said,
"Sir, I hope you will not confine me from preaching Christ." That is what we
took you up for, said the Judge. He was carried, as a vagrant person, out of
that Colony, but then he returned and preached at New Haven. And as the people
there had got into the way of concealing their ministers on week days, an
officer came and seized this minister, at their meeting house door, on a Lord's
day morning, and carried him off. Yet when he was let go, he returned again and
preached to the people, an account of which being laid before the Assembly at
New Haven, of October 13, they added another act, which required ministers who
should so return to pay the cost of their transportation, and to be committed
until they should give an Hundred Pounds bond, not to offend again in like
kind. Such were their proceedings against a precious minister of Christ; whose
name and title since is, Samuel Finley D. D. President of New Jersey college.

VI. As Mr. Dw^^ avoided being taken, and like complaints were exhibited
against Mr. Po^roy, orders were ga^^^ (...) arrest them both, and to bring them
to the (...) ^^sion of their Assembly. Accordingly, at their meeting at
Hartford, May 10, 1744. Owen came with an humble confession, and they forgave
him, he paying costs. Pomroy was brought, and stood trial for some hours; but
was condemned, and ordered to be committed till he would pay the costs, and
bind himself for one year, in a recognizance of Fifty Pounds, not to offend
again in like manner. He then yielded to their requirements. And on July 28 Mr.
Devenport signed a retraction of the four articles which were condemned at
Boston, and of his enthusiasms at New London; which was sent to Mr. Prince to
publish with all speed. He did so, but prefixed thereto an extract from an
ancient author, who says, "It is no uncommon thing for those who love God in
sincerity, through impatience with the bold impieties of wicked men, to
transgress the limits of a regular zeal. And when this impatience betrays them
into mistakes, for which they meet with too severe treatment, either from
friends, or from men in power; instead of correcting only the irregular sallies
of their zeal, they are apt to suppress the most regular and laudable
expressions of it, and become lukewarm and indifferent Christian history, vol.
2, p. 234 -- 240
." The sequel will demonstrate the propriety of this remark.

IN January Elder Timothy Packom and Daniel Green visited their Baptist
brethren at New London and Saybrook, and baptized some persons at each place.
At Saybrook the people laid some things across a stream on a Lord's day, to
raise the water to baptize in. False charges were added to what was fact in the
case; and said two teachers, and several other persons, were seized and
imprisoned at New London; one of whom was a woman with a child at her breast.
But the above evils were well exposed in a piece, entitled, The essential
rights of Protestants; dated March 30, 1744. Col. Elisha Williams, the best
President they ever had at Yale college, was the undoubted author of it; though
being printed at Boston, it was sent as a letter from thence to a friend in
Connecticut. Having described the origin, design and limits of civil
government, he says, "Man by his constitution, as he in a reasonable being,
capable of the knowledge of his MAKER, is a moral and accountable being; and
therefore, as every one is accountable for himself, he must reason, judge and
determine for himself. That faith and practice which depend on the judgment and
choice of any other person, and not on the person's own judgment and choice,
may pass for religion in the synagogue of Satan, whose tenet is that ignorance
is the mother of devotion; but with no understanding Protestant will it pass
for any religion at all. -- Ecclesiastical officers, as they are Christ's
officers, they have authority to teach men this have no authority to teach men
any thing but the mind and will of Christ. It is a truth that shines with a
meridian brightness, that whatever is not contained in a commission, is out of
it and excluded by it; and the teaching his laws only being contained in the
commission, what is not his law is out of it, and by that commission they are
exclued from teaching it, or forbid by it Essential rights, p. 8, 17.
." And from hence he plainly exposed their persecuting laws and measures. But
though this was printed at Boston, and dispersed in Connecticut, yet the ruling
party had no eyes to see it, nor ears to hear it. We must maintain the good old
way, was their cry, although what they so called was diametrically opposite to
the first principles of New England. And though for reasons before given the
Massachusetts could not go so far as Connecticut did, yet ^^eir disposition is
conspicuous in what follows.

MR. Peter Thatcher was the third minister of Middleborough, where he began to
preach in September, 1707, and he continued their pastor until his joyful exit,
April 22, 1744. He was much affected with Mr. Tennent's preaching in these
parts, and labored earnestly for a reformation among his people, but with much
sorrow of heart, until such a blessing was granted at a meeting, November 23,
1741, that about an hundred persons, professors and others, were greatly
awakened; and the ensuing harvest was so great, that when he died they had
three hundred and forty-three communicants above half of whom were males
Christian history, vol. 2, p. 77 -- 79.
The church met soon after, and elected a committee to manage their affairs,
and in particular to provide preaching for them; but the parish committee, who
were men of influence in the town Mr. Jacob Thompson, Benjamin White, Esquire and
Capt. Ebenezer Morton.
, were very opposite to the late work among them, and they counteracted the
church in that matter. And when the church had voted to hear Mr. Silvanus
Conant four sabbath^ upon probation, they went and got another man to supply
the pulpit the same days, the first of which was September 9; when Conant was
permitted to preach in the afternoon. But on September 13 they received the
following advice from a Council at Duxbury, viz. "That though it belongs to the
church to lead the congregation in the choice and call of a minister to office,
that it is the right, as it has been the custom of the several parishes (when
destitute of a minister) to apply, by a committee chosen by the whole parish,
to such person or persons as shall be recommended to them for that purpose; and
we advise the gentlemen, and all concerned, to follow this laudable custom."
The ministers who gave this advice were Eels of Situate, Gay of Hingham, Lewis
of Pembroke, Bass of Hanover, Perkins and Angier of Bridgewater Morton against
Cotton, p. 14, 15.
And by these means the body of the church were shut out of their
meeting house, with the minister they chose; and had no better place than a
barn to meet in, until they built another house. And less than a quarter of the
church called themselves the standing part, held the old house, and went on and
settled another minister. Mr. Conant was ordained, according to their laws, by
the advice of a Council of five churches, March 28, 1745, and ministered there
to good purpose, until his decease, December 7, 1777. Mr. John Cotton, then of
Halifax, now of Plymouth, published a narrative of these transactions; to which
a virulent answer was returned; both in 1746. Judge Oliver was of that opposing
party; and he and others had such influence at Boston, that the church could
not have any proper hearing there for about four years. But when that was once
granted, end every man in the parish had liberty to choose for himself, and
each to support the minister he chose, the opposers were soon sick of their
minister, and in less than ten years he was dismissed, and their society was
soon after dissolved; leaving a loud warning to all against empowering the
world to control the church about soul-guides.

CHAP. IX.
1. A Deliverer raised up in an unlikely Way. 2. His Preaching and Success. 3.
The Division at Canterbury. 4. Sufferings for preaching the Gospel. 5.
Expulsions from College. 6. The true State of the Controversy. 7. Opposition to
Whitefield. 8. New Churches formed. 9. Classes and Courts against them. 10. But
were defeated. 11. Especially in the Branford Case.

1. BY whom shall Jacob arise, for he is small? says one prophet. Jerusalem
has none of her sons to guide her, says another. And how much was this the
case with New England in 1744? Although some of their ministers had been alive
in religion, and had done a great deal to promote the power of it; yet they
were agreed with formalists in confining the ministry to a college education
and in having of it supported by tax and compulsion; therefore none of them
could now lead the church out of her Egyptian bondage. And where could such a
leader be found? Could any man think of looking to the barren shores of
Cape-Cod for his birth, to the obscure village of Canterbury for his education,
or to a bench of lawyers for his integrity and faithfulness? Of all things this
seemed most unlikely! Yet such was the event. Mr. Elisha Pain, of Easham, upon
said Cape, removed with his family to Canterbury, and was one of the seven men
who formed a church there, June 13, 1711. His wife was of the family of Deacon
John Doane His daughter Abigail married a Lothrop in Norwich, where she was
much esteemed, both for her capacity and her piety, until her death in 1735,
aet. 104.
, one of the early magistrates of Plymouth Colony. Mr. Pain had four sons,
whom he brought up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. The second of
them dated his coversion about the time of the revival of religion at Windham
in 1721, and before the general revival, twenty years after he was become one
of the greatest lawyers in Connecticut, and was in very prosperous
circumstances in the world: In one of his private papers he says, "God has so
ordered it in his Providence, that ever since I was a child I have had an
enquiring mind after knowledge, of almost all sorts; but religion bore the
sway. I seemed to have a regard for good men, and therefore took great care to
watch persons, especially to see how they kept the sabbath. Before my
conversion I had the curiosity to hear all the different worships in
New England, and enquired into their principles, and observed their behavior,
both in and out of their worship. And I saw so little, or rather nothing of the
power of godliness in any of them, that I was then even in my carnal estate,
afraid that the true religion was not in this land. Yet worldly pleasure, and
the form which was most acknowledged, would soon make me easy again. But when
conviction came to lay hold of me, let who would be of the true religion, I saw
mine was of no value." In July, 1742, he received an internal call to preach
the gospel, and in December following he offered himself for examination before
some pious ministers; and they gave him encouragement about entering into that
work, but wore for his doing it upon the Say brook plan, which he never liked.
The church he belonged to had been destitute of a pastor near two years, when
they met on January 27, 1743, and declared by vote, "That the platform of
church discipline agreed upon by the Synod at Cambridge, in 164^, is most
agreeable to the former designed practice of this church, excepting their
having ruling elders as distinct officers, and most agreeable to the
scriptures;" though they did not withdraw their fellowship from the consociated
churches. Soon after this Mr. Pain set out upon a journey; but for preaching
the gospel in Woodstock, which then belonged to the Massachusetts, he was
seized on February 19, by virtue of a warrant from John Chandler, Esquire of that
town, and was imprisoned at Worcester.

II. BUT his bonds proved to be for the furtherance of the gospel, and he
preached it to good purpose in prison. And on March 10 four ministers met at
Lebanon, and signed a testimony in his favor; wherein, after mentioning the
cause why he was not approbated in the preceding December, they say,

From the knowledge we then had of him, we were of the opinion that he was
qualified, and that it was his duty to give our testimony for him, that he is,
so far as we know or have ever heard, of a regular Christian life and
conversation; and we esteem him sound in the faith, and of good understanding
in the doctrines of the gospel of Christ.

ELEAZAR WHEELOCK, BENJAMIN POMRO^, JOSEPH MEACHAM, SAMUEL MOSELY.



THIS Mr. Mosely sent to him in a letter, wherein he said, "Dear Sir, stand
fast in the faith; be strong. They that be with you are more than they that be
with our adversaries. Never think it hard to suffer for Christ. It is enough
for the servant that he be as his Lord." -- Yet the next year all these men
were overpowered by the enemy, so as to turn and act against him, in the great
cause of reformation. On May 13 Worcester Court were constrained to give him a
discharge, as having been imprisoned without law; and he went round and
preached the gospel in the adjacent towns for a fortnight, and then returned
home. July 8 he set off again, and traveled to Providence, Bristol, Boston,
Cambridge, and as far northward as Dunstable and Lancaster, preaching the
gospel with great power; and returned home December 3, having, according to a
journal he kept, preached two hundred and forty-four sermons in that journey.
And hearing of the measures many were then pursuing, under a pretense of
promoting peace and good order, he said, "Let me speak freely of the peace that
Connecticut was in. For these forty years we have had the name of a contentious
people in the law. This was so customary, that to sue a man for debt was become
not much more than a compliment. And scarce a meeting house has been set up for
many years, without sundry petitions to the Assembly; with great heats
animosity, party against party, not in love, as is too well known to be
denied." And yet by their laws it was Forty Pounds fine for any people to set
up a meeting house without leave from Court. And, referring to what Daniel says
of those who shall be corrupted by flatteries, he said of this time, "I verily
believe they know not what they are doing; for they seem to be zealous to
maintain peace, but take the direct way to break it. Christ is a peaceable
Prince, and Prince of peace; and if there was nothing in the way of his
kingdom, it would be as peaceable here as it is in heaven. The Spirit is
compared to water; water makes no noise unless it is interrupted; so is the
spirit of Christ." In June, 1744, he went and labored with success in his
native country of Cape-Cod, from whence sprang the Baptist church in Harwich.

III. UPON his return a division took place in Canterbury in the following
manner. The parish had called a candidate there to preach, whom most of the
church were not edified by. In August a committee of their Association met
there, at the call of the parish, to give advice in the case. Mr. Pain was
requested to give them his objections against said candidate, but he refused,
because they were not called there by the church. Another member gave them a
copy of their church vote against him; which the ministers in their result said
"Was signed in behalf of the aggrieved part of the church;" and advised the
parish to go on and settle their candidate. For this Pain, on September 12,
wrote a smart reproof to one of those ministers, for wronging the truth, in
calling that an aggrieved part, which was the church; and for encouraging the
world to usurp such a power over the church of Christ. Hereupon he was
disciplined by the secular arm. Their charge, his plea, and their judgment
thereon, were as follow. Their charge was,

IV. THAT Elisha Pain, of Canterbury, in the county of Windham, who is not a
settled and ordained minister, did on the 10th day of April, A. D. 1744, go
into the third parish in Windham, in the county aforesaid, and in said parish,
in the house of Mr. Benjamin Cleaveland, there the said Pain did publicly
preach and exhort in matters of religion, both as to doctrine and practice, to
a great number of people then present, that were notified many days before.

Windham, ss. September 22, 1744.
At a Justices Court. Present Nathanael Huntington, Justice of Peace.

AND now the prisoner at the bar being brought before this Court, for preaching
the gospel of Jesus Christ, and exhorting a number of people (as presentment)
pleads, that this Court has not jurisdiction of this case; for the facts
complained of are warranted by the law of God and the King, and therefore not
triable by any Court or law inferior thereto; and this he is ready to verify
judgment.

ELISHA PAIN.

THIS Court having considered the plea of the prisoner, do judge it
insufficient; and say, that this Court has jurisdiction of this case; and the
said Pain refused to make any other plea; whereupon it is considered by this
Court, that the said Elisha Pain shall become bound to the Treasurer of the
county of Windham in the recognizance of One Hundred Pounds lawful money, to
his peaceable and good behavior, that he the said Pain will not again offend
in the like kind, between this time and the setting of the County Court, to be
holden at Windham, in and for the county of Windham, on the second Tuesday of
December next, and then appear at said Court on said day, and take up his bond,
unless the Court shall see cause to continue the same; and pay cost of this
prosecution, and stand committed until bond is given. Cost allowed, Two Pounds
Thirteen Shillings old-tenor bills. The said Pain refused to give bond as
above mentioned, or any ways to comply with the judgment, and was committed the
day and year above written.

NATHANAEL HUNTINGTON, Justice of Peace" Paine's view of the churches, p. 20-22.
.

BY giving security to the keeper, he got liberty to preach in the gaol-yard,
which he frequently did to very good purpose. The day after one of those
seasons he wrote to his beloved wife and said,

Take no thought for the morrow; the Lord will take care of all his. Be not at
all concerned about what the world can do to me; for they are all chained fast,
and cannot touch me but by leave of the blessed Jesus, and if you are not
afraid of his hurting of me, then be not afraid of the worms of the dust. I
trust the Lord is about to do some great thing. It was a day of conviction
yesterday, especially among the little ones. I never had so great a sense of
the Lord's being angry with the wicked, as yesterday morning. O may he pity you
and all Zion! I pray God to keep you and me, and all his, from a wicked and
perverse generation, among whom we dwell, and cause us to shine as burning
lights. O may he cheer up our souls; humble our natures, by giving the victory
to the spirit over the flesh! I know not when I shall be delivered from this
pleasant house; I seem to be willing to tarry here just as long as my Father
and your Father shall see cause to use me here; though I seem to have a strong
persuasion that I shall not tarry here long; but how the Lord will bring it
about I know not. Let us leave it to him, and wait with patience until the
appointed time shall come. And if I go from prison to Paradise, it will be as
sweet as if I went from a throne. I desire to commit you, myself, and all ours
and his, to the wise disposal of a holy God. So farewell in the Lord Jesus.
Amen.

ELISHA PAIN.
Windham Prison, October 8, 1744.

V. HIS persecutors soon found that their cause was weakened more by his
preaching and conduct in prison, than out of it, and therefore released him
about October 19. In the mean time, as their church at Canterbury had no way to
avoid hearing a man they were not edified by, but by leaving the meeting house,
they withdrew and held their worship at another house. And two members of it,
who had one of them been at Yale college three years, and the other newly
entered, when at home in vacation time, met for worship with their church on
Lord's days. For this they were convented before the rulers of the college in
November; who after hearing and considering of their pleas, said,

Since the principal design of erecting this college (as declared in charter)
was to train up a succession of learned and orthodox ministers, by whose
instruction and example people might be directed in the ways of religion and
good order; therefore to educate persons whose principles and practices are
directly subversive of the visible church of Christ, would be contrary to the
original design of erecting this society; and we perceive that it would be a
contradiction of the civil government, to support a college to educate students
to trample upon their own laws, and break up the churches which they establish
and protect, especially since the General Assembly, in May, 1742, thought
proper to give the governors of the college some special advice and direction
upon that account, which was to this effect; that all proper care should be
taken to prevent the scholars imbibing those or such like errors; and that
those who would nto be orderly and submissive, should not be allowed the
privileges of the college. Neither can we conceive that it makes any odds,
whether such pernicious errors are imbibed and practiced, and the laws of God
and the civil government are broken in or out of the vacancy of the town of
New-Heaven; or with or without the concurrence of their parents, since the
pernicious consequences thereof to the college and reglion will be just the
same.

THOMAS CLAP, Rector, CHAUNCY WHITTLESEY, Tutors Paine's view, p. 15, 16.
JOHN WHITING, Tutors. Paine's view, p. 15, 16.
THOMAS DARLING, Tutors. Paine's view, p. 15, 16.




VI. FOR these reasons Mr. Paine's two nephews, John and Ebenezer Cleaveland,
were expelled from college; and three years after the eldest of them was
settled at Ipswich, and the other afterward at Cape-Ann. Pain was repeatedly
cited to appear before the ministers of that county, to answer to complaints
they received against him; but he knew their way too well to be drawn into
their trap. Twelve of them met November 13, and drew up a paper against him and
his brethren, and published it in a news-paper. December 11, a larger number
met, and published a pamphlet, as a letter from them to their several
societies, which at the foot p. 52 is signed by Joseph Coite, Ebenezer
Williams, Joseph Meacham, Samuel Dorrance, Solomon Williams, Jacob Eliot,
Marston Cabot, Samuel Moseley, Ephraim Avery, Ebenezer Devotion, Eleazer
Wheelock, Abel Styles, Stephen White, John Bass, Richard Salter, William
Throope. A single passage therein will give a plain idea of the nature of their
controversy. Having quoted Deuteronomy. xiii. 1-3, as a warning to the people against
hearing Mr. Pain and his brethren, they say, "The case here supposed is an
attempt to draw the people to idolatry; and this you will say is not your case.
These prophets and dreamers endeavor to draw you to Christ, and not from him:
But then they endeavor to draw you from his institutions, to a way of worship
which he has not instituted. Though the case is not so strong, yet the argument
against your compliance is the same; for whatsoever worship God has not
instituted and directed in his word, is false worship, and therefore if there
seem to be never so many appearances of God's power attending it, you may not
go after, any more than after false god. Association letter, p. 43.
." Now observe, Christ says concerning the field, which is the world, let both
grow together until the harvest. While he says to the church, put away from
among yourselves that wicked person. In agreement herewith Mr. Pain applied
the first of these precepts to the State, and said, " The church is to cast her
tares out, when they appear, or the whole church is leavened. Ibid. p. 10.
." But they contradicted him; and calling the field the visible church,
asserted that Christ would not let the servants "Go and root up the tares, even
when they appeared. Page 21.
." Thus those who use secular force in religious affairs, violate the divine
command both ways; they obstruct discipline in the church, and invade the
rights of conscience and humanity in the State. This was remarkably verified in
Canterbury: For November 27 their church met, and sixteen males against
twenty-three joined with the parish in sending for their Consociation to ordain
Mr. James Cogswell there; and the Consociation met for that purpose December
26, but not having the majority of the church for him, they could not get along
according to their own laws. At length they called the parish together, and got
them to declare, by vote, their willingness that the Assembly should set off
those who did not choose him from supporting him; "And that they may have all
legal privileges of a distinct and religious society;" and so went on and
ordained him. Which proceeding an advocate for them in 1771 called judicious,
cautious, and gentle Fish's examiner examined, p. 76.
Yet thereby the first church in Canterbury was stripped of all legal
privileges of a distinct religious society; and because they desired no new
incorporation from the Assembly, but only petitioned to be exempted from
supporting a teacher they never chose, their petition was disregarded, their
goods were torn away, or their persons imprisoned therefore, for fifteen years;
and the ministers who ordained him discovered no more compassion toward him,
than the priest and Levite did to the man that fell among thieves. This is the
plain truth, without any exaggeration.

VII. NEW ENGLAND now received a second visit from Mr. Whitefield, who came
over in a mast-ship, and landed at York, November 2. But how were ministers
alarmed at the news! His first coming caused a great shaking among the dry
bones; what then could they look for in the present state of the churches? An
opposing party in Plymouth, disliking the preaching of the pious Mr. Leonard,
had formed a new church there, and Dr. Chauncy preached at the instalment of
their minister, five days after Whitefield landed; when Chauncy said, "I
beseech my fathers and brethren in the ministry to mark this man who has caused
divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and
avoid him. Turn your view, my brethren, into all corners of the land: Behold
the confusion in towns: the contentions in churches! -- Perhaps it will be
said, these mischievous things are only accidental effects, and not to be
charged upon him. So far from it, that they are the unavoidable consequence of
that spirit in which he appeared Sermon at Friends instalment. p. ^8
." This is undoubted truth; and the reader may judge of the nature of that
spirit, by the foregoing and following facts. For the heads of Harvard college
soon published a testimony against Whitefield, which was followed with another,
by an Association of ministers at Weymouth, January 15, 1745; and a third by an
Association at Marlborough, the 22d. The like was done by many other collective
bodies, and by individuals. And much pains were taken to persuade the world,
that he was a dishonest man, especially because of his saying so much as he had
done against unconverted ministers, while himself was a minister of the church
of England. A number of answers were returned, by himself and others; some of
which we have mentioned under the year 1740. On May 28; 1741, the President of
Harvard college delivered a sermon before the annual Convention of ministers at
Boston; when referring to Mr. Whitefield and Mr. Tennent he said, "Those two
pious and valuable men of God, who have been lately laboring more abundantly
among us, have been greatly instrumental in the hand of God to revive this
blessed work: and many, no doubt, have been savingly converted from the error
of their ways, and many more have been in some measure roused from their
lethargy." But being now reminded of this Whitefield's letter to that college,
p. 20, 21.
, his reply was, "Alas, how was I deluded with show and appearance!" And had he
and the college now got free from delusion? In the eighth page of their
testimony against White-field they say, "The believer may have satisfaction,
that he has the assistance of the Spirit of God with him, in so continual and
regular a manner, that he may be said to dwell in him, and yet he have no
feeling of it." But observe, to be past feeling is the depth of Pagan darkness,
Ephesians. iv. 19. And one of the worst things that was now alleged against Mr.
Whitefield, was his saying their colleges were in darkness that might be felt.
Therefore it was ingeniously asked upon this occasion, why they need to produce
the evidence of their own condemnation Hobby's defense of Whitefield, p. 23.
? The heads of Yale college wrote a private letter to him, and he returned an
answer, with several pamphlets upon the subject; but they were not satisfied
therewith, and therefore published a declaration against him, dated February
25, 1745, wherein they say, "From these two principles which you have laid
down, viz. that the generality of ministers are unconverted, and that all
unconverted ministers are such baneful and pernicious men, it naturally and
necessarily follows, that the people ought to discard them, or separate from
them. -- If these two principles are right and true, we are satisfied your
design is good, and we would readily join with you." But being of a contrary
mind, they accused him of a design of rooting out the standing ministers of the
country, in order to introduce foreigners in their stead, and asserted that he
told Mr. Edwards a story of that nature Said declaration, p. 6 -- 10. The
taking to Cape-Breton this year was a very remarkable event. Governor Shirley
first proposed the attempt to the Assembly at Boston. By a very small majority
they voted to undertake it, and to request assistance therein from other
Colonies, January 25; but the vote was no sooner passed, than a general union
appeared in carrying it into effect. And such dispatch was made, that an army
consisting of 4060 men, under General Pepperell, rendezvoused at Canso, in
April, where a small fleet met them, under the command of Sir Peter Warren. The
army landed on Cape-Breton April 30, to the great surprise of the enemy; and
the strong fortress of Louisburg was giver up to them on June 17, 1745. Old Mr.
Moody, who went their chaplain, publicly declared a full belief that they
should take it, before the army left Boston. Other went away saying, pray for
us, while we fight for you. That event was a great means of restoring peace to
Europe, as well as America.
This Edwards publicly contradicted; neither is there the least evidence since
of Whitefield's having any such intent. In August, 1745, I heard him preach at
Lebanon, Windham, Norwich, Mohegin and New London; before which I had never
seen him. He then spoke against separations; and his plan evidently was, to
labor for the conversion and edification of souls, and to leave the building
and government of churches to others. In 1768 the Corporation of Harvard
college, with the same President at their head, gave him a letter of thanks for
his benefactions thereto.

VIII. A YEAR having rolled away, since Canterbury church was robbed for her
rights, only for refusing to give up their judgment about soulguides, to men
who ruled with force and cruelty, without the least appearance of any design in
them of relinquishing their claims, a number of teachers and brethren met at
Mansfield, and having prepared a confession of faith and covenant, and given a
verbal account of their experiences to mutual satisfaction, they signed
covenant together, October 9, 1745. And they elected Mr. Thomas Marsh for their
p^^^or, who had, for many years, been a deacon in good esteem in the second
church in Windham; and his ordination was appointed to be on January 6, 1746.
But he was seized the day before, and imprisoned at Windham, for preaching the
gospel without license from the parish ministers. On the day he was to have
been ordained, Mr. Elisha Pain preached a suitable sermon, to a great
concourse of people, at the close of which about fourteen learned ministers
came up, and tried to scatter that flock, after their shepherd was smitten; but
they got no advantage against them. In February they chose and ordained Mr.
John Hovey for their pastor, who ministered to them for many years The first
leader in these separations, and the first pastor they ordained, after much
public service and conflict, fell asleep in the beginning of the late war. Mr.
Pain was ordained at Bridge. Hampton, on Long Island, in May, 1752, and
preached to his beloved flock, until within fifteen days of his decease, August
26, 1775, aet, 84. Mr. Hovey died October 28 following.
Mr. Thomas Denison was baptized in July, 1743, and was ordained pastor of a
small church at Ashford the November after; but they dissolving, he retracted
what is called re-baptizing, and had a chief hand in forming this new church at
Mansfield; and he laid on hands and gave the charge, in this and several
succeeding ordinations. They held the power of ordination to be in the church;
but as others have made great noise about a successive power in ministers, it
is to be observed, that Elder Denison was ordained by Elder Moulton, and he by
Elder John Callender, who was ordained by Elder Elisha Callender, in whose
ordination three of the most noted Congregational ministers in Boston assisted
in 1718. And this line was never broken, by any act of censuring or deposing,
as was the case with dissenters from Episcopacy, and also from Popery. With my
beloved mother I visited Mr. Marsh in the spring, and found him comfortable in
mind; but his body was closely locked up in prison, while a physician, who was
put into a room over his head, for giving a single woman a potion to destroy
the fruit of her womb, which destroyed her own life, was allowed, with an
officer to attend him, to visit the sick in various parts of the town. How much
was this like Barabbas and Jesus! In June Mr. Marsh was released, and in July
he was ordained a colleague with Hovey; and many such churches were soon after
formed and organized Messieurs Solomon Pain was ordained at Canterbury
September 10, Thomas Stephens at Plainfield September 11, Thomas Denison at
Norwich-Farms October 29, Jedidiah Hide at Norwich-Town October 30, Matthew
Smith at Stonington December 10, John Fuller at Lyme December 25, Joseph Snow
at Providence February 12, 1747; Samuel Wadsworth at Killingly June 3, Paul
Park at Preston July 15, Elihu Marsh at Windham October 7, Ebenezer Frothingham
at Wethersfield October 28, Nathanael Shepherd in Attleborough January 20,
1748; Isaac Backus at Bridgwater April 13, John Pain at Rehoboth August 3,
William Carpenter at Norton September 7, John Blunt at Sturbridge September 28,
Ebenezer Mack at Lyme January 12, 1749; Joshua Nickerson at Harwich February
23, Samuel Hide at Bridgwater May 11, John Palmer at Windham May 17, Samuel
Hovey at Mendon May 31, Samuel Drown at Coventry October 11, Stephen Babcock at
Wessterly April 4, 1750; Joseph Hastings at Suffield April 17, Nathanael Ewer
at Barnstable May 10, Joshua Morse at New London May 17, Jonathan Hide at
Brookline January 17, 1751; Ezekiel Cole at Sutton January 31, Ebenezer
Wadsworth at Grafton March 20, Nathanael Draper at Cambridge April 24, Peter
Werden at Warwick May 17, etc. Those in Italic became Baptish afterward;
Drown, Babcock, Morse, Draper and Werden, were so before they were ordained.
Draper was a graduate at Yale college, and the only person among them who had
such a degree; and he deserted that cause two or three years after
.

IX. THE Consociation of Windham county had an account of many of these things
laid before them January 13, 1747; upon which they adjourned to February 11,
and sent citations to the Elders Marsh, the Pains, and Stevens, to return
answers to accusations, then received against them. In the mean time the
Consociation requested their own churches to keep a day of fasting and prayer,
for divine direction. When they met again, they inserted a copy of the
Mansfield articles and covenant in their result, with objections against many
parts of it; one of which is in these words, viz. "Though most of us agree in
the article of infant baptism, yet a difference in that particular does not
break the spiritual communion of saints; therefore it is no just bar to our
covenanting and partaking of the ordinances together, wherein we are agreed."
This the ministers objected against, as it tended "To let in Anabaptists, and
seems (say they) more agreeable to the inclinations of parties than the word of
God." And having inserted many reports and reflections against said people, the
same were published at Boston, under the title of "The result of a Council of
the consociated churches in the county of Windham, relating to the principles
and practices of the several bodies of people in said county, who have
separated from the communion of the churches in this land, and set up an
uninstituted worship among themselves containing 22 pages in octavo. All their
arguments proceed upon the supposition, without proof, that theirs were the
instituted churches; and therefore that to separate from them was a revolt from
God, and a rebellion against his government in the church. And for teaching and
exhorting the prople without their leave, the before named Elder Frothingham
was imporisoned five months, John Pain eleven months, and John Palmer from
September, 1747, to January, 1748; all at Hart-ford. Solomon Pain was
imprisoned a fortnight for that cause at Windham, besides much more of like
nature done to others. And only for being members and deacons in those separate
churches, three gentlemen, at different times, were expelled out of their
Legislature; namely, Capt. Obadiah Johnson of Canterbury, Capt. Thomas Stevens
of Plainfield (father to their minister) and Capt. Nathan Jewett of Lyme. But
overstraining their power weakened it; and it now began to decline.

X. AT the election at Hartford, May 12, 1748, Colonel Huntington was again
chosen into their Council, out of which he had been excluded five years He was
the 5th son of Deacon Christopher Huntington, the first English male that was
born in Norwich, after it was planted in 1660. This son received an early
conversion, succeeded his father in the deacon's office, and did much to
promote a reformation in the town, in and after 1741. Henceforward, by annual
and full elections, he was continued a Counselor, and for a number of years
the first man therein; was Chief Judge of their County Court for twenty years,
and a Judge of Probate, until he died in peace, February 10, 1773, aet. 76.
And Solomon Pain came to this Assembly, with a memorial, signed by 330 men;
praying for a repeal of all their laws, which debarred any inhabitants in the
Colony from the liberty granted by God and tolerated by the King, or that the
execution thereof might be forbidden. After long waiting, he had liberty to
read and speak to the memorial in the Assembly; and though it was then
dismissed, yet some light was communicated thereby. In December, 1748, he was
prosecuted at Windham Court, for marrying a couple of his own people. His
brother came and pleaded his cause. The King's Attorney, in pleading against
Solomon, allowed that he was ordained the pastor of a church of Christ in
Canterbury, in as solemn a manner as could be; but then pleaded that he was not
a civil officer, because not chosen by the majority of the parish, which was
the thing which made their ministers civil officers; and he said it was in that
capacity that they were supported by tax, and had power to marry persons. And
upon this plea the case was turned against him; and also another case at the
same time against one of his society, about a tax to a legal minister. Hereupon
Mr. Elisha Pain wrote an account of these proceedings to other ministers, to
show the absurdity of their way of professing to be ministers of Christ, and to
be supported in the name of the King of England, while their constitution
differed essentially from the churches under either of those heads. At the same
time they met with a great shock from another quarter.

XI. FOR as long as Mr. Robbins continued a regular minister, and yet was
excluded out of their Consociation, it served to weaken their power. A
complaint was therefore received against him, May 31, 1743, signed by six of
his hearers, before he had any notice of who the complainants were, or what
they complained of; and a committee of ministers were appointed to go to him
upon it. As soon as he discovered who the complainants were, he went and gave
them satisfaction, and they wrote an account of it to said committee; yet they
came to him, and insisted upon his being reconciled to their Consociation: This
he tried for without success. However, perceiving what storm was gathering, he
drew three confessions, which he carried to another of their meetings; wherein
he went as far as he could toward giving them satisfaction, short of
confessing that he broke the law of God in preaching to those Batists, contrary
to the desire of Presbyterians. But as he could not in conscience confess that,
he returned home, without being reconciled to them. On May 29, 1745, a second
complaint was received against him, without his having previous notice of it,
and another committee was sent, who prevailed with him to go and offer them a
fourth confession; wherein he pleaded that his ignorance of its being a crime
to preach to the Baptists as he did, might apologize for him, so that a
reconciliation might be effected Hi^ na^a^^^, p. 1^, 14.
But they inform us, that instead of accepting what he had drawn, they drew a
confession for him to this purpose, viz. "I the subscriber acknowledge, that I
am sorry I preached disorderly at Wallingford, and prayed at the separation at
New Haven, and promise not to do so again." And only because he refused to sign
this, without explaining the word disorderly, they say, "The man appeared stiff
and self-willed to the last degree Their answer, p. ^^.
." Be that as it may, he then went home, and laid the confession they had
rejected before his parish, who voted it to be sufficient, and desired him to
continue in the ministry with them, and also that no Councils nor committees
might be sent there again, without their request. His church m^^ November 4,
1745, and renounced the Saybrook platform, and said, "We receive the scripture^
on the old and new testament, as the only pe^^^^, (...) and platform of church
government and discipline; but did not renounce fellowship with the consociated
churches Robbins's narrative, p. 15
This in their view was worse than all he had done before; and a third and much
larger complaint was received against him, and the Consociation was called to
try the same at Branford, September 30, 1746. Their moderator sent a copy of
the complaint to him, and said upon it,

You, the said Philemon Robbins, are hereby, in the name of Christ, cited and
required to appear before the said Consociation, at the time and place
aforesaid, then and there to answer the several articles of the said complaint,
and thereof you may not fail.

By NATHANIEL CHAUNCY, Moderator.
Durham, August 28, 1746.
ROBBINS drew answers to each article, and laid them before his people, who
declared their satisfaction therewith; and his church appointed a committee to
lay a copy of their votes before the Council, and earnestly to declare against
their jurisdiction over them. This was accordingly done; yet they resolved that
they had jurisdiction over Mr. Robbins, and went on the hear accusations
against him in his absence, and to condemn him in ten articles of his public
teaching, without naming any witnesses, or any time or place when or where
either of them was delivered. And concerning his conduct they say, "He has led
off a party with him, to rise up against and separate from the ecclesiastical
constitution of this Colony, under which this church was peaceably established;
reproachfully insinuating, in a church meeting, that under the Saybrook
platform it is King-Association, in opposition to Je^us Christ, the only King
of the church. -- In which articles, upon mature deliberation, we judge said
Mr. Robbins is criminally guilty of the breach of the third, fifth and ninth
commands, and many gospel rules, for which he ought to give Christian
satisfaction, by making a confession to the acceptance of this Consociation
Narrative, p. 18 -- 29
." This he was so far from doing, that he published a narrative of the whole
affair at Boston. They waited a year, and then met again September 29, 1747,
and after telling of their lenity and his obstinacy, they say the Consociation

Do in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, according to the word of God, and the
powers invested in this Consociation, by the ecclesiastical constitution of
this government, depose the said Mr. Philemon Robbins from his ministerial
office, and ministerial and pastoral relation, to the first church in said
Branford, and debar and suspend him from communion, in any of the churches. And
this Consociation do hereby forbid the said Mr. Philemon Robbins to preach the
gospel, or administer the holy sacraments, and suspend him from communion, in
any and all the churches of our Lord Jesus Christ, until he shall have, in a
public and Christian manner, reflected on himself for the crimes and faults
above mentioned, to the satisfaction of the Consociation of this county of
New Haven.

The above voted: Test,
SAMUEL WHITTLESEY, jun. Scribes Their answer, p. 117.
." ROBERT TREAT, Scribes Their answer, p. 117.
."


THIS is in an answer to Robbins, said in the title page to be printed for the
Consociation and Association of New Haven county, 1748; without any author or
printer's name. It represents, that when the Presbyterian and Congregational
churches formed the Saybrook platform, it became their own voluntary contract;
and that being established by their Legislature, it became the ecclesiastical
constitution of the whole Colony, as much as their charter, which united the
Colonies of Hartford and New Haven in one, was their civil constitution: And
that Mr. Robbins and his church had no more right to renounce their
jurisdiction, than his parish had to renounce the authority of the civil
government of Connecticut Ibid. p. 36, 94, 112.
: That a toleration was never intended to destroy an establishment; and that as
the Baptists he preached to had not fully complied with the act of toleration,
they were not an orderly society, "But only a number of men that in a
disorderly manner refused submission to their pastor." And they accuse Robbins
of intruding himself into the bishoprics of Mr. Whittlesey, at Wallingford, and
of Mr. Noyes, at New Haven Page 6, 8, 106
To prove which they quote the same scriptures that Dr. Chauncy, their
champion, had cited before; one of which, they say, means "In plain English,
his doing the office of a bishop in another's diocese; and this the apostle
ranks with some of the greatest crimes, 1 Pet. iv. 15 Page 43.
." But who formed those diocesses! Because Robbins laid his fourth confession,
which they rejected, before his parish, who voted that it was sufficient, the
Consociation observed, that a freehold rated at fifty shillings, or forty
pounds, in the common lists, made every inhabitant a voter in such meetings,
and from thence they exclaimed against him for that procedure, saying, "What if
half the society were scandalous persons Page 101.
!" Ay, what indeed! how dreadful must the consequence be! just such as
Connecticut had felt for forty years! For their laws made such votes equal to
the votes of the best saints among them, in the choice of their Legislature.
And an Assembly thus chosen broke over their own law, and elected an ordained
minister for their Governor; by whose influence the Saybrook scheme was formed
and established, without allowing the churches liberty to say whether their
ministers should meet to form it or not. And now, because Mr. Robbins continued
to preach the gospel to his people, a complaint was carried to their
Legislature against him, with a prayer that he might be turned out of his
pulpit, so that a regular man might be introduced in his stead. This was so far
from being granted, that a Council was appointed out of other counties, who
prevailed with said Consociation to restore Mr. Robbins to a seat with them,
which he held until his death in 1781, but his church sent no messengers with
him. In October, 1749, their Assembly revived their act, concerning the
Saybrook establishment in 17^8, and their acts in 1729, to exempt Quakers and
Baptists from it; and ordered a new edition of their laws, which were printed
in 1750; out of which were excluded all their persecuting acts since the late
revival of religion, without a formal repeal of any of them. And Governor
Wolcot published a pamphlet against the Saybrook scheme. Governor Fitch
published another to explain away its power, which has been upon the decline
ever since.

CHAP. X.
1. Errors and Difficulties among the Separates. 2. Unjust Treatment of them.
3. Edwards's Case. 4. Increase and Sufferings of the Baptists. 5. Others
oppressed. 6. The Evil thereof well exposed. 7. Agents sent to England against
it.

1. REFORMATION has ever been attended with great difficulties. Declension is
natural to fallen men, but a return to the right way is not so. When Israel
came out of Egypt, a mixed multitude went up. And when David withdrew from
Readiness tyranny, many resorted to him, not only of his kindred, but also of
every one that was in distress, in debt, and that were discontented; yet when
it was said of his cause in general, there be many servants nowadays that
break away, every man for his master, the scripture calls it railing, and gives
the person who uttered it the character of a fool or madman. But how full is
our world of such folly and madness! David became the Captain of those who
resorted to him; but the people, who now came out from the above-described
tyranny over the churches, had no such commander. Even the father who led them
out had too much knowledge, and cautious deliberation, to be long followed as
their chief guide; and he retired to a distant island, and settled there. Such
evils had been practiced under the name of learning, orthodoxy and regularity,
that many were prejudiced against the truth of what others falsely called by
those names. Christian liberty had been so much invaded, that many ran into
licentiousness to avoid tyranny. The right which the gospel gives to every
saint, freely to improve their several gifts, for mutual edification, had been
so much denied, that frequent instances were now seen, of persons putting
themselves forward in exercises which they had not a gift for; being so earnest
to maintain the liberty of speaking, as not duly to regard others right of
judging. And as some precious ministers had evidently lost much of their former
life and freedom, by their attempts to correct errors, disorders and
imprudences, a number of pious souls were afraid of appearing against almost
any thing that wore the garb of power and life in religion. And the example of
the Erskines in Scotland, who came out of their national church for
reformation, and yet rejected Mr. Whitefield, because he would not come into
all their measures, was held up as a warning here, against stopping in what any
had already attained to. And just in this juncture a man came from Windham to
Norwich, in the summer of 1746, with a proclamation of liberty, and an opening
of the latter day glory; exclaiming against the legal bondage of praying every
night and morning in families, whether persons felt a spirit of prayer or not;
declaring that if they had not a spirit of prayer, God did not then call them
to pray; and so of other duties. In this way sundry persons, chiefly at
Windham, proceeded, until they asserted that they had passed the first
resurrection, and were perfect and immortal; and one of them declared that he
was Christ. But this spirit soon carried them into knavery in temporal
dealings, intemperance, and what not? About the beginning of 1748, some people
in Cumberland advanced the opinion, that if a saint found that he or she had
not been married to the person that was made for them, they were not held by
legal bonds from a right now to take their true mate, if they saw who it was.
Hereupon an only child of a rich father, not living comfortably with her
husband, ventured to reject him, and to lodge with another man. Some brethren
of Artleborough hearing of it, went to labor with her father, and others, to
turn them from this delusion; but he said he did not believe there was any harm
in it, for they lay with the bible between them. But to his sorrow and shame
his daughter proved to be with child, by her new companion, and her husband
obtained a legal divorce from her. About the same time, a member of the first
church in Canterbury declared that it was revealed to him, that a certain
single woman would become his wife, though he then had a wife and children. For
such conversation the church called him to an account; and, after seven months
labor, they excommunicated him on September 27, 1749. In the winter following
he purchased some mercury at Norwich, and it was judged that the woman he had a
fancy for poisoned two children, they giving out that a new and strange
distemper was come among them, and then poisoned his wife, so that all the
three died. This was not doubted to be the fact, though she was acquitted upon
trial in Court, and he married her, and afterward went into the war, and died
in Canada. Some of her relations were called to an account, and were cast out
of the church in Canterbury, for perjury, when acting as witnesses in Court
upon that case.

II. Now though no actors in the two first of these scenes of iniquity were
ever members of any of those Separate churches, and said church had so clearly
acquitted themselves of the third, yet ministers, even from their pulpits,
through the whole country, cast these scandals upon the Separate cause in
general, to prove the dreadful danger and effects of separating from them; and
the populace were very ready to follow their guides, in this way of slander and
railing. Such glaring injustice to their character, added to much violence upon
their persons and estates, served greatly to confirm them in their way; and to
guard their minds against receiving any instruction or correction from men who
treated them so abusively. A first principle of their separation was, that the
leadings of the divine spirit are ever to be followed, and not fleshly wisdom,
nor man's inventions; but how little was the meaning and right application of
this principle understood? When it was asserted, that none but the regenerate
ought to be admitted to full communion, ministers would answer, that you cannot
know who they are. And when it was mentioned, that our Lord says, ye shall know
them by their fruits; the question was shifted, whether they held to a
satisfactory or an infallible knowledge? which dispute was often carried to
extremes on both sides. And as many would confine the word fruits to dry
morality, others ran to the opposite extreme, and formed their judgments of
persons by their inward feelings toward them, rather than upon an intelligible
view of what came from them by words and actions. The evils also which many had
suffered from an overbearing majority, turned some to plead against receiving
any members till every individual had fellowship with them, and the like in
other church acts. At length they found that hereby the least member might
tyrannize over the whole church. Again, though the undue power of Councils had
been much complained of, yet the Separates run into that evil in a new way.
When Councils were called, they were received into fellowship with the church
that wanted advice; and when they had heard the case, and given their advice,
in many instances the Council acted with the church in censuring delinquents;
though sometimes there were more of the Council than of the acting members of
the church. After some years this practice was dropped. Other mistakes will
appear in the course of this history.

III. HAVING good men against them in the cause of reformation was matter of
peculiar trial. It was as much so with regard to Mr. Edwards, as any one man.
His success was very great, and by acting upon Mr. Stoddard's doctrine, the
church in Northampton was become very numerous; into which he essayed to bring
gospel discipline, in 1744. But when some of their chief families perceived
that it would expose their own conduct, they were inflamed against Mr. Edwards.
And though it could not be honorable to reject such an eminent minister on that
account; yet finding that he had turned from good old Mr. Stoddard's doctrine,
that change was eagerly taken hold of, as a cover for their resentment. And all
his prudent endeavors could never bring that church, as a body, to give him a
fair hearing of his reasons for altering his sentiments upon that point: They
were therefore published at Boston this year. Some of his clearest proofs
against admitting unsanctified persons to the ordinance of the supper, are Romans
ii. 29, vi. 1 -- 4. Phil. iii. 3, Col. ii. 11, 12. From whence he says, " That
baptism, by which the primitive converts were admitted into the church, was
used as an exhibition and token of their being visibly regenerated, dead to
sin, and alive to God. The saintship, godliness and holiness, of which,
according to scripture, professing Christians and visible saints do make a
profession and have a visibility, is not any religion and virtue that is the
result of common grace, or moral sincerity (as it is called) but saving grace
On a right to sacraments, p. 20 -- 23.
." Which point was the capital article that the Separate churches were built
upon; but for fear it should be improved in their favor, he reminded the
reader of what he had said against them, in his treatise on the affections, and
in Brainard's life; and then said, "I am still of the same mind concerning
their lay-ordinations, their lay-preachings, and public exhortings, and
administering sacraments; their assuming, self-confident, contentious,
uncharitable, separating spirit Preface, p. 5.
." And yet he lived remote from almost all the numerous communities whom he
thus censured, and knew but very little of the real state of their controversy.
The excellent rules which he had published seven years before, were then out of
his mind; namely, to judge of a work by the real nature of it, and not by the
circumstances and means of its introduction; to make the scriptures the whole
rule to judge by; and well to distinguish between the good and the bad among
the subjects of the work Thoughts on the work, 1742, p. 1 -- 40.
A due regard to these rules of his own would have prevented the above
reflections, as well as many things in the two other books named. A Separate
minister, in the east part of Connecticut, wrote to Mr. Edwards upon this
subject, and in particular desired him to answer two questions. 1. As he had
described an excellent new house, how we could get into it without going out of
the old one, which was in a ruined condition? 2. What he meant by the word lay,
which he so often used; whether the same as the Latin church did?
He returned an answer, wherein he allowed the old house to be in a ruinous
condition; but thought we were not yet called to leave it. And to explain what
he meant by laymen, he had recourse to the old opinion about a successive power
in ministers; but he soon after felt such effects of that power, as he hardly
could have believed before.

FOR his people were so uneasy, that he agreed to call a mutual Council of ten
churches, to settle the controversy betwixt them: But in the large county of
Hampshire, which then included Berkshire also, he could find but three
ministers of his judgment, upon the point in dispute; and the church was
strenuous against allowing him liberty to go out of that county for the other
two whom he was to choose. At length they yielded so far; but when the Council
met, one of the churches had refused to send to it; so that though their
minister was received to act in the Council, yet he had no delegate with him;
therefore Mr. Edwards was separated from his dear flock, by the major vote of
only one delegate in that Council. And the only charge that they had against
him they stated in these words, viz. "The pastor insisting upon it as necessary
to the admission of members to full communion, that they should make a
profession of sanctifying grace; whereas the brethren are of the opinion, that
the Lord's supper is a converting ordinance, and consequently that persons, if
they have a competency of knowledge, and are of a blameless life, may be
admitted to the Lord's table, although they make no such profession Result of
the Council at Northampton, June 22, 1750, p. 3, 4. And Edwards's life.
." And Dr. Solomon Williams, who wrote against him, says, "Nothing should be
expressed in the words of the profession, but what some unsanctified men may
say and speak true Answer to Edwards, p. 47.
." And he was a chief actor in all that the ministers of Windham county had
done against the Separates. And Mr. Edwards, who had been moved to censure them
so hardly, yet was now separated from the people he dearly loved, upon the same
point; and he removed and settled at Stockbridge, where he became more
extensively serviceable to mankind; especially by his incomparable treatise
upon the liberty of the will, and his answer to Tailor on original sin, both of
which have been reprinted in London. At last he was chosen President of
New Jersey college; but soon died there of the smallpox, March 22, 1758, aet.
56.

IV. THE fundamental principle above described, naturally leads to the
exclusion of infant sprinkling; but the generality of those who came out in
separation had no such idea. The Mansfield articles held up internal union as
the rule of church communion, although persons were of different sentiments
about baptism; but there were very few Baptists in any of their churches before
1749. In June that year Elder Moulton baptized thirteen members of the Separate
church in Sturbridge, one of whom was Deacon Daniel Fisk; and in a little time
after all their officers, and the main body of the church, were baptized, even
above threescore persons. The exempting law for Baptists had again expired in
1747, when it was revived and continued for ten years. And in order that the
benefit of it might be extended to that society, two principal members of the
second Baptist church in Boston wrote a certificate in their favor to
Sturbridge assessors, Jan. 23, 1750. And in May following two principal members
of the Baptist church in Sturbridge gave in a list of their society according
to law; yet they were all again taxed to Mr. Caleb Rice, a minister in that
town. And, only for this and the following year, five men were imprisoned at
Worcester, three oxen and eight cows were taken away, and a great deal of other
property, for such taxes. Aaron Allen was the collector who did it for 1750,
and Jonathan Mason for 175^. The first took a good cow from David Morse, a
ruling elder in said Baptist church, for a tax of One Pound One Shilling and
Fourpence; and the other took a pair of oxen from him, valued at Eleven Pounds,
for a tax of less than Five Dollars. Such havoc did they make of their
neighbors goods, under religious pretenses! Sundry prosecutions were commenced
against those collectors; and when one of the cases came to the Superior Court,
both parties agreed to refer it to the judges; and they gave judgment in favor
of the Baptists. This gave a shock to their oppressors; but a scheme was soon
contrived to nonsuit the other actions commenced; and that was by pleading,
that the suit should have been against the assessors, and not the collectors.
By this trick Mr. Morse was injured to the value of above Twenty Pounds; and
the whole society estimated their damages at more than a Hundred Pounds. And in
a warrant for their town-meeting of March 2, 1752, an article was inserted, to
see if the town would indemnify their collector for his expenses, in the action
which was turned against him. Moses Marcy, Esquire was Moderator, and as this
article was objected to, it was proposed to raise the money by subscription,
and they enquired how much it was. Upon which the Moderator drew out and read a
paper, containing an account of "So much for going to a lawyer, and so many
dollars given to Col. Brattle at one time, and so many to another man," etc.
and he said the whole, with the execution, amounted to above Twenty Pounds.
This moved the people so, that it did not seem likely that they would vote it
by itself; therefore, contrary to law, (which was insisted upon by the Baptists
present) that article was blended with another about school-money, and the vote
was carried, whereby the Baptists were again taxed to pay the expenses of an
illegal lawsuit against themselves These facts about said meeting were sworn
to by three men at Worcester, August 31, 1753, one of whom was Deacon Daniel
Fisk, who died a member of our Legislature in 1778
And this was not enough; but said Moderator, who was a member of the
Legislature, moved them so with these things, that when they met November 22,
1752, they broke in upon their own law, and enacted, that the minister, with
two principal members of the Baptist church, should sign their certificates for
the future; and also that no minister or church should have any power to give
lawful certificates, until they shall have obtained "From three other churches,
commonly called Anabaptists, in this or the neighboring Provinces, a
certificate from each respectively, that they esteem such church to be of their
denomination, and that they conscientiously believe them to be Anabaptists."
All such certificates to be lodged with the town clerk where the Baptists
lived, before their several assessments were made. This act to continue in
force five years. And said Moderator presented a petition to the Assembly in
June following, that all the unimproved lands in Sturbridge might be taxed to
his minister; but did not obtain it. It is be observed, that those who lately
became Baptists were not in fellowship with most of the old Baptist churches;
therefore this act was passed to prevent their being exempted from taxes to
State worship. It also required them to certify a conscientious belief of a
point which they never did believe, viz. That they were Anabaptists
(rebaptizers) a name of reproach cast upon them by their persecutors.

V. AND among the many instances that discovered how tenacious our oppressors
were of their taxing power to support worship, take the following, Esther
White, of Raynham, had a small interest left her, for which she was taxed
Eightpence to the parish minister, from whom she had withdrawn four years; and
she seriously declared that it was against her conscience to pay it. Therefore,
for no more than that sum, she was seized on February 28, 1752, and was
imprisoned at Taunton until March, 1753, when said minister's own people were
constrained to go and release her, without her paying any acknowledgment to
that taxing power. She soon after became a Baptist, and continued to give
abiding evidence of true piety, until she died in peace in 1774. The case of
Framingham, twenty-five miles westward of Boston, affords a further
demonstration of the iniquity of supporting ministers by tax and compulsion.
The Honorable Edward Goddard, Esquire formerly one of the Council in this Province,
with other fathers of that town, could not concur with the majority in the
settlement of a minister; and by the advice of other ministers they became an
organized church by themselves in 1747, and wanted nothing but the sanction of
the civil power, to make them as regular and orthodox a society in law as any
others were. But as they were zealous friends to the late revival of religion,
such an incorporation was denied them. And they had been all taxed to a
minister they never chose, for six years before the publication upon the
subject, which is quoted in the appendix to vol. 1, p. 8, 15. Three years after
their minister left them, and a Baptist society is now formed among them. And
Connecticut still kept pace with the Massachusetts in oppression, of which the
place of the author's nativity now exhibited a striking example. A widow who
had withdrawn from their worship seven years, and steadily attended and
supported worship in another church, gives so clear an account of it, that her
letter is here presented to the reader, without adding or diminishing a word.

VI. Norwich, November 4, 1752 By act of Parliament eleven days were taken out
between the 2d and 14th of September this year; but as it was not done in our
almanac, this date was in old style.
. My dear Son,
I HAVE heard something of the trials amongst you of late, and I was grieved,
till I had strength to give up the case to God, and leave my burden there. And
now I would tell you something of our trials. Your brother Samuel lay in prison
twenty days. October 15 the collectors came to our house, and took me away to
prison about nine o'clock, in a dark rainy night. Brothers Hill and Sabin were
brought there the next night! We lay in prison thirteen days, and then set at
liberty, by what means I know not. Whilst I was there a great many people came
to see me; and some said one thing and some another. O the innumerable snares
and temptations that beset me, more than I ever thought on before! But, O the
condescension of heaven! though I was bound when I was cast into this furnace,
yet was I loosed, and found Jesus in the midst of the furnace with me. O then I
could give up my name, estate, family, life and breath, freely to God. Now the
prison looked like a palace to me. I could bless God for all the laughs and
scoffs made at me. O the love that flowed out to all mankind! Then I could
forgive as I would desire to be forgiven, and love my neighbor as myself.
Deacon Griswold was put into prison the 8th of October, and yesterday old
brother Grover, and are in pursuit of others; all which calls for humiliation.
This church has appointed the 13th of November to be spent in prayer and
fasting on that account. I do remember my love to you and your wife, and the
dear children of God with you, begging your prayers for us in such a day of
trial. We are all in tolerable health, expecting to see you.

These from your loving mother, ELIZABETH BACKUS.


SOME time after her brother, Mr. Isaac Tracy, was imprisoned for the same
cause, while he was a member of their Legislature; and they furiously went on,
in imprisoning of persons and spoiling of goods, to support State worship, for
eight years, till the spiritual weapons of truth and love vanquished those
carnal weapons; and they have not been so used in Norwich for these many years
past. And as great a victory was also gained in Canterbury. The fall after Mr.
Elisha Pain was settled on Long Island, he came over to Canterbury for some
necessaries for his family, when Samuel Adams, a collector, seized and
imprisoned him at Windham, on November ^1, 1752; where he wrote thus, "I cannot
but m^rvel to see how soon the children will forget the sword that drove their
fathers into this land, and take hold of it as a jewel, and kill their
grandchildren therewith. O! that men could see how far this is from Christ's
rule! That all things that we would have others do unto us, that we should do
even so unto them. I believe the same people that put this authority into the
hands of Mr. Cogswell, their minister, to put me into prison for not paying him
for preaching, would think it very hard for the church I belong to, and am
pastor of, if they ^ould get the upper hand, and tax and imprison ^^n, for not
paying what he should be so unjustly ^^xed at; and yet I can see no other
difference, only because the power is in his hands: For I suppose he has heard
me as often as I ever have him; yet he has taken by force from me two cows and
one steer, and now my body held in prison, only because the power is in his
hands." And on December 11 he wrote to Canterbury assessors, and said, "To you,
gentlemen, practitioners of the law, from your prisoner in Windham gaol,
because his conscience will not let him pay to a minister that is set up by the
law of Connecticut, contrary to his conscience and consent. The Roman Emperor
was called Pontifix Maximus, because he presided over civil and ecclesiastical
affairs; which is the first beast who persecuted the Christians that separated
from their established religion, which they called the holy religion of their
forefathers; and by their law fined, whipped, imprisoned, and killed such as
refused obedience thereto. We all own that the Pope or Papal throne is the
second beast, because he is head of the ecclesiastical, and meddles with civil
affairs; and for which he is also styled Pontifix Maximus, or High Priest. He
also compels all under him to submit to his worship, decrees and laws, by
whips, fines, prisons, fire and faggots. Now what your prisoner requests of
you, is a clear distinction between the ecclesiastical constitution of
Connecticut, by which I am now held here in prison, and the aforesaid two
thrones or beasts, in the foundation, constitution and support thereof. For if
by scripture and reason you can show they do not all stand on the throne
mentioned in Psalm xciv. 20, but that the latter is founded on the rock Christ
Jesus, I will confess my fault, and soon clear myself of the prison. But if
this constitution has its rise from that throne, then come forth to the help
of the Lord against the mighty; for better is it to die for Christ, than to
live against him. From an old friend to this civil constitution, and long your
prisoner, ELISHA PAIN."

VII. FIVE days after he was released; but the extremity of the winter hindered
him a great while from getting over to his family, who suffered much in an
unfinished house, for want of his help. Mr. Solomon Pain published this year a
view of the difference between the church of Christ, and the churches
established by law in Connecticut. And though the contest was hot for eight
years longer, yet it then abated, and in 1771 Mr. Cogswell was dismissed; and
such taxes were entirely dropped in the place, and a number of actors therein
were brought to confess their faults for the same. In the mean time, another
unsuccessful address to their Assembly, signed by a large number of men, was
presented in 1753. After which twenty churches joined in a memorial to the King
in Council, supported by authentic records and testimonies, to which Governor
Fitch affixed the seal of the Colony; and Mr. Bliss Willoughby, and Mr. Moses
Morse, carried it to London in 1756. But having laid it before the deputation
and committee for the Dissenters, whereof Dr. Avery was Chairman, they judged
that if those plain violations of charter rights were presented to the King in
Council, it would endanger the taking away of Connecticut charter; which the
petitioners were by no means willing for. Therefore said Agents returned in
1757; and said committee wrote to Connecticut rulers against those oppressions.
And by their advice a process in executive Courts was commenced, with a design
of carrying it to England by way of appeal; but having proceeded some ways
therein, they dropped it.

CHAP. XI.
1. A Change among the Baptist Churches. 2. Especially in Narraganset. 3. Their
Mistakes did not hinder the prevailing of their Sentiments. 4. The Author's
Case. 5. His Settlement in the Ministry. 6. How he became a Baptist. 7. Two
General Meetings about it. 8. The true State of the Controversy. 9. A new
Baptist Church formed.

1. TIMOTHY PACKOM was an aged and pious member of the second church in
Newport, before a division took place therein, in the following manner. Daniel
Green, a gifted member of it, experienced a sudden turn in his mind, from
general to particular redemption: And in the fall of 1739 James Brown joined
with him, and brought a charge, in general terms, into their church against
Elder Eyres, of his wanting the gospel qualifications of an elder; and then
named some instances of apparent anger and severity against members who did not
concur with his measures, to prove it. This caused much unhappiness: At length
on January 10, 1740, he read to the church a general confession of his
imperfections in those respects; and they voted the same to be satisfactory.
Said brethren enquired whether he meant to confess the particulars they had
mentioned, but could obtain no answer from him, nor a copy of his confession.
This appeared so grievous that they went and complained of it to their brethren
of North-Kingstown, who sent to enquire into the matter. For these things
Green and Brown were censured; and Packom and others joined with them, and
carried their complaints to one general meeting of their churches at Swanzey,
and to another at Providence; and not obtaining satisfaction, they formed a new
church, and got some of their elders to ordain Mr. Packom as pastor of it. And
in 1742 they published a vindication of themselves in these proceedings. But
private letters afterward from each of those men, to Elder Eyres and his
church, express deep sorrow for those hasty proceedings, and their want of a
fruitful understanding, humility and candor, with their zeal therein; for
which they earnestly desired forgiveness. But not seeing their way clear to
return into full fellowship with that church, a removal of their censure was
denied them. Green, in a letter July 2, 1745, gives the following as the chief
reason why he could not commune with said elder, viz. "So far as I can gather,
thou believe, that man's salvation, conditionally bestowable, is the free
purchase of Jesus Christ, and so the free gift of God: But then that the
security of the bestowment, or obtaining this salvation, does turn and depend
upon a condition, which is so left to man to perform, that it may or may not be
performed; not as God himself shall be pleased absolutely to cause, but as man,
supposed to be a self-inclining agent, shall of himself be disposed, in the
improvement or misimprovement of divine assistance. Whereas I believe, I think,
with all my heart, that man is in no respect an independent agent; and that if
he obtains salvation, it is not owing to himself at all; but that his
salvation, and its whole security to him, depend altogether upon the free
pleasure and causation of Almighty God, who works all things according to the
council of his own will, working in his children both to will and to do of his
own good pleasure." Such ideas, but not so clear, were impressed upon David
Sprague's mind, before he began to preach, in the Baptist church in Situate;
where he was told, that if he went on in that way he would become as bad an
electioner as any of the Presbyterians. This, as he informed me, turned him in
a great measure into their general way of preaching; and he was settled in that
way, at North-Kingstown, about the time of the abovesaid division at Newport.

II. BY the labors of Separate ministers many were converted, and a Baptist
church was formed in Coventry, and a pastor was ordained in it October 11,
1749. Elder Sprague went there, and was prevailed with to assist, with other
Baptists, in that ordination. And he there got such an acquaintance with some
Separate elders, as to invite them to come and preach in the Narragansent
country. This was done with very extensive effects; and Sprague was drawn so
far as to act with Solomon Pain in Elder Babcock's ordination the next spring;
which was then the first instance of the union of the two denominations in such
acts. The majority of the church at North-Kingstown grew so uneasy, that above
seventy of them, male and female, signed a paper May 20, 1750, which divided
the church. They therein represent, that their church was of about forty years
standing, and that good order had generally been kept up in it, until within
the last seven years. "Since that, say they, our elder and some of the brethren
have imbibed doctrines which neither we nor our general community ever did
choose should be brought into the church. The doctrines crowded upon us were,
1. That Adam, by his eating the forbidden fruit, did bring mankind under
condemnation in respect to the life which is to come at the day of judgment. 2.
That every person who is truly converted, cannot, in the course of his life,
sin himself out of God's blessings at the day of judgment. 3. That it was a
duty for Christians to sing, with loud and joined voices, with rhyme and tunes
of man's composure, in public assemblies."
These doctrines and their effects were then shut out of their meeting house;
though they proposed to leave it to others to settle the matter with their
dissenting brethren about their interest therein. Upon which Elder Sprague, and
those who were of his sentiments, constituted a church in Exeter, and several
other churches were soon after formed in those parts, in fellowship with them.

III. SOME among them, who had been baptized in the time of their former
darkness, were now baptized again; which moved Elder Eyres to write to Elder
Sprague about it, December 1, 1750, and a stop was put thereto. Also a sight of
former divisions, upon circumstantials, carried a few so far into the opposite
extreme, as to admit some to table communion without any water baptism at all.
There were at least two instances of this, the one at Exeter, the other at
Warwick; but that practice was soon over. And these and other mistakes could
not hinder an extensive spread of believers baptism among the Separate
churches; whose elders, Mack of Lyme, Stearns of Tolland Elder Shubael Stearns
(having baptized Noah Alden, in July, 1754, and left him to preach to the part
of his society who remained there) set off with others for North Carolina; and
he, Jonathan Polk, Daniel Marshal, and others, were instrumental of a great
work in those parts. I am well informed that from thence have sprung a large
number of Baptist churches; which, by a blessing upon the succeeding labors of
many, now extend through various parts of Virginia, North and South Carolina,
and into Georgia.
, Hastings of Suffield, Meacham of Enfield, Marshal of Summers, and others, were
baptized. But fierce opposition being raised against what was called
rebaptizing, which was represented to be a most wicked and pernicious thing,
several teachers and others retracted their acting therein. And as the author's
refusing to follow their example brought him to be a public object of
resentment, and succeeding events have made him more extensively so, a clear
idea of this part of our history cannot be given, without a more distinct
account of his personal conduct, and the motives thereof, than otherwise would
have been expedient and becoming. This he thinks is confirmed by ancient
examples. Acts xi. 2 -- 18, xxii. 3 -- 21.

IV. HIS being born of religious parents, and having a religious (though not
what is called a liberal) education, he has ever esteemed an unspeakable
favor. Yet he neglected the great salvation for more than seventeen years,
because he secretly imagined that it would abridge his present liberty and
comfort; and also, that when he got ready to set about the work in good
earnest, God would be moved to help, pardon and save him. But in May, 1741, his
eyes were opened to see, that time was not at his command, and that eternity
was directly before him, into which he might justly be called the next moment.
Then he knew what it was to work for his life for three months; until on August
24, as he was alone in the field, it was demonstrated to his mind and
conscience, that he had done his utmost to make himself better, without
obtaining any such thing; but that he was a guilty sinner in the hands of a
holy God, who had a right to do with him as seemed good in God's sight; which
he then yielded to, and all his objections against it were silenced. And soon
upon this a way of relief was opened to his soul, which he never had any true
idea of before, wherein truth and justice shine with luster, (...) the
bestowment of free mercy and salvation upon objects who have nothing in
themselves but badness. And while this divine glory engaged all his attention,
his burden of guilt and evil dispositions was gone, and such ideas and
inclinations were implanted in his heart as were never there before, but which
have never been rooted out since, though often over-clouded. Hereupon he was
led to make a profession of religion, in the church where he had always
attended worship, and to walk therein for about two years. But then their
minister obtained a vote in the church, to empower him to admit communicants by
a major vote, without giving the church so much as a written relation of any
inward change. It also appeared that the minister inclined to think that the
ordinance of the supper was a converting ordinance; and he discovered a strong
affection for the Saybrook scheme, which the church had rejected just before
they settled him. The author therefore withdrew from that church, about the
time that Canterbury church was robbed of their rights, in the manner before
described. He had no expectation of entering into the work of the ministry,
until September, 1746; and the grounds he acted upon then are described in his
discourse, published eight years after, entitled, The nature and necessity of
an internal call to preach the gospel. The manner of his settling among the
people he still ministers to, here follows.

V. IN a place called Titicut, upon the river between Bridgwater and
Middleborough, a powerful work was wrought, in and after the year 1741, chiefly
by means of the preaching of Mr. Elieb Byram; which moved the people to
petition for a new precinct, in order to settle him as their minister: But the
matter was delayed until he was gone and settled in New Jersey. And after
Titicut precinct was constituted, in February, 1743, ministers refused to
dismiss the communicants therein, so as to form a new church, lest they should
call a minister whom they did not approve of. They were ^hus denied the rights
which both the laws of God and man allowed them, until the brethren determined
not to be restrained by such tyranny any longer; but came out and began to
worship by themselves on December 13, 1747. The author was then unknown to
them, and they to him; but by the disposal of Providence he was brought among
them the next Saturday, in company with Mr. Snow, of Providence, who stayed and
labored ten days with remarkable effects; and the author was prevailed with to
tarry and preach among them. And the precinct committee, perceiving that open
opposition would then be in vain, came and requested him to preach to them, and
to take regular steps for settlement. He informed them, that he was willing to
act regularly according to the gosgel, but could not submit to the power that
ministers and parishes had assumed over the churches, which was contrary
thereto. Yet they requested him, and he consented, to preach to them for a
while. Such a revival took place as produced the hopeful conversion of about
twenty souls, and the quickening of many others. A church was formed February
16, 1748, which increased to threescore members in ten months. But the opposite
party met in March, and voted a large sum of money to finish their
meeting house, and to hire other sort of preaching, and assessed it upon all
the inhabitants. Therefore our society, on November 21, drew an address to
them, to remind them of past transactions, and to invite them into a
reconciliation; or, if not, yet to entreat them not to violate the golden rule
in their dealings toward us. They returned an answer which says, "What we
demand of you is equal and right; what you demand of us is evil and sinful; and
hence we have the golden rule upon our side, while you are receding and
departing from it." And they went so far as to call it "Gross ignorance and
enthusiasm" for any to deny that Christian rulers have a right to compel their
subjects to receive and support orthodox ministers. And February 6, 1749, the
author was seized as a prisoner, for Thirteen Shillings and Fourpence assessed
upon him in said tax. But as he refused to pay it, they after about three hours
confinement settled it among themselves. This was the best reward they ever
offered him for preaching two months at their request. One of his brethren was
imprisoned at Plymouth for said tax. But when distress was made upon another of
his hearers, they were prosecuted therefore, and it was found upon trial that
said money was voted at an illegal meeting. They therefore appealed to the
Superior Court; and in the mean time, on December 14, 1749, procured an act of
the Legislature which says, "That the proceedings of the meeting mentioned in
the petition he and they hereby are held and deemed good and valid in law, the
defect of the notification for calling said meeting notwithstanding." And by
virtue of this act the case was turned against the appellee in the next trial;
which shows that a worship supported by tax, is partiality established by law.
In June preceding a memorial against it was carried to the Assembly at Boston,
by Mr. John Pain, and Mr. Samuel Peck, signed by a large number of men; but it
was rejected; as a like memorial also was in 1754.

VI. As to baptism, disputes about it were first brought into the church in
Titicut in August, 1749; and a disagreeable temper was soon discovered, and
much heat in debates, for three weeks. And as the author was essaying, in his
secret approaches to the throne of grace, to give up this case to God, a sudden
conclusion came in, that the Baptist way is certainly right, because nature
fights so against it. And he was hurried on to preach it up the next day; which
caused confusion among the hearers, and returned with a horrible gloom over his
own mind; and he was turned back to his former practice. Hereupon a number of
the church drew off, and ten persons were baptized in September by Elder
Moulton. About three months after, when the heat of controversy was abated, the
question was put to his conscience, in his retired hours, Where is it, and in
what relation to the church do those stand, who are baptized, but not
converted? He could see that all the circumcised were obliged to keep the
passover; and had seen that there was no halfway in the Christian church, nor
any warrant to admit any to communion therein without a credible profession of
saving faith. No tongue can tell the distress he now felt. The neglect of
gospel discipline a little before, lay heavy upon his mind; and the disputes
and divisions in the church greatly added to his burden. And near the close of
1749, a number of people in Easton and Norton made so high a profession of
being led into believers baptism, that no ordained minister in the land would
do to administer it to them. But they met by a place of water, and one would
baptize another, and then he the next; so that about twenty persons were
dipped, by four or five administrators among themselves. Parting from their
lawful wives and husbands, and taking of others, immediately followed, until
some bastard children were born among them, with many other abominations. Could
the author therefore have discovered any foundation for his former practice, he
would most certainly have continued therein: But all his efforts failing, he
was at last brought to the old standard; so as to leave good men and bad men
out of the question, and enquire, what says the scripture? Hereby a settlement
was granted, and he was baptized August 22, 1751.

VII. THE difficulties were become so great in the church, that a mutual
Council of five churches was called, October 2; who after long labor brought
sixteen members to renew their covenant to go on together, and the Council
declared fellowship with them, and censured all the rest, and solemnly charged
those sixteen to follow all the other members with labor, until they were
recovered to fellowship, or cut off by discipline. Three of the sixteen were
Baptists, and no hint was given of breaking communion between the two
denominations. The author had no objection then against their advice, but was
held back about a month by inward discouragements. But getting relief
therefrom, he came forward, and was freely received in his office by all but
two of those brethren; and they refused to receive him, unless he would baptize
infants. A close labor was hereby brought on, and it was most fully declared,
that we meant to give free liberty to every one to act according to his
conscience in that respect; but to require a man to administer an ordinance in
the name of God, which he saw no command for, was requiring him to wrong his
own conscience, to satisfy others. Yet those two brethren, who had lately
renewed their convenant, refused to walk with their elder, or with those who
received him, unless he would sprinkle infants. For this schism in the body
they were censured; and, after ten months labors, were excommunicated. In the
midst of which time five Baptists were censured for refusing to commune with
this body. Those two were no sooner cast out than they sent for three of the
churches who were of the former Council, who met here November 1, 1752, and
fully justified them, and censured all who had acted against them, and declared
that unless they manifested repentance therefore, they must mark and avoid them.
Strangers cannot conceive how unaccountable it appeared, for eminent fathers
thus to treat their children this year, for acting according to their own
solemn charge the year before. It alarmed the Baptists in general, and our
elders Sprague, Babcock and Worden, being sent for, met here in Council January
31, 1753; and, in conjunction with many of both denominations that came, they
appointed a general meeting of these churches, and sent out citations therefore.
In answer to which twenty-seven churches met at Exeter, May 23, and unanimously
agreed, that a turning to or from infant baptism was not a censurable evil; but
that each should leave the other with God, according to Phil. iii. 15. And by
their advice a Council met at Middleborough July 11; under whose influence
those censures, both of the two and of the five members, were revoked, and
fellowship was again declared with this church. But the elders at Canterbury
and Plainfield refused to come to the Exeter meeting, or to concur with these
subsequent acts. For this Elder Babcock refused to act with Elder Pain in an
ordination at Stonington, May 29, 1753, though he did not then give his reasons
therefore. And because he afterward gave them to that church, and they sent to
Canterbury to enquire into the matter, a process was commenced against Babcock
as a transgressor, for laying in complaints against his brethren to another
church than their own. This charge was carried to his church, but not
succeeding there, Pain joined with Babcock, in calling a general meeting at
Stonington May 29, 1754, to search into these matters, that the churches might
come into a gospel settlement. Elders and brethren from forty churches then
met, viz. from twenty-four in Connecticut, eight in the Massachusetts, seven in
Rhode Island, and one on Long Island. After long and tedious debates, the
question was put to every member of the conference, whether any just cause of
offense was given to the Baptists in the result at Middleborough of November 1,
1752? Thirty-seven said nay; thirty-five said yea, and seven chose to be silent
about it. And after hard attempts to cast the blame of the breach upon the
Baptists, and manifesting a willingness to commune with Christians who wanted
light for infant baptism, Mr. Pain and sundry others declared non-communion
with such as professed to have light against it. I now find, that on the back
of the paper which called his brother over from Long Island to this meeting at
Stonington, Elisha has stated the question in these words, viz.

VIII. "A HOLDS out his principles. 1. He declares he will administer baptism
to none but adult believers. 2. That he will go to any church, and baptize all
persons that were baptized in infancy, If they will declare they were
dissatisfied with their infant baptism. B holds out his principles, and
declares that he will administer baptism to all adult believers and their
infant seed, and that he does it in the name of the Trinity, in obedience of a
divine precept. Now the question is, be these two persons agreed in their
principles? or will there be any essential difference between their practice,
if they practice according to their professed principles? Is it a matter of
indifference for a pastor of a church to say, he baptizes an infant in the name
of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, in the fulfillment of a divine precept? My
dear brother, if you can reconcile the above principles, in the essential parts
thereof, you will remove all the grounds of bars and disputes: But if there be
an essential difference in the above articles, and consequently in the practice
on them, then there is an Achan in the camp; and no marvel that Israel has, in
all reformations, been troubled therewith. Either B sins in making infants the
subjects of baptism, or A in cutting them off. Now it is clear to me, that
infants were once the subjects to be sealed with the seal of Abraham's faith;
therefore, if I allow a person to have Abraham's faith I must show that God
has forbid the seal to be put to their seed, or else forbid it in my own name;
for there is but one covenant of grace, and that had Abraham's seed in it. Now
if we allow a person to have Abraham's faith, why not his privilege? I pray God
to pinch up our minds, until the troubler be found; for it is not a division
between Pedo and Antipedobaptists, but promiscuously ^^ns through the body of
Christians, and will rend all cords of union between the dear lambs of God but
what are made by human and party bands. Oh! my dear brethren! if God has cut
off in^^^ts, by forbidding water to be put on them, let us (...) tolerate the
practice of putting it on; but if not, let none dare to forbid it, but do it in
proper office and time."

THUS spoke that eminent father of these churches, though the author then knew
nothing of it, and never saw him nor his brother after that meeting Mr. Solomon
Pain died, after a short illness, October 25, 1754; as Mr. Stevens also did
November 13, 1755. They were principal leaders among those churches.
. A strong persuasion was still held by many, that if a right temper was in
exercise, Christians might and ought to commune together, although of different
judgments about baptism. The author and his church labored earnestly to go on
in that way; but when some pious members manifested a belief of duty to be
buried in baptism, others refused to go to the water to see it done, because,
in their view, they were already baptized, and to repeat it would be taking the
sacred name in vain. And when an elder came and sprinkled some infants, the
Baptists felt a like difficulty, though they did not leave the meeting where it
was done. Being unwilling to part, attempts were made to convince each other,
which led into warm debates; to avoid which, at the next meeting, each one was
afraid to mention the subject, lest it should cause disputes. Thus edification,
the great end of Christian society, was marred instead of being promoted, by
that which is called large communion. It was so far from answering to that
name, that, with their utmost endeavors, the author and his brethren could
never arrive at communion in the ordinance of the supper, from September, 1754,
to the end of 1755. To be unsettled in religious matters was very disagreeable
to the author; but he could not avoid a fresh search into the cause of these
difficulties.

THE arguments of the beloved Bunyan, for a free communion with all saints, had
before appeared conclusive to him and others; but a review of them discovered
his mistakes. One argument is, that plain laws of old were sometimes dispensed
with; as circumcision was omitted in the wilderness; David eat of the
shewbread that was not lawful for him, and the people in Hezekiah's time eat
of the passover, otherwise than it was written. But it was found upon search,
that each of these were extraordinary cases, which were not repeated; and
therefore could afford no plea for dispensing with rule at ordinary times. And
as to Bunyan's capital argument, which is, God has received them, therefore we
ought to; it was observed, that his example is often inimitable by us; but as
far as it is imitable, it is always in the truth. Hence truth is never to be
violated for any one, no, not to save natural life, which all lawful means
should be used to preserve. And truth so clearly requires baptism before the
supper, that Pedobaptists do never come to the table with any but such as are
baptized in their esteem. Neither could we understandingly act in being buried
in baptism, until we were convinced that what was done to us in infancy was not
gospel baptism; therefore to commune at the Lord's table with any who were only
sprinkled in infancy, is parting with truth, by practically saying they are
baptized, when we do not believe they are. I since find that the learned and
pious Dr. Watts allows this argument to be just Rational foundation of the
Christian church, p. 189, 260.
, though many still wrangle against it.

IX. A NUMBER of brethren being convinced that though freedom toward all men
ought to be shown, as far as it can be in the truth, yet that truth limits
church communion to believers baptized upon a profession of their own faith,
constituted a church at Middleborough, in this way, on January 26, 1756; and,
by assistance from Boston and Rehoboth, the author was installed their pastor
the 23d of July following. Having in the mean time published a discourse from
Gal. iv. 31, to show that Abraham's first son that was circumcised was the son
of the bondwoman, an emblem of the national church of the Jews; in distinction
from regenerate souls, the spiritual seed of Abraham, of whom the Christian
church was constituted; into which neither natural birth, nor the doings of
others, can rightly bring any one soul, without their own consent. Upon these
principles was the first Baptist church in Plymouth county then founded; it
being the first of this persuasion, in an extent of country above an hundred
miles long, from Bellingham to the end of Cape-Cod, and near fifty miles wide,
betwixt Boston and Rehoboth, wherein are now seventeen churches.

MEN who regard carnal ease, or temporal honor and interest, more than truth,
cannot be pleased with the foregoing account of things; but their scorn, or
rage is contemptible, when compar^ with the divine favor or displeasure. Young
Christians who highly regard God's favor and fear his frowns, yet are far from
being aware of how nearly truth and error may be blended in honest minds; and
nothing can teach them the nature and effects thereof like experience. The
Spirit of Truth taught Peter that Jesus was the Christ the Son of the living
God: But Peter was greatly mistaken, in concluding from thence that he had
inherent strength enough to die for his Savior. On the day of Pentecost he and
others received vastly greater light and strength; yet how much were they still
mistaken in supposing that all who were converted to Christianity must be
circumcised? And though a new vision from heaven taught Peter to go freely to
the Gentiles, yet what dissimulation was he and Barnabas afterward ensnared in
about those matters! Gal. ii. 11 -- 14. Great care is ever to be taken, not to
condemn any thing but what is really evil, nor to expose what is so
unnecessarily. If the author has done either in the preceding narrative, he
desires to lie open to conviction. It is drawn from a large number of original
papers and records, which any who desire it are welcome to see. His experience
in these affairs has very sensibly taught him, that mistaken conclusions are
often drawn from good premises; and also, that wrong judgments are the natural
effect of erroneous principles. In particular that truth is not to be embraced
only because nature fights against it, nor rejected because bad men have
professed it, or good men have fought against it. Also that the holding of
internal union as the rule of church communion, naturally leads to the
censuring of brethren of both denominations, if they refuse to act according to
that rule, which is making our affection to creatures the standard instead of
the revealed will of God. Likewise to censure serious Christians, because of
difference in opinion about worship, in the same manner as if they were guilty
of a plain breach of moral precept, is doubtless erroneous. In a word, truth is
to be received and hold for its own sake, and not upon any exterior motives;
and it is never to be violated or forsaken for any consideration whatsoever.

CHAP. XII.
1. Divisions among the Learned. 2. Orthodoxy attacked, under the Name of
Bigotry and Tyranny. 3. Wallingford Ordination. 4. Remarks thereon. 5. Other
Divisions in Connecticut. 6. The like in the Massachusetts. 7. Mayhew and
Cleaveland's Controversy. 8. Arminianism exposed.

I. LITTLE do men know of themselves, until they are tried; and as little do
they know of the designs of the Most High, when he is trying of them. When Mr.
Devenport judged Mr. Noyes to be unconverted, an ample testimony was published
in his favor, by President Clap, and others Chauncy's thoughts, p. 158. -- 161.
. But the same man was judged to be heterodox, by the same President, eight or
nine years after; and then himself went to the same Separate meeting that he
had censured others for going to. And at a meeting of the Corporation of Yale
college, November 21, 1751, it was resolved that no member of the Corporation,
nor officer of instruction therein, should hereafter be admitted, until he had
given his explicit consent to their ancient forms of orthodoxy, and renounced
all opposite principles. And that as this was a known condition of their
admission, if any of them should afterward embrace a contrary system, common
honesty would oblige them to own it, and to resign their places. It was
likewise resolved, that if any of their members or officers should be suspected
of heterodoxy, he should be brought upon examination before said Corporation
Clap's history of Yale college, p. 14, 15.
. In 1753 an act of their Legislature was procured, to establish a
professorship of divinity in the college; which terminated in setting up
worship on the Lord's days, and the gathering of a church therein. A great
noise, in print and otherwise, was made about these proceedings; which had so
much influence about this time, as to cut off an annual grant of an Hundred
Pounds from the government to the President, which has not been restored since.
Much pains were taken, by him and others, to prove that none but orthodox
ministers ought ever to be elected as members of the college Corporation.

II. IN the mean time, contentions about bishoprics, among Presbyterian
ministers, turned many over to Episcopacy; and very tedious controversies were
carried on, about the validity of Presbyterian ordination, and other points
connected therewith. So much smoke and dust was raised hereby, as opened a
pleasing prospect to a number of expelling the ancient plan of orthodoxy, under
the name of bigotry and tyranny; which said they "Degrades men from their just
rank, into the class of brutes. It damps their spirits. It suppresses arts. It
extinguishes every spark of noble ardour and generosity in the breasts of those
who are enslaved by it. -- There are virtuous and candid men in all sects; all
such are to be esteemed: There are also vicious men and bigots in all sects;
all such ought to be despised Preface to Mayhew's mystery of Charles's
martyrdom, 1750.
." And the writer of this became, for sixteen years, the most popular author in
New England. He got so far in five years, as to insinuate that the doctrine of
three eternal persons in the Godhead came from the Pope or a General Council,
and that it ought to be treated with contempt. And he asserted, "That the
scripture teaches no such doctrine as that of God's imputing the perfect
righteousness of Christ to sinners for justification His sermons, 1755, p. 147,
417, 418.
" Four senior ministers of Boston joined upon this occasion in publishing a
testimony for the essential and eternal deity of our Savior, and in expressing
their grief at what had lately been published against it; but as they did not
mention his name, he let it pass with contempt. But his party in Connecticut
soon after could not help discovering themselves very plainly.

III. THE Baptist meeting at Wallingford was removed twenty miles, to
Southington, four years before Mr. Whittlesey died, in 1756. Yet in two years,
among twenty candidates whom they tried, they could not agree in the settlement
of a minister in that parish. Therefore on April 26, 1758, four ministers
advised them to send to Cambridge for a candidate; in compliance wherewith a
man came, highly recommended, from thence. And in June they gave him a call to
settle, with an offer of Two Hundred Pounds settlement, and a salary of Eighty
Pounds the first year, Ninety the second, and an Hundred a year ever after, as
long as he continued their minister. This call he carried to Cambridge, where
he was advised to accept of it; and he returned and published his acceptance
thereof, and his ordination was appointed to be on October 11. And now we are
to see more of what their Saybrook platform is. Like civil Courts, it does not
hinder persons and societies from voluntary agreements among themselves, where
there is no^ opposition; but when contentions break out, it was designed as a
known and fixed tribunal, within each circuit, so that no party might have "
Liberty to choose their own Council where they pleased;" as Dr. Cotton Mather
declares, who well understood it Ratio Diciplinae, p. 183.
. Yet in this case, though much opposition arose against said candidate, before
his ordination was appointed, his party sent for several ministers out of the
Massachusetts, for one out of the county of Hartford, as well as for such as
suited them in their own county, to be the ordaining Council Todd, p. 11.
. Before their call was given, a Justice of the Peace, who was a father in that
church, went to talk with their candidate about his doctrine; but was answered
in a short and angry manner; and the candidate said, "He was too young to be
examined; and if there were any objections against what he had delivered in
preaching, he would answer them before the ordaining Council." To this
testimony the Justice has signed his name. Two others of the society also
certify, that they waited upon him some time before his settlement and salary
were voted, to obtain satisfaction about his principles; "And particularly
desired him to let them know his sentiments with regard to original sin, and
the saints perseverance; the power of free will, and falling from grace;" but
he refused to tell them Eells, p. 9, 10.
. Therefore the Consociation was convened at Wallingford, the day before the
time appointed for his ordination, to hear and act upon a complaint exhibited
against said candidate; but he and his party protested against their meeting at
that time, and refused to be tried by them. And a minister from Hingham, in the
Massachusetts, and six more of those who were sent for, formed themselves into
a Council, and went into their meeting house, and heard the candidate for
ordination vindicate himself, before judges that his accusers refused to be
tried by. Though while they were there, they received a paper, signed by
ninety-five inhabitants of that parish, who were in possession of about half
the freehold estate therein, desiring them not to proceed in the ordination.
With this paper came a message from their Consociation, warning and beseeching
them not then to proceed: Yet in the face of all this, those ministers went on
and ordained said candidate, as the pastor of that parish. Such an instance was
never before known in this land; therefore their Consociation adjourned, and
called in the southern Consociation of Hartford county to act with them in the
affair. But all their united efforts could not bring said party to submit to a
trial before them; therefore, at their meeting of April 3, 1759, the sentence
of non-communion was passed against the minister so ordained in the first
society in Wallingford, and against the members who should continue with him.
And the ministers of that county who acted in that ordination were declared to
be disorderly persons, unworthy to sit in any of their Councils, until they
gave satisfaction for that offense; and these were Joseph Noyes, Isaac Styles,
and Chauncy Whittlesey of New Haven, Samuel Whittlesey of Milford, Theophilus
Hall of Meriden, and Jonathan Todd of East-Guilford Eells, p. 32 -- 48.
. The last of these, with Mr. William Heart of Saybrook (who collected many
stories against the New-Lights Chauncy's thought^, p. 183 -- 195.
) wrote in favor of that ordination; and Mr. Edward Eells and Mr. Noah Hobart
wrote against it. Two of these disorderly ministers were sons to the former
minister of Wallingford, and the second of them was the tutor for whose sake
David Brainard was expelled the college: And his father was Moderator of the
Consociation that deposed Mr. Timothy Allen from his pastoral office, at a
meeting which was not called for that end Ibid. p. ^15.
. Mr. Robbins was now one of their judges, in an affair which affords many
useful lessons.

IV. HERE we may see how SELF can blind the children of men. The scene of these
actions was in the same town, from whence all their actings against him
originated. He only preached there occasionally; they settled a minister in the
parish. He acted against the request of two ministers, and forty-two
inhabitants; they against the Consociation of the county, and ninety-five
inhabitants. In the first case the Saybrook platform was fairly renounced, and
the oracles of God received in its stead; in the other, those ministers only
protested against the meeting upon it, at that time Todd, p. 25.
; but intended to act upon it themselves afterward, when a "Smart young
gentleman from Cambridge" should have effected an agreeable change among them
Todd, p. 4. Eells, p. 10.
. Robbins's plea for liberty of conscience was rejected, and his confessions
also; because, say they, "The Council at Guilford did not sit to make a number
of new laws, by virtue of some legislative power in themselves, but sat to
enquire what were the laws of Christ. He omits to tell the world, that the
Association enquired of him, whether, in his third confession, he acknowledged
the transgression of any law of God, in any respect, and that he declared to
them he did not. Would any one expect that the Association would sit to hear
one flam after another Their answer to Robbins, p. 8, 9.
!" But now what terrible invasions are made upon their rights and liberties!
First it is said, "The complainants were their own members, and have no right
by the constitution to call a Consociation to sit in judgment upon them, and
exercise jurisdiction over them. They are a Congregational church. having power
o^ church discipline within themselves; and the constitution secures them in
the peaceable enjoyment of the Congregational privileges, and did not subject
them to the prosecution of their own members." And says their advocate, "It
always appeared to me a thing not only unprecedented and unconstitutional, but
cruel How cruel then were they, in all their proceedings, against the minister
of Branford!
, to advise the Moderator to call the Consociation upon a complaint against the
church, without letting the church know that any complaint was exhibited
against them, or giving them opportunity to show, if they were able, that there
was no occasion therefore." And he insinuates that the love of money had some
influence in raising opposition against that ordination Todd, p. 9, 14, 26.
. At the same time Mr. Heart (his second in this affair) has recourse to the
laws of England, about the induction of ministers into profitable livings, to
vindicate their ordination of said teacher at Wallingford; which word induction
had been made use of by Episcopalians, in the Colony of New York, to rob
Presbyterians of their rights Hobart, p. 31.
; because it was said in the Consociation, "The constitution is in danger of
being overset, but it is better that the Arminians do it than we;" they said,
"It certainly must be a very wicked thing, to dub men heretics, brand them with
ill names, and ascribe to them principles that they disclaim, only to compass
some particular designs Todd, p. 72.
." But one of their most knowing and candid ministers assures us, that he never
heard any of them so spoken of since, who had not the same character before
Hobart, p. 36.
. And it is certain, that all their proceedings against Mr. Robbins were upon
the complaints of a small party, contrary to the minds of a large majority,
both of his church and congregation. And those attempts were to root out a
minister who was well settled; these were to settle one who had preached in the
place but a few weeks before he received his call, when the opposition openly
appeared. From all which we learn, that what they call free will power, is a
power to conform to or dispense with rule, divine or human, as they judge best,
and to plead liberty of conscience for so doing. Yea, a liberty to brand
dissenters from their judgments with as many ill names as they please, but to
deny that liberty to others concerning themselves. From hence we also learn,
that their Consociation power over the churches, instead of preventing, causes
divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine of Christ. It now caused a
division in Wallingford, and those who adhered to the ancient faith of their
churches were forced to draw off, and form another church, and settle another
minister; and the secular arm, from whence their Consociation power was derived
and is supported, upholds said minister in that place, and has called him to
preach an election sermon at Hartford, whose name and title now is James Dana,
D. D.

V. THESE remarks are greatly confirmed by succeeding events. Sandeman's
letters on Thereon and Aspasio came out in 1758, which give those teachers a
most severe lashing who point their hearers to something good in themselves,
for encouragement, instead of Christ's finished atonement. Mr. Ebenezer White,
of Danbury, readily adopted these sentiments, and most of his hearers also; but
a minor part of them were so much displeased therewith, as to enter a complaint
against him to the eastern Association of Fairfield county. Upon hearing of
which, he and a large majority of his church met June 28, 1763, and renounced
the Saybroo^ platform; though they did not withdraw their fellowship from the
churches that were under it. In August the Consociation in that circuit met at
Danbury, and viewing the case to be difficult, they adjourned, and called in
the western Consociation of that county, to act with them. After much labor,
at their meeting of March 27, 1764, they rejected Mr. White and the majority of
his church, as men who had separated from their constitution; and owned the
minority who adhered to it as the first church and society in Danbury,
declaring that they were released from all obligations to Mr. White as their
minister, and that the Consociation could not recommend him as such to any
other people, until he gave them satisfaction. But this last clause was
protested against as unreasonably severe, by five ministers of their number
White's narrative, p. 22, 23.
. Mr. Izrahiah Wetmore was one of them, who in an election sermon at Hartford
nine years after gave an explicit testimony against any attempts to establish
the church of Christ by human laws. Another of them was Mr. David Judson, of
Newtown, who in 1770 renounced the Saybrook scheme, as his church also did in
1773; and several meetings of the Consociation were called upon it, and
pamphlets were published against them by Mr. Judson, and for them by Mr. Robert
Ross In 1762 Mr. Ross published a labored piece at New Haven, against the
Baptists and others, who had separated from his party; wherein he advanced
facts and arguments to prove them to be deluded enthusiasts. One of his
plainest facts is, that a few foolish people at Wrentham, an hundred and sixty
miles from him, once ventured to appoint a time to ordain a minister over them,
who had not consented thereto; and they were confounded in it. His plainest
argument, to prove that the Baptists and others are a deluded people, is in
these words, viz. "If you had not embraced some errors about experimental
religion, why do you separate FROM US!". Ross's address, p. 45, 105.
.

VI. IF we again turn our eyes to Boston, the same temper presents itself to
view. The Separate society, that began there in 1742, growing small, dismissed
their minister, and dissolved their society; and a parish upon Casco-Bay called
and settled him as their pastor. This displeased a few of the inhabitants so
much, that they brought their complaints to Boston, in 1760; and were not only
set off themselves to another parish, but procured a general law of the
Province to prohibit the settling of any minister for the future, in their way,
who had not an academical degree, or an approbation from the majority of the
settled ministers of the county where the parish lies. At the same time their
Grand Jury, in their several County Courts, were charged by the Judges from
year to year to enter complaints upon oath against every parish that neglected
to settle and support an orthodox minister. But about this time an Episcopal
church was erected near the college in Cambridge, whose minister, at the
opening of it, exclaimed most bitterly against the fathers of New England, and
their doctrines, and published some high commendations of the Episcopal way.
This moved the popular author before named, at Boston, to appear against that
party. And having quoted the 9th, 11th, 13th and 17th articles of the church of
England, which speak of original sin, justification by faith in Christ's
imputed righteousness, works done before justification, and of predestination
and election, he says, "To speak sincerely, I own it is my private opinion,
that it has been too common a thing for people in New England to express
themselves in a manner justly exceptionable upon these points, however
agreeably both to the letter and spirit of the articles aforesaid; but yet, I
believe, not more exceptionably than many eminent divines of the church of
England did in the last century Mayhew's observations upon the Episcopal
society, 1763, p. 91, 92.
." This last remark is undoubtedly just; but can any say so of what follows?

VII. THE eldest of the two brothers who were expelled out of Yale college
published an essay at Boston, to prove that two of this author's sermons were
erroneous, about the person and atonement of Christ. Directly upon which it was
declared in some of the Boston papers, "That it was as much out of character
for a gentleman of the Doctor's reputation to enter into a controversy with Mr.
Cleaveland, as it would for a general of an army to accept of a challenge from
a subaltern." To which was soon added, A letter of reproof to Mr. John
Cleaveland, of Ipswich, by Jonathan Mayhew, D.D. Therein the author of the
essay was considered "As a person unworthy to be reasoned with." Saying, "It
was my determination from the first, not to enter into a dispute with such a
wrong-headed and worse-hearted wretch! -- Had I not a right to speak my
sentiments upon these points? If you disliked them, could you not content
yourself with preaching your own? Or, if you must needs publish them, would it
not have been more decent and expedient for you to do it, without engaging in a
personal controversy with me? Would not any end you could propose to yourself
have been answered as well, though you had never mentioned my name Letter of
reproof, p. 4, 20, 39.
?" Upon which it was observed, that the eternal JEHOVAH says to wrong-headed
and worse-hearted sinners, come now and let us reason together; which this
great pretender to virtue and liberty was unwilling to do with a
fellow-minister! but would have it esteemed an indecent as well as an
inexpedient attempt, for such as did not stand in so high a class as himself to
expose his inconsistencies and errors Cleaveland's reply, 1765, p. 3, ^4.
. A sight of these things moved President Clap, and the Corporation of Yale
college, to send to Mr. Cleaveland a degree of master of arts, in 1764, as they
afterward did to his brother. Yet when Mayhew died June 9, 1766, Chauncy gave
him a high character, in a funeral sermon, and reflected upon his answerer,
calling him "An obscure person, without reputation;" but he could not at the
same time conceal his own corruption.

VIII. FOR Robert Sandeman, whose writings had made a great stir in this
country, came over from Scotland, and landed at Boston in October, 1764, and
gathered a church in Boston, another in Providence, and a third in Danbury.
Therefore, to guard against his influence, Chauncy published a volume of
sermons in 1765, wherein he gives his ideas concerning fundamental points in
the following words. Says he, "The original promise of life was not suspended
upon perfect obedience to what is commonly called the natural or moral law of
God. In contradiction hereto, I know it is said, by most Christian writers,
that the first man was so placed under this law, that he must work his way to
life by perfectly doing all things commanded by it; insomuch that he could not
have obtained it but by a persevering obedience in every point of duty, without
the least failure. But this is said entirely without book. The scripture
nowhere insinuates, that he was under such a covenant of works. It suggests, on
the contrary, that God, in favor to him, did not put him upon so severe a
trial for life. His trial, if we may believe the sacred record of it, was in a
single instance, and this not of doing, but of forbearing to do. -- That which
was made the test of Adam's subjection to God, was a command not of the moral
but positive kind; a command, not deducible from reason, but known only by
revelation. -- It would be the exact truth, should I say, that the first
parents of men, while innocent, in common with their posterity since the
elapse, could have obtained life in no way but that of grace through faith."
And after a labored criticism upon Romans v. 12, he says, "The judicial sentence
of God, occasioned by the offense of one man, is that which fastens death, with
all its natural causes and appendages, upon the human kind; and it is IN
CONSEQUENCE of this sentence, UPON men's coming into existence under the
disadvantages arising from it, that they sin themselves Chauncy's twelve
sermons, p. 18 -- 20, 23.
." This is his account, accented in this manner. From whence we may see, that
his principles were contrary to most Christian writers about original
righteousness, original sin, the nature of grace, and the justice of God in his
government of the world. For the moral law is to love God with all our powers,
and to love our neighbors as ourselves; which can never be called severe,
without implicitly denying his infinite excellency and righteousness. And
though the precept concerning the forbidden fruit could only be known by pure
revelation, yet by violating of it man revolted from heaven, and seized upon
the earth as his own; and we are all born in that state of revolt, which is
original sin. And grace and works are as distinct as wages and gifts, Romans vi.
23, xi. 6. Wages cannot be justly claimed but upon doing the work; while the
most proper subjects of gifts are such as are sensibly guilty and helpless.
Neither can the justice of God, in sending death upon infants, be clearly
vindicated in any other way, than by viewing them as sinners in our first
public head. And to deny God's right to constitute him as such, implicitly
militates against his justifying souls by the imputed righteousness of the
second Adam.

CHAP. XIII.
1. Dark and trying Times. 2. But Light broke forth in various Places. 3. A
Door opened for the Removal of ancient Prejudices. 4. Writings to prevent it.
5. And cruel Oppression. 6. To which very mean Practices were added. 7. Gross
Inconsistencies discovered.

I. DIVISIONS and perverse disputings, in all parts of the land, brought the
churches into terrible circumstances; and each party were ready to cast the
blame of it upon others. And a national war began in 1755, which ever tends to
corrupt the morals, as well as to destroy the property and lives of men. Its
influence was very extensive; and it issued in February, 1763, in the cession
of the whole continent of America North of the Missisippi to the Crown of
Great Britain; a vast territory indeed. Many rejoiced greatly upon this
occasion, imagining that our wars, which for near a century had been frequent
and very distressing, were now come to an end. But, alas! to the whole British
empire, these were but the beginning of sorrows. Upon the conquest of Quebec,
Governor Wentworth, of New Hampshire, appointed a public thanksgiving upon
Saturday, Nov. 10, 1759, because it was the birthday of an aged and good King;
and he said in his proclamation, "The ministers of the gospel are hereby
directed to perform divine service, in their respective congregations, in the
morning only, the afternoon being devoted to public rejoicings, and lawful
diversions." But when the day came, instead of rejoicings, the Governor had to
mourn over the dead corpse of his only son Langdon's sermon on said day, p. 45,
46.
. And on October 25, 1760, that aged and good King was taken from the nation.
When the news of it arrived, the pastor of the second Baptist church in Boston
preached from those words of Solomon, Woe to thee, O land, when thy King is a
child; which is a truth that others have had occasion to remember since. And
because the great reformation, in and after the year 1740, was begun and mainly
carried on among Pedobaptists, many had asserted that the Baptist principles
always came in at the tail of a reformation, when the life of religion was
gone, and people were for settling down upon the bare letter of scripture. For
a dozen years, this argument was much harped upon, until it was silenced in
these parts by clear evidence to the contrary.

II. THE second Baptist church in Middleborough ordained their pastor on
January 26, 1758. And our third church in the town was formed and organized in
1761. And though we have three meeting houses of our denomination in this town,
yet the nearest are nine miles apart, and the farthest above eleven. On April
1, 1761, Mr. William Carpenter, and his church at Norton, were established in
the Baptist order, and he enjoyed a considerable blessing upon his labors both
there and in Attleborough, and some revivings were granted in several other
parts of the land. But a much greater work came on in June, 1762, in the third
Baptist church in Middleborough, and prevailed through the year, and extended
its blessings into other societies and denominations. The subjects of this work
discovered much more of fruitfulness in their understandings, and good
government of their passions, than appeared in the revival twenty years before.
And it was very evident, that the labors of Baptist ministers were the chief
means of beginning and carrying on this work; which was powerful, undoubtedly,
to the saving benefit of many souls. And though the world said, they spent so
much time in religious exercises, that they would all starve, or come to want
and misery* yet the contrary was remarkably demonstrated, by the dispensations
of Providence: For in many places almost the whole staff of bread was cut off,
by a severe drought; while a few seasonable showers, in the parts where people
were so much engaged in religion, caused not only a good supply for themselves,
but also a large quantity to impart to others the next spring. This was very
convincing to many. Divine influences upon the souls of men were more
extensively granted afterward. Near the close of 1763, such a work began under
Mr. Cleaveland's ministry in Ipswich, as caused the addition of ninety
communicants to his church, in less than a year. A like blessing was granted in
Providence and in Norwich, and a greater one on the east end of Long Island, of
which Mr. Buell published a narrative. The work extended to New York,
New Jersey, and elsewhere. The beginning and progress of a revival at Woodstock
was also very remarkable. As Mr. Noah Alden passed through the town in
December, 1763, he preached a sermon to a few people, one of whom had been a
chief leader in mirth and frolicking, among young people there: But God was
pleased to direct an arrow of conviction to his heart, which ended in
conversion in March, 1764. No sooner did this news come abroad, than four of
his former companions went one evening to try if they could not draw him back
to his former ways again. He willingly retired with them to an adjacent
school-house, where they spent the evening together. But, instead of turning
him back to vanity, he prevailed with them to appoint a religious meeting the
next week, which led on to others of that kind, until a large harvest of souls
was granted there. And who could help rejoicing, to see a large number of young
people turned from lying vanities, to an earnest engagement in religion, and
the great affairs of the soul and eternity! Yet the minister and professors
with whom they met for worship, finding that a cold formality could not give
them satisfaction, appointed a fast, and called in the neighboring ministers
to assist therein; who fell to exclaiming against false teachers, Satan's
turning himself into an angel of light, separations, Anabaptism, etc. which
plainly taught those young believers, that edification, the great end of
Christian society, was not to be enjoyed in that way. And being convinced of
the truth of believers baptism, a church was constituted in that order in
February, 1766; and on May 29, 1768, the man who had been their chief leader
from vanity to real religion was ordained their pastor; under whose
ministrations great blessings have been granted since. And such a door is now
opening for the removal of ancient prejudices, as had not been before in many
ages.

III. THE covenant of circumcision gave those who were born in it a right to
treat all others, both as to worship and commerce, as no others had any right
to treat them. A right to office also in that church was hereditary. When our
Savior came, he fulfilled the law both moral and ceremonial, and abolished
those hereditary distinctions among mankind. But in the centuries following,
deceitful philosophy took away the name which God has given to that covenant
(Acts vii. 8) and added the name grace to it; from whence came the doctrine,
that dominion is founded in grace. And although this latter name has been
exploded by many, yet the root of it has been tenaciously held fast and taught
in all colleges and superior places of learning, as far as Christianity has
extended, until the present time; whereby natural affection, education,
temporal interest, and self righteousness, the strongest prejudices in the
world, have all conspired to bind people in that way, and to bar their minds
against equal liberty and believers baptism. But the writings of our learned
ministers in England have communicated much light in this country; to which
more was added by the travels and labors of our southern fathers and brethren.
And hereby the Philadelphia Association A yearly meeting of the Baptist
churches in those parts, which began in 1707.
obtained such an acquaintance with our affairs, as to bring them to an
apprehension that it was practicable and expedient to erect a college in the
Colony of Rhode Island, under the chief direction of the Baptists; wherein
education might be promoted, and superior learning obtained, free of any
sectarian religious tests. And Mr. James Manning, who took his first degree in
New Jersey college in September, 1762, was esteemed a suitable leader in this
important work. Therefore on a voyage to Halifax, in July, 1763, he called in
at Newport, and proposed the affair to the Honorable Samuel Ward, John Gardner,
Josias Lyndon, and other Baptist gentlemen and friends; who readily concurred
therewith, and entered upon the use of means to accomplish it. And
notwithstanding secret contrivances and some open attempts against it, an ample
charter for the purpose was granted by their Legislature, in February, 1764. In
the summer following Mr. Manning removed to Warren, to preach to a society
newly formed there, and to begin the school. In September, 1765, he was chosen
President of the college, and on September 7, 1769, seven young gentlemen took
their first degrees therein, and it was removed to Providence the next spring,
where a further account of it may be given hereafter. Mr. Hezekiah Smith, a
class-mate with Mr. Manning, having traveled and labored in the gospel as far
southward as Georgia, returned and came into New England in the spring of 1764,
and was received to preach in the pulpits of Pedobaptists, in Providence,
Rehoboth, Attleborough, Ipswich, Newbury and other places, with an evident
blessing upon his labors. He expected to have returned to New Jersey in the
fall; but a vacant parish in Haverhill prevailed with him to alter his purpose,
so as to stay and preach with them. Hereupon some ministers, who had freely
received him as an itinerant minister, turned and exerted all their influence
against him. Yet many seals were granted to his ministry, and a Baptist church
was formed in Haverhill, on May 9, 1765, and he became their pastor, before
which there was but one small Baptist church in any part of our country
northward of Boston. Their increase also elsewhere made others very uneasy.

IV. DR. Benjamin Lord published a discourse in 1763, wherein he says, "Some
few, I perceive, begin to hearken to corrupt doctrines, which tend to their
renouncing of their infant baptism, and their interest in the very ancient
covenant with Abraham and his seed; which you may be assured is a dangerous
road, and often issues very fatally, -- witness the Anabaptists in Germany,
240 years ago, and others since Discourse on sober madness, p. 16, 17.
." Directly upon which, he, with six other ministers, made some additions to
Dickinson's dialogue, and got it reprinted at Providence. In a preface to it,
they say, "It seems people do not think in season what a sinful, God-provoking
and soul-destroying evil it is, to break over God's institutions: First be
wavering, unsettled, not steadfast in any right principles, nor in the covenant
in which their infant baptism declares them to be; and then break covenant, and
separate themselves, as being in their own esteem holie^ and better than
others. It is hid from them, that evil men and seducers wax worse and worse: It
is hid from them, or rather they will not see, that they have fell into the way
of Cain, and are in danger of perishing in the gainsaying of Core." A sight of
which, from the minister where the author was born, and from whom he separated,
moved him to send the Doctor a printed letter in 1764, to open the injustice
and abusive nature of such treatment of mankind; to which he returned no
answer, but has since been more friendly to the Baptists than before. As Dr.
Gill had answered said dialogue, a copy of this new edition was sent to him. An
addition to it was made in these words, viz. say they, "St. Irenaeus, who lived
about 114 years after the death of Christ, being the disciple of St. Polycarp,
who was the disciple of St. John the Evangelist, says, in his epistle, ad. Romans
lib. 5, The church received a tradition from the apostles, to administer
baptism to little children, or infants. By tradition (say these ministers) the
ancients meant the word of God, agreeable to that of the apostle, 2 Thessalonians. ii.
15, iii. 6. Said dialogue, p. 5.
." Upon a sight of this Dr. Gill published an advertisement, in the end of the
London edition of his reply to Clark, wherein he charges this passage as a
forgery, and challenges the whole literary world to produce or point out any
such passage in the writings of Irenaeus, if they can; and said, "What a
wretched cause must infant baptism be, to require such management as this!"
Various methods have been taken to wipe off this reproach, if possible. The
first I heard of was, that those ministers sent to Yale college, and there
found a Latin translation of Irenaeus, which had that passage in it. I was
afterward told, by one of their most learned ministers, that the controversy
turned upon men's different opinions about the meaning of a Greek word or two;
which therefore could not properly be called a forgery. But in 1781 Mr. Moses
Hemmingway, of Wells, published a piece upon infant baptism, wherein he would
persuade us, that it was only a slip of memory in those ministers to write
Irenaeus, when Origin was the person intended; and therefore that Dr. Gill
discovered a very bad temper, in making such a noise about so harmless a
mistake. To which I reply, that those ministers name Origin in their next
paragraph, and say he lived about 190 years after Christ. And how came a
minister 180 miles from them to know that they meant Origin, in the disputed
passage, when it does not appear that they ever knew it themselves! However,
the use of the secular arm has ever been their worst argument.

V. WHEN the Legislature at Boston broke in upon their own exempting law, in
1752, the Baptists were so much alarmed as to call several meetings, and to
elect Mr. John Proctor their agent, to carry their case to England; and they
subscribed above an Hundred Pounds therefore; and he drew a remonstrance upon
the subject, which was presented to the Assembly at Boston, in May, 1754. It
stated matters so plainly, that a motion was made by some to take the signers
of it into custody; but Governor Shirley, newly returned from Europe, convinced
them of the impolicy of such a step; and then they appointed a committee to
confer in a friendly way with the Baptists; and matters were shifted along,
until the war came on, and their design for England was dropped. At length all
their exempting laws for Baptists and Quakers expired, and the Assembly of
November 23, 1757, made a new one, wherein both denominations were again
included in one act. By it no Baptists were to be exempted from ministerial
taxes, in the places where they lived, "But such whose names shall be contained
in a list or lists, to be taken and exhibited on or before the 20th of July
annually, to the assessors of such town, district, precinct or parish, and
signed by three principal members of the Anabaptist church to which he or they
belong, and the minister thereof, if any there be, who shall therein certify,
that the persons whose names are inserted in the said list or lists are really
belonging thereto; that they verily believe them to be conscientiously of their
persuasion, and that they frequently and usually attend public worship in said
church on the Lord's days:" And the like was required of the Quakers. It was
continued in force 13 years; and no tongue nor pen can fully describe all the
evils that were practiced under it. Only because a difficulty arose, in 1763,
between the third Baptist church in Middleborough and their minister, so as
prevent his signing a new certificate for them, they were all taxed to the
parish worship. And though, after distress was made upon some, they were
advised to apply to Plymouth Court for help; yet, instead of affording any,
they took Twenty Dollars more from them. And this was but a trifle, compared
with what was done at Haverhill. For on May 23, 1765, a paper was given to
their parish assessors, which said, "This may inform you, that we who have
formed ourselves into a Baptist church, according to the laws of this
government respecting Baptists, called by some Anabaptists, do hereby certify,
that we verily believe that Major Edmond Moors, and Mr. John White, merchant,
are conscientiously of our persuasion, and that they do frequently and usually
attend public worship with us on the Lord's days." Signed by the minister and
three principal members. Yet after this was given, the first parish in said
town met, and voted a large sum of money to build them a new meeting house; and
taxed the Baptists with the rest, to pay both that and the parish minister's
salary. And on September 15, 1766, they seized a large quantity of Mr. White's
goods for that tax. For this he sued the Assessors, at their County Court in
December; but the action was continued till March, and then was carried up to
their Superior Court by way of demur. It was to have been tried at Ipswich, in
June, 1767; but it was then put off, because two Baptist gentlemen, a Major and
a Captain, were not allowed to be witnesses of plain facts, concerning the
seizure of said goods; neither could a few hours be obtained, though requested,
to fetch other witnesses from Haverhill. Their adversaries then moved for an
agreement, to have the case tried the next term, and that the same should be a
final trial. This was concurred with, and the agreement was entered by the
clerk of the Court. The next term was at Salem, in November, when, after a fair
and full hearing, the jury found for the Baptists Thirty Pounds damages and
costs. This was immediately complained of as excessive high; therefore, rather
than not have the matter settled, Mr. White consented to remit Twelve Pounds of
it; and the Court gave judgment to have the rest paid. Yet the lawyers
prevailed to have it referred to a future Court, whether they should not have
another trial. And finally, in June, 1769, another trial was brought on, and
the case was turned against the Baptists; which in all cost them about Eighty
Pounds. The reason given for violating an agreement in Court, about a final
trial, was that it was a matter of great consequence. And the plea which
finally prevailed was built upon the ambiguous clause, belonging thereto, in
their certificate law. It might mean a baptized church member, or only a steady
worshipper therewith. The Court owned that the ^atter was the intent of the
law; yet, because those words were not in their certificate, though that
meaning was full in it, the case was turned against the Baptists. And the
reason given against admitting any of them as witness of plain facts, was
because they were parties concerned; that is, because the Congregationalists
are the majority, they may violate their promises to the minority, in matters
of great importance; and may construe words as they please, and refuse to allow
the minority to be so much as witnesses of plain facts, because, forsooth, the
majority are not parties concerned!

VI. THE noise about this case reached as far as Philadelphia, and enquiry was
made from thence, what it meant? We were told that a noted minister, in
New England, wrote for answer, that where the Baptists could get the power,
they were as bad oppressors as those they complained so much of; which story
was framed from the following actions. On September 11, 1765, a Baptist
minister was ordained in South-Brimfield, whose preaching was agreeable to some
Pedobaptists near him, who disliked a minister then ordained in the east part
of that district, of their denomination. They therefore got some of the
Baptists to join with them in a petition for a new parish there. Upon which the
Assembly at Boston, January 15, 1766, incorporated the west part of said
district into a new parish, invested with all the powers and privileges, and
subjected to all the duties of other parishes, without any mention of the
Baptists in the whole act. Hereupon the majority of this parish made a tax for
the Baptist minister, the most of whose church lived without those bounds; and
some within never concurred therewith. When the year came round, those
Pedobaptists moved to have the Baptist meeting house voted to be the parish
meeting house; and because they would not thus give away a valuable house,
built for a Baptist church, and chiefly by men who did not live in that parish,
the first movers in said taxing scheme refused to pay their own tax. A
gentleman from Boston was then their collector; and, seeing the matter must be
tried, he told me that he resolved to act impartially; and therefore made
distress upon one Baptist, who had ever opposed that scheme, and upon one of
the other party. The case was then carried to Springfield Court, where it was
soon turned against the Baptist minister; and why? he had studied both Greek
and Latin, but he had neither an academical degree, nor an approbation from the
majority of the ministers in that county, which was their legal test of
orthodoxy. He continued the beloved pastor of that church, until he finished
his course with joy, August 5, 1769; after which that church sent a confession
abroad, among their brethren, of their fault in not opposing said taxing scheme
as they ought to have done, a copy whereof is before me. How mean then was the
pretense, that the Baptists hereby discovered as bad an inclination as their
opponents did! And as great meanness was discovered at Haverhill. The want of
learned ministers often been cast as a reproach upon the Baptist churches; but
when such an one was obtained there, all manner of evil reports concerning him
could not suffice, without many instances of personal abuse. A beetle was cast
at him as he was walking the street one evening, which he took up and carried
to his lodgings. Also a stone, large enough to kill him, was cast through a
window near his head, where he was in bed. And his enemies went so far as to
cut off his horse's mane and tail in the night, and to set up a paper upon the
door where he quartered, threatening worse treatment to him if he did not
depart; and as he went preach at Solomon Kimbell's, in Bradford, Amos Milliken,
a Sheriff, came at the head of a mob to prevent it. And as Mr. Smith was going
to begin the worship of God, the chair he stood behind was snatched away; and
the man of the house tried in vain to quell the tumult, and to command peace in
his own house. At length Mr. Smith, with undaunted resolution, engaged in his
public work, and the rioters withdrew, and gave no further disturbance to the
exercise. And though some of them laid wait for him in the evening, yet it was
so ordered that he did not return home, until the coldness of the air forced
them to quit their cruel design. After Mr. Kimbell's decease, his widow, who
also was of the Baptist society in Haverhill, and had the same certified to
Bradford assessors, yet was taxed to their parish worship. And late in a winter
evening she was seized for it, and carried some miles; and then, calling at an
inn, she was prevailed upon to pay the tax; after which she was left to ^eturn
home, in the dead of the night, through frost and snow, to her three small
fatherless children. Also the widow Mary Corlis, of Haverhill, a member of the
Baptist church there, had one of her cattle taken away for a ministerial tax.
"Thus, says she, I was oppressed, in a Province where there is an universal cry
for LIBERTY! the cry of the widow and fatherless they regard not!" So far from
it, that further attempts were now made to inflame the resentment of the ruling
party against all dissenters from their woship.

VII. A BOOK was published in 1767, and dispersed through New England, wherein
it was said of the Baptist churches in general, "They little think, as I
charitably believe, how far they join with the gates of hell, in opposing the
church of Christ, by laying waste the nursery, out of which his vineyard is
supplied Fish's nine sermons, p. 95.
." As if natural growth could fit children for Christian communion; or, that a
requiring fruits meet for repentance, in order for admission thereto, were a
destroying of them. In the same book were many odious reports concerning the
separations in and after 1744, several of which were not true in fact; and
having introduced a plea in favor of those people, that they are not such now,
the writer says, "It is readily granted, that they are now much more moderate
and civil than they were in that day, are very peaceable, kind, obliging, good
neighbors. -- But what does this reasoning argue? Why it only shows that they
have lost degree of their own original spirit, as Separates Ibid. p. 158.
." And yet he began his preface with saying, "The special occasion of the
following discourses was, the revival of the spirit and principles of
Separation and Anabaptism." According therefore to his own testimony, they were
peaceable, kind, obliging, good neighbors, after that spirit was revived.
Neither were his party any more consistent with themselves in a following
publication. For upon the British claims of taxing America, an evident design
was forming to establish Episcopacy therein; to guard against which, it was
said in 1768, "We are, in principle, against all civil establishments in
religion. -- It does not appear to us, that God has entrusted the State with a
right to make religious establishments. If the State in England has this
delegated authority, must it not be owned, that the State in China, in Turkey,
in Spain, has this authority also? -- And as they must severally be supposed to
exert this authority in establishments conformable to their own sentiments in
religion, what can the consequence be but infinite damage to the cause of God
and true religion? And such in fact has been the consequence of these
establishments IN ALL AGES, AND ALL PLACES Chauncy against Chandler, p. 152,
153.
." And this publication appeared of such importance, to the annual Association
of ministers from all parts of Connecticut, in June, 1768, that they published
a letter of thanks to Dr. Chauncy therefore, in a Boston news-paper. Yet, for
these forty years, he has wrote the most to uphold their religious
establishments in New England, of any man upon earth. And a still greater
demonstration of the pernicious effects thereof is before us.

CHAP. XIV.
1. Ashfield planted. 2. Lawful Rights denied to the Baptists therein. 3. To
which new Acts were added. 4. And slanderous Publications. 5. Likewise a
spiteful Prosecution. 6. Relief from England. 7. Remarks thereon. 8. Oppression
at Montague. 9. And at Berwick.

1. A GRANT was made in 1735, to Ebenezer Hunt and others, of a township six
miles square, westward of Deerfield. A plan of it was to be drawn in
sixty-three equal shares; one of which was to be for their first minister, one
for the ministry, and one for the school; and certain improvements were to be
made upon each of the other shares, within three years after the confirmation
of the plan. They were also to settle a learned orthodox minister, and to build
and finish a convenient meeting house for public worship. By reason of
succeeding wars, the planting of that place was delayed until 1751. In the mean
time a complaint was entered to the church in South-Hadly, that one of their
members had propagated a reproachful lie concerning Chileab Smith, a father
therein. But the complaint was disregarded, which moved him to enquire into the
constitution of the church; and, to his surprise, though the words of their
covenant implied a profession of saving faith, yet he found that such a
profession was not held to be necessary in order for their communion. He then
labored to convince the church that this was a dangerous error: and, being
invited, he went to a meeting of ministers at Hatfield, August 6, 1750, and
laid before the^ many scriptural reasons against it. But they gav^ him no
satisfaction, only referred him to Mr. Edwards, who was dismissed from
Northampton two months before, for rejecting that principle. Edwards approved
of Smith's reasons against it, but not of a separation therefore. But as Smith
judged otherwise, he openly withdrew from said church; and in 1751 he removed
to Huntstown, with eight children, when there were but two or three families
therein. Others came in soon after, and lived without public worship for some
time; and then eternal concernments were so clearly opened to his mind, that he
called the inhabitants together, and prayed with, and expounded the scriptures
to them, to such good purpose that his children and many others were hopefully
converted. In November, 1753, his eldest son was called to preach the gospel;
and, with great hazard and expense, they kept their station, and maintained
public worship, through a bloody Indian war of seven years continuance; near
the close whereof they were led into believers baptism, and became an organized
church on August 20, 1761; by assistance from Killingly, Sturbridge, and
Stafford; and by the close of that year the church increased to twenty-four
members, half of whom were males.

II. IN 1762, a State tax was imposed upon that plantation; and as the law
exempts all settled ministers therefrom, two of their assessors allowed their
minister that privilege. But, for this, the other assessor entered a complaint
against them to Springfield Court. The Baptists desired time to prove that
their minister was regularly ordained; but the Court refused it, or to allow of
any appeal from their judgment; and extorted a large fine and costs from them,
for not taxing their minister contrary to law. When he was ordained, there were
but five families, out of nineteen in the place, against him; but, the danger
of the war being over, others moved in, and in February, 1763, they ordained
Mr. Jacob Sherwin over that party; and not only gave him all the privileges of
the first minister of the town, but also an Hundred Pounds settlement and
Sixty-four Pounds a year salary, to which they added a large sum to build them
a meeting house, and taxed the Baptist minister and his people with others to
pay it. The plantation being only a proprietyship, it was said the exempting
law for Baptists did not extend there; and when it was incorporated in 1765, by
the name of Ashfield, the word support was artfully inserted, which had no
place in their original grant, nor in the incorporating acts of the towns of
Charlemont and Lanesborough, passed at the same session. New taxes were
hereupon imposed upon the Baptists in Ashfield, to support a minister whom they
never chose; but their oppressors at length found themselves ensnared in the
work of their own hands. For proprietors and inhabitants are two distinct
bodies of men in law, governed by different rules; the votes of the latter
being equal, but of the former according to their interest; so that the vote of
a proprietor, who owns five hundred acres, is equal to ten inhabitants who own
but fifty acres a piece; and by their act of incorporation, the power of
taxation in Ashfield was put into the hands of the inhabitants and proprietors,
both of whom could not do it together, nor either of them apart, according to
that act.

III. THIS confusion afforded some respite to the Baptists; but hearing of
further designs against them, they came to the Assembly at Boston, of May 25,
1768, with a memorial of their services and sufferings in promoting that
plantation, and a prayer for a full exemption from taxes to a worship that they
did not join with. A committee of three was appointed upon it; two of whom
brought in a report to grant the petition: But Edson, their Chairman, was for
giving time to their opposites to bring in objections; and to him the Assembly
hearkened and on May 31 ordered that the clerks of the inhabitants and
proprietors of Ashfield should be notified of this memorial, that they might
bring in objections against it, on the second Tuesday of the next session of
the Assembly, and that the further collection of taxes from the petitioners
should be suspended in the mean time. Col. Israel Williams was received a
representative from Hatfield the next day, who was the most resolute judge in
fining the Ashfield assessors in 1762; and before the close of this session a
new act was passed which took the power of taxation out of the hands of the
inhabitants of Ashfield, three years after the town was incorporated, and
empowered the proprietors to impose what taxes they judged proper, for the
support of their minister, as well as other uses; and to lay the same wholly
upon the lands, in whose hands soever they might be, which were to be sold, if
the owners refused to pay the tax. This was done under the same influence which
has since involved the nation in blood and confusion. For in the preceding
winter our Assembly came into a resolution to write letters to sister Colonies,
to request them to unite in the use of prudent means against the attempts that
were making, to bring America to be taxed where they were not represented. On
June 30, our House of Representatives were required to rescind that resolution;
which Edson, Williams, and fifteen more, voted to do; But ninety-two members
rejected that arbitrary mandate, one of whom was Captain Benjamin White, a
Baptist, representative from Middleborough. For this noble stand against
tyranny, that House was dissolved, and no other called through the year; so
that the Baptists could have no hearing, while power was on the side of their
oppressors, who advertised their lands to be sold on May 3, 1769. But when they
met, such defects were pointed out in their proceedings, that the sale was
omitted; and each party came with memorials to the Assembly of May 31.
Contentions betwixt the House and the Governor served as an excuse for not
hearing the Baptists, but their oppressors were heard; and on July 5 it was
resolved, "That all the votes and transactions of the said town of Ashfield, in
their several townmeetings, since their incorporation to this time, be and are
hereby ratified and confirmed; any omissions or neglect of making due and
proper returns on the several warrants for calling the same meetings, or any of
them, notwithstanding." Williams and Leonard (two of the Mandamus Counselors
in 1774) were of the committee who framed this resolve, though it was not
passed into a law. July 15 the Assembly was prorogued to January, and in the
mean time a new tax was imposed in Ashfield, and the Baptist lands were
advertised to be sold April 4, 1770. In January they sent to Boston, but the
Assembly was prorogued to March 15, when they sat at Cambridge, but did not
receive the Baptists petition until the 27th, and it was dismissed April 4, the
day their lands were to be sold. Some friends in Boston laid the cruelty hereof
before some of the members so plainly, that their petition was resumed on April
10; but instead of then granting any relief, they were only put to more costs,
to notify their oppressors to bring in objections. On April 4 the Assessors of
Ashfield met, and sold three hundred and ninety-eight acres of the Baptists
lands to support the worship of the opposite party. For a demand upon the
Baptist minister of One Pound Two Shillings, they sold ten acres of his
home-lot. His father had one of the best orchards in the town, which is of
special service in a new place; yet twenty acres of improved land, containing
the main of his orchard, with a burying-yard, and a small dwelling house, were
struck off to Elijah Wells, for Thirty-five Shillings; who on May 4 came and
forcibly entered upon it, and measured it off; and the next day came and pulled
up a number of the smaller apple trees, and carried them away, and offered to
sell said house. These facts were proved by a number of witnesses before
authority, though, to shift off the odium they were exposed to, by a new
survey, they left out the house and burying-yard, and then accused the Baptists
of falsehood in the first account. But nothing better could be expected, from
men who could deal so unjustly, and could laugh at a mock-sermon, delivered by
Wells upon that occasion, which breathed as great cruelty as words could
express. Repeated applications were made to the Legislature for help, but in
vain; and the Baptist agent was at last told plainly, that it was not worth
while to wait any longer, for they would keep them under the law by which those
lands were sold, as long as they saw fit. Receiving such a plain declaration
from a member of the Assembly, in the presence of others, he went and
acquainted the Baptist ministers of Boston therewith, who thought proper to
publish an advertisement to all the Baptists in this Province, dated July 31,
requesting them to bring in exact accounts of their cases and sufferings to
their ensuing Association A yearly meeting of their churches, began at Warren,
September 8, 1767, called The Warren Association.
, "Where measures will be resolutely adopted, for obtaining redress from
another quarter than that to which repeated application has been made
unsuccessfully. Nay, complaints, however just and grievous, have been treated
with indifference, and scarcely, if at all, credited." Accounts were
accordingly brought to a meeting of fifteen churches at Bellingham, September
11, who unanimously resolved to apply to the King in Council for relief, if it
could not be obtained here; and they made choice of agents and a committee for
the purpose; and wrote to their southern brethren for assistance in the design.
This alarmed some politicians at Boston, who urged the Baptists to present an
address to our Legislature, and they promised to exert their influence in their
favor. A memorial was therefore drawn, and was signed in behalf of the Baptist
churches, by their ministers at Boston and Haverhill; wherein the late
testimony of our Assembly, against the taxing of people where they are not
represented, was commended, and this liberty was pleaded for in the church, and
in particular that the said Ashfield law might be repealed, and their property
be restored; that others who had suffered in such ways might recover damages,
and equal religious liberty be allowed to all. Soon after this was received by
the Assembly at Cambridge, a piece was published from thence, dated September
22, 1770, representing that the Baptists had complained without any just reason
at all, and that it would be serviceable to have an authentic account of the
Ashfield affair published. And, after many great swelling words about the
charity and lenity of these times, the writer said, "It was astonishing to most
people among us, to hear the newspaper complaints exhibited by the Baptists;
they could not so much as guess from whence they could arise." This was
inserted in three or four Boston papers. And then, on November 15, the Assembly
gave orders that Ashfield proprietors should be notified to bring in objections
against the first prayer of the Baptists memorial, to their next session. And
their old certificate law being out of date, a new one was framed, which
changed their title to Antipedobaptists, and changed the time of giving in
certificates to the first of September; which were to be signed by three or
more principal members, and the minister, if there be any. The word
congregation was to be used instead of the word church; and the parishes were
empowered to vote the Baptists clear, if they pleased, without certificates.
But the word conscientiously was still retained, and the certificates were
required to be given in annually to parish assessors.

IV. MR. Davis, clerk of their committee, now called them together; and, upon
examination, they declared themselves not satisfied with this law, and they
advised Davis to answer the Cambridge piece. He did so, in the Massachusetts
Gazette of December 27, by giving a plain and concise view of the Ashfield
affair, and asserting that it was the SOLE cause of their complaining publicly
at this time; and signed himself, A BAPTIST. But instead of any fair reply, a
writer appeared in the Boston Evening-Post, of January 7, 1771, saying, "There
is a little upstart gentleman, lately settled in town, who calls himself A
BAPTIST; and the youth discovers a most insufferable arrogance and
self-sufficiency. -- I very much suspect, that he is one of those deluded young
men, who are employed to defame and blacken the Colonies, and this town and
Province in particular. -- I am of the same persuasion in religion with this
young hero, -- and I cannot say what the General Assembly could do for the
Baptists in general, or the Ashfield brethren in particular, that they have not
done. -- And I believe this is the opinion of Baptists in general, and of all
others but enthusiastical bigots." And he had the impudence to annex to this,
and much more of the same kind, the signature of A CATHOLIC BAPTIST. When Mr.
Davis came to see it, he said he would never put pen to paper to answer such
mean and dirty stuff. In the gazette of February 7 came out another piece, from
a minister near Ashfield, supposed to be of Deerfield, who said, "It is a very
common observation among us, that the people called separate Baptists in these
parts will not stick at any false representations to serve their purpose;"
which he attempted to prove by facts. But Elder Smith, of Ashfield, came down
and answered him in the same paper, of March 21, when, from public records, he
fairly turned that charge back upon the minister who advanced it.

THE Assembly met at Cambridge six days after, to whom was exhibited so large a
bundle of reasons against their granting the first prayer of the Baptists
memorial, as cost them Twenty Shillings to get a copy of it from the Secretary,
it being twelve pages in folio. And yet there was no attempt in it to prove
that the word support was in the original grant of Ashfield, nor other points
that were truly to the purpose. Two passages in it may give a proper idea of
the whole performance. They say, " Natural rights are in this Province wholly
superceded in this case by civil obligation, and in matters of taxation,
individuals cannno^ with the least propriety plead them." Exactly the doctrine
of the British Court at this time; but which never could be carried into effect
at any time without covering it with religious pretenses; therefore, they went
on to flatter our rulers in that respect, and to say of the Baptists, "Some
have had the effrontery to say, that the standing ministry is corrupt,
ministers themselves unconverted, the churches impure and unholy, admitting
unconverted and unsanctified persons into their communion." As if it were a
very uncharitable and daring thing, for any not to look upon them to be a
sanctified people, when they absolutely refused to profess themselves to be
such! For our excellent Edwards was rejected by that county with much heat and
bitterness, only for his insisting upon such a profession from communicants. We
had direct intelligence that this piece was drawn in Judge Williams's family,
and it was signed in the name of the proprietors of Ashfield, by Jonathan
Tailor, Timothy Lewis, Samuel Belding, Benjamin Phillips, Philip Phillips. The
three latter were the assessors who sold said lands, and the last of them was
the man who got his brother assessors fined in 1762, for not taxing their
minister contrary to law. The Council and House joined in a committee upon said
memorial; and they say in their report,

There is an essential difference between persons being taxed where they are
not represented, therefore against their wills, and being taxed when
represented, and when what is taxed is only in consequence of what was the very
condition of their grant. -- What other method can be devised, but to sell the
lands of those who conscientiously say that they will not be as good as their
word, or keep their covenant, though it be so greatly to the prejudice of the
public! -- Your committee find, that in the sale of those lands there was no
unfairness, but every thing was quite fair, quite neighbourly, and quite legal.
-- It is our opinion that said petition be dismissed.

W. BRATTLE, by order.

V. ACCORDINGLY, on April 24, the Council voted to dismiss it. And though the
House was alarmed, and did not concur with this, but proposed to have a bill
brought in to repeal the Ashfield law, yet their proposal was rejected, and the
petition with it. And what a cloud was hereby brought over an oppressed people!
On the side of the oppressors was power, bu they seemed to have no helper. But,
behold! in a Boston paper of October 21, it was declared that the King in
Council had disannulled that law. What a surprise did this occasion! How could
so despicable a people get access to the throne, and obtain such an act,
especially in so short a time! However it was soon said, that there was a man
in Hatfield that would hinder the Baptists from reaping any advantage thereby.
This was a mystery, till it was explained on November 8, when two officers,
with a numerous aid, came to old Mr. Smith's house before he was up in the
morning, with a warrant from Judge Williams to seize his person, and to search
his house and shop for bad money. Smith readily promised the use of his keys,
and desired that no lock might be broken, and also that he might have liberty
to pray with his family before he was carried off. Liberty for prayer was
granted by one officer, but in the mean time the other broke the lock of his
shop, and damaged his goods there, and afterward in his house; and then he was
carried before a Court at Judge Williams's, where he was compelled to stand
till ten witnesses were examined; from whom no evidence could be obtained
against him, "Nor any circumstance tending to prove the indictment," as seven
of them gave from under their hands a few days after. Yet Mr. Smith was held a
prisoner through the night, in a cold room, and denied either bed or fire, to
the great injury of his body, being above 60 years old, and infirm before. In
the morning Judge Williams insinuated several things against him, without
suffering him to make any answer, and bound him over to their next Superior
Court, in large bonds with sureties. Like warrants were issued, it was said,
against their pastor, who then happened to be absent on a journey. Reports were
therefore industriously spread in the country, that notwithstanding all their
talk, those Baptists were a parcel of money-makers, and their minister was gone
to scatter it, and would never dare to return. But herein they were soon found
liars, and though the country was ransacked in the spring for witnesses against
his father, yet they all failed them. At last a man was brought near thirty
miles for the purpose, who testified to the Court at Northampton, that he
should not know the man if he met him in the room. So he was discharged, and
the law was open for him to sue for damages for this malicious prosecution.
But, lo! a bankrupt, son to the minister of Sunderland, had been brought over
the river to enter the complaint against him, so that he might never obtain any
recompense in this world. Yet God often takes the wise in their own craftiness.

VI. WHEN such noise was made at Boston about the Ashfield affair, Governor
Hutchinson happened to look and find that the word support was not in the
original grant of those lands; and perhaps he might hope, that by relieving the
Baptists, he should draw them to his side of the controversy betwixt America
and Britain. Be that as it may, he privately sent for one of their committee,
and advised him to send the Ashfield law to a friend in London, who might
present it to the King in Council; and he promised to write to Governor
Bernard, who passed it, to use his influence to have it repealed. This was
done, and its repeal was effected, and then their oppressors had their turn at
waiting upon one Assembly after another unsuccessfully; for though several acts
were framed for them, yet the consent of the Governor could not be obtained,
till they found out what his mind was, and conformed to it. In January, 1773,
the Assembly appointed a committee, out of their members, to go up to Ashfield,
and to hear both parties, and then to make a tax to pay all that they judged to
be behind concerning Mr. Sherwin's settlement and meeting house, and the
charges which had arose about the same; and what they judged any of the
Baptists had paid more than this should be refunded to them, and for the future
they should stand upon the same footing with their brethren elsewhere. The
doings of that committee were confirmed by a subsequent act in February, 1774,
and the small tax which was laid upon some of the Baptists they paid, and by
this time their oppressors were sick of their own minister, and he was
dismissed from his office, so that they lost the right in the town which they
took so much pains to wrest from Elder Smith, besides the other unspeakable
evils and scandals which sprang from thence.

VII. THIS account is carefully taken from our printed laws, journals of the
House of Representatives, and other writings and testimonies; and our opponents
are welcome to point out any mistakes therein, if they can. A gentleman of
great influence in our Legislature informed me, that it was asserted in the
Assembly, that those petitioners acted with the rest in settling Mr. Sherwin,
but now wanted to slip out their necks, and leave an intolerable burden upon
their neighbors, which story had great influence to hinder the granting of any
relief to the Baptists. Whereas, if they had been informed of it, they would
have demonstrated that this story was a glaring falsehood, as also was the
report of the committee whereof Brattle was Chairman; for Wells, who bought
Smith's lot, sued him for cutting the grass upon it in August, 1770, and upon
trial in the winter, the Court turned the case against Wells, because the sale
was not legal, two months before Brattle reported that it was quite legal. And
said law being repealed, all those sales of lands fell of course. And who can
describe all their guilt in those transactions! If it had been right to tax the
Baptists to Sherwin's settlement and meeting house, taxes of six times the
value of his settlement had been laid upon them, before the law was made to
sell their lands for his support; yet, for three years after, their oppressors
asserted with brazen Impudence, that those taxes were only to fulfill the
original condition of their grant. But according to what our delegates to
Congress asserted in Philadelphia, October 14, 177^ before many witnesses, the
settling of Elder Smith in Ashfield in 1761 fulfilled that condition, and the
denying of him the privileges of the first minister of the town was a violation
of the faith of government; for which, as well as for their great trouble and
expenses, caused by subsequent acts, they have received no recompense.

BECAUSE Governor Hutchinson procured relief to that society, some have blamed
the Baptists for not adhering to him and his party in the general contest
betwixt Britain and America; but they had good reasons against it then, and
have greater since. For many copies of his letters have been found among us,
one of which is dated from Boston, January 23, 1771, directed to Governor
Bernard, wherein Hutchinson expressed his earnest desire that Castle William
might not again be put under the pay of this Province In a clandestine way he
had given it up to the British troops, September 10, 1770.
, and that the power of choosing the Council might be taken from our
representatives; and said he, "Something, I repeat it, must be done this
session, to show the sense Parliament has of our past conduct." And after
further urging to inflammatory measures, he says, "The Baptists have made a
little stir, and complain of being oppressed; but in general they have all the
liberty which can consist with a legal establishment for maintaining public
worship, without which we should be worse than we are. No Baptist in principle
is obliged to pay to ministers upon the establishment. All who attend a Baptist
minister are not exempt; if they should be, the congregations would be broke to
pieces in all parts of the Province." He then gave reasons why the Ashfield law
ought to be repealed, and said to Bernard, "I suppose you would not have passed
it, if you had considered the force of the word support, and that it militated
with the general law in favor of Baptists. I have no doubt it was artfully
slipped in by one of the Hampshire representatives." Equal religious liberty,
therefore, was far from his design, though he appeared for their help in that
case. And the artful representative referred to was, for being one of the
seventeen rescinders, set up as Chief Judge of their County Court; in which
office he oppressed other Baptists in the following manner.

VIII. THEY formed a regular church in Montague, July 1, 1765; and gave
certificates to parish assessors according to law; yet they were taxed to other
worship, and distress was made therefore. Several attempts were made in parish
meetings to have this disorder rectified, but in vain, therefore Samuel Harvey
sued Montague assessors for a cow and calf, that had been taken from him for a
tax to their minister. After the writ was served, a parish meeting was called,
who voted to stand by their assessors, and said they meant to try the merits of
the cause, whether these were the Baptists whom the law exempted or not. When
Judge Williams came to deliver the case to the jury, he did not call that point
in question, yet he said, "The law says the certificate shall be signed by
three principal members of the Baptist church, and the plaintiff is one of the
signers, and he cannot certify for himself, therefore there are but two, and
the law says there shall be three." To him the jury hearkened, and turned the
case against the Baptists, in August, 1769. They appealed to the Superior Court
the next month; but the action was continued till September, 1770, when the
case was called, and the witnesses appeared; but because they were Baptists,
they were not admitted, and the case was again put off, and the Baptists were
required to pay half the jury's fees. At last, on May 1, 1771, a trial was
brought on, when Judge Oliver and others turned the case against the Baptists,
upon the same point as Williams had before done. Upon which it is to be
remarked, that before 1752, their laws required but two signers to a
certificate; and the law they now acted upon allowed of no more than three,
where there was not a minister, as was the case at Montague; and the signers
could not have been exempted, if their names had not been in the list. Yet
because they were strained upon, and not others, the case was turned against
them, without trying the merits of the cause, as was promised; and after the
expense of above an Hundred Dollars, the Baptists were left without any hope of
remedy from our Courts. And, to worry them out, distress was again made upon
their committee, and not others. A yoke of oxen was taken from Harvey, a cow
from Sawyer, and Major Richard Montague was seized and carried six miles toward
the prison, kept all night, and then released, and the officer went back and
took a swine that he was fatting for his family. O how dark was this cloud over
that little flock! Yet one of them said to his brethren, "Who knows but that
God will bring good out of this evil? though we are stripped of our substance,
yet unborn ages may praise him for this." Yea, they themselves have lived to
see some happy fruits of their sufferings. One thing which gave a check to
oppression, was a determination of authority, that the ministers of Baptist
churches were lawful ministers, so as to have a right to marry people, and to
be exempted from civil taxes. This was determined by the Superior Court, in one
trial at Worcester, and another in Hampshire; the last of which was this year.

IX. NONE of their opponents appeared willing to release them, till they had
tried the matter, and were taught the folly of oppression by experience. If we
turn our eyes from the west to the east, we shall see further evidence of this.
By assistance from Haverhill, a Baptist church was regularly constituted at
Berwick, in the county of York, June 28, 1768. Mr. Joshua Emery was their
teacher, though not ordained. They gave certificates according to law, yet were
all taxed to other ministers; and John Gowen was imprisoned therefore in
December, 1769. The like was done to Mr. Emery the next month; and he sued for
recompense in both cases, but they were delayed till July, 1770, when Emery
asked for (...) summons to bring the collector with his warrant. The Judge
ordered the clerk to give one, to bring the collector with his original list.
He came with it, but not the warrant, and the Council for the defendants said
there could be no trial without the warrant; and the case was turned against
Emery. He appealed to the Superior Court, where the collector was brought with
his warrant; but then he swore that he did not take Emery as a prisoner. Emery
told the Court, that he did take him and carry him to York, and held him as a
prisoner thirty hours, and requested him to prove it, either now or at the next
term. This was denied him, and judgment was given against him. With difficulty
he obtained a continuance of his friend's case; and the parish committee
promised to let the Baptists alone till that case was tried. Yet in a few days
another tax was imposed and demanded. Upon this a complaint was entered to
authority against the former collector for false-swearing, and he was bound
over to Court upon it; but he repeatedly said, he hoped the day of death would
come before that day of trial. And behold! he died suddenly just before the
Court! Yet this did not hinder the next collector from coming and seizing Mr.
Emery's horse, while he was visiting a sick person. The parish assessors were
sued therefore in January, 1771, and though they tried a number of crooked ways
to delay the matter, and to defeat the design, yet both this and his friend's
case, that was continued, were finally turned against the assessors. John
Emery, of York, joined to said society, and got the same certified to the
assessors of the parish where he lived; yet he was taxed to their worship, and
when he was from home, a collector came and seized his pewter therefore. But
experience has since taught their oppressors to cease from such violence. This
account is carefully taken from authentic vouchers now in my hands.

CHAP. XV.
1. A Revival of Religion in New Hampshire. 2. Baptist Churches formed there.
3. Publications of their Opponents promoted their Cause. 4. Mistakes about
Catholicism. 5. Bolton Controversy. 6. An Account of Mr. Davis. 7. Reasons why
the Baptists refused to give any more Certificates. 8. Oppression at
Scarborough, and at Warwick. 9. Also at Chelmsford.

1. A SMALL Baptist church at Newton, in the south borders of New Hampshire,
formed out of a Separate society there in 1755, was the only church of that
denomination in that Province, before 1770. In and after the year 1764 many
were hopefully converted in several parts of it; where believers baptism has
since been introduced in the following manner. About the year 1720 one Scammon,
of Stratham, on Piscataqua river, married Rachel Thurber, from Rehoboth, who
was a firm believer of the Baptist principles; but the country round her was so
full of prejudices against them, that in forty years she could gain no more
than one person to join with her therein; and that was a pious woman in the
neighborhood, who traveled fifty-five miles to Boston, and was baptized by
Elder Bound. But Mrs. Scammon had such a desire to have others enlightened,
that having obtained Norcott's plain discourse upon baptism, she carried it to
Boston, with a design to get it reprinted upon her own cost; though when she
came to speak to a printer about it, he informed her that he had then one
hundred and ten copies of that book on hand: Whereupon she purchased them all,
and came home and gave them away to her acquaintance, and to any people who
would accept of them; by which means they were scattered through the country,
and among poor people in new plantations. And she would often say to her pious
neighbors, that she was fully persuaded, that a church of Christian Baptists
would be formed in Stratham, though she might not live to see it. This came to
pass soon after her death, and the like in other places, by the following
means. One Samuel Shepard, born at Salisbury, near Newbury, in 1739, was
brought to the knowledge of internal religion when very young; and he learned
the art of physic, and settled in the practice of it in Nottingham, near
Piscataqua river. He had no knowledge of Mrs. Scammon, nor of any other
Baptists, till he happened to see, in a house that he visited, one of Norcott's
books; and upon reading it, there appeared such a fair examination of the
scriptures therein, as struck his mind with conviction that believers baptism
was the truth. But it being a principle hardly named among his acquaintance,
the conviction went off for some years. In the mean time, as Mr. Ebenezer
Jones, a Baptist minister, traveled through Stratham, he preached a lecture,
which was the means of the conversion of a young man named Eliphaleth Smith,
who was afterward called to preach the gospel; and in January, 1770, was
ordained the pastor of a Congregational church in a part of Nottingham called
Deerfield. In May following, as he was preaching to his people upon the
obligation that all who love Christ are under to keep his commandments, the
command to believe and be baptized was opened with peculiar clearness to the
preacher's mind; upon which he immediately found such a want of any warrant for
bringing their infants, as caused him to pass it over in his sermon; and put
him and most of his church upon such an examination of that matter, as
convinced them that they had not been rightly baptized.

II. BEFORE this, Mr. Shepard, by hearing about Elder Smith of Haverhill, was
brought again to think of what he had read in Norcott's book, and to search the
scriptures concerning baptism, and was thereby convinced that the arguments for
infant baptism were groundless, and was made willing to become a Baptist.
Hereupon he improved opportunities of discoursing upon the subject with
Christians of his acquaintance, which was large; enquiring whether he and they
might not have been heretofore mistaken about the subjects and manner of
baptism? Many were hereby put upon searching into the matter, which issued in a
turn of mind to believers baptism. And Mr. Hezekiah Smith was sent for to
Deerfield, where, on June 14, 1770, he baptized their minister and thirteen
others; and within seven days he baptized twentyfour more, who belonged chiefly
to Nottingham, Brentwood, and Stratham; and among those thirty-eight persons
were a Congregational minister and two deacons, with Mr. Shepard; who by
special teaching was brought freely to begin the great work of preaching the
gospel on July 8, 1770. And he soon had some evident seals of his ministry. Mr.
Smith, of Deerfield, with the most of his church, were united and established
as pastor and flock in the Baptist order. Churches in that order were also
formed in Stratham, Brentwood, and Nottingham; who all united in calling Mr.
Shepard to receive ordination, and for the present to take the pastoral care of
them. He was accordingly ordained at Stratham, September 25, 1771; and the
ordination sermon, preached by Mr. Stillman, of Boston, was printed, together
with the charge, by Mr. Smith, of Haverhill, and the right hand of fellowship
by President Manning, of Providence; and their principles have now had a very
extensive spread in those parts. Thus Mrs. Scammon's bread, cast upon the
water, seems to have been found after many days; the books that she freely
dispersed being picked up, and made useful to many. Neither did the writings of
learned ministers, against the Baptists, weaken their cause, but strengthen it,
as what follows will show.

III. MR. Moses Mather, of Stamford, in his first piece upon the covenant,
published in 1769, owns ingeniously, that the covenant of circumcision, in Genesis
xvii. was not, strictly speaking, the covenant of grace, but a divine
institution, whereby that nation was taken into visible covenant with God; and
that the ordinances of that church were appointed as means for the regeneration
as well as comfort and strengthening of its members. And he labors hard to
prove that the covenant is the same with the Christian church; and that the
Lord's supper is "A converting ordinance." And to those who hold that persons
ought to profess saving faith, in order to come to full communion, he says,
"This scheme makes infant baptism a mere nullity, or thing of naught. To me
this conclusion appears just and unavoidable Said discourse, p 17, 54, 57.
." Mr. Ebenezer Farris, of Stamford, was roused hereby to such an examination
of the subject, as not only brought him to embrace believers baptism, but also
to publish a defense of that doctrine at New York. And he and others called
Elder Gano from thence to baptize them in 1770; and in 1773 a Baptist church
was constituted at Stamford, and another at Greenwich, ten miles nearer to
New York. At the same time, the increase of the Baptists in Boston (above sixty
members being added to the first Baptist church there) caused a great
uneasiness among other ministers, and Dr. Chauncy published five sermons in
1772, to persuade people that it was their indispensible duty to come up to
full communion in their churches. And after laboring hard to remove their
objections against coming, especially because of fears that they were not born
again, he says, "The divinely appointed way, in which persons become members of
the visible church of Christ, is utterly inconsistent with the supposition,
that, in order to their being so, they must be the subjects of saving faith, or
judged to be so. The children of those who are members of Christ's visible
church are, by the constitution of God, from their first coming into existence,
members of his kingdom in common with their parents. So it was under the Jewish
dispensation; and so it is now, if there is any validity in one of the
principal arguments, by which we vindicate our practice, in baptizing the
infants of those who are members of Christ's church His sermons on breaking of
bread, p. 106, 107.
." The consequence indeed appears clear, that if there is any validity in their
main argument for infant baptism, their want of regeneration ought not to keep
them back from the other ordinance: But then this is directly against the
testimony for the purity of their churches, which this author produced in 1743,
p. 153.

IV. THE disposition of that party is further discovered by another publication
at this time. A Convention of their ministers at Bristol, May 20, 1772, agreed
to publish a discourse, entitled, Catholicism; or, Christian Charity: And it
was printed this year at Providence. Many excellent things are inserted
therein, about charity and a catholic disposition and behavior, and false
pretenses thereto are well exposed, especially in the following passage. Say
they, "Liberty and candor are the great basis of human happiness. We often
hear persons extolling the advantages of both, who yet seem to be really
acquainted with neither. For if they have any design on foot, any end to
answer, or purpose to carry into execution, if you entertain different views,
and with freedom speak your mind, you are instantly deemed an enemy, and you
must be treated as such; so that if you escape without the sword, it is not so
much owing to a generous spirit of liberty, as a want of power. To supply the
defect of their power, your reputation must be blasted, your influence
weakened, and your interest injured. Such liberty deserves no better name than
tyranny, and such freedom the basest slavery Catholicism, p. 65.
." The truth of this sentence is readily allowed; but to whom is it applicable?
Those ministers evidently intended it against such as refused communion with
their churches. They name the people who began to separate therefrom about the
year 1744, and represent them as being furious then against giving and
receiving ministerial support; but as now being so inconsistent and dishonest
as to come into the same practice themselves Page 37, 38.
Had they said assessing and forcing, instead of giving and receiving, they
would have discovered a regard to truth and consistency that is now wanting in
their performance. At this time they censure those as very unreasonable men,
who hold immersion to be essential to baptism Page 64.
And, speaking of asking ministers to preach occasionally, the writer says, "I
cannot see the propriety nor expediency of inviting the assistance of any man,
be his profession what it may, that denies ME the rights and privileges of the
church of Christ. -- If WE cannot eat and drink of one bread and one cup, in
token of mutual fellowship, I see no reason why I should encourage such persons
in their uncharitableness." Is not this the charity they had before condemned,
which begins and ends in self Page 25, 66.
?

IN October, 1770, an act of their Legislature was obtained, to incorporate a
number of men in Providence into a society, by the name of The Benevolent
Congregational Society in the town of Providence, for the purpose of raising
and managing a fund, to support public worship in the first church of that
denomination there. This was the first act of that nature ever passed in that
Colony; and it was published in a pamphlet the next year; in the introduction
to which they recite their law against the use of force to support ministers
(see p. 48) and say upon it, "Although this act was wisely intended, yet it was
followed with great inconvenience in those societies where the support of the
minister was thought to be a duty incumbent on the people, as thereby the
burden of the expense thereof was borne by very few persons. The
Congregational society aforesaid has had a large share of this difficulty." And
could they have had their desire, they would, undoubtedly, have introduced tax
and compulsion for their support. But as the college in the town was formed
upon another plan, said ministers refused to encourage it One of the first
class of graduates in that college was ordained at Warren July 3, 1771, who has
since been a great blessing in those parts. Others also were very successful,
so that in the years 1771 and 1772, about 230 persons were baptized, in the
adjoining towns of Warren, Swanzey, Rehoboth and Dighton. And President Manning
being called to preach and administer ordinances to the Baptist church in
Providence, caused a great turn in their affairs; and ill treatment from others
was made to work for their good.
And though its charter, granted by their Legislature, explicitly exempts the
persons and estates of the President and Professors of the college "From all
taxes," yet the vote of a town-meeting in Providence was procured in August,
1772, to limit the meaning of those words to Colony taxes only. And because the
Baptist assessors in 1773 left said officers out of their town tax, a
town-meeting was called, February 7, 1774, who censured those assessors
therefore, and published their resolves in the gazette against extending that
law to town taxes. It is hoped that many who were active in that affair are now
convinced of their error, and are sensible that they did not then show the
regard they ought to have done both to liberty and learning. Their honorable
exertions in this cause since are freely acknowledged; and these facts are only
mentioned to remove the ill effects of those publications, and to guard against
such evils for the future.

V. FOR the same end I shall give a concise view of another controversy at this
time. A minister at Bolton, in Worcester county, after being intemperate at
other times, drank to excess on a sacramental season, so as to shock the whole
congregation. But when his church called him to account therefore, he at first
denied the crime, and then confessed it; yet he violated his promise about
offering satisfaction to the congregation. Three Councils were called, who were
all for continuing him in office there. But as he had assumed the power to
negative the acts of the church, even when dealing with him, and to dissolve
their meeting without their consent, they called a meeting themselves, and
chose a moderator and clerk, and made some proposals to their minister, and
adjourned. But as he gave them no satisfaction, they, at their second
adjournment, August 8, 1771, dismissed him from his office, and from their
communion; and the town concurred therewith. This alarmed many others, who
exerted all their influence to prevent the settlement of another minister there
in those circumstances. Mr. Zubdiel Adams published a sermon against it in
1772, which was answered by one who styles himself A Neighbor; and each wrote
again upon the subject in 1773. Two editions of Mr. Wise's works were also now
published; on the other hand a pamphlet came out, said in the title page to be
published by the Convention of the ministers of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay, at their annual meeting in Boston, May 26, 1773; the whole
labor of which is to prove, that a church has not a right to dismiss their
minister contrary to his consent, or to the direction of others, where a
Council of them can be had. For this end, they insert a passage from Cambridge
platform, which says, "In case an elder offend incorrigably, the matter so
requiring, as the church had power to call to office, so they have power,
according to order (the Council of other churches, where it may be had,
directing thereto) to remove him from office." Now it is a known rule in
grammar, that though a parenthesis is useful in its place, yet that the sense
is good without it. So are Councils useful in difficult cases, if they hold up
true light; but it is a violation of said rule, to make the direction of a
Council essential to the churches act in dismissing their minister. Another
authority produced by this Convention is a passage from Mr. Hooker, which
declares for the use of Councils, and for the right of churches to withdraw
their communion from an erroneous church, that will not be reclaimed. This will
not be denied; but the question in hand was, where the power of doing it lies?
Whether in the body of each church, or in a collection of officers above them?
To confute the latter, and to establish the former of these points, was the
main design of Hooker in that book; of which I have given plain proofs (p. 40)
and am ready to advance more if necessary. Directly after their pamphlet came
out, a Council of seven churches, viz. four from Boston, one from Cambridge,
one from Roxbury, and one from Dedham, met at Bolton, August 3, at the call of
said deposed minister and his party. And, in their printed result, they have
given it as their opinion, that the act of the church in deposing of him ought
be looked upon as a nullity, because it had neither his consent, nor the
direction of a Council of others, where it might have been had. They also deny
its being the act of the majority of all the male members of Bolton church;
which last assertion was soon after proved not to be true in fact. In another
publication he is introduced, saying, "I have three times been tried by my
peers, and so far acquitted, that but little blame has been cast upon me." And
his advocate says of him, "Having never been condemned by the lawful judgment
of his peers, and being still their minister in the eye of the constitution, he
is justly entitled to the support they a first contracted to give him; neither
is it in the power of his people to withhold it Adams's reply to the Neighbor,
p. 13, 52.
." Which is making them lords over God's heritage, instead of being examples to
the flock. Yea, it is claiming such a power in the church, as the British
Court, even at this time, denied in the State. For the Governor and Council of
the Massachusetts were, in some cases, a Court of Appeal, finally to decide
executive matters; and Governor Hutchinson claimed a negative power in this, as
well as in his legislative capacity. But as the question concerning it was
referred to the King in Council, it was determined against the Governor, that
he should not have a negative power in that Executive Court; which
determination he was obliged to publish in Boston in January, 1774. And it is
most certain, that the Christian church is only an executive judicature; yet
those ministers were now contending for a negative power therein.

VI. AND though the Baptists had no hand in the Bolton controversy, yet it
serves more clearly to justify their opposition to such claims of power at this
time. A leader therein was Mr. John Davis, son to a Baptist minister in the
Delaware State, and educated at the college in Philadelphia. He came to Boston
in May, 1770, and was ordained pastor of the second Baptist church there the
9th of September following. He was one of the committee who signed the address
of the Baptist churches to our Legislature the next month; but perceiving soon
after that our charter gave them no right to support any religious worship by
tax and compulsion, he plainly declared it to men of note; which was the chief
cause of the mean and scurrilous treatment from the press, that he met with the
next winter. General Brattle, when acting as Chairman of the committee of the
Legislature in the spring, treated him in like manner; but when he had done,
Davis arose, and distinctly answered his arguments, without taking any notice
of the personal abuse that was offered him. A gentleman present said, the worth
of the man never appeared so great before. September 10, 1771, the Warren
Association made choice of him as their agent, to use his best endeavors, by
the advice of their committee, in concert with their agents in London, to
obtain the establishment (...) equal religious liberty in this land. And the
compiler of this history was then requested by a number of ministers to
undertake the work; and Mr. Davis promised his assistance therein. But, alas!
he had done but little toward it before his health failed, and his life
followed after. In August, 1772, he took a voyage to Philadelphia, hoping to
receive benefit from his native air. And obtaining some relief, and meeting
with one of his brethren in the ministry, who was going to preach to the
western Indians, he set out with him, in company with friends who were going to
settle upon the Ohio. But on February 1, 1773, the following account was
published in Philadelphia, viz. "By advices from the Ohio we learn, that upon
the 13th of December the Reverend John Davis, A. M. Fellow of Rhode Island
college, and one of the members of the American Philosophical Society, died
there, after an illness of three weeks, in the 36th year of his age." The
minister he was with informs us, that some of his last words were these: "In a
little time I expect to be with Christ, to see and know him as he is now known,
and as he is not known. My faith in my Savior is unshaken Jones's journal, p.
24.
."

VII. IN September, 1772, the author was chosen an agent of the Baptist
churches in Mr. Davis's room; and the following events took place among them.
Though their church in Chelmsford had given in certificates according to law,
yet they were all taxed to parish teachers; and in a cold season, January 26,
1773, three of their society were imprisoned therefore at Concord, one of whom
was 82 years old; and they commenced a suit in law for recompense; but their
cases were long delayed. In Bellingham equal liberty was enjoyed, because there
was none but a Baptist minister in the town; but a number of his hearers who
lived in Mendon were so much oppressed with taxes to other ministers, that in
the three preceding years they estimated their damages on that account at near
Fifty Pounds. And these and other things being laid before the Baptist
committee, May 5, they advised their agent to write to all their churches, to
consider whether it was not their duty to refuse to give any more certificates
to the power that oppressed them; and to bring in their conclusions upon it to
their next Association. And further light was held up by their enemies a few
days after. For, to vindicate their practice, they published an account of all
their exempting laws in the Boston Evening Post, of May 17, and as the first of
them ordered Episcopalians in each parish to be taxed with the rest, and then
that their ministers should draw the money out of the parish treasury, it was
now said, "Had the same prudent precaution been taken with respect to the
Anabaptists, when they were exempted from being taxed toward the maintenance
of the ministers of the churches by law established, those avaricious and
dissolute persons, who get under water to wash away their minister's rates,
without any expectation or desire of washing away their sins, would have had
little or no temptation to declare themselves Anabaptists." When the Warren
Association met at Medfield, September 7, 1773, they concluded to refrain from
giving any more certificates to that power, for these reasons. 1. Because it
implies an acknowledgment, that civil rulers have a right to set up one
religious sect above another, which they have not. 2. Because they are not
representatives in religious matters, and therefore have no right to impose
religious taxes. 3. Because such a practice emboldens the actors therein to
assume God's prerogative, and to judge the hearts of those who put not into
their mouths. 4. Because the church is presented as a chaste virgin to Christ;
and to place her trust and love upon any others for temporal support, is
playing the harlot, and so the way to destroy all religion. (Hos. ii. 5.) 5.
Because the practice abovesaid tends to envy, hypocrisy and confusion, and so
to the ruin of civil society Appeal to the public, p. 43 -- 47.

When the author came to Boston to complete this publication, he met with two
printed letters against the design; to which he returned the following reply,
on October 14. "Mr. Draper, as you have allowed a pretended Baptist room for
two long letters in your paper of the 2d and 30th of September, I hope you will
give a real Baptist room for a short answer to him in your next. I call him a
pretended Baptist, and think I have reason so to do; for though he gives his
word for it that he is of our denomination, yet the whole tenor of his letters
is, to persuade us to be easy under the taxing laws of the other party; and
toward the close of his first letter he says, had we for a little while borne
only the little finger of the Episcopalian hierarchy, we should think the
burden comparatively light, though we were called to bear the weight of the
loins of the Presbyterians of New England. And is not the hand of Joab in all
this! For my part, I am not able to get a pair of scales sufficient to weigh
those two great bodies in, the Episcopal hierarchy and the New England
Presbyterains, so as to find out exactly which is heaviest: But if this
pretended brother had felt what father Obadiah Holmes once felt in Boston from
our opponents, he would not have been so easy as he now seems to be." Hereby a
stop was put to that mean and scandalous practice, of assuming the Baptist
name, in writings against their welfare. Neither did any answer ever appear to
the above reasons for equal liberty, though oppression was still carried on
under religious pretenses.

VIII. BY assistance from Haverhill, a Baptist church was regularly formed at
Goreham, near Casco-Bay, June 20, 1768. And Joseph Moody, a member of it, who
lived in Scarborough, had the same certified annually to their parish assessors
according to law; yet distress was still made upon him for taxes to parish
worship. For such a tax of about Six Dollars, a good riding beast was taken
from him in 1771; he therefore presented proper vouchers of these facts to the
Assembly at Boston, January 26, 1774, with a petition, that like the good
Samaritan they would again set him upon his own beast. A committee was sent out
upon it, whose report was to dismiss the petition, which was done. About this
time eighteen men, of the Baptist society in Warwick, in a very cold season,
were seized for a parish tax, and carried forty miles, and cast into
Northampton gaol. On February 15, an account thereof was brought to the agent
of the Baptist churches, who directly laid their case before the Legislature at
Boston; praying that they might be released, that recompense might be made
them, and effectual measures taken to prevent such things for the future. But,
though a committee was sent out upon it, no help was granted. This moved one of
the Baptist committee to express his astonishment thereat, in the gazette of
March 3, and to ask how this news would be received in sister Colonies, or at
the British Court, from whence late help had been afforded to our Ashfield
brethren? A reply hereto came out March 14, which said, "No one can deny that
they have been in great trouble of late; and whoever considers how dangerous
the occupation of counterfeiting an established currency is, they cannot
greatly admire at it." Which inuendo was catched at, and enlarged upon in the
Providence gazette. Though in fact a Pedobaptist church member in Ashfield had,
before this, been convicted of harboring a counterfeiting club at his house,
for which the Court gave judgment that he should be fined, set in the pillory,
and have his ears cropped; while a Baptist member, whom they had ensnared, was
only fined. Thus do men expose themselves, when they drag into religious
controversy things which have no relation to it. In a Boston paper of April 7,
the assessors of Warwick published a vindication of themselves in taxing those
Baptists, in which they said, "We apprehend that every body politic have a
right to choose their religion, and to enact laws for its support, and that
they ought so to do: And since Congregationalism is the choice of the people of
this Province, the religion which our forefathers had in view to establish in
coming over to this country, we think there is good reason why dissenters from
us should pay to the support of it; especially since it is one condition upon
which they receive and hold their lands." This last article is flatly denied,
and let any of that party prove it if they can. And will any still plead for a
practice that cannot be upheld without lying! Another evil effect of it is
before us.

IX. ONE of the Chelmsford cases was now tried at Charlestown. Jonathan Sewal,
the lawyer who was most active against the Baptists of Haverhill, undertook for
them; and he must needs put the collector as well as the assessors into the
writ. The effect of which was, that the jury judged the assessors to be guilty,
and the collector not guilty; and that the Baptist should recover of the
assessors Three Pounds damages and costs, while the collector should recover
costs of the Baptist for carrying him to prison, where he was confined above
three days. The guilty assessors soon had their expenses paid by the town; but
as the Judges and said lawyer went off directly, the other Chelmsford cases
were never tried, nor the small sum now adjudged to one of them received. And
no exempting law for the Baptists in this Province was now in force. These
things being heard of at Philadelphia, caused an uneasiness among the
Presbyterians there, and a man was sent from thence to Boston, and a new
exempting act was passed at Salem in June; after which it was declared in a
Philadelphia paper, that relief was granted to the Baptists in the
Massachusetts. Such pains have that sect taken to keep up their credit and
influence in this country. But that act was so far from affording us any
relief, that it required annual certificates to be recorded in each parish
where the Baptists lived, a copy of which could not be had without Fourpence of
our money, which is Threepence sterling; the very tax upon a pound of tea that
brought on the American war.

CHAP. XVI.
1. A Review of English Affairs. 2. Of New England in particular. 3. Cause of
the American War. 4. How it began. 5. Cause of so general a Union therein. 6.
Its Progress. 7. The Vanity and Folly of our Enemies. 8. Divine Goodness to our
Land, displayed in the Abilities, Temper and Success, of General WASHINGTON.

1. DISPUTES about power and gain, under a religious mask, could no longer be
restrained to words, but must come to dreadful blows. To this those claims have
always tended. When Henry the 8th revolted from the church of Rome, and set
himself up as head of the church of England, he ruled as tyrannically as the
Pope did; though his allowing the common people to have the bible in their own
tongue, gave much light to the nation. And a greater reformation was produced
thereby, in the short reign of his son Edward, than the church of England has
ever attained to since. Neither do their ideas differ so much from ours about
facts, as about the names they ought to be called by. An Episcopal minister of
considerable note, after thirty years labor to promote their way in
New England, gave the following account of the cause of its first plantation.
Says he, "While the virgin Queen, of immortal memory, sat at the helm, she
steered so steady a course, and rode with so tight a rein, that Calvin's
English disciples, impregnated with the leaven of Geneva, could do little more,
upon their return, after the Maria persecution, than fret in their fetters,
murmur, and mutter their discontents in secret. -- To Elizabeth succeeded
James, father of the martyr. He imagining it more for his ease, threw away the
Queen's curb, and rode with a snaffle. Under this soft Sovereign the non cons
seem, by the Galliotism of the state, and Grindalizing of the church, to have
grown into great numbers. But Charles resumed, in some sort, the heroine's
bridle, and gave leave to Laud to make use of whip and spur; so the sturdy
Puritan, unused to restraint, and growing restive, finding that flouncing and
plunging would not throw down, ran away from his riders, and took sanctuary in
New England. But good God! how dearly did that most pious Prince and holy
prelate pay for this! and how fatal and lasting have been the consequences of
that GRAND REBELLION, that brought both of those great personages to the block
Letters from Narraganset, 1752, by James M'Sparran, D. D. printed at Dublin,
1753, under the title of America dissected, p. 23, 24
!" That is, Charles claimed a night to impose laws and taxes upon the people
without their consent, and Laud endeavored to cover and enforce the same with
religious pretenses; and because they drove on furiously in that way, until
both of their necks were broke, arbitrary teachers have canonized them for
saints and martyrs; and have stigmatized resistance to such power with the
odious name of REBELLION. After the flames of war which they kindled had raged
through three bloody campaigns, between the King and Parliament, their
commissioners met at Uxbridge, January 30, 1645, to treat about reconciliation:
But it could not be obtained, because a secret instruction from Charles to his
commissioners said, "As the King's duty is to protect the church, so it is the
church's to assist the King in the maintenance of his just authority: Wherefore
my predecessors have been always careful (especially since the reformation) to
keep the dependency of the clergy entirely upon the crown, without which it
will scarcely sit fast upon the King's head; therefore you must do nothing to
change or lessen this necessary dependency Rapin, vol. 2, p. 510.
." Before the reformation the Pope rode foremost, and sometimes compelled
Princes to walk on foot, yea, to hold his stirrup; but since, as is here
observed, they have been always careful to keep the reins in their own hands.
And this contest has caused infinite mischiefs in New England.

II. THE first planters of it requested no more than equal liberty of
conscience; and though the crown would only give a conditional, and not an
absolute promise thereof, "Yet, casting themselves on the care of Providence,
they resolved to venture Prince's chronology, p. 57, 60.
." On this foundation was New England planted in 1620; and this has been its
only support ever since. For though the Massachusetts company came over ten
years after, with an ample charter from Charles; yet he and Laud soon attempted
to vacate it, and at length positively required the company to send it back
again Hutchinson, vol. 3, p. 105.
: And the loss of their heads, and the overthrow of Episcopacy, was the cause
why these plantations were not then entirely ruined. In the mean time, an
imagination of great purity at Boston emboldened the church to assume the whole
government in this wilderness, with an expectation of exhibiting to the world
such a view of the glory of Christianity, as had never before been seen. And
the leaders here were enchanted with this bright image, until their charter was
wrested from them in 1684; upon which the world resolutely took the bridle
again into their own hands. And how flattering was their late prospect, of
riding where they pleased without control? Methinks I hear the British
ministry saying, our fleets and armies have triumphed over all our enemies, and
we are revered to the remotest regions. The wealth of both the Indies is ours,
and our resources are boundless. The vast continent of North America is wholly
at our command, and who can hinder our doing as we please? Arts and sciences
are already carried very high, and who knows how much greater improvements may
be made? As to religion, fanaticism and bigotry are quite out of fashion, and
reason and liberty are the darling topics of the age. Episcopacy prevails in
almost all our Colonies, and soon will in the remainder. Parliaments have
formerly made dreadful work; cut off the head of one King, and drove another
from his throne; but those days of superstition and cruelty are at an end. The
Parliament is now entirely at our command; and the establishment of its
supremacy over the Colonies is all that is wanting to complete the happiness of
the empire; and who can prevent so great a good? Can a few factious fellows at
Boston do it! The thought is contemptible! And we are assured, by the most
respectable gentlement upon the continent, that as soon as it is seen that
government is determined to maintain its authority, opposition will cease, and
the land will be at rest. At their head is a man, who, by the best history of
his country that was ever published, has discovered a perfect knowledge of
their affairs, civil and religious. And his influence is so great, that after
he was made Lieutenant Governor of the Province, he was freely elected into
their Council. At the same time he had the command of their castle, the key of
their chief harbor, was Judge of Probate in their head county, and Chief Judge
of their Supreme Executive Court through the Colony, until his Majesty has been
pleased to raise him to the highest seat in their government. Who then can
scruple the truth of his testimony, or the sufficiency of his influence to
accomplish our desires?

III. I AM sensible that these ideas will not please some men; therefore the
following facts are adduced to support them. The most plausible plea for the
claim of Britain to tax America was, that we were indebted to her for
protection. If so, why did she pay us large sums, for assisting her in her
wars? Our conquest of Cape-Breton, in 1745, brought her into debt to us, for
which she sent us over a good quantity of cash, whereby we were enabled to call
in our paper money. Yet, through jealousy of our power, acts of Parliament were
passed in 1749 to prohibit, under great penalties, the erection of any
tilt-hammers here to plate iron, furnaces to make steel, or slitting-mills to
cut nail-rods; although no country abounds more than ours with iron. All this
and much more was patiently borne, and requisitions from the crown, of
assistance in the succeeding wars, were obeyed beyond our proportion; for which
large sums were repaid by Parliament: Did this look as if they thought we were
in debt to them? By no means. But soon after the peace of 1763, they passed an
act to compel the Colonies to furnish certain articles for a standing army
therein in the time of peace; the great engine of despotism. And as this act
was but partly obeyed in New York, their legislative power was suspended, until
they should do it fully. To this the stamp act was added, to deprive America of
any legal deeds of our lands, or securities for our money, without paying a tax
therefore to Britain. And when they were forced to repeal that act in March,
1766, it was resolved, "That his Majesty in Parliament, of right, had power to
bind the people of the Colonies by statutes IN ALL CASES WHATSOEVER." William
Warburton, Bishop of Gloucester, had delivered a sermon, the preceding month,
before the society who supported their missionaries in America, wherein he
called the inhabitants of it factious people, ready to laugh at the bible; and
said, "The spreading of GENTILISM in the Colonies calls for our rejected
charity." And to render them as odious as possible, he accused them of annually
stealing slaves from the opposite continent, and sacrificing them to their
great idol, the god of gain. "Nothing (says he) is more certain, than that the
infamous traffic for slaves directly infringes both divine and human law.
Nature created man free, and grace invites him to assert his freedom
Gloucester's sermon, February 21, 1766, p. 11, 13, 25, 26.
." Yet it is most certain that his party, in the southern Colonies, and in the
West India islands, have had the chief hand in that infamous traffic. February
20, 1767, John Ewer, Bishop of Landaff, before the same society, said of the
first planters of New England, "What reproach could be cast heavier than they
deserve? who, with their native soil, abandoned their native manners and
religion; and ere long were found in many parts living without remembrance or
knowledge of God, without any divine worship, in dissolute wickedness, and the
most brutal profligacy of manners. Instead of converting barbarous infidels, as
they undertook to do, they became themselves infidels and barbarians. And is it
not some aggravation of their shame, that this their neglect of religion was
contrary to the pretenses and conditions under which they obtained royal grants
and public authority?" And having expressed his earnest desire and hopes of the
speedy establishment of bishops in America, he says, "This point obtained, the
American church will soon go out of its infant state; be able to stand upon its
own legs, and without foreign help support and spread itself. Then the business
of this society will have been brought to the happy issue intended Landaff's
sermon, p. 6, 7, 25, 26
." (See p. 27, 28.) Dr. Thomas Bradbury Chandler, of New Jersey, now published
a book upon the same subject; wherein he owns it as the opinion of many, that
the circumstances of the nation now afforded the most favorable prospect of
the speedy establishment of bishops here, that had ever appeared since Queen
Ann's death. Yet he had the face to declare that such a plan was agreed upon,
"That bishops shall not interfere with the property or privileges, whether
civil or religious, of churchmen or dissenters -- but shall only ordain and
govern the clergy, and administer confirmation to those who shall desire it
Chandler's appeal to the public, p. 50 -- 54, 79.
." The tea and glass-act was passed this year; which moved the Pennsylvania
Farmer to write his elegant letters upon our public danger; the first of which
was dated November 5, 1767. As those letters were greatly esteemed, and had
very extensive effects, ten letters by way of answer to them were published at
Boston, in 1769. Much pains were taken therein to persuade us that the Farmer
had given false alarms, and that our liberties were in no real danger; and yet
in the ninth letter it was said, "The question whether the Parliament can lay
internal taxes could be determined best by considering the power of that body
to alter or vacate charters. The Parliament can annul our charters at will Here
is a power claimed by man, which, with reverence be it spoken, is what the
eternal JEHOVAH never assumed! His infinite perfections render it impossible
for him to lie, to act inconsistently, or to entice any into sin; all which
have been frequently done, by men who have assumed the power to support
religious teachers by ^ax and compulsion.
, without alleging pro causa misuser or abuser, because the King is joined by
the whole Council of the nation." And in January, 1773, Governor Hutchinson
purposely drew our Assembly into a debate upon this subject; and when he closed
it the 6th of March he said, "It is essential to the being of government, that
power should always exist which no other power within such government can have
right to withstand or control; therefore, when the word power relates to the
supreme authority of government, it must (...) understood ABSOLUTE and
UNLIMITED." And he refused his consent to an act passed in that session, to
grant the salaries of the Judges of our Superior Executive Court, because he
expected that the King would pay them out of the American revenue then
collecting. In June following his letter to a member of Parliament, of January
20, 1769, was published by the Assembly at Boston, wherein he said, "I never
think of the measures necessary for the peace and good order of the Colonies
without pain. There must be an abridgment of what are called English
liberties." This, and other original letters, were procured and sent back by
the amiable and judicious Franklin, our agent at the British Court; who, as
soon as this was known there, was spurned from thence with much scorn and
bitterness; an infallible evidence that what they were in pursuit of were the
works of darkness; for he that does truth comes to the light, that his deeds
may be made ^anifest. John iii. 20, 21.

IV. IN November following arrived large cargoes of tea, which were sent over
to establish a precedent of the power of the British Parliament to tax this
country internally. From Philadelphia and New York it was sent back, and not
suffered to be landed; and the same was earnestly tried for at Boston: But
Governor Hutchinson reduced his native town to the cruel necessity of either
suffering it to be landed, and the tax thereon paid, or else of casting it into
the sea; and the latter was chosen. Now the character of those who teach God's
fear by the precepts of men, is to watch for iniquity: And when accounts of
this and other transactions arrived in March, 1774, the British ministry
imagined that they had got enough of it to cover and carry their arbitrary
designs. And such use was made thereof, as to procure one act of Parliament to
shut up the port of Boston, until their power was obeyed there; a second to rob
the people of this Province of their right to choose their own Council; a third
to screen the executors of their orders from punishment, even if they committed
murder in doing it; and a fourth greatly to enlarge the Province of Quebec, to
establish Popery therein, and to deprive its inhabitants of their right of
trials by jury, and other English liberties. As these were hostile measures,
Thomas Gage, the chief commander of all the British forces in America, was
appointed Governor of the Massachusetts, in order to carry them into effect.
And he arrived ^t Boston May 13, where he met the Assembly the 25th, but soon
prorogued them to Salem, where a few acts were passed, and then they were
dissolved, never to meet again upon their former constitution. The port of
Boston was shut up in June, and in August twenty-four of the thirty-six
Counselors, appointed for us by the crown, were sworn into office; and writs
were issued for a new choice of representatives, to meet them at Salem the 5th
of October. But a week before that time the Governor, by proclamation, forbid
their meeting; because the people had compelled some of those Counselors to
resign their commissions, and the rest were afraid to venture out of Boston.
Yet most of the representatives met, resolved themselves into a Provincial
Congress, and sat at several times and places, until they dissolved on December
10; having taken various steps toward the internal regulation and defense of
the country, and proposed a new choice of delegates from the towns, to meet in
February. In the mean time all these Colonies considered the case of Boston as
their own, and sent large contributions to its suffering inhabitants. Delegates
from twelve Colonies met at Philadelphia, September 5, and sat till October 26,
stated the unalienable rights of mankind, and the nature, limits and end of
civil government, in a clear manner; and sent addresses to the throne, and to
various parts of the empire, well calculated to expose, and, if possible, to
remove the dangers that hung over our liberties. They also recommended wise
measures for our internal regulation; and, in the name of their constituents,
solemnly covenanted to refrain from importing any British goods, or exporting
any of ours to them, after certain times set; if said oppressive acts should
not then be repealed, until their repeal was effected.

IN the night preceding September 1, a party of soldiers went and seized a
large quantity of powder, in a public store in Cambridge, which, with some
field pieces, they brought off to Boston; upon which a report flew like the
wind, that Gage had sent out his troops, who were killing the people.
Multitudes were alarmed hereby, and were marching in arms to relieve their
friends, until this report was contradicted. And on Lord's day, February 26,
1775, a field officer, with about an hundred men, sailed from the castle to
Marblehead, and then marched nimbly to Salem, to fetch some pieces of artillery
from thence; but were defeated in their design by the vigilance of the people.
After which Colonel Gilbert collected a quantity of arms and ammunition at
Freetown, and sent to the Governor for protection; who thereupon wrote to the
authority of Bristol county, to make provision for two hundred soldiers there:
But, before they marched, some thousands of the inhabitants assembled on April
10, seized those war stores, and dispersed that nest of enemies at Freetown.
Yet after all this, and much more of like nature, we are informed, that the
Mandamus Counselors at Boston were under such an infatuation, as to give it as
their opinion, that their countrymen would not venture to fight against the
King's troops; and to advise their Governor to try the experiment, by sending a
body of them to destroy or bring away the stores that were collected at
Concord. But though this advice was followed with great secresy, by crossing
the water from Boston common in the dead of the night, so as to get twelve
miles in their way before sunrise, yet they then saw a company of the militia
collected to oppose them; of whom they killed eight men on the spot, and then
marched six miles further to Concord; where they shot down two men more, before
our people fired upon them This is a most certain fact, though it was
contradicted by our enemies in London.
And they not only used their endeavors to destroy some cannon and carriages,
but also cast a considerable quantity of flour into the river. Hereupon the
cowardly Americans drove the heroic Britons back to their ships the same day,
with much terror and slaughter, although near two thousand of their best troops
were employed in the affair; which will transmit the remembrance of Lexington,
and the 19th of April, down to the latest posterity.

V. BUT how the inhabitants of a country of fifteen hundred miles extent,
divided into thirteen Colonies, very differently constituted, wherein were
persons of almost all nations, sects and opinions, could unite against the
arbitrary claims of the most powerful kingdom upon earth, and could persevere
therein for eight tedious years, in defiance of the utmost exertions both of
craft and violence, until those claims are fully given up, is matter of
universal astonishment, and will be the subject of curious enquiry to future
ages. To me it is past all doubt, that no other sufficient reason can be given
for this unparalleled event, than the design which God has declared to us, in
the passage that adorns our title page. Pride and disobedience to him had
arrived to such height in both countries, that we must become dreadful scourges
to each other, to discover what was in our hearts, whether we would keep his
commandments or not.

VI. A SECOND Provincial Congress met at Concord; February 1, and proceeded to
further measures for the defense of our liberties; and other Colonies did the
like. The Assembly at Providence, in December, had ordered the cannon to be
brought up there from their fort near New-port, which were now conveyed to the
camp before Boston, formed by the militia, who assembled by thousands, and
filled the towns and villages, from the bay south of Boston to Mystic river on
the north; being a circle of twenty miles. On the other hand, the British
Generals, How, Burgoyne and Clinton, arrived with large reinforcements to
their army at Boston. Charlestown, to the north of it, lies, as that does, upon
a peninsula, the latter betwixt Charles and Mystic rivers. It contained above
four hundred houses, many of them very elegant. June 17 the British commanders
perceived that the Americans had begun to fortify a hill on the north side of
Charlestown; upon which the town was surrounded with their ships and floating
batteries, and then their army landed to attack our entrenchment. Burgoyne was
upon a hill in the northeast part of Boston; and eight days after he wrote the
following account of the action to England. Says he, "If we look to the height,
Howe's corpse ascending the hill in the face of entrenchments, and in a very
disadvantageous ground, was much engaged; to the left the enemy pouring fresh
troops, by thousands, over the land, and in the arm of the sea our ships and
floating batteries cannonading them; straight before us a large and noble town
in one great blaze; the church steeples, being of timber, were great pyramids
of fire above the rest, behind us, the church steeples and heights of our own
camp covered with spectators of the rest of our army which was engaged; the
hills round the country covered with spectators, the enemy all in anxious
suspense; the roar of cannon, mortars and musquetry, the crush of churches,
ships upon the stocks, and whole streets falling together in ruins, to fill the
ear; the storm of redoubts, with the objects above described to fill the eye,
and the reflection that perhaps a defeat was a final loss of the British empire
in America, to fill the mind -- made the whole a picture and complication of
horror and importance, beyond any thing that ever came to my lot to be witness
to. -- Yet the day ended with glory, and the success was most important,
considering the ascendency it gave the regular troops; but the loss was
uncommon in officers, for the number engaged."

VII. CAN this be believed by posterity? Major Pitcairn, who was most forward
in firing upon our people at Lexington, was now slain, with two other field
officers, two of Howe's aids, seven Captains, and about eight hundred men;
besides near as many more who died of their wounds, while our loss was but
about half that number. All this in driving the despised Americans from a
redoubt they had raised in one night, under the direction of a physician The
Honorable Joseph Warren, of Boston, who had just before been appointed a
Major General by our Provincial Congress.
as their chief commander; and after he fell, the British veterans did not
venture to pursue our people, though it might have been done for half a mile,
under the protection of their own ships and batteries. Is this their glory! it
was glorying in their shame. And a plain account of their motives here follows.
Charles Lee had been an officer under Burgoyne in the last war, and had
contracted a near friendship with him; and hearing of his arrival at Boston, he
sent him a letter, which Burgoyne answered from thence, July 8; and said, "The
vital principle of the constitution, in which it moves and has its being, is
the supremacy of the King in Parliament: A compound, indefinite, indefeasible
power, coeval with the origin of the empire, and co-extensive over all its
parts." And having laid this as his foundation, he, in an artful manner, went
on to compare our conduct with theirs who beheaded Charles, and set up
Cromwell; and that of his party, to those who expelled James, and crowned
William; and then says, "These principles, depend upon it, actuate the army and
fleet throughout; and let me at the same time add, that there are few if any
gentlemen among us who would have drawn their swords in the cause of slavery.
-- I know Great Britain is ready to open her arms upon the first overture of
accommodation. I know she is equally resolute to maintain her original rights;
and if the war proceeds, your one hundred and fifty thousand men will not be a
match for HER POWER." This was their capital argument; which, however, failed
him and his army at Saratoga two years after. Our second Continental Congress
met at Philadelphia May 10, and sent a petition to the King, wherein they
assured him, that their ardent desire was, for the restoration of the former
harmony between the two countries, and for its establishment upon a permanent
and lasting basis; and said, "Our breasts retain too tender a regard for the
kingdom from which we derive our origin, to request such a reconciliation as
might in any manner be inconsistent with her dignity and welfare." And they
prayed him to direct to some mode wherein such a reconciliation might be
accomplished. On September 1, this petition was delivered to Lord Dartmouth, by
Governor Penn, and Mr. Arthur Lee; to whom the minister said, "No answer would
be given." Now compare this with Burgoyne's declaration. He called their claims
over the Colonies original rights, and the vital principle of the constitution;
which was so opposite to truth, that it is impossible for any men ever to have
such a right to power over others: And instead of a readiness for
accommodation, they were earnestly barring the door against it. General Gage
covenanted with our friends in Boston, that if they would deliver up their arms
and ammunition, they should have liberty to go out with their other effects.
But when he had thus disarmed them, he violated his promise in a shameful
manner; which raised both the resentment and the contempt of the country
against his party. It taught the people not to confide in their promises, and
also to despise them; as being afraid, that if our women and children were not
kept there as hostages, the people would rush in and destroy or captivate their
boasting army.

VIII. ON the other hand, because Cromwell, with the wisdom of the serpent, but
not the innocence of the dove, made a great overturn in the nation, which yet
ended in confusion and slavery, our enemies imagined that nothing better could
take place here, if we revolted from their King. But how far are God's thoughts
above theirs? He raised up a man in Virginia, the oldest of our Colonels, who,
by the Congress, was unanimously appointed the chief commander of our armies;
and as such arrived at the camp at Cambridge July 2. And through eight perilous
campaigns he was preserved in safety and health, was enabled to unite reason
and resolution, authority and mildness, until his country was delivered from
the most imminent dangers, and peace restored to the nations; and then he as
readily resigned his command as ever he received it, and joyfully retired into
a private station, followed with the universal esteem and blessings of his
country; while a demonstration is hereby held up to all the world, that
prudence, uprightness and benevolence, will procure and preserve that honor,
authority and happiness, which are in vain sought for in any other way.

CHAP. XVII.
1. Reasons why the Baptists joined in this War. 2. Gracious Visitations in our
Land. 3. Labors for equal Liberty. 4. New Attempts to divide and enslave
America. 5. The Folly thereof exposed. 6. Great Exploits performed. 7. To which
succeeded terrible Inroads of the Enemy. 8. Yet wonderful Relief was granted
against them. 9. Their amazing Cruelty. 10. Vast Uncertainty of our Affairs.
11. The closing Scenes of the War.

1. SINCE the Baptists have often been oppressed in this land, and would have
suffered more than they did, had it not been for restraints from Great Britain,
how came they to join in a war against her? Many have wondered at it, and some
have censured them severely therefore. But they had the following reasons for
their conduct. 1. Where Episcopalians have had all the power of government,
they have never allowed others so much liberty as we here enjoyed. In England
all are taxed to their worship, while none are admitted into civil offices but
communicants in their church. In Virginia, they cruelly imprisoned Baptist
ministers, only for preaching the gospel to perishing souls without license
from their Courts, until this war compelled them to desist therefrom. Of this
we had incontestible evidence. Therefore we could have no rational hopes of any
real advantage in joining with them. 2. The worst treatment we here met with
came from the same principles, and much of it from the same persons, as the
American war did. Many proofs of this have already been given, and more are at
hand if called for. 3. The first Baptist minister in America publicly held
forth, that all righteous government is founded in compact, expressed or
implied; which is equally binding upon rulers and ruled; so that every officer,
whether succeeding or elected, who intermeddles in any matter not fairly
derived from thence, goes beyond his commission. (Vol. 1, p. 168.) When
therefore our countrymen adopted these principles, and founded their opposition
to arbitrary claims wholly thereon, how could we avoid joining with them? For,
4. those claims appeared to us absolutely unjust, and a direct violation of the
immutable rules of truth and equity; so that a concurrence with them would have
brought such guilt upon our consciences, as is infinitely worse than all the
frowns of men. 5. Though heavy corrections were to be expected, yet a strong
hope was begotten of final deliverance to this land; the good effects whereof
might hereafter return to the people who now invaded our rights. It is not
pretended that our denomination were all agreed, or had equal clearness in
these points; but a majority of them were, more or less, influenced thereby.


II. A MAIN ground of the hope now mentioned, was the gracious visitations
granted from time to time, in various parts of this country, which bespoke a
design of final deliverance, and not of destruction or slavery. Within seven
years past several thousands had been hopefully converted from the errors of
their ways, in Virginia, the Carolinas and Georgia. In and after the year 1773,
a powerful work prevailed in Pittsfield, Adams, Lanesborough, Hancock, and
other towns in Berkshire; and the like in the adjacent parts of the county of
Albany, and into the State of Vermont; which raised and increased many Baptist
churches there. And, to come nearer home, the second Baptist church in
Middleborough was reduced very low, until a revival began in the spring of
1773, which by the fall of 1775 caused the addition of ninety members to that
church, and thirty to our third church in this town. The work extended into the
east and most uncultivated part of Freetown, where it raised a new church, and
another in Dartmouth. In November, 1774, a like blessing was granted in
Attleborough, which in ten months added thirty members to the first Baptist
church there, and a number more to other societies. In December this revival
extended into Providence, where it prevailed gloriously through the winter.
Their college enjoyed a precious share of it, the good effects whereof are
still experienced in distant churches. In ten months, more than an hundred
persons were added to the Baptist church there, beside large additions to other
churches in the town. And though the alarms of war in the spring caused a great
interruption of spiritual exercises and enjoyments, in places near the scene of
action, yet the same were promoted thereby in distant places. At the time of
the Bunker-Hill battle, a young physician was converted at Harverd, thirty-five
miles off, who was called the next year to preach the gospel; and he is now
pastor of a large Baptist church there, who are chiefly the seals of his
ministry. Royalston and Richmond, to the northward, and Suffield, to the
westward, were favored with a considerable revival of religion at this time,
as Pomfret, Killingly, and other towns in Connecticut, were in 1776. And while
the defense of the civil rights of America appeared a matter of great
importance, our religious liberties were by no means to be neglected; and the
contest concerning each kept a pretty even pace through the war.

III. VIEWING the Continental Congress as our highest civil resort, the Warren
Association, at their meeting at Medfield, September 13, 1774, agreed to send
their agent to Philadelphia, there to follow the best advice he could obtain,
to procure some influence from thence in their favor. A Convention of the
county of Suffolk, at this time the head county of our Province, gave
countenance to this procedure; for their seventeenth resolve says, "This
county, confiding in the wisdom and integrity of the Continental Congress, now
sitting at Philadelphia, will pay all due respect and submission to such
measures as may be recommended by them to the Colonies, for the restoration and
establishment of our just rights, civil and religious The Congress gave their
special approbation of these resolves.
." These resolves were carried by said agent to that city; where he met with an
Association of Baptist churches, from several adjacent Colonies, who elected a
large Committee to assist in the affair, and by their request a conference was
procured in the evening of October 14, with the Honorable Delegates from our
Province to Congress, in the presence of several more of their members, and
other gentlemen. It was opened by reading a brief memorial of our chief
grievances in the Massachusetts, on religious accounts, which our Delegates
endeavored to answer; first by denying that we had any cause for such
complaints, and then by attempting to cast all the blame thereof upon the
executive department, and asserting that our Legislature were entirely clear of
it; but plain facts, especially in the Ashfield affair, confuted both of these
pleas; and the conference was closed with a promise from said Delegates of the
exertion of their influence in our favor. But as some in Philadelphia made an
attempt to turn these things against the general union of the Colonies, in the
defense of our civil rights, a report was industriously spread in New England,
before said Baptist agent got home, that he had been to Philadelphia on purpose
to break that union. And while he was gone, the first parish in his own town
voted to tax all the Baptists therein to their minister, because they refused
to give them any more certificates. He therefore soon met the Baptist committee
at Boston, by whose advice a plain memorial of their grievances and desires was
laid before our Provincial Congress; to which the following answer was returned.

In Provincial Congress, Cambridge, Dec. 9, 1774.
On reading the memorial of the Reverend Isaac Backus, Agent to the Baptist
churches in this government:

RESOLVED, That the establishment of civil and religious liberty, to each
denomination in the Province, is the sincere wish of this Congress: But being
by no means vested with powers of civil government, whereby they can redress
the grievances of any person whatever, they therefore recommend to the Baptist
churches, that when a General Assembly shall be convened in this Colony they
lay the real grievances of said churches before the same, when and where their
petition wi^^ most certainly meet with all that attention due to the memorial
of a denomination of Christians so well disposed to the public weal of their
country.

By order of the Congress, JOHN HANCOCK, President.
A true extract from the minutes, BENJAMIN LINCOLN, Sec'ry.

OUR former charter provided, that when the Province should happen to be
destitute of any Governor or Lieutenant Governor, the Council and
Representatives should have the whole legislative power therein. Therefore, by
the advice of the Continental Congress, such an Assembly was convened at
Watertown, July 19, 1775; to whom in September the Warren Association presented
a memorial, wherein, after mentioning the above advice, they say, "Our real
grievances are, that we, as well as our fathers, have, from time to time, been
taxed on religious accounts where we were not represented; and when we have
sued for our rights, our causes have been tried by interested judges. That the
Representatives in former Assemblies, as well as the present, were elected by
virtue only of civil and worldly qualifications, is a truth so evident, that we
presume it need not be proved to this assembly; and for a civil Legislature to
impose religions ^^xes, is, we conceive, a power which their constituents never
had to give; and is therefore going entirely out of their jurisdiction. --
Under the legal dispensation, where God himself prescribed the exact proportion
of what the people were to give, yet none but persons of the worst characters
ever attempted to take it by force. 1 Samuel ii. 12, 16. Mica. iii. 5 -- 9. How
daring then must it be for any to do it for Christ's ministers, who says, my
kingdom is not of this world! -- We beseech this honorable Assembly to take
these matters into their wise and serious consideration, before him who has
said, with what measure ye mete it shall be measured to you again. Is not all
America now appealing to heaven, against the injustice of being taxed where we
are not represented, and against being judged by men who are interested in
getting away our mon? And will heaven approve of your doing the same thing to
your fellow servants! No, surely. -- We have no desire of representing this
government as the worst of any who have imposed religious taxes; we fully
believe the contrary. Yet, as we are persuaded that an entire freedom from
being taxed by civil rulers to religious worship, is not a mere favor, from
any man or men in the world, but a right and property granted us by God, who
commands us to stand fast in it, we have not only the same reason to refuse an
acknowledgment of such a taxing power here, as America has the abovesaid power,
but also, according to our present light, we should wrong our consciences in
allowing that power to men, which we believe belongs only to God." -- This
memorial was read in the Assembly, and was ordered to lie a week on the table,
and was then read again, and debated upon, and was referred to a committee,
upon the receipt of whose report it was read a third time, and liberty granted
to bring in a bill in our favor; and such a bill was received and read once,
and a time set for a second reading: But then other business was crowded in,
and nothing more done upon it. Such is the disposition of mankind.

IV. As the British ministry were deceived, and entirely disappointed in their
first scheme, a new one was invented, in the close of 1775; which was, by acts
of Parliament, to declare all these Colonies to be in a frate of rebellion, and
out of the King's protection; to hire a large army from Germany, to add terror
to the ro^^ings of the British lion; and then to appoint Commissioners to
proclaim pardon and peace to any Colony or place that should submit to their
power, and promise to raise as much money among themselves as the Court of
Britain should judge to be their proportion, toward the support and defense of
government: Their peace to last as long as this was done. And in order to man
the British ships, and to make all afraid of their power their commanders were
ordered to enter the n^^nes of as many of the captives whom they should take as
they thought proper, among the list of their hands on board, so as to compel
them to fight against their own country, and to be punished as deserters, if
they should attempt to make their escape. And had not the Lord been on our
side, when men thus rose up against us, how soon would they have swallowed us
up! But when, in his wise dispensations, he had given them all the advantages
that could well be conceived of, how easily did he turn their counsels into
foolishness? For when the British party in Boston came to look out in the
morning of March 13, 1776, behold! two stately forts appeared on the top of two
hills in Dorchester, capable of commanding both the town and the ships in the
harbor. Burgovne's letter to England the June before informs us, that his
party had laid a plan to take possession of those hills, which was to have been
executed the 18th of that month; but was prevented by the Bunker-Hill battle
the preceding day. And as the only landpassage on to those heights was across
an open marsh, within half a mile of their guards on Boston-Neck, and as they
had a multitude of their friends scattered through the country, was it possible
for several hundred tuns weight of materials to be prepared before, and then to
be carted some miles on to those hills, and two forts to be erected there in
one night, by the undisciplined Americans, and the sagacious Britons know
nothing about it! Yet such was the event; and let them deny it if they can. Not
only so, but while they were preparing to go over and attack those forts, the
winds and waves were put into such a commotion, as finally prevented the
attempt. And on March 17 the British army, with a large number of our inimical
countrymen, fled from Boston; and soon sailed to Nova Scotia, or to Britain.
Indeed some of their men of war were left in Nantasket road, out of the reach
of our cannon; yet on May 17 a small armed vessel took a large storeship of
theirs in the bay, which was conveyed into Boston in their sight, and they had
not power to prevent it, having on board a thousand stands of arms, fifteen
hundred whole barrels of powder, and a large quantity of other necessary
supplies for our army. And on June 14 their ships were compelled to quit the
lower harbor, by the firing of some cannon which our people had conveyed down
the night before; whereby that port was again opened, which was cruelly shut up
two years before. And about four hundred and fifty of their troops were
captivated by our cruizers about this time; and a vast quantity of their goods
of all kinds were taken and brought into our country.

V. NOT aware of such events, the next object of British policy was, to appoint
such men to execute their new plan as should be able to divide the Colonies, by
drawing some part of them to accept of their pardons. And as Lord George How,
who was slain near Ticonderoga, July 6, 1758, was so much beloved here, that
the Massachusetts were at the expense of erecting a monument for him in
Westminster-Abbey, who could be so likely to gain upon our people as his two
brothers? William was already appointed Governor of this Province, and Chief
General of their armies; and Richard, successor in title to George, and an
intimate friend to Dr. Franklin, was now made Chief Admiral of their fleet; and
they were made joint Commissioners to proclaim pardon to all who would accept
of it on the above terms. And as an army of thirty-five thousand men was to be
at their command, who would not be glad to receive their pardon and protection,
rather than to be a mark for their resentment? But alas! the winds and waves
were so contrary, that the two brothers could not meet, to send out their
proclamations, until July 12, eight days after the Congress, by the consent of
the people in the thirteen Colonies, had declared them to be FREE AND
INDEPENDENT STATES. However, from on board their ships near New York, they sent
forth their proclamations, which our people readily propagated through all
these States. And, with a packet to Congress, Lord How sent a letter to his
friend Franklin, a member of it, wherein he says, "Retaining all the
earnestness I ever expressed to see our differences accommodated, I shall
conceive, if I meet with the dispositions in the Colonies which I was once
taught to expect, the most flattering hopes of proving serviceable, in the
objects of the King's paternal solicitude, by promoting the establishment of
lasting peace and union with the Colonies. But if the deep-rooted prejudices of
America, and the necessity of preventing her trade from passing into foreign
channels, must keep us still a divided people, I shall, from every private as
well as public motive, most heartily lament that it is not the moment wherein
those great objects of my ambition are to be attained." -- Franklin returned an
answer from Philadelphia July 30, wherein he says, "The official dispatches, to
which you refer me, contain nothing more than we had seen in the act of
Parliament, viz. offers of pardon upon submission; which I am sorry to find, as
it must give your Lordship pain to be sent so far on so hopeless a business.
Directing pardons to be offered to the Colonies, who are the very parties
injured, expresses indeed that opinion of our ignorance, baseness and
insensibility, which your uninformed and proud nation has long been pleased to
entertain of us; but it can have no other effect than that of increasing our
resentment. It is impossible we should think of submission to a government that
has, with the most wanton barbarity and cruelty, burnt our defenseless towns,
in the midst of winter; excited the savages to massacre peaceful farmers, and
our slaves to murder their masters; and is even now bringing foreign
mercenaries to deluge our settlements with blood October 17, 1775, the enemy
burnt four hundred and seventeen buildings in the town of Falmouth, in
Casco-Bay. In the evening of the 7th of that month, their ships fired upon the
town of Bristol, near Swanzey; which caused the death of Mr. John Burt, their
minister, and some others. Lord Dunmore, Governor of Virginia, retired on board
an armed ship, and drew off all the slaves and others that he could; and, after
much other mischief, they burnt the town of Norfolk on January 1, 1776; in
which cruel action, besides the unnatural nature of it, the whole loss to the
inhabitants was computed at above three hundred thousand pounds. And a man was
taken up, upon his way to the Ohio Indians, with a Colonel's commission from
General Gage, to command all the savages and others that he could raise in the
wilderness against us.
. -- Long did I endeavor, with unfeigned and unwearied zeal, to preserve from
breaking that fine and noble china vase, the British empire; for I knew, that
being once broken, the separate parts could not retain even their shares of the
strength and value that existed in the whole; and that a perfect reunion of
these parts could scarce ever be hoped for. -- The well-founded esteem, and,
permit me to say, affection, which I shall always have for your Lordship, make
it painful for me to see you engaged in conducting a war, the great ground of
which, as described in your letter, is the necessity of preventing the American
trade from passing into foreign channels. To me it seems that neither the
obtaining or retaining any trade, how valuable soever, is an object for which
men may justly spill each others blood: That the true and sure means of
extending and securing commerce, are the goodness and cheapness of commodities;
and that the profits of no trade can ever be equal to the expense of compelling
it, and holding it by fleets and armies."

THE real nature of the controversy is here stated in a fair and elegant
manner; and its whole progress verifies the truth of the word which says, only
by pride comes contention; and the love of money is the root of all evil. And
can a clearer demonstration thereof be given, than for the inhabitants of one
country to claim a right to be lawgivers and judges for others three thousand
miles off, so as to dispose of their persons and property without their
consent? A darling practice of our age, especially among high politicians, is
to set up reason above divine revelation; but how will their rules suit in this
case? One of their noted authors expressly denies that God had a right to
command Abraham to sacrifice his son, with an intent to have it obeyed; and
says, "The command might be given in order to convince Abraham, that even his
honesty and integrity, when not under the direction of his understanding, might
mislead him in the conducting of his actions." The reason given for thus
setting up an inward rule above the written word, is this: Says he, "It was
right and fit, in the nature of the thing, that Abraham should guard and
protect the life of Isaac; which obligation, as it is founded in nature, so it
is independent of, and antecedent to, any divine command; yea, it is antecedent
to the consideration of a deity, because it must and would be the same, if
there were no such thing as a deity Chubb's tracts, printed in London, 1754,
vol. 2. p. 3, 12.
." Yet when he comes to the question, from whence does evil proceed? he says,
"The difficulty in this case may not arise from the state of things, but from
the weakness of our understandings, and the shortness of our knowledge, which
render us incapable of seeing through and to the end of them Page 22.
." Very true; why then do these weak and dark minds refuse entire submission
and ready obedience to HIM whose understanding is infinite? Had any due regard
been paid to his authority in our mother island, we should never have heard of
paternal solicitude in invading the unalienable rights of her children; nor of
pardons brought upon the points of bayonets! At the same time we have just
cause to confess, that all our sufferings were less than our iniquities
deserved, and that we were far from giving God all the glory of our support and
deliverance, as we ought to have done. To give a particular history of this war
is out of my province, though a concise view of the chief events of it comes
into our plan. Yet wanting time and means for it, my narrative must necessarily
be incomplete.

VI. As Canada had long been a dreadful scourge to New England, and the
repeating of those bloody tragedies was intended by our enemies, amazing
exertions were made to prevent it, and to unite that country with ours. Most of
its inhabitants desired it, which was a great inducement to this attempt.
Therefore the Colonels Ethen Allen and Seth Warner, encouraged thereto by the
authority of Connecticut, surprised and took the strong fortresses of
Ticonderoga and Crown-Point, May 10, 1775, without the loss of a man on either
side; whereby above two hundred pieces of cannon, two vessels on
Lake-Champlain, and a large quantity of other stores, fell into our hands. All
this was done by three hundred and thirty men, chiefly from the State of
Vermont. An army followed under General Montgomery, and after a close siege
took St. John's, at the farther end of said lake, and obtained the city of
Montreal, November 13; previous whereto Allen was taken and carried to Europe.
In September Colonel Arnold set off from Cambridge with eleven hundred men, and
marched to Newbury-Port, from whence they sailed into Kennebeck river, and went
up to its head. And though near a third part of them then returned back, yet
the remainder went forward, through a great and terrible wilderness, over
rivers, hills and mountains, where they saw not the habitation of any human
person for thirty-one days, until they arrived among the Canadians on November
3, by whom they were kindly treated. And the falling snows, severe coldness of
the air, and other unspeakable difficulties in that northern region, did not
hinder their march forward, nor the junction of Montgomery's forces with them
in December before Quebec, the capital of Canada. These were some of the doings
of a people, whom British policy, or rather folly, had declared to be cowards
and paltroons. Allen and Arnold sprang from the despised Rhode-Islanders. On
the other hand, as General Clinton had sailed from Boston with some forces,
General Lee set off by land, and headed him at New York, in Virginia, and in
North and South Carolina. At length, being reinforced from Britain in June, by
Admiral Parker and Lord Cornwallis, a furious attack was made upon the fort on
Sullivan's Island, near Charleston; but they were defeated, with great damages
in their shipping, as well as loss of their men; and the remainder returned and
joined their main body near New York. General Washington with our main army was
there, and had erected various fortifications in that city, and upon
Long Island. And through the land many gloried in what the Americans had done,
and evidently treated their enemies with contempt. But how vain did their
glorying soon appear?

VII. OUR army met with a terrible defeat on Long Island, August 28; were
forced to evacuate the city of New York, September 13; fought on a retreat at
the White-Plains; Fort Washington was given up November 16; General Lee was
taken December 13; and General Washington with the small remnant of our army
retreated beyond the Delaware. Ravishing of women, and plundering of houses, by
an enraged enemy, was seen through all the beautiful country of New Jersey, and
their cantonments were extended into the towns of Trenton. Bordentown and
Burlington, on the Delaware; the latter within twenty miles of Philadelphia,
over to which a few freezing nights might give them an easy passage. And if we
turn our eyes to the north, we behold General Montgomery slain, December 31, in
attempting to storm Quebec. In the spring our army were forced to make a hasty
retreat from thence, being most cruelly harrassed by the enemy, and greatly
distressed at the same time with the smallpox. And though a costly fleet to
oppose them was formed on Lake-Champlain, yet it was lost on October 12. And on
December 3 the enemy, with a powerful force, took possession of Rhode Island,
near the heart of New England. Our first army enlisted for eight months, the
second for a year, which was now expiring, and the soldiers were daily
returning home. Our paper money had been kept in good credit, until large
additional sums were made in September, which lessened its value; and such vast
quantities of goods were taken by our cruizers, and sold at public auction,
that sugars rose from five dollars and a third per hundred to ten dollars in
three months, and the like in other goods. Thus our prosperity seemed likely to
destroy us, for if our public credit failed, confusion and slavery appeared the
unavoidable consequence. And, to accomplish this, if possible, the enemy
counterfeited our paper currency at New York, and in a clandestine manner
dispersed large quantities of it through the country. Every earthly help failed
us; but as our appeal had been to heaven against oppressors, many cries now
undoubtedly ascended there, saying, give us help from trouble, for vain is the
help of man. And what an answer thereto was returned!

VIII. WHILE the enemy were expecting in a few days to march in triumph to
Philadelphia, on December 26 General Washington takes near a thousand of them,
and carries them there as captives. And though a large reinforcement of the
enemy marched up to Trenton, and expected to have out General and his forces in
the morning, yet the next news they hear of him is at Princeton, a dozen miles
off, where he captivates another party of their troops, and is soon gone out of
their way, January 2, 1777. These things terrified the enemy in such a manner
as to call in and confine them at Brunswick, within sight of their shipping,
until spring, when they returned to New York. Hard attempts indeed were made by
some, to persuade the world that bribery moved the British General thus to act:
As if men who could scarcely reward their friends for necessary services, could
outbid their enemies, who had the wealth of both the Indies at command! Such
violence will courtiers offer to reason, rather than to confess that wherein
they deal proudly God is above them, and easily turns their counsels into
foolishness. For though their main army sailed into Chesapeak-Bay, and marched
from thence to Philadelphia in September, and kept it one winter, yet they got
no real advantage thereby. Rather, by dividing their forces, they prepared the
way for their own confusion. Burgoyne had acquired a large share of military
skill and fame, in former wars in Europe and in the East Indies; and thirteen
thousand troops were assigned him, besides savage auxiliaries, to invade our
country from Canada. Ticonderoga was thought by many to be almost impregnable,
and yet it was deserted by our army, July 5, before it was fully invested by
the enemy, who pursued and harrassed our people most terribly. And if the
strongest sortress in the land was thus given up, only upon seeing the manner
of the enemy's approach, how easily might they subdue an open country, and
march where they pleased! Where is the power now that can defend us! A great
consternation spread through the country; and to pursue this advantage with the
utmost speed, moved Burgoyne to take such methods as effectually defeated his
designs. Had he returned a little back, and taken the advantage of a water
passage over Lake-George, he might have reached to Fort-Edward much sooner than
he did. But fearing an abatement of the ardour of his troops, and of the
consternation of the Americans, he pursued them in a way attended with great
natural impediments, which were much augmented by fallen trees and other
obstacles then thrown in their way. So that by the time he sent out a party
toward Bennington, with a haughty proclamation to intimidate our countrymen,
their spirits were revived, and on August 16 they faced the enemy's encampment,
and forced their lines with undaunted resolution. His western detachment, under
St. Ledger, was also defeated. And the chief commanders in that department
being removed, and others appointed, in whom our people had confidence, they
were all alive in the defense of our country. Ticonderoga was recovered, and
every resource and way of escape was cut off; so that the haughty General and
his army had no way left but to surrender themselves and their weapons into the
hands of the people the had greatly abused and despised. This was on October
17. All Europe were astonished at this event; and one of their most powerful
Princes soon made the proposal, which was accomplished on February 6, 1778, of
coming into an alliance with the United States of America. Hereby a great turn
was made in our affairs, and a door was opened for our deliverance, though not
without many other trying scenes.

IX. AS the invaders of our rights called us rebels, it was very difficult
settling a cartel for the exchange of prisoners; and when that was agreed upon,
new difficulties about it soon arose. When they had taken General Lee, who had
been one of their officers, he was not dealt with as our country officers in
their hands were; which moved the Congress to order some retaliation upon their
officers in our hands, which caused reciprocal complaints, and many terrible
actions on both sides. On January 1, 1777, two hundred of our countrymen, who
had been prisoners at New York, were brought to Milford to be exchanged; but
they had been so cruelly used, that a very large part of them died before their
friends could have notice of it, so as to afford them any relief. Two young men
from Middleborough, and a pious member of a Baptist church in Attleborough,
died there in that manner. And during the war their prison-ships at New York
destroyed many thousands of our people, in a much more cruel manner than common
murder. Therefore when there was a want of union and vigor in the defense of
our country at any time, new attempts of the enemy against us never failed of
supplying that want. They plainly acted like thieves and robbers in all parts
of the land. In the morning of May 25, 1778, a party of them came up to Warren,
and burnt their meeting house and minister's house, with some others; plundered
their goods, and carried off several of the inhabitants that were not in arms,
one of whorn was the pastor of the Baptist church there, who was confined for
some time in a prison-ship at Newport. On their return they burnt a number of
houses in Bristol, among which was their Episcopal church. But I must not
enlarge upon this subject. Other Commissioners were now sent over, with new
offers of pardon, and also of an enlargement of our privileges, if we would
submit to the British government. Copies thereof were sent to the Congress, and
to the Governors of the several States. In answer to those sent to Governor
Trumbull, he well said, "There was a day when even this step, from our then
acknowledged parent state, might have been accepted with joy and gratitude; but
that day, sir, is past irrecoverably. The repeated rejection of our sincere and
sufficiently humble petitions; the commencement of hostilities; the inhumanity
which has marked the prosecution of the war on your part in its several stages;
the insolence which displays itself on every petty advantage; the cruelties
which have been exercised on those unhappy men, whom the fortune of war has
thrown into your hands; all these are insuperable bars to the very idea of
concluding a peace with Great Britain, on any other conditions than the most
absolute, perfect independence." However, the vast uncertainty of human affairs
must yet be largely experienced, before such a peace could be obtained.

X. GENERAL How was recalled, and Clinton took his place as Chief Commander;
and he evacuated Philadelphia, after they had possessed it near nine months,
and marched his army across the lower part of New Jersey, where General
Washington gave them battle, near Monmouth courthouse, June 28; when many were
slain on both sides, and the excessive heat of the air cut off many more. And
no sooner had the British troops arrived at New York, than a powerful French
fleet appeared upon the coasts, and came before that place. British fears and
American hopes were raised hereby; which alternately were as changeable as the
winds. The French made no attempt upon New York; but their speedy arrival at
Rhode Island caused considerable destruction of the British shipping, and
raised the hopes of our people of seeing that place delivered. Many thousands
were collected for that purpose, who, under the command of General Sullivan,
landed upon the island, August 9. But the appearance of the British fleet drew
that of France out of the harbor the same day; and a terrible storm soon
dispersed and shattered both fleets, so as to prevent any general engagement,
or a deliverance to Rhode Island. In December the capital of Georgia was taken,
by a party of the British troops. In 1779 various attempts were made to open a
passage up the North River; but finding it impracticable, a strong party was
sent to New Haven, who slew a number of the inhabitants, and plundered the
town, and then went and burnt the beautiful towns of Fairfield and Norwalk.
Their malignity was hereby further discovered; but it could not draw the
sagacious Washington from the mountains, while he saw a powerful fleet and army
below him. From Georgia a party of their troops marched to the gates of
Charleston; but the arrival of a French fleet on the coasts turned them back to
Savannah; which place our friends attempted to take by storm on October 9, but
without success. Thus the hopes of help from our allies were a second time
disappointed. The produce of the field was also so much cut short last year,
that bread was the scarcest the beginning of this that we had ever known. And
to have the judgment of famine added to that of the sword, would be terrible
indeed. But infinite goodness now gave us an earlier harvest than we had ever
seen, and in a few months our scarcity was turned into plenty. And on October
24 the enemy went off from Rhode Island, which was a great relief to this part
of the country.

XI. HAVING made sufficient trial of these northern hills, they flattered
themselves with much greater advantages in the southern plains of America. And
for a while it seemed as if in that way they would have carried all before
them. A large force sailed from New York in December, and though they had a
tempestuous passage, yet after some repairs at Georgia they came and besieged
the capital of South Carolina; which was compelled to yield to them, May 12,
1780. The country then lay open to their ravages; and on August 16 General
Gates, who had gained great fame in the north, was entirely defeated in those
southern regions. And though a French fleet and army arrived at Rhode Island
July 10, yet none could then tell whether we should obtain any solid benefit
thereby. Our public credit was sinking daily, even so that scarce any recruits
for our army could be obtained, but upon private personal security. And in
November the officers therein constrained the Congress to promise them halfpay
during life, to prevent their deserting the public service of their country. In
June our currency had depreciated so far, that seventy-five paper dollars were
readily given for one of silver. By orders from Congress, the New England
States then came into such measures as kept it at a stay until February, 1781;
when the pouring in vast quantities of it from the southward gave it such a
rapid turn, that it run entirely down in May, so as to stop passing. Before
which General Green, on March 14, lost a large number of men in the battle of
Guilford courthouse, in North Carolina; from whence Lord Cornwallis marched
with a powerful army into Virginia, where he spread much terror, and laid waste
the country; while the credit of Congress was sunk so low, as scarcely to be
able to send the least supply to General Green. Yet, to the astonishment of
our enemies, he was made instrumental of an entire recovery of South Carolina
and Georgia. A loan of money from France revived our public credit; their
troops marched through the land from Rhode Island to Virginia; the winds and
seas, with the hearts of the people, all concurred together to compel another
experienced British General, with a large and powerful army, to yield
themselves as prisoners to the despised and much injured Americans, October 19,
1781. The effect of which was, that on November 30, 1782, the British Court
fully gave up their claims to these Thirteen United States; which treaty was to
take place as soon as peace was settled with France and the other powers
concerned. Preliminaries for it were signed January 20, and the peace was
settled in September, 1783. Though before we say more upon it, we must take a
further look at things among ourselves.

CHAP. XVIII.
1. A new Constitution framed, but not accepted. 2. Pepperell riot. 3.
Government and Liberty described. 4. But much opposed. 5. Our present
Constitution brought in. 6. Baptist Testimonies rejected. 7. What their Faith
and Order is. 8. A Charge to embrace further Light as it opens.

I. OUR Assembly for 1777 were empowered to frame a new constitution of
government, which was to be established or rejected by the next Assembly. This
was done in the winter after, but without any bill of rights; and an article
was inserted therein to adopt their old ecclesiastical laws, which caused the
Baptist agent and committee to meet at Boston February 21, 1778, and to draw up
an address to our next Assembly against those laws, with a prayer that it might
be fixed as a fundamental principle of our government, "That ministers shall be
supported only by Christ's authority, and not at all by assessment and secular
force; which impartial liberty has long been claimed and enjoyed by the town of
Boston." An hundred copies of it were printed and dispersed, and a large number
of various denominations subscribed it. This gave such an alarm, that an
earnest warning was given to our rulers, in the election sermon at Boston, May
27, against making any alteration in their established modes and usages in
religion; when it was said, "Let the restraints of religion once be broken
down, as they infallibly would be by leaving the subject of public worship to
the humors of the multitude, and we might well defy all human wisdom and power
to support and preserve order and government in the State Payson's sermon, p.
20.
." However that constitution was set aside; and his party in the country, soon
after, gave a remarkable discovery of what their ideas were about religion and
good order.

II. FOR two young Baptist ministers were called to preach in Pepperell, near
forty miles northwestward of Boston, to whom six persons offered themselves as
candidates for baptism. Therefore, on June 26, they met in a field by a river
side, where prayers were made, and a sermon begun, when the chief officers of
the town, with many followers, came and interrupted their worship. The owner of
the field warned them to depart out of it, if they would not be peaceable; but
they refused to go. One of the Baptist ministers desired them to act like men,
if they would not like Christians; and reminded them of the liberty of
conscience which is generally allowed, and even by the powers we were at war
with; and began to open the divine warrant therefore: Upon which an officer
said, "Don't quote scripture here!" Another of them, who was a communicant in
their church, cast the odious name tory upon one of those candidates for
baptism. And he no sooner attempted to discover the injustice thereof, than the
officer said, "Hold your tongue, or I Will beat your teeth down your throat!" And
a dog was carried into the river and plunged, in evident contempt of our
sentiments. A gentleman of the town then invited the Baptists to go and hold
their meeting at his house, which was near another river. They accepted of it,
and so went through with their worship. At the close of which a man was hired
with a bowl of liquor to go into the river, and dip another two or three times
over; where also two or three dogs more were plunged. After which three
officers of the town came into the house where the Baptist ministers were, and
advised them immediately to depart out of what town for their own safety. Being
asked whether their lives would be in danger if they did not depart? no answer
was returned. But seeing their temper, the Baptists agreed to disperse, and to
meet at a distant place of water; which was performed, and those six persons
were decently baptized, though further abuse was offered at the close of it. By
direction of the Warren Association, an account of these things was published
in the Independent Chronicle of October 15; which others laid before the Grand
Jury of the county of Middlesex. But they were prevailed with to suspend the
matter, until the town should vindicate themselves. This they attempted in the
Chronicle of November 12. It mainly turned upon disputing the names of actions,
and about the persons who performed them. The Baptist account charged the
hiring of a person to go into the water upon an officer, which was said to be
by way of mockery. But say the town, "The misrepresentation of this affair, and
indeed a most unpardonable one it is, appears from considering, that the
conduct of said Bynton and Lawrence was altogether from the instigation of a
youngster, who promised Bynton a bowl of liquor on complying with his proposal;
and this was done inconsiderately, and not meant as a piece of religious
mockery. The officers of the town had no concern in that affair. -- They were
quite opposite, and particular care was taken by the officers of the town to
prevent riotous behavior, and to maintain peace and good order. That we did,
as a town, pay particular attention to the conduct of those dangerous persons,
is a fact we do not wish to conceal." Now the dangerous person, who then
carried into Pepperell the dangerous practice of quoting scripture to defend
liberty of conscience, and of burying in baptism, was Isaiah Parker, pastor of
the Baptist church in Harvard, who from that day to this is allowed by
authority to be regular minister of Jesus Christ, though he is not a State
minister. Another event, still more dangerous to their way, was as follows.

III. BY the unanimous voice of the Warren Association of September 8, a
pamphlet was published, which says, "As the affairs of GOVERNMENT and LIBERTY
are the greatest points of controversy now in the world, it certainly is of
great importance that our ideas be clear and just concerning them. Permit us
therefore to offer a few thoughts upon a familiar metaphor, which the Holy
Ghost has used to illustrate their true nature. In Amos v. 24, he says, let
judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream. From whence
we may observe, 1. That judgment and righteousness are essential to freedom.
When we would represent any thing as quite free, we say it is as free as water.
And not only the flow of mercy and grace from God to men, but also its effects
in them, in producing obedience unto him, are often compared thereto in the
word of truth. John iv. 14, vii. 38, Titus ii. 11, 12, iii. 5 -- 8. This is
most certain, because, 2. Freedom is not acting at random, but by reason and
rule. Those who walk after their own lusts, are ^louds without water, carried
about by winds; or raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame; while
the true SONS OF LIBERTY are like streams which run down in a clear and steady
channel. David says, I will run the way of thy commandments, when thou shall
enlarge my heart. I will walk at liberty, for I seek thy precepts. Streams and
rivers must have steady channels to run in; but they that promise liberty while
they despise government, are wells without water, clouds that are carried with
a tempest. 2 Peter ii. 10 -- 19. 3. Though tyranny and licentiousness often
make a great noise, yet government and liberty are much stronger than they are.
The former, like raging waves, dash themselves against the rocks, and die upon
the shore; or like a tempest, after making sad waste and devastation, their
strength is gone, and their force is over. While the latter, like a mighty
stream, carry all before them, and never rest till they can get through or over
all obstacles put in their way. 4. Streams and rivers are of great use, and
cause a constant flow of refreshment and blessings wherever they come; so does
the exercise anD administration of judgment and righteousness, among all people
that enjoy them. Hence, 5. The command of heaven is, let them run down: Put no
obstruction in their way. No, rather be in earnest to remove every thing that
hinders their free course. 6. The context plainly shows, that a main
obstruction to these great blessings among the people then spoken to, was their
assuming a power to govern religion, instead of being governed by it. True
religion is a voluntary obedience unto God. And the great design of all
ordinances and acts of worship toward him, is that thereby we may obtain
pardon and cleansing, with direction and assistance to behave as we ought
toward our fellow men. But instead of this, those people added their own
inventions to divine institutions, and substituted their acts of devotion
toward God, in the place of a righteous practice toward men; or for a cover
to their contrary conduct: And they would fain have been thought very
religious, although they turned judgment into wormwood, hated him that rebuked
in the gate, and abhorred him who spoke uprightly.


IV. INFINITE wisdom disposed things in such a manner, as to give a keener edge
to this remonstrance than could be foreseen by man. For an extract from the
last election sermon, and also from Chauncy against Chandler, was added to the
above observations, with some remarks thereon. At the same time our army on
Rhode Island saw such danger of being surrounded by the British fleet, that
they wisely came off with all their stores, in the night after August 30.
Chauncy imagined that this defeat might be turned to ministerial advantage; and
therefore at his next lecture, when many of our rulers were present, he
delivered a discourse from the seventh of Joshua, wherein he represented that
one of the accursed things which caused that defeat, was their neglect of
making a new law to help ministers about their salaries, which the depreciation
of our currency had greatly lessened. This sermon was soon printed and
dispersed in the country. And in the Continental Journal of October 8 it was
highly commended, and its author also; and then it was said, "Although the
General Assembly has now been sitting for some time, no motion (as I can learn)
has as yet been made, or is likely to be made, for this purpose. -- Are the
clergy then to submit to this treatment? Are they as an order, and the only
order of men in the community, to remain subjected to injustice and fraud!" Now
it was so ordered, that the above passages in the Baptist pamphlet were
inserted in the Independent Chronicle the same day, in the same street in
Boston. By which means the same author was declaring to the world in one paper,
that all religious establishments were of infinite damage to the cause of God
and true religion; and in another, that the want of further exertions in that
way was an accursed thing, which caused the defeat of our army. And what could
be done in such a case? In the Boston Gazette of November 2 it was declared,
that said Baptist pamphlet "Exhibited only a compound of ignorance, impudence
and abuse." And their refusal to comply with ministerial demands, was declared
to be a using force against them; upon which it was said, "I cannot conceive
that it is more proper to use force against ministers than for them; yet this
is the subject from which a set of men, who have occasioned more disturbance
and damage to this State than would be repaired by all the money which selling
them all for slaves would produce, derive their importance." And the secular
arm was called for to punish them. This was so far from being obtained, that
the pastor of the first Baptist church in Boston was called to preach the
election sermon there, May 26, 1779, in which the difference between church and
State was well described, with the importance of keeping them entirely
distinct; and it was printed and sent through the State by order of authority.
However our opponents were far from yielding this point.

V. DELEGATES from the several towns, elected entirely for the purpose of
framing a new constitution of government, met on September 1, and chose a large
committee to make a draught for their consideration, and adjourned. When they
met again, they took in hand a bill of rights which was laid before them. The
third article therein was to give civil rulers power in religious matters,
which occasioned much debate; until a Baptist member moved to have that article
recommitted. The motion was concurred with, and he was elected the Chairman of
a committee of seven upon that article. Five of them were great politicians,
and they brought in a new draught, which, after warm debates, was passed by a
majority, November 10, as it now stands in our constitution. In order to obtain
this vote, it was asserted that there never was any persecution in this land;
but that what had been so called were only just punishments upon disorderly
persons, and disturbers of the public peace. And the Baptists were accused of
sending their agent to Philadelphia in 1774, with a false memorial of
grievances, in order to break the union of the Colonies. Sharp debates were
caused hereby for some time; but the first volume of our history was brought in
and laid upon the table, which silenced the first part of those declamations,
and their agent being informed of the latter part, published said third article
in the Chronicle of December 2, with reasons against the power claimed in the
middle part of it; and then named his accusers concerning the Philadelphia
affair, and charged them with a violation of their promise made there; and
challenged them to a fair hearing before any proper judges. This was so far
from being granted, that a long reviling piece, full of glaring deceit, came
out in the Chronicle of February 10, 1780; which was soon after reprinted in
the Providence Gazette, where the appeal it pretended to answer was not known.
It accused the Baptist members of the Convention of bitterness and rage against
their ministers, especially for comparing them to the sons of Eli; and to prove
that they were not worthy of that charge, the writer says, "Eli's sons were not
to blame for taking that part of the offerings which the law allowed them, but
for the illegal manner in which they took it." Very true; and the only cause of
the bitterness and rage now discovered against the Baptists, was their refusal
to countenance such an illegal and wicked manner of proceeding. An anonymous
Baptist writer began some publications in the Chronicle, against the power of
taxation claimed in the abovesaid third article, about the time that the
constitution was finished. In answer to whom a writer appeared in the
Continental Journal of March 9, saying, "The wicked enemies of our civil and
sacred rights are like the troubled sea, whose waters cannot rest, but being
driven by furious winds are continually casting up mire and dirt. -- There is a
certain junto composed of disguised tories, British emissaries, profane and
licentious Deists, avaricious worldlings, disaffected sectaries, and furious
blind bigots, who had much rather overturn and destroy the Commonwealth, than
not to have the gratification of their own humor." And he subscribed himself
Irenaeus, a member of Convention. The Baptist agent and committee met April 6,
and published and appeal to the people of this State, against the taxing power
for religious teachers claimed in the new constitution, then sent out for their
acceptance or rejection. But their opponents were so much concerned about it,
that no less than three different pieces against the Baptist agent were
published in the Boston papers in the month of May, to two of which the writers
subscribed their names, which had not been done before. One of them was a
follows: The first part of the third article in our bill of rights says, "The
happiness of a people, and the good order and preservation of civil government,
essentially depend upon piety, religion and morality, and these cannot be
generally diffused through a community but by the institution of the public
worship of God, and of public instructions in piety, religion and morality;"
which part said agent, in his publication of December 2, declared a full
concurrence with. Upon which a minister of Roxbury, in the Chronicle of May 18,
said, "Mr. Backus, by inadvertently concurring fully with this part, gave up
the whole cause for which he was agent." This he endeavored to prove, by
fixing an emphasis upon the word essentially, and then observing that
government can exist without Christianity. And his evident design was to sink
the credit of the agent among his brethren, in order to terminate this
controversy. But the agent answered all those three publications in one paper,
June 26, when he observed, that "No government could ever be established
without appeals to the Deity; the knowledge of whom is as much greater under
the gospel than it is in Pagar countries, as seeing in daylight is above
feeling in the night, Mat. v. 14, Acts xvii. 27. And men ^an have no more RIGHT
to add go God's laws about his worship, and to judge the consciences of such as
refuse to submit to their additions, than they have POWER to cause the
dayspring to know his place, Job xxxviii. 12, Luke i. 78. And is not gospel
light essentially necessary for the good order of government, although
government can exist without it!" And notwithstanding their third (...)
expressly excludes all subordination of one religious sect to another, yet he
observed, that since it was passed, four Baptist brethren had been imprisoned,
and a fifth had a cow taken from him, for no other cause than a refusal to
acknowledge such subordination. Two of them were of Bridgwater, the others were
of Lancaster. Those of Bridgwater were threatened this month with imprisonment
for another ministerial tax; but it was prevented in the following manner. One
of them was lieutenant of a company of militia; and, as the public credit was
sunk so low as to render it exceeding difficult to raise recruits for our army,
news came to him that the town had chosen him a member of a special committee
to procure a number of men that were wanted, which news came just after the
collector had threatened to carry him to gaol for said tax, and prevented it.
But a third Baptist from Lancaster was imprisoned at Worcester, June 26, where
two of his brethren had been from April 12, and they were confined there until
fall.

VI. YET when the new constitution took place, October 25, 1780, it was said,
"We may rely that the present government will do all it fairly can, by
authority and example, to answer the end of its institution, that the members
of this Commonwealth may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all GODLINESS as
well as honesty, and our liberty never be justly reproached as licentiousness.
I know there is diversity of sentiment respecting the extent of civil power in
religious matters. Instead of entering into the dispute, may I be allowed from
the warmth of my heart to recommend, where conscience is pleaded on both sides,
mutual candor and love Cooper's sermon, p. 37, 38.
." And in the Boston Gazette of February 5, 1781, it was said, "Last summer, a
certain rich man, in the county of Plymouth, altered his principles with regard
to baptism, was rebaptized, and admitted into Mr. Backus's church in
Middleborough. Some neighbors were so uncharitable and censorious as to
imagine that this person changed his religion in order to be freed from
ministerial taxes. -- However it remained a question in the minds of many
people, by what means his estate could be exempted legally? inasmuch as they
verily supposed that Mr. Backus has declared he would give no more certificates
to any body whatsover, always pleading, as they received it, that the practice
was contrary to the dictates of his conscience. Nevertheless, contrary to the
expectation of every one, our assessors have been furnished with a certificate.
-- I hope the public will put the most favorable construction upon the late
remarkable conduct of our agent for a thousand souls; that his laudable example
will be punctually imitated by all others of the same profession, and thereby
finish one part of the tedious dispute which has long subsisted." This paper
was left for him three days after, by a noted lawyer, at a house he was to
preach at in Bridgwater. From thence he went into Boston, and demanded the name
of the writer of that libel. This was refused by the printer, though he was
ready to publish an answer to it: An answer was therefore left, upon an express
promise from the printer, that he would not publish a reply without the
writer's name. Yet this promise was violated on March 5, without so much as
sending the reply to the agent. He was however so unwi^ ^s to send another
piece, which was published May 7, wherein some expressions were so turned, as
to cast the printer's faults upon the public. From hence three or four reviling
pieces were published in the Boston papers against him; in one of which he was
threatened with a halter and the gallows. Yet for all this noise, they had no
other foundation than a line that was given July 12, 1780, which certified that
a man in Pembroke was a baptized member of the first Baptist church in
Middleborough, signed only by their pastor, at a time when no certificate law
had been in force for some months, and never could be again, according to said
third article, which excludes all subordination of any one sect to another. And
the line given did not answer to any law ever made in this government, from its
foundation to this day. It may therefore be proper in this place to give a
distinct account of what the faith and order of these Baptist churches are,
against whom such opposition has been made.

VII. IN general their faith and practice come the nearest to that of the first
planters of New England, of any churches now in the land, excepting in the
single article of sprinkling infants. In particular they believe, 1. That God
set Adam as the public head of all mankind; so that when he revolted from
heaven, and seized upon the earth as his own, all the human race fell in him,
and all bear his earthly image, until they are born again. 2. That in infinite
mercy the eternal Father gave a certain number of the children of men to his
beloved Son, before the world was, to redeem and save; and that he, by his
obedience and sufferings, has procured eternal redemption for them. 3. That by
the influence of the holy Spirit, each of these persons, as they come into
existence, are effectually called in time, and savingly renewed in the spirit
of their minds. 4. That their justification before God, is wholly by the
perfect righteousness of Jesus Christ, received by faith. 5. That every such
soul will be kept by the power of God, through faith unto eternal salvation. 6.
That, according to God's institution, regenerate souls are the only materials
for particular Christian churches. 7. That the right way of building such
churches is by giving a personal verbal account to the church of what God had
done for their fouls, to the satisfaction of the church. 8. That the whole
power of calling, ordaining and deposing officers, is in each particular
church; although it is ordinarily proper and expedient to call in the advice
and assistance of sister churches upon many such occasions. 9. That the whole
power of governing and disciplining their members is in each particular church;
though advice and coursel from others, in some cases, is becoming and even
necessary. 10. That the government of the church should be wholly by the laws
of Chirst, enforced in his name, and not at all by the secular arm. 11. That
gospel ministers ought be supported by his laws and influence, and not by tax
and compulsion enforced by the civil power. 12. That ministers ought to preach,
and not read their sermons, at least in ordinary times; that being evidently
the apostolic practice, and the contrary enables men to impose upon people, by
reading the works of others, and is attended with other evils. 13. That free
liberty ought to be allowed for every saint to improve his gifts according to
the gospel; and that the church should encourage and recommend such as are
qualified for the gospel ministry. 14. That officers, when chosen and ordained,
have no arbitrary, lordly or imposing power; but are to rule and minister with
the consent of the brethren, who ought not to be called the laity, but to be
treated as men and brethren in Christ. These are the chief points of faith and
order, wherein we differ from others, and for which such resentment has been
shown against us. And in this and the former volume of our history we have
clearly proved, that all these points were held by the fathers of Plymouth
Colony. And Governor Winslow, one of their first planters, informs us that when
they parted with Mr. Robinson, their dear pastor in Holland, in 1620, he gave
them the following advice and solemn charge, viz.


VIII. "WE are now to part asunder, and the Lord knows whether ever I shall
live to see your faces again: But whether he has appointed it or not, I charge
you, before God and his blessed angels, to follow me no further than I follow
Christ. And if God shall reveal any thing to you by any other instrument of
his, be as ready to receive it as ever you were to receive any truth by my
ministry; for I am very confident that he has more truth and light yet to break
forth out of his holy word. He took occasion also miserably to bewail the state
and condition of the reformed churches, who were come to a period in religion,
and would go no further than the instruments of their reformation. As for
example, the Lutherans could not be drawn to go beyond what Luther saw; for
whatever part of God's will he has further imparted and revealed to Calvin,
they will rather die than embrace it. And so you see the Calvinists, they stick
where he left them; a misery much to be lamented, for though they were precious
shining lights in their times, yet God had not revealed his whole will to them;
and were they now living, they would be as ready to embrace further light as
what they had received. Here (says Winslow) he put us in mind of our church
covenant, whereby we promise and covenant with God, and one another, to receive
whatsoever light and truth shall be made known to us from his written word; but
withal exhorted us to take heed what we receive for truth, and well to examine
and compare it with other scriptures before we received it; for, said he, it is
not possible the Christian world should come so lately out of such thick
Antichristian darkness, and that full perfection of knowledge should break
forth at once Winslow's answer to Gorton, p. 97, 98.
." Such were the noble sentiments and solemn charge of Mr. Robinson, that
eminent father of the planters of New England. To which I shall annex a caution
he gave, in his preface to a defense of their cause ten years before. Says he,
"I desire the Christian reader to take knowledge of this one thing, that as the
pretense of zeal in forward ministers against all corruptions is a thick mist,
holding the eyes of many well-minded people from seeing the truth, so the
person with whom I now particularly deal trusts to this insinuation above all
others, conveying himself under this color into the hearts of the simple, and
hereby making way most effectually not only for his counsels and
advertisements, for the quenching of their affections toward the truth, but
also for his idle guesses and likelihoods (vol. 1, p. 7) with such personal
comparisons and imputations as his book is stored with, to alienate men's hearts
from it. But the godly reader is to consider that to accept persons in judgment
is not good, especially in the Lord's cause; and that his faith is not to be
held in respect of persons, James ii. 1 Preface to his answer to Bernard, p. 5
." Let this be remembered in our next chapter.

CHAP. XIX.
1. Mayhew against the Doctrines of sovereign Grace. 2. Yet very angry at
having his Conduct exposed. 3. Others treated abusively. 4. Of the Charge of
Separation. 5. Of Baptism. 6. Of Ministers Power. 7. Of universal Salvation.

1. DR. Mayhew published two sermons, in the beginning of 1763, from those
words, The Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his works.
From whence, after laying down many just observations, he endeavors to prove,
that the Lord is good to all the different ranks, orders or species of his
intelligent and sensitive creatures; and good and kind to all the individuals
of which these species consist. He allows that the terms all, every, and the
like, are sometimes used in a limited sense in scripture, and that there are
many places which must necessarily be so understood; but denies any limitation
here, because God's goodness is perfect and infinite, as well as his other
perfections. And beginning with a greater number, and coming down to a lesser,
he at last comes to the lowest individual; and if any held that he was not good
to that individual, Mayhew says, "I think you should paraphrase the text thus,
the Lord is good to all but one, and his tender mercies are over all his works,
excepting a single insignificant creature, which either escapes his notice, or
at which he is angry, and so makes it miserable, though it neither has nor is
capable of offending him." And he goes on to observe, that John says, God is
LOVE; and then says, "It is worthy of particular remark, that though God is
infinitely wise and powerful, etc. as well as good, yet he is never styled in
scripture wisdom or power in the abstract, as he is here styled LOVE. Perfect
goodness, love itself, is his very essence, in a peculiar sense; immeasurable,
immutable, universal and everlasting LOVE Said sermons, p. 39, 44.
." Again says he, "Nothing was prior, not even the existence of God, to his
will to be good. -- God is then not only eternally, necessarily and
essentially, but infinitely or perfectly good. And if so, then equally,
universally, and immutably good in all times and places." Necessity therefore
he ascribes to the will of God, though his party strenuously deny that it can
be consistent with the liberty of our wills. And he had before asserted, "That
there is no medium betwixt God's being actually kind and merciful to all, and
his being positively cruel and unmerciful to some Page 35, 46
." And to give his ideas of the atonement, he says, "Infinite goodness itself,
considered in connection with infinite wisdom, requires that order, and the
highest veneration for the majesty of God, his laws and government, should be
preserved amongst all his reasonable creatures. Their own good essentially
depends upon it. And this important end is most effectually attained by the
sacrifice of Christ, by whom we have received the atonement. We are ^stured in
the holy scriptures, that God forgives the sins of men through this great
sacrifice intervening, rather than without any, not because he is in his own
nature deficient in goodness, or not perfectly merciful, but because he is
infinitely wise as well as merciful. -- There was a fitness and congruity in
it, as the wisest and best method for saving sinful men, without any kind of
reference to that common but yet strange supposition, of divine justice being
entirely distinct from divine goodness Page 64.
." It is to be noted, that here he owns that he rejects the common sentiments
of our fathers; and says he, "I seriously declare, that if I were to form my
conceptions of God's moral character, by such discourses as I have sometimes
heard and read, and such as were, by many, thought to be truly evangelical,
instead of thinking him really good to ALL, and his tender mercies over ALL his
works, essentially good, and infinitely the best of beings, I could not but
conclude him to be infinitely more unjust and cruel than any other being in the
universe!" And he at length ventures to say of infants, "To suppose that the
sin of Adam and Eve is or can be so imputed to them, as to render them justly
liable to eternal misery, without any offense of their own, is one of the
grossest of all absurdities." And to hold that any of the human race are not
chosen in Christ to eternal life, is a doctrine which he rejects in the same
manner; after which he says, "If, therefore, my brethren, you know of any
particular scheme or system of Christianity (so called) two or three of the
most distinguishing and leading principles of which, and the basis on which the
whole rests, are plainly and certainly repugnant to the doctrine of God's
universal goodness, and his tender mercies over all his works; you may be
certain that such scheme or system is false; absolutely and wholly false, so
far as it has any connection with or dependence upon those principles Page 50,
62, 63, 83, 85.
." He allows that there will be a future punishment to the wicked, but leaves
the words concerning it undefined; and concludes with mentioning, that in the
other world the meaning of that passage in the Revelation will be more clearly
opened than we can conceive of it here, that " Every creature which is in
heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and
all that are in them, heard I saying, blessing, and honor, and glory, and power
be unto him that sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb forever and ever."

II. THE reader may now judge, whether this author had not a design against
some of the most important principles of the Protestant reformed system of
Christianity, as it had long been professed in this and other countries. Yet
because Mr. Cleaveland represented his sermons in that light, in his essay to
defend that system, Dr. Mayhew called it "A defamatory libel;" and said to
Cleaveland, "Can you possibly think it became you, an obscure person from
another Province, and one so unlettered as you are, an outcast from the
college to which you was a disgrace? -- Did you not show the utmost assurance,
in thus setting up your little self? -- Poor, unhappy man! You doubtless
thought to emerge from your obscurity, and to appear as a person of some
consequence, by this vain attempt. -- It is as much beneath me to play the
critic on such a performance as yours, as it would be particularly to expose
the vanity of your criticisms on my sermons. -- But I will proceed to the main
business of this letter, which is to set your falsehood and iniquitous
proceedings, with reference to my sermons, in some order before your eyes; and
to administer the reproof and correction which you deserve, or rather a part
thereof. For it is only they that hold the sword of public justice, that can
legally punish such wickedness to the extent of its demerits. Your villainy in
this affair appears written, as one may say, even upon your forehead Mayhew's
letter of reproof, 1764, p. 4 -- 6.
." And his whole letter of fortynine pages is in this strain; which instead of
universal goodness, discovers how such men would treat their opponents, if
their power was equal to their wills. A sight of these things moved the
President and Corporation of the college, who expelled Cleaveland, to give him
the title of A. M. the same year. Yet when Mayhew died two years after, Chauncy
reflected upon Cleaveland (as before observed, p. 229) and called him an
obscure person without reputation. And to this day the persons of those two men
are held in such admiration by multitudes, that they are much sooner disturbed
at hearing their errors exposed, than at hearing their MAKER blasphemed! while
they are highly pleased with seeing eminent ministers of opposite principles
treated with a high degree of abuse and contempt, as appears in what follows.

III. ALL establishments of worship by human laws, that ever were erected under
the Christian name, were built upon calling the covenant in Genesis xvii. the
covenant of grace. Yet our excellent Edwards was separated from his dear flock
at Northampton, only for insisting upon a personal profession of sanctifying
grace in order for full communion. (Page 191.) From thence he went and settled
at Stockbridge, on the west borders of our State; where his successors have
endeavored to pursue his plan of reformation. A considerable number of
ministers, in various parts of the land, have also labored in the same cause.
About the close of 1768, Dr. Joseph Bellamy published a small piece upon the
halfway covenant; which was soon answered, and he wrote not less than ^x
pamphlets upon the covenant, to prove that a profession of saving faith was a
necessary term of communion in the church, and of being active in baptism. The
piece on the opposite side, mentioned in p. 268, was occasioned hereby. And
within six years above twenty pamphlets were written by different parties upon
this subject, through the country from New Jersey to Boston. The name of a
halfway covenant was disowned by all these writers, and their controversy
turned entirely upon the question, whether a profession of saving faith ought
to be required of communicants, or not? For both parties agreed that none
should be active themselves in baptism, but such as had a right to come to the
other ordinance; and they were as unable to settle this matter as Stoddard and
Mather were seventy years before. (Page 33, 34.) How to reconcile divine
sovereignty with human liberty, and efficacious grace with the use of means for
conversion, were also questions that they had long and tedious debates upon. At
length a singular act of discipline at Stockbridge seemed to give the other
party an occasion, and it was eagerly improved, to give them as bad a thrust
with their horns, as ever was given by any bulls in Bashan. It was as follows.
Those who have seen the nature of original sin, cannot tell how to keep up the
idea of childrens being born in the covenant of grace, without some regard to
grace in their parents. And in the same chapter where the unbelieving consort
is said to be sanctified by the believer, a widow is required to marry only in
the Lord. Therefore, because a young widow in Stockbridge church married an
immoral profane man, in the beginning of 1777, she was censured and excluded
from their communion. This occasioned the calling of a Council in January,
1779, which was adjourned to May, and from thence to October, when they
justified the church in that act. The man who married said widow was from
Connecticut; and he got a learned minister from thence to plead his cause in
the last of those Councils, who was son to the ruler that sent a man to prison
forty years ago, for preaching the gospel. (Page 165.) As his client was not
relieved by that Council, he published his plea for him, which has passed
through three or four editions. It was answered from Stockbridge, upon which he
published a larger piece in 1780, entitled, Letters of friendship; which being
replied to, he in 1781 gave what he called a gentle reprimand. And in 1782
these three pieces were printed in one at Boston. Their evident design was to
relieve that woman, to prevent division among their ministers, and to keep up
the use of force for their support; all which it is said are accomplished
thereby. Be that as it may, it is certain that much deceit and cruelty have
been used in this affair. Many would limit the word persecution to corporal
punishments; which is so opposite to truth, that reviling and mockery contain a
great and cruel part of it, Mat. v. 11, Heb. xi. 36. Colonel Gardener, who was
converted sixty-five years ago, declared that "He would much rather have
marched up to a battery of the enemy's cannon, than have been obliged so
continually as he was to face such artillery as this Gardiner's life, p. 35.
." Yet in order to carry his point, this advocate advanced a parable of a
church who refused to allow a brother therein to marry a woman he dearly loved,
because not a gracious person; and advised him to marry a member of theirs that
was sound in the faith, which is most shockingly described; and then saying of
her person, "As to some trifles, which a carnal man would object to, it becomes
you, as a spiritual man, to make no objection. It is true, she is of a mean
family, and a very weak understanding; she is peevish and fretful to the
highest degree; her shape is semicircular; she is what the world calls
monstrous ugly; every feature is adapted to mortify carnal desires, which is
much better than to have them gratified; she is the queen of sluts, and without
any polite education. But she has grace, SAVING GRACE; she is regenerated; let
your grace wed with hers, and a sweet bride she will be. Moreover, she is past
the flower of her age, and we suppose need so requires Pl^a, p. 29.
." Now is it possible to dress up a church and scripture phrases in a more
odious and scandalous manner than is here done! Yet in his reprimand, which he
calls gentle, he insinuates that for any to be offended at it argues guilt;
because, says he, "It was expressly declared that it is to be applied only as
truth applies it." But when we look into his plea, we find him saying, "Let the
following parable apply where it will apply Plea, p. 27, Reprimand, p. 15.
." Truth cannot apply it to any church upon earth; but his will has published
the names of thirteen ministers in that plea, more worthy than himself, for the
world to laugh at as much as they will. And this is doubtless the chief reason
of its circulating so extensively. But how mean and spiteful is it to treat the
word grace in this manner! Affixing the word to the covenant of circumcision,
where God never put it, is the source of that difficulty at Stockbridge. The
words sanctified and holy, in 1 Cor. vii. 14, are both of a kind, and the
latter the effect of the former; and their meaning may be ascertained by 1 Timothy
iv. 5. But if we must go to the law for the meaning of the world holy there,
the same word in the law is given as the reason why they should not marry with
unholy persons, Deuteronomy. vii. 3, 6. Every soul therefore will be self-condemned
that affixes the name grace to the convenant of circumcision, and at the same
time censures the church at Stockbridge for attempting to act consistently upon
it.

IV. HIS second pamphlet is directed to ministers who had essayed to withdraw
from the major party in the country; to whom he applies the apostolic warning,
beware of dogs, beware of the concision: Which warning was levelled against
those who held to the covenant of circumcision after it was out of date, and
could not bear to quit all confidence in the flesh, Phil. iii. 2, 3. The
General Association of ministers in Connecticut, June 3, 1780, stated the
nature of those ministers crime in these words, viz. "Refusing intercourse of
ministerial labors, and to receive our members, on recommendation from the
pastors and churches to which they belonged, to their communion, without a
particular and personal examination Letters of friendship, p. 133.
." But in the Boston edition this passage is left out; and some ministers are
^ccused of renouncing communion with others, in consequence of that affair at
Stockbridge. Suc^ deceit are men guilty of! And it is asserted, that "The
churches in New England are generally full as strict in their practice, as the
church at Stockbridge, and require full as much religion in the profession,
life, and conversation of the candidate." And the minister of Lebanon
(mentioned in p. 191) is referred to as an example thereof Ibid. 62, 115.
. Yet he was a man who held tenaciously that the field where saints and the
visible children of the wicked one are ordered to grow together, intends the
visible church; which an excellent writer says gave others occasion to reflect,
"That those churches whose practice is agreeable to his loose principles, do
that at noonday, in the presence of God, angels and men, which the devil did
in the night, while men ^lept Edwards's reply to Williams, p. 103.
!" It is also to be observed, that a member of the church in Stockbridge
detected said advocate in several violations of truth, as to matters of fact
there. But instead of any honest retraction, he said of that member, "Where he
is known, he can perhaps hurt no man's character, either with his tongue or
pen; and it is a question whether, at this period of time, he can hurt his
own." And again, "He has exerted himself with all his might, to suppress the
gospel ministry in this land, laboring among other efforts to remove the only
probable means for the support of it Letters of friendship, p. 138. Reprimand,
p. 13
." That is, the man he points to, being of the Convention who formed our new
constitution, labored to exclude the use of violence from it in supporting
religious teachers. And his character was such as to be freely chosen one of
the Massachusetts Senators in May, 1781. How then did his opponent despise
government?

V. MR. Lock long since observed, that learned disputants often act as
deceitfully about the main words of their controversy as a trader would do if
he took the figure 8, and called it sometimes seven and sometimes nine, as
would suit his advantage. And how much was that the case in this dispute! The
most puzzling argument of the advocate for the profane man, was declaring that
by baptism he was in the church, and ought to have been disciplined, rather
than his wife for marrying of him. And in 1783 the same author published an
address to the Baptists, wherein he represents the covenant of circumcision to
be such an ample charter of church privileges, that it would even have been an
impeachment of the sacred character, or reflection upon the perfections of God,
to expect an express description of who were the subjects of baptism in the new
testament. Now it is certain that every man in Israel who should forbear to
keep the passover as it was instituted, must be cut off from his people, Numb.
ix. 13. And if the covenant is the same now, every person among their churches
who has been sprinkled in infancy must come to the ordinance of the supper, or
be excommunicated, be he converted or unconverted, moral or profane. Yet the
abovesaid pleader has the effrontery to say to his opponents, "You tell us,
gentlemen, that some of us do not agree with you, in our notions of the terms
of church communion, or admission of church members. -- But -- no mortal knows,
or can know, who has grace or who has not. -- Let us speculate and dispute as
long as we please, we must practice alike, or we cannot practice at all Letters
of friendship, p. 20.
." But if many are in darkness, and know not where they are going, does that
prove that others have no true light? And if they love darkness rather than
light, can their evils make void the word of Christ? who s^ys, he that does
truth, comes to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are
wrought in God; and also says, every tree is known by his own fruit: -- A good
man, out of the good treasure of his heart, brings forth that which is good;
and an evil man, out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings forth that
which is evil; for of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaks. And the
way wherein greedy dogs are to be known, who can never have enough, is that
they all look to their own way, every one for his gain, from his quarter. They
bite with their teeth, and cry, peace; and he that puts not into their
mouths, they even prepare war against him. -- Yet will they lean upon the Lord,
and say, is not the Lord among us? None evil can come upon us. This is their
learning, their logic; from a negative proposition they form a positive
conclusion. They are in covenant with death, and agreement with hell, and from
thence think to secure themselves; and they scornfully slight all warnings of
future danger. But the time is hastening when their bed will be too short for
them, and their covering too narrow; and it will be a vexation only to
understand the report of the gospel, Isai. xxviii. 14 -- 20. Romans x. 16. Union
and communion with God, who is LIGHT and LOVE, was the life of man at first;
and a revolt from him, into darkness and disorder, was death, the penalty of
the law. And the character of hell is lying and murder, John viii. 44.
Therefore I conclude, that the known use of deceit and cruelty is the covenant
with death and agreement with hell, wherewith scornful officers have often
thought to secure themselves against present and future dangers. This I take to
be a scriptural glass, and return our opponents compliment upon it. Says he,
"Why do the letters of friendship offend them, since it is so expressly premised
that no person is pointed at in them unless justly characterized? If my face is
dirty and not fit to be seen, I wash it, and never quarrel with my glass about
it Reprimand, p. 15.
." And since his zeal has been so great for the relief of one censured woman,
let him appear for another nearer home. For a woman of good character, in the
head county of his own State, was censured in 1781, and excommunicated in 1783,
by a minister who is a fellow of Yale college, for no other crime than
refraining from coming to the Lord's table with such as hold the Lord's supper
to be a converting ordinance.

VI. THIS may lead us to take a further view of their claims of power over the
churches. About twenty years ago, a minister who was a fellow of Yale college
published a pamphlet to prove that the power of ordination is inherent in
ministers, and that Christ never gave that power to the church as a body. This
he dedicated to their Governor; and he therein allowed that the people have a
right to choose their ministers, but not to ordain them, any more than the
freemen of Connecticut have to swear their magistrates into office. An answer
was wrote to him, and he made a reply in 1766. But then both his patron and his
comparison failed him, because his Governor and several magistrates were left
out of office by the people, for favoring the stamp act. And what could he
then do? He slipped over the line, and said, "The Governor of a Province is, by
the King's commission, invested with power and authority as ^uch an officer,
distinct from the rights, powers and privileges, belonging to the government,
by the constitution, charter, and laws of the land. And though the magistracy,
and other officers, and the House of Representatives, have a legislative and
executive authority with him, under his precedence, and act with him in
judgment, in many cases; yet are these distinct branches of authority,
originating from different fountains of power: The former from special
commission from the King, the other from the constitution and laws of the
government. I take the case to be much parallel in ecclesiastical government
Beckwith's second letter against lay-ordination^, p. 42, 43.
." And we have shown (p. 275) that the Massachusetts ministers claimed a higher
power than the King allowed to his Governor; and he was the head of their
establishments for worship, both there and in Connecticut. (Page 78, 178.)
Therefore they are now in a deplorable case; for an ocean three thousand miles
wide rolls betwixt the head and the body of that constitution, so that they
have only a dead polluted carcass left in their high places, Ezekiel. xliii. 7.
And those who have so often rejected the reasonable testimonies and petitions
of the Baptists, are forced now to become suppliants to them, in order to save
their polluted scheme. In a Boston paper, before mentioned, of February 5,
1781, they tell a story of a gentleman's babe, that was taken by an ape and
carried to the roof of the house, while he and his family were at church, and a
careless maid got to sleep; and yet that the babe was saved by their prayers.
Upon which they name the Baptist agent, whom they accuse of doing the like with
their religion; but expressed their hopes of having it now returned into its
former condition. But herein they appear more contemptible than the priests of
Baal did in Elijah's time; for they came out like men, and performed their
devotion in the sight of the people, while these only published their prayers
in newspapers, and were afraid that their names should be known. And the babe
they pray for is not a human creature, but a monster, begotten upon a whore;
and great happiness is promised to those who shall dash such little ones
against the stones, Psalm cxxxvii. 8, 9. And the Baptists not only covet such
happiness, but obedience to government requires it of them. For all Protestant
kingdoms have set up their King as head of the church; but that name is now
excluded from our Legislature. And to move the people to receive this
constitution, the compilers of it said to them, "Your delegates did not
conceive themselves vested with power to set up one denomination of Christians
above another; for religion must at all times be a matter between God and
individuals Address before the constitution, March 2, 1780, p. 17.
." And no man can take a seat in our Legislature until he solemnly declares, "I
believe the Christian religion, and have a firm persuasion of its truth
Constitution, chap, vi.
." And as surely as it is true, Christ is HEAD of all principality and power,
and the church is COMPLETE in him; and required to do all her acts in his name.
Therefore all worship that is supported in any other name is only will worship,
Col. ii. 9, 10, 23, iii. 17. And though recourse has often been had to Germany,
for matter to prejudice people against equal liberty and believers baptism, yet
twenty thousand mercenaries have lately been brought from thence to fight
against such principles, and to deluge our land with blood against whom no
denomination in America have acted with more prudence and vigor than the
Baptists. In the fall of 1778, our Legislature passed an act to ^ebar inimical
persons from returning into this State, wherein three hundred and eleven men
were named as such; and our enemies are welcome to point out one Baptist among
them if they can. Yet our opponents are still so unwilling to allow equal
liberty, and that the power of church government should be in the body of each
community, that a pamphlet was published at Boston against it, near the close
of 1783, wherein it is said, "If the power of dismissing its pastors is
determined to be lodged in the church, without the intervention of any
indifferent persons, the clergy of New England are of all men the most
miserable Thatcher's observations, p. 11.
!" This author was an active member of the Convention who formed our new
constitution, but they are now ensnared in the work of their own hands; and to
move others to relieve them he says, "The world produces not a set of ministers
more holy in their lives, more free from immorality of every kind, more pure in
their doctrines, or more ingenious, animated and pathetic in their addresses,
than the clergy of New England. -- The observation has often been made, that
it is natural to the clergy to be fond of power. Without dispute they are so,
for they are men, and subject to the same feelings and inclinations with
others. But in New England, let them have felt ever so much of this
inclination, they have not discovered it. Where is the man who can point out
the instance, where the ministry have attempted to encroach upon the rights of
the churches Ibid. p. 5.
?" Such attempts have been so openly discovered, that at present I shall only
point the reader to his now doing of it, in the name clergy he so often
assumes. It is derived from the word that is translated heritage, in 1 Pet. v.
3, which name has long been usurped by ministers, in order to avoid the scandal
of lording it over the church. And the following facts may discover his vanity
in boasting of their general purity as to doctrine.

VII. ALL Mayhew's arguments against the doctrines of sovereign grace, pointed
directly to universal salvation, though the minds of the people were not then
prepared to receive it. But an artful teacher from Britain, who by the way of
New York came into New England in 1772, by deceitful addresses to the passions
of its inhabitants, and procuring an edition of Relly upon Union at Boston in
1779, and another at Providence in 1782, prepared the way for the ministers of
the county to discover themselves. And in August, 1782, a pamphlet was
published in Boston, which soon passed a second edition, entitutled, Salvation
for all men. Dr. Chauncy, undoubtedly, had a chief hand th^rein, and most of
the ministers in Boston seemed to favor the scheme, and others continue in
fellowship with those who have openly owned it. Their main arguments turn upon
extending the divine goodness to every individual, and Christ's merits also;
although they do not attempt to tell how long it will be before all come to
enjoy the same. They say, "There will be a great deal to be done, after the
second coming of Christ. -- Indeed (say they) the doctrine of PURGATORY, as now
taught by the Papists, seems to be a corruption of a genuine doctrine held by
the ancient fathers, concerning the fire of hell, which will burn up sin and
lust Said pamphlet, p. 14, 21.
." But we do not hear of any yet who have ventured to assert with Origin, that
Christ will be crucified in the next world to save the devils. Several valuable
pamphlets have been wrote against these delusions, but those ministers are
still held in fellowship. Though Dr. Chauncy himself says, "I am clearly of the
mind, that a visibly wicked minister is the greatest scandal to religion, and
plague to the church of God; nor is it a hurt, but a real service to the cause
of Christ, to expose the characters of such, and lessen their power to do
mischief Chauncy's thoughts, 1743, p. 141.
." And again he says, "The religion of Jesus has suffered more from the
exercise of this pretended right [to make religious establishments] than from
all other causes put together; and it is with me past all doubt, that it will
never be restored to its primitive purity, simplicity and glory, until
religious establishments are so brought down as to be no more Reply to
Chandler, 1770, p. 144.
."

CHAP. XX.
1. Unjust Conceptions concerning Liberty of Will. 2. The Nature thereof
exposed. 3. Bloody Effects of it from afar. 4. And also among ourselves. 5. The
ill Effects of it in the Churches. 6. Regeneration the only effectual Remedy
against it. 7. Address of the Baptists concerning the Return of Peace.

I. WHEN we have conceived an ill opinion of any denomination, it is exceeding
difficult to treat them fairly. An instance hereof is before me, that may be
proper to mention. Edwards's treatise on the will has passed through one
edition at Boston, and two or more in London, without ever being answered,
although it is levelled directly against the turning point of Arminianism, to
which the opinion of universal salvation naturally succeeds. Many who do not
own either of those names, yet have conceived a strong prejudice against
Calvinism, which Edwards professed to own, though not every opinion that Calvin
advanced. A late learned performance from London, reprinted at Philadelphia in
1783, contains the following things. The author, when giving his own deliberate
ideas, says, "The visible world demonstrates, it was made by an omnipotent
power, and is preserved by the same power. What does not necessarily exist,
must be originally created, and continually upheld by the power that made it.
-- There is no medium betwixt self-existence and dependence on its cause;
therefore a cessation from it of the power that made it is annihilation to it.
Thus as all created things were made, and still subsist solely by the energy of
the Creator's will and power, he must necessarily, whilst they exist, be
omnipresent with them, in them, and through them; therefore cannot be ignorant
of any thing relating to them, nor unconcerned about them, or any part of them
Phipps against. Newton, p. 37, 38.
." If so, then the creature can do no act but what his Creator sees cause
either to order or permit, which is the essence of Calvinism. No, says this
author, "We attribute the whole of man's salvation to the light or grace
within, first and last, without at all placing man's destruction to the account
of his Maker, which John Calvin directly does." And after attempts to prove
this charge from ancient writings, he tries to confirm it from Edwards on the
will. And in reference to his main point, he says, "We are told, the will is
always determined by the strongest motive. Has the will no liberty then at any
time? Is it always so forcibly determined, in all its motions, by circumstances
and motives successively arising upon it, from the original constitution of
things, that every man is necessarily obliged to think, speak and act, just as
he does? -- Was this really the case, our inevitable acts would certainly
render us no proper subjects of reward and punishment; of come, ye blessed, or
go, ye cursed. We must be equally unintitled to approbation and censure Ibid.
p. 86, 97, 98.
." But I must tell him and all his friends, that I am much better acquainted
with Edwards's writings than they are, and I absolutely know that the ideas
naturally arising from the words forcibly and inevitable, as here used, when
charged upon Edwards, are entirely unjust and abusive. And it tends to raise an
evil temper in those who read the same, against all the friends of Edwards's
writings, of whom I am heartily one. I am certain that the author who has thus
censured him, is not a greater friend to the full liberty of the human will,
and against every idea of positive influence from God to restrain men from
good, or to impel them to evil, than Edwards was. And I know that from my
inmost thoughts I abhor and detest every thing of that nature, and challenge
all the sons of men to prove the contrary if they can. Whether said author will
like the following description of liberty is uncertain. In a Boston paper of
June 21, 1784, we are informed, that a new book of Dr. Chauncy's is now in the
press, which gives a view of man, "As an intelligent moral agent; having within
himself an ability and freedom to WILL, as well as to do, in opposition to
NECESSITY from any extraneous cause whatever."

II. THIS perfectly agrees with that disregard to God, and to equal liberty
among the common people, which has lately been so conspicuous in that
metropolis. Perhaps a text could not be found more suitable to have preached
upon, at the commencement of our new constitution, than the following: "Their
children also shall be as aforetime, and their congregation shall be
established before me, and I will punish all that oppress them. And their
nobles shall be of themselves, and their Governor shall proceed from the midst
of them, and I will cause him to draw near, and he shall approach unto me; for
who is this that engaged his heart to approach unto me? says the Lord." Jer.
xxx. 20, 21. But a noted minister of Boston took out the words here printed in
Italic, and not the rest, for the subject of his sermon at that time; in which
he told of conscience being pleaded on both sides of the question about
religious liberty. And the two sides are exactly these. The Baptists pleaded
that Christ's ministers might be supported only by his laws and influence:
Their opponents pleaded still to be called by his name, but that they could not
in conscience give up the use of secular force to support them. The Baptists
never asked for any greater liberty in this respect in the country than Boston
has long enjoyed: Their opponents plead conscience for denying it to them,
which doubtless is supposing that gain is godliness, and from such we are
commanded to withdraw. The minister of Chelsea, who in 1778 defied our
Legislature to preserve order in the State, if they allowed equal liberty in
the church, was received a member of that Assembly in 1783, to tax others,
while he pays none himself. But who can wonder at their treating the people
thus, since their treatment of their Maker is so flagrant! Claim his promises
without regarding his precepts, which is the practice the tempter would have
drawn our Savior into, Mat. iv. 6, 7. But greater absurdity and blasphemy can
scarcely be conceived of, than to claim God's promises to support us in
disobedience to his precepts, and to deny his right to govern our wills,
further than we please. His authority and commands are certainly a cause
without us; but we have already seen that the above writer thought them too
severe even for Adam in innocence, and that grace gives an exemption from that
severity. (Page 229, 230.) But I have seen a record concerning one, who was as
zealous for confidence in the flesh as these late disputants are, and had as
fair a claim to it as any of them, who at length was made to know that said law
was haly, just, and good; that it was scriptural, but he a carnal slave to sin,
instead of having such high dignity and liberty as he before imagined he had.'
And NECESSITY brought him most freely to preach the faith that he before
endeavored to destroy, 1 Cor. ix. 16. Gal. i. 16, 23. And any person in the
world can as soon cease to exist, as cease to desire happiness, and to escape
misery. A false imagination of good in the forbidden fruit, drew our first
parents into rebellion against God; and such imaginations are the only source
of sin in all their children, James i. 14, 15. Good is still their pursuit, but
the have lost the knowledge of who can give it, or what it is; but the
regenerate soul knows both, and this is the precise difference between them,
Psalm iv. 6, 7. Who does not know that debtors and criminals are not fit judges
in their own causes? yet that is the case with all reasoners against the truth
and perfection of God's written word. How would wrong judgment proceed in civil
Courts, if the Judges or jurors were allowed to construe laws according to a
rule within them, instead of a fixed known standard! If we believe the word of
truth, a most obstinate tyrant, a most hardened wretch, yet gladly sent Israel
away with rich treasures, the same night which God had told Abraham of four
hundred and thirty years before. Exodus xii. 33, 40, Psalm cv. 37, 38. Which
turn of his will and choice was by a cause without him, which brought him to
act voluntarily and exactly according to a previous immutable decree, and that
without giving any renewing grace to his soul. But as soon as death was out of
view, he eagerly pursued Israel into the Red Sea, where he and his army
perished. And none but infidels will pretend to deny the justice of God in that
destruction, although it was he that exactly disposed all the circumstances
which moved Pharaoh voluntarily to act as he did. And the gospel refers to this
instance, to show how, by much long-suffering, vessels of wrath are fitted to
destruction, according to the sovereign will of God. Romans ix. 17, 18, 22. And
those who will not believe him here, will in vain cry for mercy hereafter.
Those who are effectually drawn to Christ by divine teaching, know that they
could not have come without it, nor avoid coming most freely with it. John vi.
44, 45. And to hear many speaking evil of things which they know not; but what
they know naturally as brute beasts, and in those things to corrupt themselves:
To see them tread down the good pastures, and foul the deep waters, and thrust
others with side and shoulder, serves to confirm believers in the truth of
revelation, and in the hope of a speedy deliverance from such evil beasts, Jude
x. Ezekiel. xxxiv. 18 -- 25. As the wages of sin is death, God cannot be just in
paying the same to infants, but upon his right to constitute Adam as their head
to act for them, and dealing with them as sinners in him; for justice cannot
pay wages where they are not due. And as Christ came into the world purely to
save sinners, infants could have no part in his salvation, if they were not
sinners. That infants may partake of that salvation, even in their mothers
womb, is certain, Luke i. 44. And it is as certain, that though the first Adam
was a figure of the second in some things, yet that he was not so in others;
and in none more plainly than these three, viz. the one brought death, the
other life; the one by a judicial sentence of law, the other by a free gift of
grace; the one by a single offense ruined the world, the other atoned for many
offenses, and will finally bring forth a much more glorious world than that
which Adam destroyed. I conceive that these ideas, both of the resemblance and
the difference betwixt the two public heads of mankind, are plainly contained
in the fifth of the Romans, and fifteenth of the first to the Corinthians. Yet
how many are there who will have it, that Christ died equally for all the human
race, and yet that he saves but a part of them, because their wills defeat his
good desires and intentions? To these others have succeeded, who assert that he
died for every one of them, and will finally bring them all to happiness,
though not until many of them have been in hell-flames for thousands of years,
to burn up their corruptions. But I boldly declare I would as soon worship the
Pagan god of flies, as any imaginary savior that could possibly be mistaken or
disappointed in any of his designs. I fully believe that God's plan of
government was and is infinitely perfect. That it is calculated so in infinite
wisdom, that all his dispensations shall demonstrate to all intelligent
creatures, that all desirable good is to be enjoyed in obedience to his
revealed will, and nowhere else; but that disobedience thereto is infinitely
hateful and dreadful, how pleasing soever it may appear at first. That he gives
sinners opportunity to try their inventions to the utmost extent of them, most
plainly warning them of their danger in the mean time; and that examples of
their defeat, and of just punishments, inflicted upon the impenitent, will be
visible to the blessed, and cause high praises to him forever and ever; which
words are equally made use of to describe the continuance of his glories, the
happiness of the saints, and the misery of the wicked, Rev. v. 13, xiv. 9 --
11, xix. 3, xx. 10, xxii. 5. And as it was the old serpent that poisoned our
first parents, by setting up reason against revelation, especially in calling
in question the truth of the penalty of the law, so the same poison is
exceeding visible and pernicious among their children at this day.

III. It is most certain that the reformation in the church of England, which
took place in the days of Edward the sixth, was produced by preaching the
doctrines of original sin, justification by faith in Christ's imputed
righteousness, and his sovereign and efficacious grace upon the souls of men,
to their eternal salvation. And it is as certain that a d^parture from these
doctrines has been growing upon that church ever since. Tailor against original
sin, though he was a dissenter, yet was brought into the east part of
Connecticut by an itinerant missionary of the church of England above forty
years ago; and it has had an extensive circulation through this country. Many
of other denominations were pleased with it, while they tried hard to persuade
the world that Whitefield was a dishonest man, and upon evil designs against
this country, when he preached the gospel according to the doctrines
established by law, both in Old-England and New. (Page 171.) Ten years after, a
professor of Harvard college tried to fix that odium upon his character in the
minds of his pupils; and at the same time denied the liberty of gospel
ministers to preach in any parish where another was settled, without his
license Wigglesworth's lectures concerning ministers power, 1754, p. 14 -- 16;
And if facts are fairly examined, will it not be found, that those in our day,
who have been most fierce for taxing others where they are not represented, yet
are not willing to own that their Maker had a right to constitute Adam as their
representative? In 1628 a charter was granted to the Massachusetts from the
British Court, which exempted this Colony from all taxes thereto, but only the
fifth part of the gold and silver ore that should be found in it; and it gave
the Colony the exclusive right to choose their own Governors. But in 1684 these
privileges were wrested from them, and their lands were all claimed by the
crown, and great tyranny was here exercised for some years, until the King was
driven from his throne, and another was placed thereon by compact. He gave ^s a
new charter of many privileges, but reserved a power to tax our trade, and an
arbitrary power in the crown to appoint our Governors, and to demand our
property for their support. And as those who turn every one to his own way can
never have enough, the remainder of our charter privileges were taken away in
1774, and fleets and armies were sent to compel this country into an unlimited
submission to the wills of the British Parliament. And after many terrible
frowns of providence upon their unmerciful proceedings, a speech from the
British throne of November 2, 1780, said, "The present arduous situation of
public affairs is well known; the whole force and faculties of the monarchies
of France and Spain are drawn forth, and exerted to the utmost, to support the
rebellion of my Colonies in North America, and, without the least provocation
or cause of complaint, to attack my dominions; and the undisguised object of
this confederacy manifestly is to gratify BOUNDLESS AMBITION, by destroying the
commerce, and giving a fatal blow to the POWER of Great Britain. By the force
which the late Paliament put into my hands, and by the blessing of providence
on the bravery of my fleets and armies, I have been enabled to withstand the
formidable attempts of my enemies, and to frustrate the great expectations they
had formed; and the signal successes which have attended the progress of my
arms in the Provinces of Georgia and Carolina, gained with so much honor to the
conduct and courage of my officers, and to the valor and intrepidity of my
troops, which have equalled their highest character in any age, will I trust
have important consequences in bringing the war to a happy conclusion. It is my
most earnest desire to see this great end accomplished; but I am confident you
will agree with me in opinion, that we can only secure safe and honorable terms
of peace by such powerful and respectable preparations, as shall convince our
enemies, that WE WILL NOT SUBMIT TO RECEIVE THE LAW FROM ANY POWER WHATSOEVER."
Lord Cornwallis was one of his most successful officers in Carolina, who there
gave orders, on August. 30, 1780, "That every militia man, who had borne arms
with us, and afterward joined the enemy, shall be immediately hanged." Yet on
December 30 General Clinton and Admiral Arbuthnot, as Commissioners from the
King for restoring peace to the Colonies, gave out a declaration from New York,
"That Great Britain had manifested the sincerity of her affectionate and
conciliatory intentions, in removing forever your pretended grounds of
discontent, by repealing among other statutes those relating to the duty on
tea, and the alterations in the government of Massachusetts Bay, and exempting
forever not only the continental but the insular Colonies from parliamentary
taxations;" and so in^^ted all or any of "The Colonies in rebellion" to come in
and receive pardon and peace. And befove they had got through they said, "The
loyal are exhorted to persevere in their integrity for the preservation of
their country, its religion and liberties." And this declaration arrived and
was published in Boston just before the King's speech, which expressed a
resolution not to receive law from any power whatsoever, not even excepting the
power of heaven. And how much better were the wills of men in this land?

IV. FOR six months after the war began the general welfare of the country was
kept so much in view, that men enough were easily obtained to fill up our army,
which was also plentifully supplied with provisions. But a committee from the
southward met at the camp in or near Cambridge, in October, 1775, to settle the
affairs of the next campaign, who raised the wages of officers, and lowered
those of the private soldiers, which directly caused an uneasiness; and a
looking to private interest, both in and out of the army, gradually prevailed
from that time, until in the fall of 1780 it procured a promise of half-pay to
officers during life. And just before the news of peace arrived, this
selfishness arose so high in the officers, as to appoint a public meeting in
the camp at West-Point in the beginning of March, 1783 (without leave from
General Washington, who was there) to consult about either marching in arms to
Philadelphia, and compelling the Congress to grant their desires, or else
drawing off into the wilderness, and leaving the country defenseless to the
ravages of the enemy. And though, with a wise and masterly address, General
Washington prevented their taking either of those horrid steps, yet none can
tell how much influence these contrivances had, to produce a vote in Congress
for five years whole-pay, in lieu of the half-pay during life. And though the
war was leveiled against hereditary claims of power over others, and to secure
equity among all the inhabitants, and the articles of union and confederation
between these States expressly forbid their granting any titles of nobility, yet
in May following those officers presumed to incorporate a society among
themselves, to have an hereditary succession, and each a golden medal and blue
ribbon, with a large fund of money at command, and power to elect our chief
rulers into their society. This discovered their dispositions, whatever
alterations may have been made in their society since.

V. THE above proceedings have caused unspeakable difficulties through these
States, which have been loudly complained of by multitudes, who still are
bewitched with the opinion, that they are born in a like covenant as the seed
of Abraham were, which gave them a right to make servants of others who were
not in that covenant. Yea, and also with the opinion that civil Legislatures
have a right to empower some men to covenant for others with religious
teachers, and to compel them to fulfill it. And this practice (which is directly
against the law of God even as it was given to the Jews) was at the
commencement of our new constitution called GODLINESS, in capitals, while
honesty was put in small letters. Which things are not mentioned because I
think myself better by nature than others, for I know the contrary. And after
renewing grace was granted, I was such a dull scholar in Christ's school, that
I was thirty-two years in learning a lesson of only six words, viz. one Lord,
one faith, and one baptism. It took ten years to get clear of the custom of
putting baptism before faith, and near five more to learn not to contradict the
same in practice; after which above seventeen trying years rolled over us,
before we could refrain from an implicit acknowledgment of more than one Lord
in religious affairs. And what noise has been made in the world since, only
because we will not give up this lesson, and obey man rather than God! And the
chief movers therein, undoubtedly, are men who deny his right to impute Adam's
sin to them, or to damn them for not receiving Christ's imputed righteousness
for their justification. Neither can any own these doctrines, and be
self-consistent, in holding that natural birth or human doings can bring
infants into the covenant of grace. If it be of grace, then it cannot be of the
birth or works of nature. That which is born of the flesh is flesh, says our
blessed Lord. Circumcision was a type of his death, and of our being cut off
from confidence in the flesh, and ingrafted into him by regeneration. Before
his personal coming this sign was, by divine institution, put upon many who had
not the thing signified within them; but as Abraham had it, it was a seal to
him, while it was only a sign or type to many others, Romans iv. 11, Col. ii. 11,
12. By the covenant with Abraham, none were to be circumcised but such as were
born in his house, or bought with his money; in which capacity he was an
eminent type of Christ, whose church is constituted of persons purchased with
his blood, and regenerated by his spirit. Aaron was also a noted type of him,
and his lawful seed a type of regenerate souls, who are the spiritual house
which is built upon the foundation that is disallowed of men. And in vain do
any of them try to prove the covenant to be the same now that it was with
Abraham, until they can prove that Christ is hereafter to come, and endure
another crucifixion. Mystery Babylon, which means the mystery of confusion, was
erected by confounding type and anti-tpye, church and state, together. For a
woman after marriage to refuse to be governed by her husband, and to say, I
will go after my lovers, that gave me my bread and my water, my wool and my
flax, mine oil and my drink, proves her to be a harlot. And by this practice
the church of Rome became the mother of harlots, and abomination of the earth.
Kings have committed fornication with her; and by her sorceries were all
nations deceived. How much have Protestants been deceived with these
abominations! To set up any mere man as head of the church, is an imitation of
those who crucified our blessed Lord, by holding to an earthly kingdom of the
Messiah. The taking away of the property of the people by force, for the
priests in the church of Israel, brought amazing vengeance upon those who gave
countenance to that practice; yet the like iniquity has been tenaciously held
fast, by men who call themselves ministers of the gospel; and forcing away the
property of the Baptist for such, has been done in various part of this
country, even down into this year 1784. and much clamor is made against them,
only for refusing to give any countenance to such wickedness. But the call from
heaven to all the saints is, come out of her, my people, that ye be not
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues; for her sins
have reached unto heaven, and God has remembered her iniquities, Rev. xvii. 5,
xviii. 3, 4, 5, 23.

VI. LATE reasonings have set the creature man so high, as to deny that a cause
without him can determine his choice; while they hold that God's choice must be
determined by what he sees in the creature, and not in himself. But the only
seed that can produce the new birth gives such a turn to the mind, as to view
all flesh but as fading grass, and the inhabitants of the world but as
grasshoppers before God. Yea, as a drop of the bucket, and small dust of the
balance. And to set the contrast in its full light, it is declared that all
nations before him are as nothing, and they are counted to him less than
nothing and vanity. This is the incorruptible seed, of which souls are born
again, Isai. xl. 6 -- 17, 1 Pet. i. 23, 24. In our natural darkness we imagine
that our obligation to serve God and to come to Christ depends upon our will
and pleasure; and that when we get ready to set about the work in earnest, his
goodness and mercy will necessarily bring him to appear for our help, and to
pardon and save us. Whereas in truth it is as much impossible for any rational
person ever to be exempt, for one moment, from obligation to love God with all
his powers, and to love his neighbors as himself, as it is for him to escape
out of God's presence, or to put an end to his own existence. When Christ came
and laid down his life for us, he gave the fullest demonstration of the truth
and love of God (as it was previously revealed in predictions and figures) and
greatly enhanced our obligation to love and obey him; and also clearly opened
the way for our doing it, in newness of spirit, and not in the oldness of the
letter. The oldness of the letter lays every sin and defect as a bar in the way
of approach to a holy God; but the newness of the spirit, while it cuts us off
from any confidence in the flesh, makes all our sins and wants powerful
arguments for our daily coming to the throne of grace for supplies. Though Adam
in innocence could have no idea of a mediator, or of pardon and cleansing from
sin; yet his obligation to the God of truth made it his indispensable duty to
believe and obey him, in all his revealed will, and highly criminal to call the
same in question. And unbelief still remains unspeakably criminal in his
posterity; for their natural powers of thinking and choice are not lost.
Therefore the more unable we are to love God with all our powers, and to
believe and obey his revealed will, the more guilty and inexcusable; because we
love the creature instead of the Creator, and regard lying vanities in
opposition to eternal truth, which is confirmed by every event that ever
happened. Good men and bad, angels and devils, all act according to the
characters given of them in the holy scriptures. No soil can bear good wheat
until the roots naturally in it are broken up, and the wheat sown therein; so
the new birth cannot be wrought in any but by divine revelation. It is not a
creation of new faculties, but the giving new ideas and dispositions, which
were our indispensable duty before, but our evil hearts were contrary thereto.
Breaking up of the thorns and briers in a field, is removing things which ought
not to be there; and the good seed being sown, and an union formed between the
seed and the soil, the birth, the growth is produced. By such means as these
great relief was granted to our country, when its ruin seemed inevitable. For
at the close of 1779 public credit was sunk so low, that forty paper dollars
would not buy more of the produce of our own country, than one would in 1775;
and from thence to the end of the war very few soldiers were raised in
New England, but upon private personal securities; and large quantities both of
clothing and provisions, that were raised for them, never reached to their
camps, by reason of the unfaithfulness and treachery in those who should have
conveyed the same to them. But in the year 1779 a fresh revival of religion was
granted, which increased in the year 1780, and spread the most extensively and
powerfully through New England, that any revival had done for near forty years.
Besides considerable additions that were made to some of the Congregational
churches, it greatly increased the Baptist churches that were formed before,
and raised about twenty new ones. According to the best accounts yet obtained,
there were not less than two thousand persons baptized upon a profession of
saving faith in New England, only in the year 1780; and chiefly in the States
of New Hampshire and the Massachusetts. And though true religion is directly,
opposite to wars and fightings among men, yet it teaches an inviolable regard
to truth and equity; and no small part of the duty of love is a defense of the
innocent, when their rights are invaded, and their lives are in danger. The
gospel shows that the only lawful use of the sword, is to punish such as work
ill to their neighbor; and subjection to the powers that do it is a matter of
conscience with believers, Romans xiii. 1 -- 10. And this revival of religion was
undoubtedly a great means of saving this land from foreign invasion, and from
ruin by internal corruption; though the latter is still so great, that there
has been but little rejoicing, and less thankfulness, for the deliverance and
peace which are wonderfully granted to us. The Warren Association, at their
meeting, September 9, 1783, gave their views of these times in the following
address to their countrymen, viz.

VII. " Dearly Beloved,

"AFTER a long and very distressing war, we rejoice at this opportunity of
congratulating you, upon the return of peace to the nations, and to our land in
particular, with a prospect of unspeakable advantages to the present and future
generations. Indeed we are not insensible that many are sorrowful and
complaining, instead of rejoicing at these times; several causes whereof are
obvious. For ever since our first parents revolted from heaven, in order to
please their eyes and their taste, their children have been chiefly influenced
by carnal sense, instead of reason and truth. And the burden of taxes, the
great scarcity of cash, with the pressing calls for money from every quarter,
have drawn a terrible gloom over many minds; which is greatly increased by a
view of the untried scene of political existence into which we have entered,
where none can tell what is before us; and we have no such arm of flesh to
trust to as formerly. Added to which are a great variety of disappointments and
losses, with the use of corrupt schemes to repair them, and to get more power
and gain, among all orders of men in the land, which make a number think our
case almost desperate. But the gospel gives light, and opens the most glorious
prospects, where nature can see nothing but darkness. It assures us that
sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof, and forbids anxiety about
tomorrow, because a sparrow cannot fall to the ground, nor an hair from your
heads, without the providence of our heavenly Father. And what confirmations of
this truth have we had? Yea, and which now surround us? A main hope of our
enemies was built upon the prospect of starving us into submission; but behold!
the showers and shines of heaven were not at their command; no, nor the hearts
of the people neither. The events of this war are unparalleled. -- Deceitful
reasonings from the power given to the members and rulers of the Jewish church,
have persuaded people for many ages, that some men are born with a right to
govern others, and that they are not accountable to the people for what they
receive and do; which has been the grand source of oppression and tyranny
through the world. But how has God rent away this veil of darkness! The
American revolution is wholly built upon the doctrine, that all men are born
with an equal right to what providence gives them, and that all righteous
government is founded in compact or covenant, which is equally binding upon the
officers and members of each community. -- And as surely as Christianity is
true, Christ is the only lawgiver and head of his church; whom he will save
from the power both of galleys and gallant ships,, those modern engines of
tyranny, Isai. xxxiii. 16 -- 24. And his laws determine that his ministers
shall neither be tyrants nor slaves: Shall neither be supported by forcing away
any man's property without his personal consent, nor go a warfare of their own
charges, Mat. x. 7 -- 10, Luke x. 3 -- 12, 1 Cor. ix. 7 -- 14. Opposite
extremes about these matters have long served to uphold each other. The terms
hire and reward, on one hand, have been taken to drag this affair into secular
courts; and the word freely, on the other, to excuse people from doing any
thing to support their ministers; as if freedom belonged only to ministers,
while the people were slaves to their lusts. Whereas it is as clear as the
daylight, that the obligations between pastors and people are mutual; and that
their union and welfare greatly depend upon a free and faithful discharge
thereof, out of supreme love to God; viewing themselves to be but stewards of
all their gifts and treasures, who must soon give account unto him of their
stewardship: Yea, and that he only can give them success or enjoyment in any
undertaking whatever. These laws naturally tend to keep his flock from being
devoured by such as feed themselves and not the flock, as well as to exclude
all members therefrom who refuse to be governed by him; and likewise to guard
against all sinful divisions. Corrupt men will not have such advantage as they
formerly had, to deceive the simple with artful addresses to their passions,
either about the licentiousness or tyranny of others. The cry of persecution
will be stopped, while those who love the truth will endeavor to unite with
societies who walk most clearly therein, and be in earnest to fill their places
with duty and usefulness; knowing that mutual esteem and confidence are most
surely promoted thereby, without which societies are unhappy, if not broken and
dissolved."

CHAP. XXI.
1. The Rise of a Church on Martha's Vineyard. 2. The State of the Baptists in
the County of Barnstable. 3. Also in the County of Plymouth. 4. Of a Riot at
Hingham. 5. Of the Baptists in Bristol County. 6. Likewise in Suffolk, Essex
and Middlesex. 7. In the Counties of Worcester and Hampshire. 8. Of a Revival
of Religion to the Westward. 9. Also to the Northward. 10. And on our eastern
Shores.

1. THE next thing before us, is to give a distinct though brief a ^ount of the
late revival of religion, and of the state of the Baptist churches. And we may
begin with the affairs of Martha's Vineyard, an island about twenty miles long,
and ten broad, whereon are the towns of Edgarton, Tisbury, and Chilmark. They
are a county by themselves, for holding of Inferior Courts, from whence they
may appeal to Superior Courts in other counties. From Falmouth, in Barnstable
county, to the entrance of the harbor of Holmes's Hole, on said island, is
nine miles; which harbor is much frequented by those who sail upon these
coasts, and piloting of vessels round Cape-Cod and elsewhere is no small part
of the business of its inhabitants. The line betwixt Edgarton and Tisbury comes
down upon the head of said harbor, so that the inhabitants round it are upon
the corners of two towns, seven or eight miles from the meeting houses in
either of them: which I am told some of their children of fifteen or sixteen
years old never saw. For the soil is generally thin and barren, so that but
very few horses can be kept there, and the men are much employed on the sea, or
in getting sustenance out of it: Yet they have been all taxed to a worship that
they or their families could but rarely attend, and from which they seemed to
get no good; so that at length very few of them went to any public worship at
all. It is said, however, that but few intemperate persons were found among
them. The war added greatly to their calamities, as our State could not protect
them, and they lay at the mercy of our enemies; who came there with a powerful
force in the fall of the year 1778, and took from the island all their arms and
ammunition, besides three hundred head of cattle and a thousand sheep, and most
of the produce of the land near said harbor. Dark indeed did their case
appear; and on December 26 was such a cold snow-storm as caused the death of
seventeen men in a privateer sloop at the east end of the island, and
seventy-five more in a brig near Plymouth. Yet this terrible storm drove into a
creek, at the head of Holmes's Hole, such a vast quantity of bass as supplied
the inhabitants of the whole island with as many of them as they were pleased
to take, and more than they could make use of. And not long after a British
vessel was cast away upon the west part of the aland, which gave the
inhabitants a good supply of rice. And greater favors of another kind were
before them. By afflictive providence, and private means of grace, four
persons near Holmes's Hole were awakened to a sense of their sin and danger,
and in the spring of 1780 they experienced a happy deliverance of soul. And no
sooner was light granted to them than they endeavored to hold the same forth
to others, which brought them to set up religious meetings, and a number were
hopefully converted by these means. And about the last of June they sent for
Elder Lewis, of Freetown, who went over in July, and preached and baptized a
number of them. He did the like again in August and October, as Elder Hunt also
did in November; and, by particular request, I met them there in December, when
a careful enquiry was made into their sentiments and views, and the order of
the gospel, with the solemn nature of the Christian profession, was publicly
laid open and inculcated. After which, on December 21, 1780, we saw fifty
persons solemnly sign covenant together, to whom six more were added on the
24th, and all then sweetly communed together at the Lord's table. The high
sheriff of the county was a leading member of this church, which contained some
persons of every rank among them. The husband of one of them was born among the
Portuguese, and was now newly returned from a distressing captivity in England.
By seeing and hearing of these wonders of divine grace, his vows in trouble
were brought with authority upon his mind; and though the tempter set in
violently with his suggestions, that there was no mercy for him, and that he
had better go and drown himself, in the evening after this communion, yet
sovereign grace prevented it, and set his soul at liberty, so that he was soon
after baptized and joined to that church, as a considerable number more also
did. I have received no late accounts of the Indian Baptist church on that
island. (Vol. 1, p. 439.)

II. OUR next view is of the county of Barnstable. The Separate minister at
Harwich, named in p. 175, has removed to Tamworth, in New Hampshire, and the
other of Barnstable is now a pastor of a Congregational church at Newmarket, in
that State; and Baptist churches are raised out of each of those Separate
societies. A Baptist church was formed and organized at Harwich in 1757; but by
advice of a Council, their minister was deposed from his office in 1777, for
immoral conduct, and they are now destitute of a pastor, though they have an
agreeable teacher with them. They have some members from Wellfleet, where our
ministers have frequently preached to attentive audiences. A small parish in
the south part of Harwich got a Baptist minister, from the west part of our
country, to preach in their parish meeting house; and in 1781 they formed a
Baptist church there, and he was ordained their minister: but he is upon the
Arminian plan, and not in fellowship with our churches. The Baptist church in
Barn stable was constituted June 20, 1771; but they were very small for seven
years, and then a revival was granted, and another in 1781; and things at
present appear encouraging among them, though they have not been able as yet to
get a settled pastor. There is the beginning of a Baptist society in Sandwich,
in that county; but we may truly say of our times, the harvest is great, and
the laborers are few.

III. THE rise of the first Baptist churh in Middleborough has been described
(p. 215); but coldness and stupidity had greatly prevailed therein for five
years before the late revival of religion, which began in the latter part of
1778, and was at its height in July, 1780. The first person added to the church
in this revival was on February 28, 1779, and eighty-five have been received
since, above two-thirds of whom belong to Bridgwater, in the west part of which
town a large Baptist meeting house was built last year, eight miles from ours,
and they have now got a minister to preach to them, though as yet they remain a
branch of our church. The rise of the second Baptist church in Middleborough
was as follows: Mr. Thomas Nelson, who was born in the town June 6, 1676, just
before Philip's war broke out, removed into that part of it called Asawamset,
in 1717; about which time he joined to the first Baptist church in Swanzey, as
his wife also di August 5, 1723. In 1753 he and his sons, with a few more, set
up a meeting at his house, and obtained Mr. Ebenezer Hinds to preach to them.
Four miles southwestward from thence Mr. James Mead was ordained pastor of a
Separate church in 1751; but he died in 1756, after which the body of his
church became Baptists, and Mr. Hinds's hearers joined with them, and ordained
him their pastor, January 26, 1756, in which office he still continues. Mr.
Nelson died before this church was formed, in his eightieth year; but his wife,
Mrs. Hope Nelson, lived to be a member of it, and communed with them at the
Lord's table after she was an hundred years old. She died December 7, 1782,
aged an hundred and five years and seven months. Her living posterity, besides
all that had deceased, were two hundred and fifty-seven in the year 1774. But
as some of them are removed to Nova Scotia, and to other distant places, their
number when she died has not since been obtained. Many of them are members of
Baptist churches, and three of them are public teachers therein. Mr. Ebenezer
Jones was ordained the pastor of the third Baptist church in Middleborough
October 28, 1761; but whisperers, who separate very friends, caused such a
division there two years after, as not only removed him from being their
pastor, but also broke up their meeting for a time. He has been preaching for
some years past at Steventown, in the county of Albany. Mr. Hunt was ordained
the pastor of said church October 30, 1771; in which year they had a
considerable revival, and another much greater in 1780. Their letter to the
Warren Association, in September that year, gives the following account of it.
Say they, "In our letters for several years past, we had to lament the sad
decay of religion among us, and the abounding of iniquity, which in the last
year increased to the greatest degree ever known in this place. Men were bold
in wicked ways, and all the endeavors of a few faithful ones among us could
not prevent it. But blessed be God, things have taken another turn this year;
for when sin, the great enemy of mankind, was coming in like a flood, the
spirit of the Lord has lifted up a standard against him. About the middle of
March, on a Lord's day in the afternoon, there appeared a very visible
alteration in the face of the whole assembly; they were all attention to the
word, and concern was discovered in their countenances, which increased so that
by the beginning of April several scores of persons appeared under deep concern
about their souls and eternal salvation. And since the work began we have
reason to hope that about one hundred souls have been turned from darkness to
light, and eighty-three have been baptized. -- It is very remarkable in our
view, to see so many suddenly turned from darkness to light, and have such a
clear understanding of the nature of religion, and so ready to practice what
they know. -- We have been remarkably free from disorders, by means of which
those who appeared to oppose this work (who are chiefly of another
denomination) and were waiting to see how things turned out, have seen such
things as have greatly stilled and convinced them. Thus has it pleased our
gracious God to visit a most unworthy people, and after a dark night of sorrow
and mourning, to make us glad with his salvation." From the beginning of the
revival to September, 1781, more than an hundred persons were added to that
church, above half of whom were males.

IV. A BRANCH of this church is at Marshfield, where a steady society for
worship has been kept up for some years; and in the late revival a number of
persons were hopefully converted in Situate, on the north borders of our
county; and frequent religious meetings were held there. This caused a great
uneasiness in the adjacent town of Hingham, where their ministers had long
taught the world to tyrannize over the church (p. 159). And as an exhorter from
Rhode Island government had attended several meetings in Situate, the people
of Hingham could not be content without showing their particular resentment
against him. Therefore one of them followed said exhorter into Abington, as he
was upon his return home, and importuned him to go and hold a meeting at his
hou^^. This he at last consented to; and a numb^^ of people met there for
religious worship in the evening of May 28, 1782. But just as they were going
to begin their exercise, a large mob came up, whose leader was a communicant in
one of the churches in Hingham, and, by leave of the man who had invited said
exhorter to his house, they went in and seized him, and carried him away with
the bible in his hand; but upon his telling them that it was the best law he
ever heard of, they knocked it out of his hand, and stamped it under foot, with
oaths and execrations too horrid to be repeated! And they bruised and injured
his body, as well as tore his clothes; and forcibly carried him and two other
baptized brethren out of Hingham; and afterward threatened the lise of said
exhorter, if he ever came there again. By good advice, a complaint was
exhibited to the Grand Jury of that county against the chief of those rioters,
and a bill was found against five of them, supported by eight witnesses; and
four of the rioters were arraigned before the Court at Boston, October 10, and
pleaded not guilty; upon which their trial was appointed to be on January 14,
1783; and they were laid under bonds then to appear; and the Court bound the
witnesses also to appear at that time, four of whom were men, and the others
women. The season proved to be exceeding difficult, by reason of snow, ice and
a severe air, yet the four male witnesses appeared at the time appointed, but
no^e of the rioters, neither was any forfeiture of their bonds exacted; but
their trial was put off for two days, and all the witnesses were required then
to appear. A sleigh was therefore procured to carry two of the female
witnesses; but as they called at a friend's house in Hingham in the evening, to
refresh themselves, it was conveyed away and cut to pieces, and they could not
find their horse till next day. Yet all the eight witnesses appeared in Boston
at the time last appointed; but then the lawyers prevailed to have the trial
put off until April; one of whom was the man that pleaded conscience for
supporting worship by tax, in our conference at Philadelphia, mentroned p. 303.
But the world may now see what consciences such men have. In the spring those
rioters found that they could no longer put the case off, and then they were in
earnest to settle it without a public hearing, which was finally done, by their
engaging to pay all costs. But let the politicians of Boston remember, that it
is but a few years since they declared to the world, that a delay of justice is
a denial of justice, and therefore that wherein they judged others they are
self-condemned. And they appear more openly so from the following instance. The
burden of civil taxes being exceeding heavy, and a pair of oxen being exposed
to sale therefore in Taunton, opposition was made against the sale; until a
gentleman offered a generous price for them, and then the matter was settled.
Yet to deter persons from any such thing for the future, two men of Taunton
were seized in the night, and carried off to Boston by armed men, the August
after said riot at Hingham. What right they had thus to bring men out of
another county, belongs not to me to determine; but if an impartial regard to
the public peace, as well as to the rights of Christianity, had prevailed in
the breasts of some men in Boston, could those rioters in their own county have
possibly been indulged as they were, and those sufferers have been so cruelly
treated!

V. OFFICERS in the church as well as state often do much mischief if
unfaithful, and much good if faithful in their several stations. Our churches
in Swanzey and Rehoboth have had large experience of this. The blessings which
the first church of Swanzey enjoyed under the successive ministrations of their
elders, Miles, Luther and Wheaton, are touched upon (vol. 1, p. 353, 506, vol.
2, p. 68, 121, 124). Mr. Samuel Maxwell was ordained a colleague with the last
of them the year before his death. Mr. Maxwell lived to a great age, and was
este^med a pious man; but he was so unsteady in his principles and conduct, as
to cause much unhappiness in the churches. On this account he was, by his own
request, dismissed from Swanzey in 1739, and though he took the charge of the
Baptist church in Rehoboth six years after, yet he did not continue four years
with them. In 1742 said church in Swanzey settled a gifted minister from
Narraganset, who had a thronged audience for a few years, yet then he was
accused of the sin of uncleanness, which charge he never cleared up, but went
off and left the church. Their next minister was accused of taking unjust
methods to get into that place; and he was much influenced by a few men in the
church who were attached to Arminianism; and by these means, the church that
had two hundred members in pious Elder Wheaton's days, was reduced to a very
small number, and the congregation also. After about thirty years he was
dismissed at his own request, and removed away. And as the meeting house and
minister's house in Warren were burnt by the enemy, and the place was still
exposed to their rage, they agreed at present to unite with Swanzey church,
three miles off; and their pastor was called and settled there. And such a
divine blessing was granted, that when I was there in October, 1781, I was
informed that within two years about two hundred persons had been added to the
two churches in Swanzey. The former elders of the second church in Swanzey are
before mentioned (p. 11, 13, 43.) Their next elder, Job Mason, was ordained May
22, 1738, and was well esteemed in his office until his decease, in August,
1775, aet. 80. His brother Russel Mason, their present pastor, was ordained
November 2, 1752. General redemption had been so much held there, as to admit
members upon a general declaration of their faith, until a powerful work among
them, in the beginning of 1772, introduced particular relations of the work of
divine grace upon their souls; and light has greatly increased among them
since. And in this late revival it has introduced singing in their public
worship. The town of Rehoboth calls for our next attention. The Baptist church
formed there under Mr. Comer's ministry (p. 121) increased to ninety-five
members in less than two years. But in 1736 a minister was ordained in his
stead, whose principles were unsound; and six years after he took a whore
instead of his wife, and went off with her. Since which diversity of sentiments
about doctrines, terms of communion, etc. have produced many small societies in
that town, which I shall not attempt particularly to describe here, as a list
of them may hereafter be given. The two Baptist churches in Attleborough were
formed out of Separate churches there. The pastor of the church in Norton
(mentioned p. 232) after a pious and useful life, fell asleep on August 23,
1768. After which the church united with a small society in the north borders
of Taunton, where they are become a large society; and their present pastor was
ordained November 12, 1772. In the year 1780 there was a most precious harvest
of souls among them. No other Baptist churches in that county have had more
than one pastor; and their names may hereafter be given.

VI. THE three countie^ last mentioned contain the whole of the ancient Colony
of Plymouth (the first in New England) excepting the few towns since set off to
Rhode Island. The Colony of Massachusetts is the next before us, the head
county whereof is Suffolk. The affairs of the two Baptist churches in Boston,
their capital, have been described (vol. 1, p. 353, etc. vol. 2, p. 33, 50,
125, 149, 269, 276.) To which I shall add, that Mr. Condy was a gentleman of
superior powers and learning, and of a very respectable character among
mankind; but the sentiments he had imbibed about the doctrines of sovereign
grace, impeded his public usefulness in the ministry; and upon the instalment
of their present pastor, January 9, 1765, he freely resigned his office in that
church. The present pastor of their second church succeeded Mr. Davis in 1774.
The next Baptist church in that county is in Bellingham, which was constituted
October 15, 1750. Their first pastor was Mr. Elnathan Wight, a pious and useful
man, who died in November, 1761. To him succeeded their present pastor, who was
installed there November 12, 1766. He was first ordained at Stafford, June 5,
1755; but was dismissed from thence by the advice of a Council, August 28,
1765, because the majority of the church appeared to be so much out of a gospel
line of travel, that other churches withdrew their followship from them. The
rest of the Baptist churches in that county have had no more than one minister.
In Essex, beside the church of Haverhill, of which we have spoken (p. 236)
Baptist meetings are held at Danvers, Rowley a^^ Methuen. In Middlesex, the
church whereof Mr. Draper was pastor in Cambridge (p. 176) dissolved after he
left them, and the time of the constitution of our present church there may be
hereafter seen. Mr. Elisha Rich was the first pastor of our Chelmsford church,
who was ordained there October 5, 1774, but he removed into the State of
Vermont near four years after. Their present pastor was ordained September 24,
1783. Baptist meetings are steadily held at Framingham and Weston, but churches
are not formed there.

VII. IN Worcester county, the church at Sutton, mentioned (p. 124.) was become
final when their aged pastor died, January 4, 1775, and they are since
dissolved. The second Baptist church there settled a minister in 1768, who was
dismissed four years after for not being found in the faith. Elder Green, of
Leicester, after a very laborious and useful life, was taken to his rest August
20, 1773, act. 73. Benjamin Foster, A. M. educated at Yale college, was
ordained there October 23, 1776, and an evident blessing attended his labors
for a considerable time. But differences about some points of practice arising
among them, he was dismissed by mutual consent, about six years after, and
removed and preaches to a new society in Danvers, his native place. The first
pastor of the Baptist church in Sturbridge died in 1755, and they have gone
through many trying scenes since, but have at present a prospect of settling an
agreeable pastor soon. Mr. Samuel Dennis was ordained at Petersham in October,
1778, but he was taken from his beloved flock by death in April, 1783. The
first pastor of South-Brimfield church, in the county of Hampshire (p. 124)
removed from thence to NovaScotia (though he came back afterward) and Mr. James
Mellen was their second pastor, who is mentioned p. 242, 243. Their present
pastor was ordained November 11, 1773, when the church was very small and
feeble, but a great blessing has been since granted there. They had but
twenty-three members in the church before a revival began among them in 1779,
which in their letter to our Association, in September that year, was thus
described, viz. "Dear brethren, we have to inform you, that by the grace of God
we are at peace among ourselves, and enjoy much of that love which passes
knowledge. The Lord of his mercy is come down among us, by his great and mighty
power. Such solemn meetings we never had before; it comes like the showers of
rain upon the mown grass. O the agonies of soul that some feel, and the joys
that some are, full and more than full of! It seems as if heaven was come down
here. Numbers are born of the Spirit, and ^eel the sweet liberty of the gospel.
O the solemn c^i^s for the salvation of sinners! O the amazing joys we feel!
Never, never did we before see such a happy day! May the Lord have all the
glory O that it may spread through all the earth! Through divine goodness it
does spread more and more. Brethren, pray for us. Some who a few weeks ago
seemed the most stupid, are now speaking freely of their amazing joys, and
beholding their bleeding and very precious Redeemer. The work is so great that
we cannot consent to our elder's meeting you in Association this year. We have
this year thirty-four added by baptism; our whole number is fifty-seven." From
our sister church in Wilbraham, adjacent to them, they wrote at the same time
and said, "We pray God to direct you in conferring upon matters that concern
the visible kingdom of Christ, and do that which may be for his glory, and the
lasting peace and benefit of his churches. Beloved, the love of Christ, that
bond of peace, still unites our hearts. God of his infinite grace and goodness
is carrying on a glorious work by his spirit. Saints are quickened thereby, and
sinners are converted to him. It is wonderful to behold the change that has
been in the space of one year with us. The hearts of fathers are turned to the
children, and the children to the fathers. God is to us a place of broad
rivers; we desire to exalt him, and give him all the glory. -- Added to the
church this year fifty-one; died none. Our present number is one hundred and
thirty-three."

VIII. AN elder from Berkshire wrote August 29, 1779, and said, "I snatch a
moment to acknowledge the debt of love. I read the refreshing lines from you,
and rejoice in your prosperity. May Zion's King enlarge her borders. It is a
most remarkable time of the work of our God in New-Providence Now part of the
town of Adams.
, Lanesborough, Hancock, New-Lebanon, Little-Housack, and some other places. In
the fore part of June, at Shaftsbury, I baptized twenty-nine in one day. At
Wallomstock Near where the Bennington battle was.
I attended the ordination of Elder Wait, and had a charming interview with
Elder Gano. In a few weeks past I have baptized thirty-two, who have joined to
our church. Elder Mason has baptized perhaps near thirty more, and a number
have declared what God has done for them, that are not yet baptized. O
brethren, help us to praise the God of love!" From Ashfield they wrote in
September, 1780, and said, "The Lord has been pleased to pour out of his spirit
abundantly in this place, to the quickening of his children, and the conviction
and conversion, of many souls, as we in a judgment of charity, have reason to
believe. O help us to praise the Lord for his goodness, and his wonderful works
to the children of men, and to us in particular! -- We have had the addition of
nine members by letters, and thirty-six by baptism; have dismissed two to the
church in Colerain, and excluded one. Our present number is ninety-four." And
in all the churches and members that were added to the Warren Association in
1780, there was an increase of seven hundred and ninety-six members. Ninety
were added only to the church in South-Brimfield, which formerly had passed
through many and sore trials. And from a minister in the State of
New Hampshire, to whom I wrote, I received the following remarkable account,
dated March 15, 1781. Says he,

IX. "I REJOICE, sir, to hear that in the midst of judgment, God is remembering
mercy, and calling in his elect, from east to west. You have refreshed my mind
with good news from the west and south, and in return I will inform you of good
news from the north and east. Some hundreds of souls are hopefully converted in
the counties of Rockingham, Stafford and Grafton, in New Hampshire, within
about a year past. In the last journey I went, before my beloved wife was taken
from me, I baptized seventy-two men, women, and some that may properly be
called children, who confessed with their mouths the salvation God had wrought
in their hearts, to good satisfaction. Meredith, in Stafford, has a church
gathered the year past, consisting of between sixty and seventy members. I
baptized forty-three in that town in one day, and such a solemn weeping of the
multitude on the shore I never before saw. The ordinance of baptism appeared to
carry universal conviction through them, even to a man. The wife, when she saw
her husband going forward, began to weep, to think she was not worthy to go
with him: In like manner the husband the wife, the parent the child, the
children the parent; that the lamentation and weeping methinks may be compared
to the inhabitants of Hadadrimmon, in the valley of M^giddon. -- Canterbury, in
Rockingham county, has two Baptist churches gathered in the year past, one in
the parish of Northfield; the number I cannot tell, but it is considerably
large: I baptized thirty-one there, and a number have been baptized since by
others: The other is in the parish of London, in said Canterbury, containing
above an hundred members. -- Another church of about fifty members is gathered
in Chichester; another in Barrington, consisting of a goodly number, and one in
Hubbardston, all three in Stafford county. Two churches in Grafton county, one
in Holderness, the other in Rumney. The church in Rumney had one Hains ordained
last August, much to the satisfaction of the people. All these seven churches
have been gathered in about a year past. -- One church was gathered last fall
in Wells, over which brother Nathaniel Lord, late of Berwick, is ordained. --
There appears to be a general increase of the Baptist principles through all
the eastern parts of New England." A large part of those plantations, for an
hundred and fifty miles upon our eastern shores, have no Congregational
ministers. Near thirty incorporated towns in the county of Lincoln have scarce
five such ministers settled in them. But I have received the following
entertaining account of the revival of religion in those parts.

X. A MAN who was born there, and was about ten years old when such a noise was
made against Mr. Whitefield, as we have described (p. 171) says, "I was then
convinced that neither myself, nor those men who spoke with so much spite and
malice, were the children of God; and I was rationally convinced that those
they spoke against were his children, although they called them deluded,
possessed with the devil, Highflyers and Newlights; and though they spoke it as
a scandal, yet I believed I must know that light, or perish in darkness; and I
still retained a selfish or legal love to those people, though never so much
despised. And from that time until I was twenty-six years old, the spirit of
God was striving with me, by awakening my conscience, convincing me of sin, and
that I must be born again. And so I went on sinning and repe^t^^g reforming and
forgetting, looking upon God to (...) such a God as I would have him to be; in
hopes, that for what good there was in me, he would show mercy to me. But when
about twenty-six years of age, and my affections much set upon the things of
the world, just about the time I was married, I was suddenly taken down with
sickness, and part of the time deprived of reason; and those who saw me
despaired of my recovery. But, glory be to God, he dealt not with me according
to my deserts, but according to his rich love and free grace in Jesus Christ;
for he enlightened my understanding, and awakened my conscience, and set my
sins in order before me, and that which I had forgotten came all to memory,
with the breach of many vows and promises, which grieved me to the heart as I
thought. O, I cried to God to forgive my sins, and to show mercy for Christ's
sake; for I saw myself a condemned sinner, and told those who came to discourse
with me about religious matters, that I saw myself to be the greatest sinner of
all men; and had I owned all this globe, I would have given it all for an
interest in Christ. Yea, all the men upon earth could not have persuaded me out
of the opinion, that I was more willing to receive Christ than he was to
receive me. But it pleased the Lord, in about a month, to raise me up to a
considerable state of bodily health, with a great earnestness, as I thought, to
seek and serve him; reading the scriptures often, praying in secret and in my
family, exhorting many others to seek and serve God, and warning them against
evil practices. Yet in all this I did not think I was born again, neither did I
think I could do any thing of myself to forward the work of regeneration; and
here I got clear of one false hope, and began to build upon another; now I put
great dependence in my nondependence, and so went on with my reformation,
thinking all the good I did that it was God who wrought it in me, and the evil
came from the devil and my own corrupt nature; and this hope gave me great joy
in my good performances, but great grief, guilt and repentance, for the
commission of any known sin, or the omission of any known duty; and so I went
on for ten or twelve years, and after that I grew more engaged after the
treasures of the world, and then my delight in religion died away. -- At length
I began to think I was blind, and ignorant both of my own miserable estate, and
of the remedy God had provided. I prayed that God would enlighten my
understanding; but still I grew more blind, ignorant and wicked, as I thought,
but kept it to myself, till at last I got hedged up so that I could neither
read nor pray, which lasted but a short time. This was a sabbath morning,
September 30, 1781. -- Now I began to see the base views I formerly had of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and of the plan of salvation; for when I had a discovery of
actual sins, and the danger I was exposed to thereby, I would repent and
reform, and think what a glorious Savior Christ was, and that some time or
other he would save me from hell, and take me to glory, with a desire to be
happy, but no desire to be holy. But, glory be to God, he now gave me another
view of salvation; now I saw his law to be holy, and loved it, though I and all
my conduct was condemned by it. Now I saw that God's justice did not strike
against me as his creature, but as a sinner, and that Christ died not only to
save from punishment, but from sin itself. I saw that Christ's office was not
only to make men happy, but to make them holy, and the plan now looked
beautiful to me; I had no desire to have the ^ast tittle of it altered, but all
my cry was to b^ conformed to it. -- On October 3 the load of guilt and
condemnation was instantly removed, and my soul was filled with joy and peace.
Then it was asked me, could I desire any thing more? And at first I saw no
want, till I found a want of love and gratitude in me to return thanks to God
for this great deliverance, which I began to cry and plead for; and those words
were spoke to me, greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his
life for his friend; which came with such light, life, love and power, that I
knew it to be the voice of my blessed Jesus, who by his holy spirit set that
glorious seal to my soul that God is true; and now, by his grace, I could speak
forth redeeming love and free grace without dread or fear. At this time there
was no work or moving of religion among us, or round about us." But he was
constrained to go and visit his neighbors from house to house, and to lay open
to them the vast concerns of the soul and eternity, whereby many were awakened,
and a large number have been hopefully converted since. Two new Baptist
churches have been formed in this year, and there is a prospect of greater and
more extensive blessings in those new plantations.

CHAP. XXII.
1. Of the Baptist Churches in the County of Providence. 2. In New-port County.
3. And Westward from thence. 4. The Folly of Man exposed. 5. Even among all
Sects. 6. How Truth is held in Unrighteousness. 7. By the Shakers as well as
others. 8. The only Remedy against Delusions, and Measure of our real
Happiness, is a hearty Obedience to God's revealed Will.

I. WHEN we turn our eyes westward, and take a view of the first Baptist church
in America, the folly of man and the goodness of God appear very conspicuous
therein. The learned Mr. Callender, in his century sermon, expressed some
scruple whether Mr. Roger Williams, the founder of that town and Colony, was
ever a member of that church, or not. But he was convinced of this mistake
afterward. Governor Winthrop, the most ingenuous and upright writer of any
gentleman at Boston in that day, whose writings have come down to us, dates the
beginning of the Baptist church in Providence in March, 1639, and says it began
by Ezekiel Holiman's baptizing Mr. Williams, and then he baptizing the rest.
But that in July after, the opinion mentioned (p. 95) put a stop to his further
travel with them. And Richard Scott, who was one of them, says two or three of
the church withdrew with Williams. (Vol 1, p. 106 -- 108.) Thomas Olney was
their next minister. But the diversity of sentiments mentioned in this volume
(p. 94 -- 96) brought such darkness over their affairs, that no regular records
before 1770 are now found therein. Their ancient fathers, Olney, Dexter,
Wickenden, Tillinghast and others, could write well, as their civil records and
some private papers witness; and I cannot but hope that more distinct accounts
of their religious affairs will hereafter be discovered. Elder Tillinghast,
whose memory is precious (p. 110, 114) pl^^nly told his people their duty to
future ministers; but himself was so far from being chargeable to them, that he
gave the lot upon which their first meeting house was built, and died in a good
old age, in 1718, and his posterity are now numerous and respectable. Mr.
Ebenezer Jencks, brother to the Governor, was a pastor of that church from
1719, to his decease in 1726, colleague with Elder James Brown (p. 116.) And
their two families have, in late years, done the most of any families upon
earth for the promotion of learning, and the Baptist cause in Providence. Elder
Winsor, there mentioned, continued in that office until his death in 1758, aet.
81. Elder Thomas Burlingham was a colleague with him, and died in 1770, aet.
82. Elder Winsor's son Samuel suceeded him in the care of said church in
Providence, from 1759 until 1771, when he and a minor part of the church drew
off, on account of differing sentiments concerning the doctrines of grace, and
singing in public worship, then introduced (which was a return to the first
principles of the church) and he and his followers formed another church in
Johnston. One of the two churches in Smithfield (mentioned in p. 120) is
dissolved: Elder John Winsor officiates in the other, where Elder Place did;
but I have not been favored with any distinct account of their ^ffairs, nor of
those of the church in Situate, where Elder Hopkins succeeds Elder Fisk. The
like is to be said of the church in Cumberland, where Elder Ballou succeeds
Elder Cook. These three churches hold to general redemption, and make laying
on of hands a term of th^^r communion. But Elder Joseph Winsor, son^^ the first
Elder Winsor in Providence, who succeed ^lder Thomas Knowlton in Gloucester, is
in full fellowship with our churches. And so is Elder Rufus Tift, who was
ordained in North-Providence June 16, 1784, successor (...) Elder Ezekiel
Angel, who died September 27, 1780.

II. OF the ministers of the first and second churches in Newport, we have
before spoken (p. 109, 110, 122.) The learned Mr. Callender died there January
26, 1748; and Mr. Upham's society at Springfield being small, he was prevailed
with to remove to Newport the next year, where he ministered the chief of his
time until 1771, when he returned to his flock at Springfield, whom he had
often visited in the mean time. And Mr. Kelly, from Philadelphia, was ordained
pastor of the first church in Newport, October 9, 1771; and though the war
caused his removal from them, yet he has since returned to them again, Elder
Wightman, of the second church there, died August 31, 1750, aet. 82. Elder
Eyres was taken from them February 13, 1759, aet. 68, and their present pastor,
who had often preached to them before, was ordained the 29th of April
following. He was almost the only dissenting minister who continued to preach
on the island through all the distressing season of its being possessed by the
enemy; and he has had a precious harvest of souls there since. The third church
in Newport, who keep the seventh day, began under the ministry of Mr. William
Hiscox in 1671, who continued their pastor until his death, May 24, 1704, aet.
66. Elder William Gibson from London was his successor, and died March 12,
17^7, aet. 79. Elder Joseph Crandall had been a colleague with him for two
^ears, and continued their minister until he died, September 13, 1737. Elder
John Maxson was their next minister, from 1754 until his decease, March 2,
1778. Mr. Ebenezer David (who was converted in Providence college, and took his
first degree there in 1772) belonged to this church; and having been a chaplain
much esteemed in our army, died therein not far from Philadelphia, a few days
after Mr. Maxson. Their present pastor was ordained a colleague with him.

THE church in Dartmouth (mentioned in p. 18, 73) now have their meeting house
and the majority of their members within the bounds of Tiverton. Elder Tabor
died in 1752; after which they had Elder David Round for their minister a
number of years, and some others; but it was a dark trying time with them,
until a late remarkable revival was granted. Their present pastor is from
Newport. He removed there in the spring of 1775, but labored under many
discouragements for five years, and then heavy afflictions were made to work
for good to him and his people. He was ordained April 13, 1780, and much of a
spirit of prayer was granted for the revival of religion; which prayers were
answered in such a manner, that betwixt the first of June that year, and June
27, 1781, ninety members were added to that church. In which time say they, "We
have seen as it were many Pentecost days, and enjoyed heaven upon earth: All
glory to God forever and ever. The subjects of the work seem to be of all ages,
from fifteen to sixty, and all circumstances of life. They tell clear
experiences of a work of grace; and some who have been professors several years
can now tell something like a new conversion."

III. WHEN we pass over the Narraganset Bay, I perceive that the church in
South-Kingstown (mentioned p. 120) has long been dissolved; those in
North-Kingstown and Warwick continue, but my intelligence concerning them is
too imperfect to be of any service to the public. The like may be said
concerning the seventh day church at Westerly and Hopkinton, who continued to
act as one church with their brethren of Newport, until they were regularly
dismissed therefrom in 1708. The church in the west part of Warwick, where
Elder Worden was ordained (p. 175) is dissolved; and after preaching for some
time to the church in Coventry (mentioned p. 202) many of them removed to the
place where he is now settled in Berkshire. The west part of Coventry, with the
adjacent borders of Situate and Foster, had scarcely the appearance of
religion among them, until Elder Nichols was raised up, and made instrumental
of a very considerable reformation in those parts, Elder David Sprague died in
Exeter, in 1777, and his son before and h^^^ has been made a very useful man
there. Oliv^^ Babcock succeeded his father in office at Westerly. Elder
Wightman's son is his successor in Groton. The church at New London (p. 89) is
dissolved, by means of the ill conduct of their minister. The pious Elder
Merriman died at Southington last winter, aet 88. Such a revival of religion
was granted in Woodstock, in 1780, as added ninety members to the Baptist
church there in less than two years. And to the honor of Governor Trumbull it
is to be remembered, that he has repeatedly interposed his influence in favor
of that society, to relieve them when taxed to the worship of their opponents.
The present Baptist minister of Suffield was ordained in 1775; and such a
blessing was granted upon his labors, that their church increased in about a
year from sixty to two hundred members. And our principles prevail more and
more in all parts of the country; so that we may truly adopt the language of
Moses's prophetical song, for their rock is not our rock, even our enemies
themselves being judges. They have often declared that their ministers and
churches would come down, if they were not supported by compulsion. They have
now tried that power against us, and to support themselves, until it plainly
fails them, while our rock stands firm. Let all the glory be given to God
therefore. We are so far from deserving any part of it, that like babes we have
need again to be taught which are the first principles of the oracles of God.

IV. LET us take a brief view of those principles, and of the folly of man in
departing from them. If we pay any regard to the word of Christ, we must know,
that no man can see his kingdom, nor have right to any power therein, without
regeneration; and also that all striving about who shall be the greatest is
excluded therefrom, John i. 12, 13, iii. 3, Mat. xviii. 1 -- 4, xx. 25 -- 28.
Agreeable to which the fathers of New England were taught, that, "As the
kingdom of Christ is not of this world (John xviii. 36) but spiritual, and he a
spiritual king; so must the government of this spiritual kingdom, under this
spiritual king, needs be spiritual, and all the laws of it. And as Christ Jesus
has, by the merits of his priesthood (1 Cor. vi. 20) redeemed as well the body
as the soul, so is he also, by the scepter of his kingdom, to rule and reign
over both: Unto which Christian magistrates, as well as meaner persons, ought
to submit themselves; and the more Christian they are, the more meekly to take
the yoke of Christ upon them; and the greater authority they have, the more
effectually to advance his scepter over themselves and their people by all good
means. Neither can there be any reason given, why the merits of saints may not
as well be mingled with the merits of Christ for the saving of his church, as
the laws of men with his laws for the ruling and guiding of it. He is as
absolute and entire a king as he is a priest, and his people must be as careful
to preserve the dignity of the one, as to enjoy the benefit of the other
Robinson against Bernard, p. 38.
." And as the teachers in the church of England continued to call baptism
regeneration, as Origin did, and yet the author against whom Mr. Robinson wrote
told of his begetting many of his hearers in Christ by his preaching, Robinson
said to him, "Their baptism was true baptism, and so the true seal of their
forgiveness of sins, and new birth, as you affirm p. 119, and this their seal
of the new birth has stood good upon them all this while, visibly and
externally; and yet, after all this, you preach unto them and beget them anew,
visibly and eternally (for only God knows that which is true within.) You
have begotten them through the gospel. Behold a monstrous generation! a man
begetting children twenty, thirty or forty years after they be born! If
Nichodemus had heard of this, he might well have said, how can these things be
Preface, p. 11, 12.
!" And how is the folly of others also now exposed in our land? In 1638, the
year Harvard college was founded, a law was made at Boston, to empower the
voters in each town (which then were only the communicants in their churches)
to compel every inhabitant therein to contribute proportionably with others,
"For upholding the ordinances in the churches, whereof he does or may receive
benefit." And because a man wrote some arguments against this practice, he was
fined Ten Pounds; and another was fined Forty Shillings, only for reading the
same before company; and the ministers said such men were "Rather to be taught
by cudgel than argument." (Vol. 1, p. 98, 100.) But how is their folly now made
manifest unto all men, according to God's promise? 2 Timothy iii. 5 -- 9. Corrupt
ministers have done the most to promote infidelity and a contempt of revealed
religion of any men upon earth. After these things had broken forth in the
nation most terribly, in and after the reign of Charles the second, bishop
Burnet said, "I am forced to declare, that having had much free conversation
with many that have been fatally corrupted that way, they have very often owned
to me, that nothing promoted this so much in them, as the very bad opinion
which they took up of all clergymen of all sides: They did not see in them that
strictness of life, that contempt of the world, that zeal, that meekness,
humility and charity, that diligence and earnestness, with relation to the
truths of the Christian religion, which they reckoned they would most certainly
have, if they themselves firmly believed it. Therefore they concluded, that
those whose business it was more strictly to enquire into the truth of their
religion, knew that it was not so certain as they themselves, for other ends,
endeavored to make the world believe it was. And that, though for carrying on
of their own authority or fortunes, which in one word they call their trade,
they seemed to be very positive in affirming the truth of their doctrines; yet
they in their own hearts did not believe it, since they lived so little
answerable to it, and were so much set on raising themselves by it; and so
little on advancing the honor of their profession, by an exemplary piety and
shining conversation. This (says Burnet) is a thing not to be answered by being
angry at them for saying it, or by reproaching such as repeat it, as if they
were enemies to the church; these words of heat and faction signify nothing to
work upon, or convince any Preface to his pastoral care, 1692, p. 12, 23.
." And he well observes, that a real reformation is the only effectual remedy.
And such a door is now opened for an extensive reformation, as never has been
before among any people since the rise of Antichrist. He rose and has prevailed
by the connection of the officers of church and state together, so as to level
the terrors both of this and the future world against all that attempted to
resist their power. But how is that connection now broken? A learned gentleman
in the law published an answer last January, to the minister mentioned (p. 353)
who tells him plainly, "That a church has a right, beyond all obligation that
human laws can lay upon them, to dismiss their pastor when they please.
Churches may advise churches, and members may reason with members; but to
advise will always suppose, that the advice may be accepted or rejected; and
should it be rejected, I know not to what earthly tribunal the pastor, as
pastor, could repair with his complaint against his church. -- The first
principle in a religious body is, that they will act according to the dictates
of a good conscience, advising, not controuling one another. There is nothing
more plain than that when they consent to do that which their consciences
disapprove, they do not act as a religious society Strictures upon Thatcher, by
J. S. p. 19, 22.
." This is a most important truth, but how little is it regarded?

V. CAN the conscience of any man approve of his taking away the property of
another for nothing? or requiring him to do much service for a community,
without any support or reward? Christ says the labourer is worthy of his
reward; and his command is, let him that is taught in the word communicate unto
him that teaches, in all good things. Be not deceived; God is not mocked. Yet
how many are there at this day that make high pretenses of regard to a free
gospel, and at the same time treat those whom they applaud as true teachers of
it worse than they do their oxen? Not only neglect to communicate good things
to them themselves, but hinder others from doing of it. Such an instance has
been described (p. 116.) And there are persons now in all parts of the land,
who are ready to spit their venom, and if possible to ruin the characters of
all teachers who will not either be tyrants or slaves; either be confederate in
forcing away the property of people for nothing, and worse than nothing, or
else spend their lives and strength for the good of souls, and receive nothing
from them but empty words. The great design of religion is to make men just and
merciful; but how opposite thereto is it, to set a man up in a public and
expensive office, exposed to the resentment of earth and hell, and require him
to go this warfare of his own charges! 1 Cor. ix. 7 -- 14. Can any wonder if a
curse is sent upon the blessings of men who refuse to lay these things to
heart? Mal. ii. 2, iii. 9, 10. Truth and love bring teachers and members to act
in union, and to regard each others case as their own, which a precious number
do in our day; but pride and covetousness causes divisions and offenses,
contrary thereto; and all such are to be marked and avoided. Those in general
who have made use of secular force in religious matters have been such
schismatics (p. 50) neither can others be free of that guilt, who lay heavy
service and burdens upon their officers, and will not touch them with one of
their fingers. The time is coming when the vi^^ person shall no more be called
liberal, nor the churl beautiful; but the liberal devises liberal things, and
by liberal things shall he stand, Isai. xxxii. 5 -- 8. Near or quite half of
the expense of the sitting of the Legislatures, both of Massachusetts and
Connecticut, ever since they have supported ministers by tax (except in the
late time of war) has been to contrive how to take and give property that they
had no more right to ^^^dle with, than they had to appoint some m^^^^ make a
weekly feast in each town, and compel (...) to pay for it, whether they liked
it or not: ye^^ although they discovered poison therein. For worse poison for
bodies was never found upon earth, than a great deal of the teaching thus paid
for in our land is to the souls of men. The apostle speaks of oppositions of
science falsely so called, and of those who hold the truth in unrighteousness;
and perhaps the following are instances of it.

VI. THAT Christianity is essentially necessary to the good order of civil
society, is a certain truth, (p. 331) but men hold it in unrighteousness, when
they assume a power to add to Christ's laws about his worship. Pretenders to
new immediate revelations do this as really as state politicians. Special
teachings of the Holy Spirit we all need continually, to give us a right
understanding of the holy scriptures, so as to apply and obey them in a right
manner; but they are perfect in themselves, and sufficient to furnish the man
of God for every good work, when he takes the apostles as the true expounders
of the prophets. On this foundation the Christian church was built, Ephesians. ii.
19, 20. And though confounding of them together produced mystery Babylon, yet
when she shall be destroyed that order will be again observed, Rev. xviii. 20.
Their writings, with the united church of believing Jews and Gentiles built
thereon, appear to be the two witnesses mentioned in Rev. xi. 3 -- 15. Directly
after their resurrection, the kingdoms of this world will become the kingdom of
Christ; which undoubtedly intends an entire submission to his laws and
government. Reference is there had to Zech. iv. 11 -- 14, which speaks of one
candlestick, of two olive trees, and of golden oil communicated into it through
them. There was then but one church; but after the partition wall betwixt Jews
and Gentiles was broken down, both have access by one spirit unto the Father;
which spirit is plainly the golden oil communicated to souls through the word
of truth. This united church is the light of the world, and the pillar and
ground of the truth, Mat. v. 14, 1 Timothy iii. 15. The chief disputes in the
world have been whether God's revealed mind is strictly true? or if true, how
it can be equal? The apostles and prophets, and all hearty believers of their
writings, have ever witnessed for both of these points; but it has long been in
sackcloth or mourning. And perhaps when they are killed, and yet the people
will not permit them to be buried, means when officers become so corrupt that
truth falls in the street, and equity cannot enter, though the people will not
entirely part therewith. Hereupon Jehovah will arise and render vengeance to
his enemies according to their deeds; yea, recompense to the islands. After
which the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and to them that turn from transgression
in Jacob; who will be established in a way of covenant obedience to the words
of his mouth, by the influence of his spirit. This prophecy the apostle applies
to future times, which will be as life from the dead, Isai. lix. 14 -- 21, Romans
xi. 15, 26. Again, because it is a most important truth that God is no
respecter of persons, many deny his right to do what he will with his own
grace, though in a way of perfect justice. He is perfectly just in all his
dispensations, while he shows mercy to whom he will show mercy. And to deny
this is to deny him the right which every freeman has with his own property.
Oh, madness! It is also an essential truth, that God is LOVE in the abstract;
but it is a fatal delusion to imagine that he loves every individual sinner, so
as not to inflict endless punishment upon such as die in impenitency. The
devils are his creatures, and were a higher order of them than men; yet their
endless punishment is declared as one evidence against those who turn grace
into lasciviousness, Jude 6. Again, Christ's finished atonement is the object
of faith, and all our encouragement to come to God by him, is ever to be
derived from the record thereof given in the gospel, which is as true before we
believe it as afterward; but it is a most deceitful trick to argue from
thence, that the true believer is not conscious of an inward change in his
soul, so as to be enabled to do such acts as are well pleasing to God, Heb.
xiii. 16. When any in Israel were bitten with the fiery serpents, all hope of
life was cut off, but only from an object without and above them, to which each
of them must look, or death was his portion; yet when he looked, a change was
wrought within him; the poison was expelled, and health recovered; and it would
have been a wicked thing in any of them not to have rejoiced, and been thankful
therefore. Now Christ himself explains faith and regeneration hereby, John iii.
14, 15. Yet Robert Sandeman, and James Relly after him, have poisoned the souls
of many with artful representations that it is pharisaical pride for any to
tell of inward experiences, and to rejoice in what God had done within them.
And the latter of them, by deceitfully representing that our own interest is
part of the first object of faith, has carried his argument in many minds, that
every individual will finally be saved, because if it were not so, it could not
be a crime not to believe a point which was not true in fact. Whereas in the
passage that he builds most upon, a not believing the record as it stands in
the book is the crime charged; and life is there declared to be in the Son, and
given to us, and also that none have life but those who have that gift, 1 John
v. 10 -- 12, Now compare this with Christ's own words concerning the brazen
serpent, and Relly's argument appears as false as it would to have argued, that
it could not have been a crime for a poisoned person to refuse a look to it,
unless healing was as certainly his before as afterward: No crime to make
light of the gospel call, unless the feast they are called to is certainly
theirs, and they may come to it when they please; and that God's infinite love
obliges him to receive them whenever they shall cry for it in good earnest,
Mat. xxii. 1 -- 4. The devil himself never preached worse doctrine than this,
yet how many are strongly attached thereto!

VII. ANOTHER essential truth of the gospel is, that we must daily deny
ourselves and take up our cross, or we cannot be Christ's disciples: But this
truth has often been held in unrighteousness in every age. The people mentioned
p. 209, run to a great length in that way. A man from Charlestown, near B^^ton,
was their head, who about 1758 assumed God's essential prerogatives in such a
blasphemous manner, that he was complained of to authority, upon which he fled,
and his followers concealed him for many years, and a house was built for that
purpose in Harvard, where they privately resorted to him, who declared himself
to be perfect and immortal, until death arrested him, and he was buried with
great secresy. Since which the same house in Harvard has been made the
headquarters of a small company from Britain, who have a woman for their head.
They privately got together in the county of Albany, and formed their scheme;
and then in April, 1780, it was suddenly proclaimed, that a new dispensation
was begun, greater than had ever been known in the world before, which all were
called to enter into, or they could not be saved. A Pedobaptist minister in
New-Lebanon, and a Baptist minister in Pi^^sfield, fell into the snare, and
many hundreds were drawn into it, in various parts of Massachusetts,
New Hampshire and Connecticut. The said Baptist minister in Pittsfield, after
being a few months with them, was delivered from that delusion, and published
an account of their scheme, which was printed at Hartford, Norwich, Providence
and Boston. I was at his house in June, 1782, and went with him to visit a
considerable number of them. They earnestly inculcate that doctrine of devils
of forbidding to marry, and require so much bodily exercise, in singing and
dancing, etc. as has destroyed the health and even the lives of some; a cruel
cross indeed! while their chief leaders delight themselves much in feasting and
drinking spirituous liquor. I would by no means misrepresent any of their
sentiments or conduct; but I have obtained most certain evidence that these
seven abominations constitute the essence of their scheme. 1. They hold an
earthly head to their church. 2. That out of it is no salvation. 3. That the
only way into it is by confessing even secret sins to them. 4. That when any
have so done, they must believe as the church believes, and do as they say. 5.
They teach do and live. 6. Their doings are unnatural and violent. 7. They
endeavor to enforce and propagate their scheme with a strange power, signs and
lying wonders.
Some of them at Norton and elsewhere have carried matters so far this year, as
for men and women to dance together entirely naked, to imitate the primitive
state of perfection. And their forcibly stripping a woman of one of their
families, who testified against their wickedness, has moved the authority of
Bristol county lately to take them in hand therefore. Forbidding men and their
wives to lodge together is a point they are strenuous upon. But a number who
were with them have renounced their delusions, and their party is evidently on
the decline. And so is that of another company, of whom take the following
concise account. Jemima Wilkinson, born among (...) Quakers in Cumberland, in
the county of Providence, being a young woman of a retentive memory, and an
eloquent tongue, declares that in October, 1776, she was not only taken sick
but actually died, and her soul went to heaven; soon after which, she says, her
body was re-animated by the spirit and power of Christ; upon which she set out
as a public teacher, and for a while had large assemblies to hear her in
various parts of the county of Bristol, and from thence westward to New London.
Indeed she has traveled as far as Boston on one hand, and Philadelphia on the
other; but her chief followers were within the above limits. A young man, who
was an intimate counselor of hers for some years, gives the following account
of her, and of how he and other people were ensnared by her. He first heard her
at Tiverton, in 1778, and says he, "The first appearance seemed to be something
singular and extraordinary, in a habit different from what is common amongst
women, wearing her hair curled in her neck, without any other covering on her
head, except when she traveled out she put on a hat much like a man's, only
with the brim down. Her visage a good deal bright, with a very agreeable
countenance; her voice very grum and shrill for a woman, and seemed pathetical
and engaging in her discourse, in which were abundance of scripture
expressions, though not much explained, or light held up from them; neither did
I ever hear her advance much scripture doctrine of the principles of religion,
but her exhortation seemed to be very affecting, showing a very sedate
countenance with seriousness and solemnity, admonishing all to repent and
forsake evil, and learn to do well, and live as they would wish to die. -- And
as the state of mankind at this day is much like the Athenians, that spent
their time in nothing else but either to hear or tell some new thing, her
coming forth as a preacher different from all other sects or denominations of
people, being a woman of extraordinary natural abilities, speaking as an
orator, of a great memory in the scriptures, and having abundance of strange
reports spread abroad concerning her, some false and some true, produce
abundance of spectators and enquirers. And she appears zealously engaged, and
says she devotes herself and service wholly to the glory of God, and the good
of souls. She exhorts people in a pathetical manner, with great confidence and
boldness; and says she has an immediate revelation for all she delivers; that
she is the greatest minister that God has sent to the people these seventeen
hundred and odd years; and advancing herself to live as she exhorts others to,
fully in a state of perfection, with no liability of error or defect in any
respect, seems to have great influence upon many serious people; for no one
would rationally think that a person in their right senses would dare to hold
forth and affirm such great and exalted things concerning themselves, unless it
were so in reality Brownell upon enthusiastical errors, 1783, p. 5 -- 7.
." This is a brief view of the substance of his account of her way of
proceeding, which brought a number of ignorant people, and some who have been
officers in the State, to follow and cleave to her affectionately, as a person
invested with immediate and great power from above, even power to work
miracles. But her influence has not been half so great and extensive as that of
the other woman mentioned, both of whose schemes are now dying away.

VIII. AND thus I have pointed out some of the ways wherein men have gone a
whoring with their own inventions (Psalm. cvi. 39) which is fixing their
affections and dependence thereon, instead of the God of truth. And though it
is a maxim with earthly politicians, that their King can do no wrong, thereby
imputing all that is wrong to others, yet they have long taken the opposite
course concerning the kingdom of Christ. All the frauds, oppressions and
licentiousness, that have been practiced under his name, have been cast upon
Christianity itself; as if because men are false, therefore God is not true.
Instead of owning his just authority, they have exalted themselves above him,
and have arraigned his sayings at their bar, Romans iii. 4. What he says
concerning the entire depravity of man, and their enmity of heart against God,
they make a chief argument against the truth of his sayings in his written
word; and thus they plainly confirm the truth of it, by their arguments against
it. And because errors and heresies more openly break out, where he has poured
out his spirit, than where people like Moab are settled upon their lees, many
conclude that it was not his spirit that moved upon the minds of the people;
which argument is about as conclusive as it would be to say, that the
influences of the sun are not really good in the spring and summer, because
they cause a very disagreeable stench to arise from dunghills and dead
carcasses, which we do not smell when the sun is at a great distance, and these
things are hard frozen in the winter; or to say that the showers of heaven are
not good, because they make the thorns to grow as well as the wheat. These
reasoners often declare, that if we are entirely dependent upon the sovereign
will of God, for renewing and saving grace, then all our use of means to attain
salvati^n is in vain; but why do they use means for their bodies? If the Lord
will, we shall live, and do this or that. Who were they that said a few years
ago, " We will bring America to our feet! -- We will not receive law from any
power whatever!" Where is the Governor who required us to submit to an absolute
and unlimited power in man! (Page 289, 290, 364.) God's plan of government is
absolutely perfect and immutable; and he has appointed the means and the end,
and the means in order to the end, in the moral as well as natural world. The
means of grace are calculated in infinite wisdom to open the eyes of men, and
to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God.
Precepts and promises, rewards and punishments, calls and warnings, are all
motives to influence the choice of man. And the strongest hold that the devil
has in this world is to persuade man, that a being governed in his choice by
motives without himself, is inconsistent with the liberty of moral agents; and
to persuade him at the same time that necessity obliges God to pardon and save
them, whenever they shall become sincere penitents. Thus they assume a
sovereignty to themselves, which they deny to their MAKER; and treat him as a
servant, to whom they may say, go thy way for this time, and when I have a
convenient season I will call for thee; making his choice dependent upon
theirs. If motives without us do not determine our choice, it would be
impossible for God to govern us; and, as the excellent. Edwards observes,
Arminian principles truly involve in their nature the horrid blasphemy which
they falsely cast upon the Calvinists, of charging God with acting a deceitful
part toward men, in appointing the means of grace; for these are motives to
determine their choice on the side of virtue, which he could not be sincere in
appointing, if their choice is not determined by motives without themselves
Edwards on the will, p. 266, third edition.
. His immutable designs are so far from interfering with the liberty of moral
agents, that where they are known, the believer dare not make them the rule of
his conduct; and hereby subjects and rebels are distinguished. An express
precept required Saul to destroy Agag, as well as the rest of the Amalakites;
and by disobedience thereto he lost his kingdom and his soul. On the other
hand, David knew that God designed to remove Saul, yet having no precept to
kill him, he refused to do it, though much provoked thereto, when he had very
convenient opportunities to cut him off. And though the prophet Samuel, by
immediate direction from above, anointed David to be king over Israel, yet he
never assumed that power but by their free choice and covenant; and when this
was done by part of them, he made no use of their arms to compel others to
receive him. And when ten tribes revolted from his grandson, who collected an
army to bring them under him again, God warned him not to do it, and was obeyed
therein. And if a power of will opposite to the bible had not been dreadfully
set up in latter ages, mystery Babylon would not have been drunken with blood
as she now is. A revelation to the Jews of God's design, that Jesus should die
for that nation, did not at all lessen the guilt of those who thereupon took
counsel together for to put him to death, John xi. 51 -- 53. Obedience to what
he requires of us, is the measure of our duty and felicity, without attempting
to get into the place of the universal Ruler. At the same time no honest soul
could be happy under his government, if they thought it possible for men or
devils to deceive him, and to defeat his designs. And whether the whole history
of this country, as well as others, does not demonstrate, that a hearty and
unfeigned obedience to his revealed will is our wisdom as well as duty, and
that all disobedience thereto is infinitely hateful and dreadful, is now freely
referred to the reader's conscience.

CHAP. XXIII.
1. The Nature of Covenants explained. 2. The Sentiments of the Baptist
Churches about Terms of Communion, the Power of Councils, and the Nature and
Place of human Learning. 3. A List of their Churches in New England.

I. THE word covenant, when used concerning contracts between man and man,
includes many ideas that can have no place in the affairs betwixt the creature
and his Creator; and so much darkness has appeared in controversies upon this
subject, that some worthy men have thought it best to adopt the word testament
instead of covenant in the latter case. But a review must convince us that we
cannot get free of difficulties by this change of words; because testament,
when used about a father's will who is absent from us, is essentially different
from the will of God, who is ever present, and sees our inmost thoughts. Yet
testament ever means the will of the testator expressed, and also a free
disposal of his property as he pleases; which, when well ratified, is as good
a title as any in the world, although it would spoil it for the legatees to
have any hand in forming it. And mutual consent, with mutual obligations and
privileges, are essential ideas in all covenants. This do, and thou shall live,
was the language of God to Adam in innocence, with which his heart concurred;
and this obligation to love is immutably binding upon all his children, Luke x.
27, 28. To withhold this obedience is to rob both God and man of their right;
and God justly requires every sinner to give again that he had robbed, and to
walk in the statutes of life without committing iniquity. And the new covenant
is the writing the law of love in the believer's heart, which yields a free
consent to it, in the tenor of I will, and they shall, Ezekiel. xxxiii. 15, Romans
viii. 3, 4, Heb. viii. 10, 11. All who have this work wrought within them ought
to confess the same with their mouths, and to receive each other as Christ
received them, to the glory of God. Says the apostle, they fast gave their own
selves to the Lord, and unto us by (...) will of God, Romans x. 10, xv. 7, 2 Cor.
viii. 5. This is the exact nature of a church covenant, which shows that no
person can be brought into it without his own consent, that the covenant cannot
b^nd any person or community to act any thing contrary to the revealed will of
God, nor ever exempt any from their obligation to act agreeable thereto with
all their hearts.

II. GREAT imperfections still remain among us in these respects; yet it is
thought best to exhibit to the world a list of the churches in New England who
profess these principles, at least so far as not to allow that persons can be
forced into religious covenants. A few of them admit some Pedobaptists to their
communion, and it is but a few; neither can that practice last long, as our
opponents know that practice speaks louder than words; and a noted minister and
church in the county of Plymouth openly debarred one of their pious members
from their communion last year, for no other crime than a being buried in
baptism; by which act say they, "She has practically declared infant baptism a
nullity, and this church to be a company of unbaptized persons." And the
Separate churches in Connecticut published their terms of communion three years
ago, which were these, viz. "As to our Baptist brethren, we are free to hold
occasional communion with such as are regular churches, and make the Christian
profession as abovesaid, and acknowledge us to be baptized churches," etc
Declaration of said churches met at Killingly* September 19, 1781, p. 21
. Hereby they confirm our terms of communion, as described (p. 214, 215.) Our
sentiments concerning the use and power of Councils are the same as those
described by our fathers (p. 39, 40) and we refuse to hear any complaints of
censured persons in our annual Associations, because that would imply
jurisdiction over the churches, which we disclaim; and we hold that a Council
freely chosen, and meeting near the place of difficulty or grievance, where a
fair hearing of the parties concerned may be had, is the most rational and
scriptural method of proceeding in such cases. Our sentiments about the nature
and proper place of human learning are well expressed (p. 55.) Confining the
ministry to an education at college, as well as compelling people to support
such, have produced infinite mischiefs in all ages, which could never have
prevailed as they have, if cruel arts had not been made use of to keep the
people in ignorance, and to prejudice their minds against true knowledge, both
sacred and civil. The foundation for learning laid at Providence (mentioned p.
235) has suffered much in the late war, but the school appears now again in a
promising way. All other colleges have been very expensive to governments, but
this has never received any thing in that way (no not to repair damages which
government has occasioned therein) but personal generosity laid its foundation,
and has been its support hitherto. Gentlemen of various denominations, chiefly
in the town of Providence, subscribed above Four Thousand Pounds therefore
before the college edifice was erected in that town; and considerable sums have
been given since, especially in the year past, to augment their library. And as
liberal sentiments are taught therein, and all denominations, whose civil and
moral conduct is agreeable, have equal privileges for learning in it, liberal
communications are earnestly solicited for the necessary support of this
institution.

III. A brief View of the present State of the Baptist Churches in New England,
according to the latest and best Accounts that have been received.

[The first Column contains the Year when each Church was constituted, the
second the Name of the Town, the third their Minister's Name, if they have any,
and the fourth the Number of their Members, if that is known.]

In the MASSACHUSETTS.
County of Suffolk. Year. Town. Ministers. No. 1665. Boston Samuel Stillman,
A.M. 158 1743 Isaac Skillman, A. M. 43 1750 Bellingham Noah Alden 56 1769
Wrentham William Williams, A. M. 39 1776 Medfield Thomas Gair, A. M. 72 1780
Needham Noah Baker 1780 Stoughton Vacant County of Bristol. 1663 Swanzey
Charles Thompson, A.M. 1693 Russel Mason 1753 Rehoboth Nathan Pierce 1762 John
Hicks 100 1772 Jacob Hicks 1777 James Sheldon 48 1780 Vacant 1761 Taunton
William Nelson, A. M. 79 1769 Attleborough Job Seamans 80 1781 Elisha Carpenter
59 1772 Dighton Enoch Goff 120 1774 Freetown Abner Lewis 95 1781 David Seamans
50 1774 Dartmouth Vacant 19 1781 Daniel Hicks 1780 Raynham Vacant 35 County of
Plymouth. Year. Town. Ministers. No. 1756 Middleborough Isaac Backus 137 1757
Ebenezer Hinds. 70 1761 Asa Hunt 194 County of Essex. 1765 Haverhill Hezekiah
Smith, A. M. 190 County of Middlesex. 1771 Chelmsford Abishai Crosman 87 1780
Newton Caleb Blood 79 1781 Cambridge Thomas Green 27 Dukes County. Chilmark
Silas Paul 1780 Tisbury Vacant 79 County of Worcester. 1738 Leicester Vancant
7^ 1749 Sturbridge Jordan D^dge 53 1762 Charlton Nathaniel Green 155 1765
Sutton Ebenezer Lamson 78 1767 Grafton Elkanah Ingalls 38 1768 Petersham Vacant
1770 Royalston Whitman Jacobs 89 1774 Douglass Vacant 1775 Dudley Vacant 33
1776 Harvard Isaiah Parker 110 1779 Ashburnham Vacant 37 1780 Northbridge
Vacant 25 1782 Templeton John Sellon 23 County of Hampshire. 1736
South-Brimfied Elijah Codding 236 1740 West-Springfield Edward Upham, AM. 1761
Ashfield Ebenezer Smith 90 1762 Granby James Smith 1765 Montague Vacant 32 1768
Wilbraham Seth Clark 159 1772 New-Salem Samuel Bigelow 35 1780 Shutesbury.
William Ewing 1780 Colerain Vacant 26 1780 Bernardston Joseph Green 50 1780
Chesterfield Vacant County of Berkshire. 1769 Adams Peter Wenden 133 1771
Lanesborough Nathan Mason 150 1772 Pittsfield Valentine Rathbun 15 1772 Hancock
Clark Rogers 85 1777 Washington Vacant 1779 Sandisfield Joshua Morse 30 Alford
Jacob Drake 1781 W. Stockbridge El^^than Wilcox 15 County of York. 1768 Berwick
William Hooper 5^ 1772 Sanford Vacant ^8^^ Wells Nathaniel Lord 56 1782 Coxhall
Simon Lock 3^ County of Cumberland. 1768 Goreham Vacant 1782 N. Gloucester
Vacant County of Lincoln. 1784 Bowdinham Job Macombet 27 1784 Thomaston Isaac
Case. 50 State of NEW HAMPSHIRE. 1755 Newton Vacant 1770 Richmond Matturean
Bellou 122 1771 Lebanon Vacant 12^ 1771 Westmoreland Ebenezer Baily 1771
Brentwood Samuel Shepard 156 1771 Deerfield Elipheleth Smith 1772 Gilmanton
Vacant 30 1777 Marlow Eleazer Beckwith 1778 Croydon Vacant 22 1779 Canterbury
Vacant 1780 Vacant 1780 Northwood Edmund Pilsbury 44 1780 Salem Samuel Fletcher
60 1780 Rumney -- Hains 1780 Holderness Vacant 1780 Meredith Nicholas Folsom
1780 Chichester Vacant 1780 Barrington Vacant 1780 Hubbardston Vacant 1782
New-Hampton Jeremiah Ward 1782 Perryston Samuel Ambrose 1782 Temple Vacant 1782
Savil Vacant 12 1783 Wear Vacant 1783 Canaafi Thomas Baldwin 18 State of
CONNECTICUT.
County of Hartford. 1739 Southington Vacant 18 1743 Colchester Vacant 1755
Stafford Vacant 1760 Er^field Vacant 1775 Suffield John Hastings 1780 Coventry
Vacant Farmington John Davis 1783 Chatham Solomon Wheat Country of Fairfield.
1751 Stratfield Seth Hig^ie 1773 Stamford Elkanah Holm^^ 1773 Greenwich Vacant
County of New London. 1705 Groton Timothy Withtman Silas Burris 1775 Rusus
Allen Stoningt^n Eleazer Brown 1765 Simeon Brown 1775 Stonington Point Vacant
New London Zadock Darrah Saybrook Elipheleth Lester Lyme Jason Lee 1782 Norwich
Christopher Palmer County of Windham. 1750 Killingly, John Martin 1776 Vacant
59 1766 Woodstock Biel Ledoyt 143 1776 Pomfret Vacant 1774 Ashford Vacant 1779
John Rathbun 1780 Willington David Lillebridge 1780 Mansfield Vacant State of
RHODE ISLAND. County of Newport. 1644 Newport Erasmus Kelly, A. M. 25 1656
Gardner Thurston 230 1671 William Bliss 39 1685 Tiverton Peleg Buroughs 134
County of Providence. 1639 Providence James Manning, A. M. 127 Situate Reuben
Hopkins Situate Reuben Hopkins Smithfield John Win^or Cumberland Abner Bellon
Gloucester Joseph Winsor 79 N. Providence Rufus Tift 1771 Johnston Samuel
Winsor Foster Nathan Young County of Washington. 1708 Hopkinton Joshua Clarke
1750 Westerly Vacant Josiah Wilcox Charlestown Samuel Niles S. Kingstown
Benjamin Wait Vacant 1710 N. Kingstown Nathan Hill Philip Jenckins William
Northup 1750 Exeter Solomon Sprague 1772 Richmond Thomas West Vacant County of
Kent. Warwick Abraham Lippet 1743 East-Greenwich John Gorton Coventry Thomas
Manchester Caleb Nichols 300 West-Greenwich Elisha Green County of Bristol.
1764 Warren Vacant The following churches were omitted in their proper place.
1757 Harwich Vacant 43 1781 Samuel Nickerson 1771 Barnstable Vacant 41 1781
Freetown Vacant Total number 4,783

Having had several Interviews with diverse of the People called Quakers, on the
Subject of the first Volume of my History, and finding I have not clearly
expressed their Sentiments and Practices, and some Facts appearing to me
different from what they did when I wrote, I am desirous, with them, to have
the History corrected, and Matters put in such a Light, that Posterity may not
misapprehend them: Let the Reader therefore receive the following Correction,
as what appears to me most consistent with the Truth, and in Justice to that
People ought to be transmitted to Posterity.

IN page 141, the following extract from John Tyso's letter, "There was nothing
IN him (i. e. Dr. Increase Mather, as he said) that he hoped to be saved by,"
having been made by me to manifest an error in Friends respecting Christ
within; I would observe, that I do not look upon it as an error, provided
Christ without be also acknowledged, and it be held agreeable to the true sense
of John vi. 56, xvii. 26, 1 John iii. 24, in which sense I am informed it is
held by Friends.

In page 143, 144, I have quoted some of Roger Williams's arguments against
Friends sentiments of the grace of God having appeared, or being manifested to
all mankind universally; for their answer to which arguments, I would refer to
Fox, etc. answer, page 17 -- 20, 2d part.

In page 307, I mentioned that Quakers were so called from Fox and his
companions trembling and quaking before Gervase Bennet, a Justice in Derby. I
meant not to insinuate, that their trembling on that occasion, or others, was
occasioned by the fear of man; neither do I on a review of proofs find
sufficient grounds to reject Fox's account of their receiving said name, which
follows in the same page; though it is allowed by Barclay, as well as Mosheim,
that their quaking and trembling in other places occasioned their being
commonly called by that name.

In page 321, I undertake to inform posterity how those Quakers behaved under
their sufferings; upon a review of which it appears just to add, that I find,
and that by other parts of Cudworth's uncontroverted letter, not quoted by me,
that he was turned out of office, as he expressly says, "Because I had
entertained some of the Quakers at my house, that thereby I might be the better
acquainted with their principles; the Court professing they had nothing at all
against me, only in that thing, of giving entertainment to the Quakers." And he
informs us, "That when the Quakers were committed to prison, they must be
kept-on coarse bread and water, no Friend may bring them any thing, none
permitted to speak with them, nay, if they have money of their own, they may
not make use of that to relieve themselves; they have many adherents, and a
little to acquaint you with their sufferings, which is grievous unto and
saddens the hearts of most of the precious saints of God; it lies down and
rises up with them, and they cannot put it out of their minds, to see and hear
of poor families deprived of their comforts, and brought into penury and want.
As far as I am able to judge of the end, it is to force them from their homes
and lawful habitations, and to drive them out of their coasts. -- As for the
means by which they are impoverished, these in the first place were scrupulous
of an oath." This does not appear to be confined to allegiance of fidelity to
government, but oaths at large, which principle I understand they maintain from
our Savior's command, Mat. v. 34, I say unto you swear not at all, etc. "Why
then we must put in force an old law, that all may take the oath of fidelity;
-- they cannot -- then a fine of Five Pounds. On this account thirty-five head
of cattle, as I am credibly informed, has been by the authority of the Court
taken from them the latter part of this summer. A poor weaver that has seven or
eight small children, himself lame in his body, had but two cows, and both
taken from him: The Marshal asked him what he would do? The man said, that God,
who gave him them, he doubted not would still provide for him. To fill up the
measure yet more full, though to the further emptying of Sandwich men, the
Court of Assistants, the first Tuesday of this instant, was pleased to
determine fines upon them for meetings, One Hundred and Fifty Pounds, and among
others the poor weaver spoken of Twenty Pounds, etc." And after his mentioning
their not suffering their friends of Rhode Island to come and trade with them,
proceeds, "So that unless the Lord steps in to their help and assistance, in
some way beyond man's conceiving, their case is sad and to be pitied, and truly
it moves bowels of compassion in all sorts except those in place, who carry it
with a high hand toward them. Our bench now is Thomas Prince, Governor, etc."
See the letter in Bishop's history, from page 168 -- 177, or more at large in
the second volume, folio, of the book of sufferings of the Quakers, from page
191 -- 195, which last I did not see till since the publication of the first
volume of my history.

From the foregoing account, and what Bishop charges upon Governor Prince, viz.
"That in thy conscience they were such a people as deserved to be destroyed,
they, their wives, their children, their houses and lands, without pity or
mercy:" Which sentiment of his against the Quakers, I am told, is remembered in
the family, being handed down to those of his posterity now living. -- It must
therefore be acknowledged, he must have had too great a share in the
persecutions mentioned: And as the persecuted Norton said, the strength of
darkness must then have been too unhappily over him. And in justice to Humphry
Norton's character (which is understood to be lessened by my manner of
inserting his letter, and treating this subject, in page 322 of my history) I
think further to manifest his and J. Rouse's behavior under their sufferings,
by inserting a paragraph in Bishop's history, page 179, which would render my
account more intelligible and full. Speaking of the number of lashes, which I
mentioned, he adds, "Which as it drew store of blood, so it took much with the
spectators, who beheld them in the stocks first praying, then saluting each
other, and bidding the executioner have patience a little (when he came to take
off their clothes) and he should see they could give their backs to the
smiters." And Bishop adds, that "They gave in a paper assigning the grounds and
reasons of their returning, when they were demanded wherefore they came in,
which the magistrates would not suffer to be read; and so envious were they,
that for taking John Rouse by the hand they put three of the inhabitants of
Sandwich in the stocks." And it appearing by the said Bishop's history, and the
book of Friends sufferings, that other whippings and persecutions followed in
Plymouth Colony, and that the said Humphry Norton, under whippings and other
persecutions at New Haven, appears to have behaved in a Christian temper, when
being loosed from the stocks after being whipped, having a great iron key tied
athwart his mouth, and burnt deep in his hand with a red hot iron, "He kneeled
down and prayed to the Lord, uttering his voice toward heaven, to the
astonishment of them all." -- The reader is referred thereto for a more
particular account.

In page 323, I interpreted the figurative expressions of "Rending the rocks of
wisdom and knowledge, and exalting that which is low," as directed against
civil and ecclesiastical government, which I supposed they meant to subject to
a supposed spiritual power in Christians without outward laws and rules: But on
further enquiry and conversation with Friends, I am convinced they thereby
referred to the coming of the Lord, by his spiritual work, to level the wise
and great, compared to mountains; and the literal knowledge and mere scolastic
divinity, compared to rocks, as being hard to penetrate and break; for that
which is meek and low to be exalted, even Christ within the hope of glory. --
In which sense I perceive that passage is now understood by Friends.

In the same page I observed, on some preceding extracts from Fox's and
Williams's writings, "This opens the plain cause why they (the Quakers)
militated so hard against other magistrates and government." And in the form of
an allegory, in page 507, it is said, "To whom others made fierce opposition
professedly from the light within; and their clashings were so great that
several lives were lost in the fray." The terms militate, fierce opposition and
clashing to the loss of lives, used to represent the conduct of Friends in
those days, in respect to civil government, are too harsh to be justified by
any authenticated facts. -- I conceive it to be essential to civil government,
that the magistrate have a power to inflict corporal punishments, and also to
arm his subjects to war against invaders of their rights, and therefore that
the teaching of a contrary doctrine in either of these points, so far as it has
influence, tends to obstruct or pull down government; and in no other sense did
I ever mean to charge the Quakers with militating against or obstructing
government.

I find they allow magistrates to inflict corporal punishments upon their
subjects, who transgress the rules of equity See Fox's epistle to Friends at
Nevis, in 1675. Also, Isaac Pennington's works, folio, first part, page 323.
; but do not approve of arming their subjects to war against others. And in all
States where they have been, I know nothing but that, as a society, they have
been either actively obedient thereto, or have passively suffered what they
were pleased to inflict upon them, without plotting against the government
thereof, or using any forcible resistance against it. And I desire the reader
to remember that I mean to correct every thing in my history that seemingly or
really contradicts these ideas, and this character of the society.

In page 324, I speak of our Lord's direction to his disciples, Mat. x. 23, and
of his own conduct toward the Gergesenes, Mat. viii. 34, as forming a general
rule for us, thence charging some blame upon those Quakers who returned into
the Massachusetts; whereas they now both appear to me to refer to special and
peculiar cases.

As to the writings I referred to at the top of page 327, I rather think my
memory failed me in that respect; and as to not having light from scripture,
for actions, in the same page, I find that they suppose that Isaiah xx. 2, and
Micah i. 8, prove, that the women there mentioned might be moved by the divine
spirit to do those actions; of which the reader is left to judge for himself.

Upon a review of page 325 and 462, compared with their own writings, I find
that I had some mistaken ideas of what they held concerning the light within,
and therefore freely refer the reader to their own authors for information in
that respect.

I did not mean, in page 462, to charge them with calling darkness light, any
further than wherein they appeared to be against allowing others the free
liberty of examining and by arguments opposing sentiments which they ju^^ed to
be erroneous; which, whether they were against or not, I freely submit to the
reader's judgment.

William Harris is referred to at the bottom of page 152, and in page 457 is
named as a Quaker; I am now convinced that he was not one then, if he ever was;
and the word only, as I twice used it in page 469, and once in page 472, in a
way that seems to acquit Mr. Williams from any blame in his dispute with the
Quakers, was more than I intended; for I really think there was a great deal of
imperfection discovered by him, as well as his opponents, in the management of
that dispute; and if he meant to punish any merely for their plain use of thee
and thou (which I think he did not) I do not concur with any such thing.

In page 463, I have not so fully quoted Friends answer to Roger Williams's
objections as might be necessary to give an adequate view of both sides of the
dispute; therefore I refer my reader to their writings on that subject,
particularly George Fox's answer to said objections, page 155, and appendix,
117, 118.

Page 470, line 32, after the word sentence, insert, viz. blood will be given,
which words are particularly marked, as referred to by Grove.

As by the grapes of Sodom and clusters of Gomorrah, in page 460, some might
suppose I meant to charge the vices, that are couched under those expressions,
upon the Quakers; I here declare that I meant no such thing.

Perhaps the partiality, in favor of Mr. Cotton, which I mention in page 471,
was owing to Mr. Coddington's particular affection for him, rather than to the
cause there assigned.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 32, line 23, read 1707. P. 65, l. 3, r. eighty. P. 99. l. 30, r. Burton,
Esquire P. 170, l. 21, for him, r. them. P. 237, margin, r. sober-mindedness. P.
240, l. 10, r. to prevent. P. 264, l. 12, for him, r. t^^e. P. 298, l. 12, r.
Colonies. P. 354, l. 4, r. country. P. 359, l. 11, r. spiritual. P. 329, l. 26,
r. 1758. Page 405, l. 22, r. bountiful.


