Massacre of Wyoming.


A NARRATIVE Of the CAPTURE Of certain AMERICANS, At Westmorland, By SAVAGES;
And the perilous ESCAPE which they effected, by surprising Specimens of Policy
and Heroism. To which is subjoined, Some Account of the Religion, Government,
Customs and Manners of the Aborigines of NORTH AMERICA.

HARTFORD: Printed and Sold near the Bridge.

ON hearing a particular Account of the Capture of certain Americans at
Westmorland on the Susquehannah, and the surprising Escape which they effected,
by rising upon and vanquishing their savage Captors, my Mind was so struck with
the rare specimens of Enterprise, Bravery, and Conduct which were exhibited in
these little Adventures, that I presently projected the Publication thereof,
though the Narrative is worthy of an abler Pen.

A Narrative, etc.
THE savages who occasioned the following scenes, were sent from the British
garrison at Niagara, some time in the fore part of March, A. D. 1780, through a
deep snow, on a wretched skulking indian expedition, against a few scattering
people which they hoped to find about Susquehannah; especially those who were
making sugar in the woods at that time of the year.

The number of indians which skulked about Westmorland at this time, was
sixteen: whether they all come from Niagara in company and separated in the
vicinity, or were separate parties from Niagara, I could never learn: but they
appeared about Westmorland in two parties of six and ten indians in different
parts of the country; the party of ten appeared the next day after the party of
six.

I will give a narrative of each in their turns.

The party of ten indians, after lurking about the settlement for some time,
first made their appearance on Tuesday the 28th of March, at break of day, five
miles below Plymouth settlement, where sundry people were scattered about
making maple sugar, which is known to be a profitable branch of business here
as in many parts of America: the manufacturers frequently build a little hut
near a maple grove, and continue boiling all night. In one of these huts was
Mr. Upson and Jonah Rogers, a lad thirteen years of age, they watched with the
sugar boiling-by turns; and at daybreaking Upson having finished his watch, was
reclined on the floor a-sleep, and John was up, and at this time amusing
himself in some trifles; when to his surprise, a savage suddenly entered the
hut, and immediately fired his piece through the bowels of Upson, and with his
tomahawk split out his brains; a second of these frightful semi-painted demons
immediately entered, and seized Jonah by the arm, when the whole gang presently
rushed into the hut, with their shocking painted visages and savage shoutings,
upon the devoted John, to whose affrighted mind they presented the utmost
horrors of instant death, heightened by a glaring representation of the infernal
pit: they gave him to understand by their jargon dialect, which he partly
understood, that he must go with them; which in his present view was the more
wretched alternative of instant death. He had no way to vent his horror but by
immoderate crying, which the savages suppressed by menaces of death; he then
fell to supplicating them with all his might, for liberty to go home; but these
entreaties also the savages suppressed by the same threats as before: thus the
lad, advanced far enough in life to anticipate the horrors of savage cruelty
and captivity, yet too young to share the full fortitude of manhood, not
suffered to vent his horror by crying, or daring to beg for relief from his
inexorable masters, and not a mortal with whom to confer or condole, he was
fixed in a plethory of grief and despair, while the savages perfomed their
detestable custom, by taking off the scalp of Mr. Upson.

The savages next proceeded down the river, to a place called Fishing-Creek;
where on Wednesday they surprised and took Messi. Peter Pence, Moses Van Campen
and a lad named Moses Van Campen, nephew to the former. They continued lurking
about until Friday, when they discovered some sugar works where the kettles
were boiling; they concluded that the people had hid themselves near by, whom
they caught by the following stratagem: they obliged the prisoners to halloo,
and call them out as if they were friends; this had the effect proposed, and
brought out a Mr. Pike, with his wife and child; the man they retained as a
prisoner, but the woman and child they spared, for the sake of gratifying a
humor of painting them in the indian manner, which they performed, and then
sent them home.

I may here observe, that I don't remember to have heard an instance of these
savages offering to violate the chastity of any of the fair sex who have fallen
into their hands; this is principally owing to a natural inappetancy in their
constitutions; which circumstance, were it otherwise, and were they equally
nefarious in this, as in their other violations of the laws of nature and
humanity, it would render their depredations, if possible, much more demoniack
than they are. This is an instance, among numberless, which an observing mind
may perceive, where the wise Creator of all, in his assignments of passions
powers and properties, has balanced and sorted those matters in a manner
worthy of himself.

The savages being now in possession of five prisoners, viz. Messrs. Pence, Van
Campen, Pike, young Van Campen, seventeen years of age, and Jonah Rogers,
thirteen years old, together with a number of blankets, and a quantity of sugar
and indian meal which they had plundered in the sugar-huts, which was all the
provision they had, they, without delay, shaped their course for Niagara. They
usually marched about 15 miles in a day. The lad Jonah, after being joined by
the other prisoners, recovered his spirits, and being somewhat humorous,
rendered himself a great favorite of the savages. The prisoners were miserably
scanted in their allowance of provisions, but Jonah grew bold and familiar, and
had the address to get as much as he pleased of any thing that the savages had;
some of which he usually imparted secretly to his fellow prisoners, who were
half starved, and obliged to stagger along with all the baggage of the whole
party, which was very heavy; and what rendered their duty doubly burdensome
the snow was up to their knees every step they trod, and all the chance any of
them had for their lives, was from continuing this intolerable rout, 300 miles,
to Niagara, without any relief or refreshment, excepting the hope of the
savages taking vension, or other game by the way; and to render their condition
completely desperate, the indians, whose savage tempers cannot be sufficiently
gorged, simply by the blood of their victims, but are greatly delighted in
frequently reminding them of their approaching tortures, impoliticly informed
the prisoners that they were to be kept alive for the purpose of carrying the
baggage, until they had marched well toward Niagara, and then they should feel
the tamahawk, and their scalps, not themselves, be carried into Niagara; which
sentence, it was expected, would be put into execution, at least on some of
them, especially on Mr. Pike, of whom they were apprehensive, on account of his
having been a continental soldier.

In these desperate circumstances, it is easy to conceive, that people would be
led to meditate, if possible, some way of escape; to save themselves by flight,
was impracticable, as the savages were fleeter than themselves, and would
pursue with fire arms, with fatal effect on the fugitives; the only chance was
to rise by night, disarm and attack the savages: but if we consider that the
prisoners had their hands carefully secured behind them both night and day, and
carefully deprived of any utensil that might be used to separate their
ligatures; and that the enemy were active and watchful, and more than double in
number to those who were able to assist in such an enterprise; and that the
cruelest death that savages could inflict, would be practiced on them, in case
their plot should be discovered, or miscarry; I say, if we consider these
things, we may form some idea of the bravery, or rather desperation which
inspired such an attempt. Some one of them first projected the enterprise, and
when they had opportunity of conference on the march, the proposal was made to
the rest, who all concurred on the first motion, without the least reluctance
or hesitation in any one of them; and on the next Friday after they began their
march, they resolved to put the plan into execution the ensuing night. They
faithfully promise each other by all the ties of honor and common calamity, to
stand by each other, and abide the combat, if fate so required, even to the
spending their last drops of blood. Their plan expressly agreed on, was as
follows: each one was to watch his opportunity, if possible, to possess himself
of some instrument, wherewith to separate the cords which tied his hands behind
him, and if any one should be so fortunate as to secure an instrument, he was
at night, when the indians were well asleep, to cut himself loose; and then
liberate the others himself, or reach the instrument to his nearest fellow, as
he should judge safest, and to be handed if possible, until all were loose;
this done, each one was, with the utmost address, dexterity and stilness, to
secure such arms and ammunition, as were most contiguous, to him, and nimbly
repair therewith to a certain spot of rendezvous, about two rods distant from
where they couched by the side of a fire; when, if leisure would permit, they
were farther to consult on the particular mode of attack, and to assign to each
man his duty, or in whatever stage of the plot after they were loose, the
savagegs might take the alarm, each man was to catch some weapon, and without
giving the savages a moment's time to recover from their consternation, were to
attack them with all fury, and at once put the matter to a final issue. But
when night came on, no one had been able to secure any kind of tool, wherewith
to cut himself loose; they however, when the savages were asleep, struggled and
strove to get their hands at liberty; but all in vain. The night passed without
effecting any thing, and happily, without exciting the least suspicion.

On Saturday it was agreed at all events to bring matters to a crisis the
ensuing night; they all as one declared they would march no farther toward
Niagara. By Saturday night they had marched 75 miles; their lodging was as
follows: after erecting a fire, they spread down their blankets, of which they
now had such a plenty as to afford them a comfortable bed and covering. One
circumstance worthy of notice in this place is, that the savages were so
infested with lice* that they could not sleep quietly with their claoths on,
and this being a cold night, they stripped off even their shirts, and exposed
them on some bushes to freeze, in order to thin the lice; whence it happened,
that when they turned out in the alarm at midnight, they were stark naked. Pike
had observed that the indian whom he was taught to call his master, when he
went to sleep, laid his knife under his body, which he possessed himself of by
the following art: pretending a great fondness for his said master, he begged
the favor of sleeping at night by his side, and had the dexterity when the
indians were asleep, to extract the knife unperceived, wherewith he cut himself
loose. Mr. Pence likewise being allowed a knife at supper time, instead of
returning it, droped and covered it in a certain place by the couch; and when
the indians demanded his knife, he pretended that it had been surrendered up,
and so it passed over; and when the savages were asleep, he resumed his knife,
and cut himself loose; and by means of these two knives, all the prisoners were
soon at liberty, excepting Jonah, whom it was thought best not to awake; every
one, as soon as possible, got hold of some kind of weapon, expecting every
moment the savages would be upon their legs, give the yell of war, and commence
a violent attack, with the inequality of ten to four; but still they slept. One
grand object was secureing the fire arms; those were all set against a tree at
the head of the couch, and were presently removed to a place appointed, about
two rods distant, by the side of a tree. Some ammunition they likewise secured;
with which they even had leisure to prime their pieces, which the indians,
previous to their lying down, had cautiously unprimed. Thus in the space of a
few lucky moments, these four men, with the most cautious dexerity, deprived
ten savages, not only of their fire arms, but nearly of all their tomakawks,
removed them to the spot assigned, and after a hasty, but very wise and prudent
consultation, it was resolved that two men should stand by the guns, and fire
upon the savages as they rose up, and during the conflict; the other two men
took each a tomahawk, and with undaunted bravery, advanced to the couch where
the ten indians lay, in order to commence the attack, one on each side of the
couch; they uncovered the indians heads, and with an unerring blow, each struck
his tomahawk into the brains of an indian, killing both in an instant; the
other eight indians sprang up the same moment, and at once perceived that their
arms were not only taken from them, but fatally turned against themselves, and
moved by that cowardly qualm which naturally rises in bosoms that delight in
cruelty, they scampered off as quick as they arose, without giving the two men
time to give a second blow. The two men who stood by the guns, saluted the
indians as they arose, and pursued them as they fled with the same salutation,
as far as their naked precipitation would permit; they sorely wounded some,
which appeared from a profusion of blood which they sprinkled on the snow as
they fled: the snow at this time had a hard crust, yet not so strong but what
they broke through almost every step; this had a sad opperation on their naked
shins, which their present trouble and haste would not permit them to take any
care of: some small defense for their legs in this race would have afforded
them no small comfort, as they were obliged to abandon them to the crust, which
mangled them most pitifully, which appeared the next morning by the numberless
fragments of flesh and skin, which they left by their tracks, many of which
were as big as dollars. Jonah being asleep with the indians, started in
surprise and confusion, and run off with them a few rods, but recollecting the
plan to which he had been privy, he leaped back to the company; Pike
humourously gave him a cuff on the ear, saying, what you rascal, was you going
to run off with the indians? They were now all enraptured with their
deliverance and victory, which was every way complete, equal, or even superior
to the utmost stretch of their fancy and fond wishes. Their joy was mixed with
astonishment at so rare and surprising an event; which so dazzled their
imaginations, that they could scarcely believe and realize facts, supported by
the instant testimony of all their senses. How great and sudden was their
change of circumstances! From the severest sufferings, and the most ill-boding
apprehensions of extreme woe, under savage captivity, by a bold and manly
execution of a wise concerted plan, they, in the space of a few minutes,
vanquished the whole party of savages, so superior in number, that they deemed
it needless to keep a guard; possed themselves of their effects, and completely
regained their liberty.

It was practiced in ancient times, even by heathen writers, in cases of sign^^
deliverance to ascribe the efficiency thereof to the power of Deity; and it
would be unpardonable in an American, at a day of such striking manifestations
of divine patronage, not to ascribe to the auspicious providence of Deity, not
only the more general and important speciments of aid, but every subordinate
instance, and in special the present. Who can conceive, that men without
special assistance, could arise in the night, in such an attempt against such
superior number of indians, who are alert and vigilent, and ever jealous in the
extreme, cut themselves loose, secure the arms, and perform all the necessary
transactions, moving about on the snow, crumping around their ears, without
arousing those infernal dogs; and then, that they should instantly vanquish
them, without a conflict, when they could but know, that naked and destitute,
they must inevitably and miserably freeze and starve, short of reaching any
relief, which proved in fact to be their awful fate, their guilty consciences
sufficiently remonstrating against turning about and submitting to the mercy of
their victors. They probably set their faces toward Niagara, 230 miles distant,
without arms, or a scrap of clothing or food, and have never been heard of
since, which occasioned great mournings at Niagara, as some prisoners inform.
It is probable that the operation of famine and frost, landed those wretches,
one after another, on a bed of snow, where they left the world, literally as
naked as they came into it. Their horrid fate, had it fallen to the share even
of wild beasts, ought to have moved compassion in every human breast; but when
we consider how richly those monsters merited their fate by the most
unprovoked, needless and voluntary hostilities, prosecuted with the most wanton
stretches of inhumanity and guilt, it moderates the pang of sympathy, and
constrains the minds of the compassionate, in some measure, to acquiesce in the
providential exercise of those punishments, which human nature could not bare
to inflict on the most accummulated guilt.

Our people spent the remaining part of the night very agreeably by the fire
side, without any fear of the vanquished savages. The booty which the indians
left, was more than they could bring home, which determined them to make a raft
of timber on the Susquehannah, in order to transport themselves, with their
effects down the river; but this unluckily run aground, by which means they
lost all their provisions and booty, excepting their fire arms, with which they
made the best of their way home, having 75 miles to measure back, without any
provisions but what they could catch by the way. They traveled until Monday,
when they killed a raccoon, and on Tuesday found the carcass of a deer, lately
killed; with which refreshments they reached the settlements on Thursday. At
their unexpected return, with the account of their brilliant exploits, as we
may well judge, they were heartily congratulated.

Having said thus much of the ten savages, I proceed to a tale of the six.
These made their appearance on Monday the 27th of March, near a place called
Kingston, within the limits of Westmoreland, where they soon kidnapped Thomas
Bennet, with his son, twelve years old, and a Mr. Hammond, and without delay,
set out for Niagara. The treatment they received from the savages, was rough
and menacing, especially Bennet, with whom they had long been acquainted, and
at whose house they had been entertained: Such is the perfidious nature of
these wretches, like the immortal Arnold, and his brethren, that hostilities,
and inhumanity exercised on an old acquaintance, especially a friendly one, but
serves more highly to season their taste for inhumanity and savage triumph. In
short, as to situation and prospects, these people were similar to those who
were prisoners to the other party of indians, which I need not repeat; they
were reduced to the same desperate alternative, which naturally in these brave
men, produced a similar resolution. On Tuesday they agreed to attack the six
indians the ensuing night, with the inequality of two to six, they placing no
dependence on the boy. They were to endeavor, in couching at night, to place
themselves as favorable as they could, and to take the best observation, as to
where the indians placed their weapons, when they went to sleep, and by all
means, each was to possess himself of a tomahawk, and watching each the others
motion, Bennet was to give the signal, when both were to rise in an instant,
and address themselves to the indians with their tomahawks, in the true savage
taste. They had the address to prepare, and provide themselves as was proposed,
and just as they were about to fix their choice on a fatal moment, to arise in
the desperate attempt, it so happened that one of the indians began to stir,
and lift up his head, and presently raised up his body, and sat by the fire
side, putting the fuel in order: Bennet determined still to pursue the plan,
and not let it die thus in embryo, began to stretch himself as if just awake
from sleep, and entered into some small conversation with the indian, in order
to amuse him; be presently arose, and stood on his feet, turning himself by the
fire, and watching a favorable moment to put into execution the daring plan,
which greatly swelled and heaved in their anxious bosoms* Hammond lay as if
asleep, though ready, and waiting the signal to spring and second the blow of
his fellow. Bennet began leisurely to renew his request for liberty to return
home, promising, that if he might go home, he would supply them in a friendly
manner with provisions, whenever they should apply; at this the indian turned
up his face, pointing upwards with his finger; and in token of contempt, cries
out with an indian accent, pee; at this instant, Bennit took his tomahawk, and
with a violent blow buried it in the brains of the indian; Hammond sprang at
the same time, and with a lucky blow killed another; the other four indians
immediately arose, and turned to run, when Hammond, by a second blow, wounded a
third deeply between his shoulders; Bennit's weapon was so fastened in the
indian's skull, that he could not extract it for a second blow, but catched up
a long indian spear which was at hand, and before they were out of reach, he
pushed it quite through the trunk of a fourth indian's body, who ran off with the
same in his body, as did likewise he that received a wound from Hammond, with
the two sound indians, never presuming to contend; though had they dared to
face the assailants, and put the matter to the issue of bodily strength, they
might have had more than an equal chance; but properties of such opposite
natures as bravery and cruelty, cannot exist in the same breast. Our people
from being prisoners to savages, suddenly became prisoners of rapture and
amazement, at such an extraordinary deliverance, and victory. They secured the
arms, and without delay returned home to their applauding friends. It appears
by some after discoveries, that the indians skulked about in the dark, until
they perceived that our people had left the ground, when they came to the
place, and picked up some provisions and clothing, hid their dead between some
logs, in which point the indians are very assiduous, and marched for Niagara.
The two savages who escaped unhurt at this time, were all that reached Niagara,
out of sixteen, to report the sorrowful fate to their shameless employers.

To this narrative it may not be wholly impertenent to subjoin a few hints
concerning the religion, government, customs and manners of the aborigines of
this country.

As to religion, these aborigines, though they are perhaps the most rude and
illiterate of all the human race, yet the principle of natural religion are not
wholly extinguished in them; and indeed, though some authors have amused the
world with tales of whole nations of atheists, more absurd to a man of thought,
than the idea of nations of idiots and pigmies; yet I appeal to the common
sense of mankind, whether the grand leading ideas of an all-wise, all-ruling
Being, the deathless nature of mind, and a futute reckoning would not naturally
arise in the mind of every thinking man, with an irresistible conclusion,
though he were divested of all the partialities of education. These animals,
though they trample on the rights of humanity, and the dictate of nature, yet
seem to have some confused ideas of these leading points, as I have been
informed. They address the Supreme Being under the title of the Great Man, and
frequently pronounce mandates, presages and oracles, which they pretend to
receive from him, on many occasions, and more especially at their powows, a
kind of beastly masquerade or frolic. There is a notion prevails among them,
that when one is slain in battle, if the enemy get his body, he will fare worse
for it after his decease, and for this reason they will hazard their lives more
to bring off the bodies of the slain, than in almost any other attempt. A
notable instance of this kind, we had a few years past, in an action at
Westmorland: It is asserted, by all conversant among the indians, that at their
funerals they practice burying bottles of rum, tomahawks, and such things as
the deseased were most fond of, with them in their graves. Such rude customs,
consonant to the ignorance of savages, discovers an assent to those natural
principles of religion. Those who believe there is a God, and after a natural
death, that they shall survive in his presence and dominion, cannot suppress
the idea of retribution. It is said that among these savages, when one commits
any abominable crimes, which are shocking in their view, they treat him with
abhorrence, and suppose that the vengeance of heaven will surely overtake him.

These people are as wholly destitute of any kind of government, as any of the
human species can be. There is no kind of animals which herd together, but have
some kind of government: among cattle, rank is determined by bodily strength
and activity; each one knows his superiors and inferiors, and when a stranger
is added to the flock, the first business is to determine his rank, which is
ordinarily done without much strife* this salutary regulation, suited to their
natures produces general tranquillity. Geese that pass and repass our country,
spring and autumn, for change of climate, flying in regular wedges, with a
certain one at head to direct their way, have a kind of instinctive policy in
assigning the time and place of rendezvous, and appointing an expert leader: so
these savages when they hear the din of war, if there are white people inhuman
enough to encourage them to skulk, surprise, kill and capattive the unwary or
defenseless, which are their only exploits, they repair to their standard, and
appoint or acknowledge certain leaders, whom they obey only in proportion to
their natural talents, to awe, influence and command them: these are what they
commonly style head warriors; besides which, especially in times of peace,
there are those whom they style great men; and if one of these becomes eminent
above the rest, and so continue for a number of years, perhaps he obtains the
title of sachem, These great men are such to whom nature has been somewhat more
liberal in the bestowment of sense and stability, who have distinguished
themselves on diverse occasions, or have a commanding address and deportment; by
such means they of course obtain what I would call a natural authority: this
kind of authority obviously obtains among all mankind, by an irresistible law
of nature: conspicuous excellence commands obsequious deference. I am well
informed these great men have considerable awe over the rest, who pay a very
considerable deference to their opinion and advice when they are under their
inspection, and free from strong drink and passions.

But least we should form too respectable an idea of these great men, we may
consider that they are drunk as often as they have cider, rum, or other
spirits, and are frequently guilty of as gross enormities as the rest. These
are the most consistent ideas I can form from the small information I have had,
and the few observations I have made concerning rulers and authority among the
indians, though I am willing to submit to the opinion of any who may be
otherwise and better informed, I think I have represented them with as much
dignity in these matters, as the specimens of their government will possibly
support. It is universally acknowledged that there is no authority among them
that pretends to inflict any kind of punishment on those who commit any kind of
crimes; if this be so, it is sufficient to my purpose, and without any comment,
proves the essentials of government and authority to be wholly wanting. Murder
is no very uncommon crime among them; they frequently gorge their unhallowed
passions by mauling and stabing the objects of them to death; and herein the
fear of punishment does not much excite the caution of doing it by night, or in
a solitary, place but whenever their passions and malice impels; the
perpetrator expects perhaps to be called by some an ugly fellow for a while,
but is apprehensive of no punishment, unless some relative or friend of the
slain has bravery enough to avenge his death. I was some years past at an
indian settlement, and saw a recent grave where a murdered indian had a few
days before been buried; the murderer was about among the others, and though
this was in the chief town of that tribe or nation, yet no other notice was
taken of the matter, than that the more steady people viewed the murderer as a
wretch, whom the vengeance of heaven would some time overtake. If no avenger
arose in that case, as I doubt whether any did, I conclude the odium declined
with time, adding one to their numberless stigmas of national guilt. It is
common for a relative or friend in such a case, to avenge the murder, and
sometimes the avenger meets the vengeance of a third, and so on until several
fall. I submit to common sense the idea of a sovereign or sachem presiding over
such a tribe.

Theft and robbery among them are venial crimes* which renders their small
property very precarious, and discourages the acquisition of more, were they
disposed to it.

As to marriage, it is attended with some small ceremony among them; but an
indian whenever he pleases, turns off one wife and takes an other: it is a
little extraordinary for a man and woman to live together during life. It is
said that if their wives happen to be too familiar with another indian, the
husband is apt enough to resent it, but not so if with a white debauchee.

There is in the vicinity of some, if not all indian towns, a house
constructed, called the woman house, to which their women periodically resort;
to this the males never presume to approach, but if their business calls them
that way, they shun it by a circuitous walk; if the males have occasion to
carry them any necessaries, they leave the same at a certain distance, where,
when they are gone, the women go and fetch it; this custom resembles one
observed by the ancient Jews. The manner of burying their dead, is to seat the
body on the surface of the earth, with the trunk erect, and placing in his arms
such things as used to delight him in his life, and which they suppose will be
useful to him in future, they cover him with a pile of earth; these piles are
sometimes flatted down by some means or other, and leave the bones and funeral
treasure above ground.

The indians are universally intemperate in drinking; both males and females
never fail of intoxicating themselves whenever they have the means. They are a
most lazy, indolent generation, especially the males, who by their greater
strength, and total want of delicacy, oblige the squaws to perform all the most
laborious and fatiguing employments; these, use has taught to carry the most
incredible burdens when they travel to and fro, and on all occasions, while
the males walk in their company without offering to partake of the burden.

A gentleman of veracity who had resided considerably among them informed me,
that he never observed any of the males to attempt any domestic labor, but at
one particular time, when the squaws were much involved in business, they
proposed an entertainment, and invited the men to assemble and hoe a field of
corn for them, which they accordingly did, and then partook of the repast which
the squaws had provided, which was a pig cooked with some indian corn and
beans, the flesh was carved into as many parts as their were guests, of which
my informant by special invitation was one, each was presented with his share
of flesh fixed on a sharpened stick, and were told if any chose to refresh
themselves with the sauce, and carry the flesh home, they were at liberty so to
do; accordingly some eat their allowance on the spot, and others bore theirs
home.

The indians by way of ornament, pass a knife quite around the circumferrence
of their ears, separating an annular piece of cartilage, near half an inch in
width, which they curiously wind with wampum, but this is presently broken by
some accident in their sylvan walks, and the strips are left pendulous. They
likewise paint one half of their faces with a deep red, which gives them a very
frightful appearance. What little clothing that they wear, is made either of
skins of wild beasts, or some coarse cloth when they can get it. The women
wear a kind of petticoat reaching precisely to their knees, and the men
something of small width fastened about their loins, and both sexes a blanket,
which is their chief garment, thrown over the whole; if they happen to get a
linen shirt, it is full mounted with ruffles of the same, seldom fastened at
the collar or wristbands, and never put off for washing until it is worn to
rags.

FINIS.

