A Circular Letter, FROM HIS EXCELLENCY George Washington, COMMANDER IN CHIEF
OF THE ARMIES OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA; Addressed to the GOVERNORS of
the several STATES, on his resigning the Command of the Army, and retiring from
public Business.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by Robert Smith, jun. back of the Fountain Inn, between
Second and Third streets.

Head Quarters, Newburgh, June 18, 1783.
SIR,
THE great object, for which I had the honor to hold an appointment in the
service of my country, being accomplished, I am now preparing to resign it into
the hands of Congress, and return to that domestic retirement, which, it is
well known, I left with the greatest reluctance; a retirement for which I have
never ceased to sigh through a long and painful absence, in which (remote from
the noise and trouble of the world) I meditate to pass the remainder of life,
in a state of undisturbed repose; but, before I carry this resolution into
effect, I think it a duty incumbent on me to make this my last official
communication, to congratulate you on the glorious events which Heaven has been
pleased to produce in our favor, to offer my sentiments respecting some
important subjects, which appear to me to be intimately connected with the
tranquillity of the United States, to take my leave of your Excellency as a
public character, and to give my final blessing to that country, in whose
service I have spent the prime of my life; for whose sake I have consumed so
many anxious days and watchful nights, and whose happiness, being extremely
dear to me, will always constitute no inconsiderable part of my own.

Impressed with the liveliest sensibility on this pleasing occasion, I will
claim the indulgence of dilating the more copiously on the subject of our
mutual felicitation. When we consider the magnitude of the prize we contended
for, the doubtful nature of the contest, and the favorable manner in which it
has terminated; we shall find the greatest possible reason for gratitude and
rejoicing; this is a theme that will afford infinite delight to every
benevolent and liberal mind, wether the event in contemplation be considered as
a source of present enjoyment, or the Parent of future happiness; and we shall
have equal occasion to felicitate ourselves on the lot which Providence has
assigned us, whether we view it in a natural, a political, or moral point of
light.

The citizens of America, placed in the most enviable condition, as the sole
Lords and Proprietors of a vast tract of continent, comprehending all the
various soils and climates of the world, and abounding with all the necessaries
and conveniences of life, are now, by the late satisfactory pacification,
acknowledged to be possessed of absolute freedom and independency; they are
from this period to be considered as the actors on a most conspicuous theater,
which seems to be peculiarly designed by Providence for the display of human
greatness and felicity: Here they are not only surrounded with every thing that
can contribute to the completion of private and domestic enjoyment; but Heaven
has crowned all its other blessings, by giving a surer opportunity for
political happiness, than any other nation has ever been favored with. Nothing
can illustrate these observations more forcibly than a recollection of the
happy conjuncture of times and circumstances, under which our Republic assumed
its rank among the nations. -- The foundation of our Empire was not laid in a
gloomy age of ignorance and superstition, but at an epoch when the rights of
mankind were better understood and more clearly defined, than at any former
period: Researches of the human mind after social happiness have been carried
to a great extent; the treasures of knowledge acquired by the labors of
philosophers, sages and legislators, through a long succession of years, are laid
open for use, and their collected wisdom may be happily applied in the
establishment of our forms of government. The free cultivation of letters, the
unbounded extension of commerce, the progressive refinement of manners, the
growing liberality of sentiment, and, above all, the pure and benign light of
Revelation, have had a meliorating influence on mankind, and increased the
blessings of society. At this auspicious period the United States came into
existence as a nation, and if their citizens should not be completely free and
happy, the fault will be entirely their own.

Such is our situation, and such are our prospects; but notwithstanding the Cup
of Blessing is thus reached out to us, notwithstanding happiness is ours, if we
have a disposition to seize the occasion, and make it our own, yet it appears
to me, there is an option still left to the United States of America, whether
they will be respectable and prosperous, or contemptible and miserable as a
nation; this is the time of their political probation; this is the moment when
the eyes of the whole world are turned upon them; this is the moment to
establish or ruin their national character for ever; this is the favorable
moment to give such a tone to the fedral Government, as will enable it to
answer the ends of its institution; or, this may be the ill-fated moment for
relaxing the powers of the Union, annihilating the cement of the Confederation,
and exposing us to become the sport of European politics, which may play one
State against another, to prevent their growing importance, and to serve their
own interested purposes. For, according to the system of policy the States
shall adopt at this moment, they will stand or fall; and, by their confirmation
or lapse, it is yet to be decided, whether the Revolution must ultimately be
considered as a blessing or a curse; -- a blessing or a curse, not to the
present age alone, for with our fate will the destiny of unborn millions be
involved.

With this conviction of the importance of the present crisis, silence in me
would be a crime; I will therefore speak to your Excellency the language of
freedom and sincerity, without disguise. I am aware, however, those who differ
from me in political sentiments may, perhaps, remark, I am stepping out of the
proper line of my duty; and they may possibly ascribe to arrogance or
ostentation, what I know is alone the result of the purest intention; but the
rectitude of my own heart, which disdains such unworthy motives; the part I
have hitherto acted in life, the determination I have formed of not taking any
share in public business hereafter; the ardent desire I feel, and shall
continue to manifest, of quietly enjoying in private life, after all the toils
of war, the benefits of a wise and liberal Government, will, I flatter myself,
sooner or later, convince my countrymen, that I could, have no sinister views
in delivering with so little reserve the opinions contained in this address.

There are four things which I humbly conceive are essential to the well-being,
I may even venture to say, to the existence of the United States as an
independent power.

1st. An indissoluble union of the States under one fedral head.

2dly. A sacred regard to public justice.

3dly. The adoption of a proper peace establishment. And,

4thly. The prevalence of that pacific and friendly disposition among the
people of the United States, which will induce them to forget their local
prejudices and policies, to make those mutual concessions which are requisite
to the general prosperity, and, in some instances, to sacrifice their
individual advantages to the interest of the community.

These are the pillars on which the glorious fabric of our independency and
national character must be supported. -- Liberty is the basis -- and whoever
would dare to sap the foundation, or overturn the structure, under whatever
specious pretext he may attempt it, will merit the bitterest execration, and
the severest punishment, which can be inflicted by his injured country.

On the three first articles I will make a few observations; leaving the last
to the good sense and serious consideration of those immediately concerned.

Under the first head, although it may not be necessary or proper for me in
this place to enter into a particular disquisition of the principles of the
union, and to take up the great question which has been frequently agitated,
whether it be expedient and requisite for the States to delegate a larger
proportion of power to Congress, or not; yet it will be a part of my duty, and
that of every true patriot, to assert, without reserve, and to insist upon the
following positions. -- That unless the States will suffer Congress to exercise
those prerogatives they are undoubtedly invested with by the Constitution,
every thing must very rapidly tend to anarchy and confusion. That it is
indispensible to the happiness of the individual States, that there should be
lodged, somewhere, a supreme power to regulate and govern the general concerns
of the confederated Republic, without which the union cannot be of long
duration.

That there must be a faithful and pointed compliance on the part of every
State with the late proposals and demands of Congress, or the most fatal
consequences will ensue -- That whatever measures have a tendency to dissolve
the union, or contribute to violate or lessen the sovereign authority, ought to
be considered as hostile to the Liberty and Independency of America, and the
authors of them treated accordingly -- And lastly, that unless we can be
enabled by the concurrence of the States to participate of the fruits of the
Revolution, and enjoy the essential benefits of civil society, under a form of
government so free and uncorrupted, so happily guarded against the danger of
oppression, as has been devised and adopted by the Articles of Confederation,
it will be a subject of regret, that so much blood and treasure have been
lavished for no purpose; that so many sufferings have been encountered without
a compensation, and that so many sacrifices have been made in vain. Many other
considerations might here be adduced to prove, that without an entire
conformity to the spirit of the Union, we cannot exist as an independent power.
It will be sufficient for my purpose to mention but one or two, which seem to
me of the greatest importance. It is only in our united character, as an
empire, that our endependence is acknowledged, that our power can be regarded,
or our credit supported among foreign nations. The Treaties of the European
Powers, with the United States of America, will have no validity on a
dissolution of the Union. We shall be left nearly in a state of nature, or we
may find by our own unhappy experience, that there is a natural and necessary
progression from the extreme of anarchy to the extreme of tyranny; and that
arbitrary power is most easily established on the ruins of liberty abused to
licentiousness.

As to the second article, which respects the performance of public justice,
Congress have in their late address to the United States, almost exhausted the
subject; they have explained their ideas so fully, and have enforced the
obligations the states are under to render complete justice to all the public
creditors, with so much dignity and energy, that, in my opinion, no real friend
to the honor and independency of America, can hesitate a single moment
respecting the propriety of complying with the just and honorable measures
proposed; if their arguments do not produce conviction, I know of nothing that
will have greater influence, especially when we recollect that the system
referred to, being the result of the collected wisdom of the Continent, must be
esteemed, if not perfect, certainly the least objectionable of any that could
be devised; and that, if it shall not be carried into immediate execution, a
national bankruptcy, with all its deplorable consequences, will take place
before any different plan can possibly be proposed or adopted; so pressing are
the present circumstances, and such is the alternative now offered to the
States.

The ability of the country to discharge the debts, which have been incurred in
its defense, is not to be doubted. And inclinanation, I flatter myself, will
not be wanting; the path of our duty is plain before us; honesty will be found,
on every experiment, to be the best and only true policy. Let us then, as a
nation, be just; let us fulfill the public contracts which Congress had
undoubtedly a right to make for the purpose of carrying on the war, with the
same good faith we suppose ourselves bound to perform our private engagements.
In the mean time let an attention to the cheerful performance of their proper
business, as individuals, and as members of society, be earnestly inculcated on
the citizens of America; then will they strengthen the hands of government, and
be happy under its protection. Every one will reap the fruit of his labors;
every one will enjoy his own acquisitions, without molestation, and without
danger.

In this state of absolute freedom and perfect security, who will grudge to
yield a very little of his property to support the common interests of society,
and ensure the protection of government? Who does not remember the frequent
declarations at the commencement of the war, That we should be completely
satisfied, if at the expense of one half, we could defend the remainder of our
possessions? Where is the man to be found, who wishes to remain in debt for the
defense of his own person and property to the exertions, the bravery, and the
blood of others, without making one generous effort to repay the debt of honor
and of gratitude? In what part of the Continent shall we find any man, or body
of men, who would not blush to stand up, and propose measures purposely
calculated to rob the soldier of his stipend, and the public creditor of his
due? And were it possible that such a flagrant instance of injustice could ever
happen, would it not excite the general indignation, and tend to bring down
upon the authors of such measures the aggravated vengeance of Heaven? If, after
all, a spirit of disunion, or a temper of obstinacy and perverseness should
manifest itself in any of the States; if such an ungracious disposition should
attempt to frustrate all the happy effects that might be expected to flow from
the union; if there should be a refusal to comply with requisitions for funds
to discharge the annual interest of the public debts, and if that refusal
should revive all those jealousies and produce all those evils which are now
happily removed; Congress, who have in all their transactions shown a great
degree of magnanimity and justice, will stand justified in the sight of God and
man! And that State alone, which puts itself in opposition to the aggregate
wisdom of the Continent, and follows such mistaken and pernicious councils,
will be responsible for all the consequences.

For my own part, conscious of having acted, while a servant of the public, in
the manner I conceived suited to promote the real interests of my country;
having, in consequence of my fixed belief, in some measure, pledged myself to
the army, that their country would finally do them complete and ample justice,
and not wishing to conceal any instance of my official conduct from the eyes of
the world, I have thought proper to transmit to your Excellency the enclosed
collection of papers, relative to the half-pay and commutation granted by
Congress, to the officers of the army; from these communications, my decided
sentiment will be clearly comprehended, together with the conclusive reasons
which induced me, at an early period, to recommend the adoption of this measure
in the most earnest and serious manner. As the proceedings of Congress, the
army, and myself, are open to all, and contain, in my opinion, sufficient
information to remove the prejudice and errors which may have been entertained
by any, I think it unnecessary to say any thing more, than just to observe,
that the resolutions of Congress, now alluded to, are as undoubtedly and
absolutely binding upon the United States, as the most solemn acts of
confederation or legislation.

As to the idea, which I am informed, has, in some instances, prevailed, that
the half-pay and commutation are to be regarded merely in the odious light of a
pension, it ought to be exploded for ever: That provision should be viewed, as
it really was, a reasonable compensation offered by Congress, at a time when
they had nothing else to give to officers of the army, for services then to be
performed: It was the only means to prevent a total dereliction of the service.
It was a part of their hire; I may be allowed to say, it was the price of their
blood, and of your independency; it is therefore more than a common debt; it is
a debt of honor; it can never be considered as a pension, or gratuity, nor
cancelled until it is fairly discharged.

With regard to the distinction between officers and soldiers, it is sufficient
that the uniform experience of every nation of the world, combined with our
own, proves the utility and propriety of the discrimination. Rewards in
proportion to the aids the public draws from them, are unquestionably due to
all its servants. In some lines, the soldiers have perhaps generally had as
ample compensation for their services, by the large bounties which have been
paid them, as their officers will receive in the proposed commutation; in
others, if, besides the donation of land, the payment of arrearages of
clothing and wages (in which articles all the component parts of the army must
be put upon the same footing) we take into the estimate the bounties many of
the soldiers have received, and the gratuity of one year's full pay, which is
promised to all, possibly their situation (every circumstance being duly
considered) will not be deemed less eligible than that of the officers. Should
a further reward, however, be judged equitable, I will venture to assert, no
man will enjoy greater satisfaction than myself, if an exemption from taxes for
a limited time (which has been petitioned for in some instances) or any other
adequate immunity or compensation be granted to the brave defenders of their
country's cause. But neither the adoption or rejection of this proposition,
will, in any manner, affect, much less militate against, the act of Congress,
by which they have offered five years full pay, in lieu of the half pay for
life, which had been before promised to the officers of the army.

Before I conclude the subject of public justice, I cannot omit to mention
obligations this country is under to that meritorious class of veterans, the
non-commissioned officers and privates, who have been discharged for inability,
in consequence of the resolution of Congress, of the 23d of April, 1782, on an
annual pension for life: their peculiar sufferings, their singular merits, and
claims to that provision, need only to be known, to interest the feelings of
humanity in their behalf: nothing but a punctual payment of their annual
allowance, can rescue them from the most complicated misery; and nothing could
be a more melancholy and distressing sight, than to behold those who have shed
their blood, or lost their limbs in the service of their country, without a
shelter, without a friend, and without the means of obtaining any of the
comforts or necessaries of life, compelled to beg their daily bread from door
to door. Suffer me to recommend those of this description, belonging to your
State, to the warmest patronage of our Excellency and your Legislature.

It is necessary to say but a few words on the third topic which was proposed,
and which regards particularly the defense of the Republic. As there can be
little doubt but Congress will recommend a proper peace establishment for the
United States, in which a due attention will be paid to the importance of
placing the militia of the Union. upon a regular and respectable footing; if
this should be the case, I should beg leave to urge the great advantage of it
in the strongest terms.

The militia of this country must be considered as the palladium of our
security, and the first effectual resort in case of hostility; It is essential,
therefore, that the same system should pervade the whole; that the formation
and discipline of the militia of the Continent, should be absolutely uniform;
and that the same species of arms, accoutrements, and military apparatus,
should be introduced in every part of the United States. No one, who has not
learned it from experience, can conceive the difficulty, expense, and
confusion, which result from a contrary system, or the vague arrangements which
have hitherto prevalied.

If, in treating of political points, a greater latitude than usual has been
taken in the course of this address, the importance of the crisis, and the
magnitude of the objects in discussion, must be my apology. It is, however,
neither my wish nor expectation, that the preceding observations should claim
any regard, except so far as they shall appear to be dictated by a good
intention, consonant to the immutable rules of justice; calculated to produce a
liberal system of policy, and founded on whatever experience may have been
acquired by a long and close attention to public business. Here I might speak
with more confidence, from my actual observation; and if it would not swell
this letter (already too prolix) beyond the bounds I had prescribed myself, I
could demonstrate to every mind, open to conviction, that in less time, and
with much less expense than has been incurred, the war might have been brought
to the same happy conclusion, if the resources of the Continent could have been
properly called forth; that the distresses and disappointments which have very
often occurred, have, in too many instances, resulted more from a want of
energy in the Continental Government, than a deficiency of means in the
particular States: That the inefficacy of measures, arising from the want of an
adequate authority in the supreme power, from a partial compliance with the
requisitions of Congress, in some of the States, and from a failure of
punctuality in others, while they tended to damn the zeal of those who were
more willing to exert themselves, served also to accumulate the expenses of the
war, and to frustrate the best concerted plans; and that the discouragement
occasioned by the complicated difficulties and embarrassments, in which our
affairs were by this means involved, would have long ago produced the
dissolution of any army, less patient, less virtuous, and less persevering,
than that which I have the honor to command. But while I mention those things,
which are notorious facts, as the defects of our federal constitution,
particularly in the prosecution of a war, I beg it may be understood, that as I
have ever taken a pleasure in gratefully acknowledging the assistance and
support I have derived from every class of citizens; so shall I always be happy
to do justice to the unparalleled exertions of the individual States, on many
interesting occasions.

I have thus freely disclosed what I wished to make known, before I surrendered
up my public trust to those who committed it to me. The task is now
accomplished; I now bid adieu to your Excellency, as the Chief Magistrate of
your State; at the same time, I bid a last farewell to the cares of office, and
all the employments of public life.

It remains, then, to be my final and only request, that your Excellency will
communicate these sentiments to your Legislature, at their next meeting; and
that they may be considered as the legacy of one who has ardently wished, on
all occasions, to be useful to his country, and who, even in the shade of
retirement, will not fail to implore the divine benediction upon it.

I now make it my earnest prayer, that God would have you, and the State over
which you preside, in his holy protection; that he would incline the hearts of
the citizens to cultivate a spirit of subordination and obedience to
Government; to entertain a brotherly affection and love for one another, for
their fellow-citizens of the United States at large, and particularly for their
brethren who have served in the field; and finally, that he would most
graciously be pleased to dispose us all to do justice, to love mercy, and to
demean ourselves with that charity, humility, and pacific temper of the mind,
which were the characteristics of the Divine Author of our blessed religion;
without an humble imitation of whose example, in these things, we can never
hope to be a happy nation.

I have the honor to be, with much esteem and respect,

SIR, Your Excellency's most obedient and most humble servant. G. WASHINGTON.

PRINTING, Performed with expedition, and in a neat man^^^ by ROBERT SMITH,
Back of the White-Horse and Fountain Inn, Chesnut-street.

ORDERS from Town or Country for Advertisements, etc. left at the
Printing-Office, or the South-East Corner of Market and Third-streets, will be
carefully observed, and punctually attended to. Humbly entreats the Public for
their Encouragement in the Line of his Business, which he will endeavor to
merit by a close Application and particular Attention to their Commands.


