AN ORATION DELIVERED MARCH 5th, 1783.

AN ORATION, DELIVERED MARCH 5th, 1783. AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF
THE TOWN OF BOSTON; TO COMMEMORATE THE BLOODY TRAGEDY OF THE FIFTH OF MARCH,
1770.

BY DOCTOR THOMAS WELSH.

Non TALI AUXILIO nec DEFENSORIBUS ISTIS
Tempus eget:
Virg Aeneid. Lib 2. Lin. 521. BOSTON: ( Commonwealth of MASSACHUSETTS)

PRINTED BY JOHN GILL, IN COURT-STREET.

AT a Meeting of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the Town of BOSTON,
duly qualified and legally warned in public Town-Meeting assembled, at
Faneuil-Hall, on Wednesday the 5th Day of March, Anno Domini, 1783.
ON a Motion made, Voted, That the Hon. James Otis, Esquire Moderator, John
Scollay, Esquire Ezekiel Price, Esquire Dr. Cooper, Tuttle Hubbard, Esquire Nathaniel
Appleton, Esquire Mr. Elisha Sigourney,
Be and hereby are appointed a Committee to wait upon Doctor THOMAS WELSH, and
in the Name of the Town to thank him for the spirited and elegant ORATION
delivered by him at their Request, in Commemoration of the horrid MASSACRE,
perpetrated on the Evening of the fifth of March, 1770, by a Party of Soldiers
of the XXIXth Regiment, under the Command of Capt. Thomas Preston, and to
request of him a Copy thereof for the Press.

Attest. WILLIAM COOPER, Town Clerk.

Gentlemen,
MY private Feelings had almost prevailed upon me to decline a Compliance with
your Request; Motives of Respect ONLY induce me now to deliver you this Oration
for the press.

THOMAS WELSH.

AN ORATION.
FRIENDS AND FELLOW-CITIZENS,
INVITED to this place by your choice, and recollecting your well known
indulgence, I feel myself already possessed of your candor, while I "impress
upon your minds, the ruinous tendency of standing armies being placed in free
and populous cities in a time of peace."

A FIELD here presents annually traversed by those, who by their sagacity have
discovered, and by their voices declared, in strains of manly eloquence, the
source from whence these fatal streams originate, which, like the destroying
pestilence, have depopulated kingdoms and laid waste the fairest empires.

IN prosecution of the subject, I presume I shall not offend a respectable part
of my audience, I mean the gentlemen of the American patriot army. I should not
have neglected so favorable an opening to have shown my poor respects to the
CHARACTER of the Commander in Chief of the American Army, but from a
conciousness of inability to add to a name, more durable than marble, which
will out live the assaults of envy and the ravages of time.
-- An army whose glory and virtue have been long since recorded in the temple
of fame -- her trumpet has sounded their praises to distant nations -- her wing
shall bear them to latest ages.

WHEN the daring spirit of ambition, or the boundless lust of domination, has
prompted men to invade the The natural state of nations with respect to each
other, is certainly that of society and peace. Such is the natural and
primitive state of one man with respect to another; and whatever alteration
mankind may have made in regard to their original state, they cannot, without
violating their duty, break in upon that state of peace and society, in which
nature has placed them, and which, by her laws, she has strongly recommended to
their observance.

PURLAMAQUI, Part 4. Chap. 1. Sect. 4.
natural peaceful state of society, it is among the first emotions of the
heart, to repel the bold invader. Men assembled from such motives, having
expelled the enemy from their borders, re-assuming the pruninghook and the
spade, for the sword and the spear, have in all ages been called the saviors
of their country.

A MILITIA is the most natural defense of a free state, from invasion and
tyranny: they who compose the militia, are the proprietors of the soil; and who
are so likely to defend it, as they who have received it from their ancestors
-- acquired it by their labor -- or obtained it by their valor? every free man
has within his breast the great essentials of a soldier, and having made the
use of arms familiar, is ever ready for the field. And where is the tyrant who
has not reason to dread an army of freemen?

IN the battle of Naseby Vide Political Disquisitions.
in the days of Cromwell, the number of forces was equal on both sides; and all
circumstances equal. In the parliament's army only nine officers had ever seen
actual service, and most of the soldiers were London apprentices, drawn out of
the city two months before. In the king's army there were about a thousand
officers who had served abroad, yet the veterans were routed by the apprentices.

ROME advanced to the zenith of glory and greatness, and conquered all nations
in the times of the republic, while her army was an unpaid militia.

THE Grecians carried on their wars against Persia by means of their militia;
and at last beat the numerous mercenary armies, and subdued the vast empire of
Persia.

THE deeds of valor performed by my own countrymen, and in our day, are
numerous and recent, and point out as with a sunbeam, that the militia is to a
free country a lasting security.

YOU will now permit me to consider the condition and consequences of a
standing army.

MEN who inlist themselves for life soon loose the feelings of citizens. To
command and be commanded, excites an idea of servitude and dependence, which
degrades the mind, and in a social view destroys the character of a free agent
Moore in his view of society and manners in Europe, observes -- "As to the
common soldiers, the leading idea of the discipline is, to reduce them in many
respects, to the nature of machines; that they may have no volition of their
own, but be actuated solely by that of their officers; that they may have such
a superlative dread of their officers, as annihilates all fear of the enemy;
that they may move forward when ordered, without deeper reasoning or more
concern than the firelocks they carry along with them."


THEY who follow the profession of arms conceive themselves exempted from the
useful occupations of life, and thence contract a habit of dissipation;
soldiers inured to exercise and labor in their duty, at leisure to roam, will
not be wholly inactive in a city, where the means of gratification abound;
persuing the objects of pleasure, with the same zeal they engaged in the toils
and enterprises of the field. Whole armies have, too late, found themselves
destroyed by the dissolving power of luxury.

WE have a remarkable instance of this, my fellow-citizens, in the army of
Hanibal, which, having withstood the greatest hardships, and which the most
dreadful dangers had never been able to discourage, in winter quarters at
Capua, was entirely conquered by plenty and pleasures. Vide Livy's Roman
History for an account of the battles, sufferings, and almost incredible march
and destruction of the renowned Garthaginian General and his army.


THE effects of luxury though productive of the greatest misfortunes to an army
stationed in a city, are by no means confined to that class of men. The great
body of the people, smote by the charms and blandishments of a life of case and
pleasures, fall easy victims to their fascinations. The city reared by the
forming hand of industry, soon feels the symptoms of dissolution -- The busy
merchant now no more extends his commerce! The mechanic throws aside his
chissel; the voice of riot succeeds to the sound of the hammer, and the
midnight revel to the vigils of labor.

WHEN a large respectable standing army has been stationed in a city, commanded
by officers of known patriotism, who have taught those under their orders, to
enterchange the kind and friendly offices of life; citizens conceiving
themselves secured from domestic broils and the danger of invasion from abroad,
imperceptibly relax in their attention to military exercises, and may thus be
exposed as a tempting bait to an aspiring despot; besides, a people who have
made themselves respectable by their personal attention to their own defense,
neglecting their militia, may be insulted by those neighbors who had formerly
been accustomed to revere their power.

WHEN communities have so far mistaken their interest, as to commit the defense
of every thing valuable in life to a standing army; the love of case will
scarcely permit them to reassume the unpleasing task of defending themselves.

AT the conclusion of a long and bloody war, the liberties of a people are in
real danger from the admission of troops into a free city. When an army has
suffered every hardship to which the life of a Soldier is peculiarly incident,
and has returned crowned with the well earned laurels of the field, they justly
expect to be received into the open arms, and with the applauses of those for
whom they have fought, and in whose cause they have bled; in a situation like
this, whole communities in transport of gratitude, have weakly sacrificed at
the shrine of a deliverer, every thing for which their armies have fought or
their heroes have bled.

NATIONS the most renowned among the ancients for their wisdom and their
policy, have viewed the army with an eye of attentive jealousy; the Romans
characterized for personal bravery, In the battles fought in our age, every
single soldier has very little security and confidence except in the multitude;
but among the Romans, every individual, more robust and of greater experience
in war, as well as more inured to the fatigues of it, than the enemy, relied
upon himself only. He was naturally endued with courage, or in other words,
with that virtue which a (...).

MONTESQUIEU
trembled for their country, at the sight of one hundred and fifty lictors or
peace officers, as a guard of the decemviri -- Such an army was dangerous, they
said, to liberty. These politic people knew the prevailing propensity in all
mankind to power. The history of later times has abundantly justified the
wisdom of their jealousies All parts of Europe which have been enslaved, have
been enslaved by armies. No nation can be said to enjoy internal liberty which
admits them in a time of peace. When a government has a body of standing troops
at command, it is easy to form pretensions for the distribution of them, so as
to effect their own purposes; when a favorite point is to be carried, a
thousand soldiers may convey irresistible argument, and compel men to act
against their feelings, interest and country.

SUCH were the arguments employed by Philip the second of Spain, to persuade
the inhabitants of the Netherlands to relinquish their liberties, their
property and their religion; the progress of these dreadful measures produced
scenes of Massacre and Devastation, the recital of which must excite exquisite
horror in the most savage breast.

ONE of the commanders of the army under the duke of Alva, demanding a pass
through the city of Rotterdam, This whole affair is related at length in
Watson's History of the Low Countries to which the reader is referred.
was at first refused, but assuring the magistrates that be meant only to lead
his troops through the town and not to lodge them in it; they consented to
suffer the companies to pass through one by one: No sooner had the first
company entered the city, than the officer, without regard to his engagements,
ordered them to keep the gates open 'till the other companies should arrive;
one of the citizens endeavoring to shut the gate, was killed by his own hand;
his troops eager to follow his example, drew their swords, and giving a loose
to their fury, spread themselves over the town, and butchered more than three
hundred of the inhabitants.

THIS was among the first events of that war which rendered the Netherlands a
scene of horror and devastation for more than thirty years; but which, whilst
it proved the source on many occasions of extreme distress to the people,
called forth an exertion of virtue, spirit and intrepidity, which seldom occurs
in the annals of history. Never was there a more unequal contest than between
the inhabitants of the Low Countries, and the Spanish Monarch; and never was
the issue of any dispute more contrary to what the parties had reason to expect.

UNDER similar circumstances, my fellow-citizens, a standing army was
introduced and stationed in this city; which produced the scene we now
commemorate; and which I know you cannot all remember; but let the stranger
hear and let the listening youth be told; that on the evening of the fifth of
March, seventeen hundred and seventy, under the orders of a mercenary officer,
murder with her polluted weapons, stood trampling in the blood of our
slaughtered countrymen; imagination cannot well conceive what mingling passions
then convulsed the soul and agonized the heart! -- Those pangs were sharp
indeed which ushered into life, a nation! -- like Hercules Hercules is
represented when very young, engaged in the most courageous and dangerous
enterprises -- such as encountering lions, squeezing them to death against his
own breast, or tearing their jaws asunder; sometimes when an infant, grasping
serpents with a little smile upon his cheek, as if he was pleased with their
fine colors and their motions, and killing them by his strong gripe with so
much ease that be scarce deigns to look upon them.
she rose brawney from the cradle, the snakes of Britain yet hung hissing round
her horrible, and fell! -- At her infant voice they hasted -- At the dread of
her rising arm they fled away.

AMERICA separated from the nations of Europe by the mighty ocean, and from
Britain by the mightier hand of Heaven, is acknowledged an independent nation;
she has now to maintain her dignity and importance among the kingdoms of the
earth. May she never be seduced from her true interest, by subtle intrigue,
mistaken policy, or misguided ambition! but considering her own condition may
she follow the maxims of wisdom, which are better than the weapons of war!

IT has become fashionable in Europe, to keep a large standing army in times of
peace. The people of Great Britain have professed their aversion to the
establishment, yet have suffered it to gain ground upon the idea of preserving
the balance of power. This custom is so deeply rooted and so firmly
established, that nothing short of annihilation of the governments where they
have been so long tolerated can abolish the institution.

FROM the situation and vicinity of the nations of Europe with respect to each
other, the different extent of territory rendering it more difficult to repel
an invasion from some countries than others, for the celerity of defense and
the more complete security of extensive countries; from these and similar
considerations, even wise politicians have defended the propriety of the
establishment; but let their motives be ever so pure, the ambitious and the
aspiring have views more extensive and ruinous; they have felt the charms and
experienced the utility of this engine, and are not wanting in their exertions
to support its existence.

OUR fortunate Alliances in Europe have secured us from any danger of invasion
from thence; this security is derived from considerations of the best policy
and true interest of the allied powers.

THE new and glorious treaty, concluded since the last anniversary with the
States of Holland, whose manners, laws, religion, and bloody contest for
freedom so nearly resemble our own, If there was ever among Nations a natural
Alliance, one may be formed between the two republics. The first planters of
the four northern States found in this Country an Asylum from Persecution, and
resided here from the Year one thousand six hundred and eight, to the Year one
thousand six hundred and twenty, twelve Years preceding their Migration. They
ever entertained and have transmitted to posterity, a grateful Remembrance of
that Protection and Hospitality, and especially of that religious Liberty they
found here, having sought it in vain in England.

"The first Inhabitants of two other States, New York and New Jersey, were
immediate Emigrants from this Nation, and have transmitted their Religion,
Language, Customs, Manners and Character: and America in general, until her
Connections with the House of Bourbon, has ever considered this Nation as her
first Friend in Europe, whose History, and the great Characters it exhibits, in
the various Arts of Peace, as well as Achievements of War by Sea and Land,
have been particularly studied, admired and imitated in every State.

"A Similitude of Religion, although it is not deemed so essential in this as
in former Ages, to the Alliance of Nations, is still, as it ever will be
thought, a desirable Circumstance. Now it may be said with Truth, that there
are no two Nations, whose Worship, Doctrine and Discipline, are more alike than
these of the two Republics. In this particular therefore, as far as it is
(...) weight, an alliance would be perfectly natural.

"A Similarity in the Forms of Government, it usually considered as another
Circumstance, which renders Alliances natural: and although the Constitutions
of the two Republics are not perfectly alike, there is yet Analogy enough
between them, to make a Connection easy in this respect.

"The Originals of the two Republics are so much alike, that the History of
one seems but a Transcript from that of the other: so that every Dutchman
instructed in the subject, must pronounce the American Revolution just and
necessary, or pass a Censure upon the greatest Actions of his immortal
Ancestors: Actions which have been approved and applauded by Mankind, and
justified by the Decision of Heaven.

"If therefore an Analogy of Religion, Government, Original, Manners, and the
most extensive and lasting commercial Interests, can form a Ground and an
Invitation to political Connections, the Subscriber flatters himself, that in
all these Particulars the Union, is so obviously natural, that there has seldom
been a more distinct Designation of Providence to any two distant Nations to
unite themselves together."

Extracts from the Memorial to their High Mightinesses, the States General of
the United Provinces of the Low Countries, by that great Statesman and Patriot,
His Excellency JOHN ADAMS, Esquire Minister Plenipotentiary at the Hague, dated
Leyden, April 19, 1781.


affords a happy presage of lasting security. We may add, the situation of our
own country, with respect to other dominions, is so secured by nature, that no
one can feign pretensions sufficiently plausible to convince the people of
America, of the propriety of supporting a standing army in a time of peace;
whilst memory retains the exploits of our brave citizens in the field, who have
joined the standard of freedom, and successfully defended her injured altars
and her devoted rites. The community will be assured, that upon the basis of a
well regulated militia, an army may be raised upon all future occasions
sufficient to oppose the most formidable invaders.

HERE, were it pertinent, I would express a confidence; that when the army
shall be disbanded, justice, with impartial scale, will distribute due rewards
to those who have jeoparded their lives in the high places of the field.

EVERY American, is conscious of the great effects produced by the knowledge of
the people in the use of arms, and from that experience need not be exhorted to
an attention to their militia.

WHEN we consider our own prosperous condition, and view the state of that
nation, of which we were once a part, we even weep over our enemy, when we
reflect that she was once great; that her navies rode formidable upon the
ocean; that her commerce was extended to every harbor of the globe; that her
name was revered wherever it was known; that the wealth of nations was
deposited in her island; and that America was her friend, but by means of her
standing armies, an immense continent is separated from her kingdom, A doubt
may be entertained of the truth of this assertion; but we can hardly believe
that it would have entered into the head of a Minister or Parliament, to
collect a militia in Great Britain to enforce their acts in America; so that in
our view, had the army been disbanded at the end of the last war, America and
Britain at this moment would have been parts of the same Kingdom.
and that once mighty empire, ready to fall an untimely victim, to her own mad
policy.

NEAR eight full years have now rolled away, since America has been cast off
from the bosom and embraces of her pretended parent; and has set up her own
name among the empires. The assertions of so young a country, were at first
beheld, with dubious expectation; and the world were ready to stamp the name of
rashness or enterprise according to the event.

BUT a manly and fortunate beginning, soon insured the most generous
assistance. The renowned and the ancient Gauls came early to the combat -- wise
in council -- mighty in battle! Then with new fury raged the storm of war! The
seas were crimsoned with the richest blood of nations! America's chosen legions
waded to freedom through rivers died with the mingled blood of her enemies and
her citizens; through fields of carnage; and the gates of death!

AT length, Independence is ours -- the halcyon day appears, lo from the east I
see the harbinger, and from the train it is peace herself; and as attendants all
the gentle arts of life; commerce displays her snow white navies, fraught with
the wealth of kingdoms; plenty from her copious horn, pours forth her richest
gifts. Heaven commands! The east and the west give up, and the north keeps not
back! all nations meet! And beat their swords into ploughshares and their
spears into pruning hooks, and resolve to learn war no more. -- Henceforth
shall the American wilderness blossom as the rose, and every man shall sit
under his vine and under his fig tree, and none shall make him afraid.


