BRIEF OBSERVATIONS ON THE DOCTRINE OF UNIVERSAL SALVATION, AS LATELY
PROMULGATED At NEW HAVEN.

By JONATHAN EDWARDS, Pastor of a Church in NEW HAVEN.

"Prove all Things, hold fast that which is good."

1 These. 5.21. "Beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether
they are of God; because many false Prophets are gone out into the World".

1 John. 4.1. "That we henceforth be no more Children, tossed to and fro, and
carried about with every Wind of Doctrine."

Ephesians. 4.14. "Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal Life."

John 5.39. "To the Law, and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to
this Word, it is because there is no Light in them."

Isai. 5.20. NEW HAVEN: Printed by Meigs, Bowen and Dana, in Chapel-Street.

BRIEF OBSERVATIONS, etc.
IT is proposed in these few pages -- to give some account of the doctrine of
universal salvation, as lately proclaimed in this city -- to consider the
principal arguments by which it is attempted to be supported -- to mention some
passages of scripture which are inconsistent with it -- and to point out some
of the consequences which will follow from it.

I. The doctrine is, that all mankind, without exception but none of the
devils, will be saved; that this universal salvation will take place
immediately after the general judgment, so that after that time, there will be
no punishment of any individual of the human race; that this deliverance from
future punishment is obtained in the way of the most strict justice; that
Christ having paid the whole debt, for all mankind, it is not consistent with
justice, that any man should be punished for sin, in his own person; that the
sinners of the old world however, were kept in hell from the flood till the
crucifixion of Christ, and that during the three days, that Christ's body lay
in the Grave, his spirit went and preached the gospel to them, and delivered
them from further punishment; that perhaps those who die in impenitence and and
unbelief, may, till the final judgment, be in the same state, in which the
sinners of the old world were, before the death of Christ.

II. I am to consider the principal arguments by which this system is attempted
to be supported.

It is argued partly, from the divine goodness and compassion, but chiefly from
several passages of scripture. The arguments from divine goodness, equally
prove that all devils, as that all men, will be saved. If a God of infinite
goodness and compassion cannot inflict endless punishment on a fallen man, how
can he inflict the same on a fallen angel? True goodness and compassion do not
act with partial biasses and attachments, but see the happiness of every
intelligent being, whose happiness is consistent with the good of the system.
To say, there is no atonement made for the fallen angels, gives no
satisfaction. For why did not infinite goodness provide an atonement for them,
as well as for mankind? If it be said, that the perdition of devils is not
inconsistent with goodness, because it is not opposed to the good of the system
in general, but necessary to it: I answer, in the same way the eternal
perdition of ungodly men, may be reconciled with goodness. -- The argument from
the divine goodness is also wholly inconsistent with the well known
dispensations of providence toward mankind in this world. The argument has
been stated thus; Can you, an affectionate parent, take your own child, and
cast it into a glowing oven? -- No -- But has not God as much goodness and
tenderness as you? How then can you suppose, that he will cast any of his
children, into the lake of fire and brimstone, and confine them there forever.
-- On this argument I observe,

1. That it equally militates against the eternal punishment of any of the
fallen angels, as any of fallen men: for they are the children of God by
creation, as truly as men. It is however true, that though we cannot bear to
cast our children into glowing ovens, yet God can and does, first neglect the
means necessary for the salvation of some of his children, and then cast them
into the the of fire and brimstone.

2. That it also proves, (so far as it proves any thing) that God cannot
afflict and destroy mankind, as we all know he does, in this world. Permit me
in my turn, to use this argument: -- Can you an affectionate parent, throw down
your child from eminences, so as to brake his bones, mangle his flesh, and
dislocate his neck? Or can you plunge him into a raging sea, and leave him to
the mercy of the waves? Can you cast him to be devoured by lions or tigers? Can
you voluntarily bring on him the tortures of convulsions, of the cholick or of
the stone? Can you set your house on fire, and in it consume your wife, your
children and whole family together? -- I know, you cannot think of doing any of
these. But has not God as much goodness and tenderness as you? How then can
you suppose that he will ever treat any of his children in this manner? -- Yet
in fact he does all those things to his children: The instances are very
common. -- This shows the absurdity of all such arguments, as that stated
above; which however are the most popular, and with many, the most convincing
arguments employed to prove universal salvation. It is mere trifling to argue
against future punishment, on principles which cannot be reconciled with God's
common providence: and to assert boldly that God cannot do what we all see and
know, that he in fact does.

The principal texts of scripture, produced in support of this doctrine, are
these which follow.

I. Cor. 15.22. As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.
From these words it is argued, that as all mankind died in Adam, so all mankind
will live eternally in and through Christ. -- In this chapter, the Apostle is
discoursing of the resurrection of Christ's people, the whole body of his
followers, Verse 23. But every man in his own order, Christ the first fruits,
afterward they that are Christ's, at his coming. These words immediately follow
those now under consideration, and plainly show the sense of the Apostle in the
22d. verse to be, that all Christ's, all his disciples, or his followers shall
be made alive in him. But who those are whom the Apostle calls Christ's, or his
people, his followers, is not determined in this text. It is however abundantly
determined by the whole New Testament, that they are the penitent and
believing, and they only. As all who were in Adam, or were represented by him,
died in him; so all who are in Christ, or are represented by him, shall live in
him. But it is denied, that all men are in Christ, and are represented by him,
as their spiritual head, nor is this asserted in this text. The whole that is
asserted in it is, that all who are in Christ, shall live by him, as all who
were in Adam, died in consequence of his Fall.

But in aid of the construction of the text aforesaid, which I oppose, it is
said, "that the head of every man is Christ;" which is supposed to mean, that
every man is in Christ, and is represented by him. The words are in I. Cor.
11.3. "The head of every man is Christ, and the head of the woman is the man,
and the head of Christ is God." I grant that, as in the work of redemption, the
character and office of God the father is superior to the Son; and as in the
family economy, the husband is superior to his wife in honor and authority:
so Christ is exalted in authority and dominion over all mankind. In this sense
too, he is the head of the devils, as he is "made head over all things to the
church," and "all things are put under his feet, he only excepted, who put all
things under him." But that he is so the head of all men, that all will be
saved by him, does not appear.

But it is pleaded, that "Christ died for all;" that he is "the Savior of all
men;" -- that he is "the Savior of the world," -- "and a propitiation for the
sins of the whole world" -- "that he gave himself a ransom for all" -- "and
that he tasted death for every man." -- Doubtless these expressions are
strictly true, as Christ has made an atonement, or laid a foundetion in his
death and sufferings, for the salvation of all mankind: so that salvation is
offered to all: -- ALL without exception are invited to accept it. But what if
some obstinately refuse to accept it? -- Will they still inherit this
salvation? -- This is not asserted in any one of those texts now referred to:
Yet it should be asserted, to make them at all to the purpose of universal
salvation. All that is asserted, is, that Christ has made atonement or
provision for the salvation of all men. But this no more proves that all men
will in fact be saved, than if a prince should make a feast sufficient to
entertain all the inhabitants of a city, this proves, that all those
inhabitants will actually partake of the feast. Notwithstanding this provision,
a great part may refuse to comply with the royal invitation, and thus exclude
themselves -- Yet it is true that there was a feast made for all. -- In like
manner the provision made by Christ is abundantly sufficient for all; yet some
exclude themselves by their unbelief. -- In this sense Christ gave himself a
ransom for all, and tasted death for every man: and this sense of these
passages is plainly given by the scripture itself, particularly in John iii.
16. "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son," not that all
mankind might be saved by him, but "that whoever believes in him, should not
perish, but have everlasting life."

It is further pleaded, that God "will have all men to be saved," -- that he
has "no pleasure in the death of the wicked," -- and that he is "not willing
that any should perish." The death or perdition of the wicked is not in itself
a desirable object; in this view God does not, nor can take pleasure in it: he
cannot delight in the punishment and destruction of his creatures simply
considered. Yet he may inflict on them punishment and destruction, when they
are necessary to vindicate his character, to support his law, to restrain
others from sin, and to promote the good of the whole. -- The texts now under
consideration are to be taken in the same sense with Lam. iii. 33. "He does not
afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men." And Hos. xi. 8. "How shall
I give thee up, Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee, Israel? How shall I make
thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboim? Mine heart is turned within me;
my repentings are kindled together." -- A most benevolent parent may find it
necessary to chastise, and even to disinherit a child. Yet he never does it, as
we say, of choice; but with great reluctance. It is true, all things
considered, he may choose to do it. Still, in itself, it is very disagreeable
and painful to him.

Jer. xxxi. 34. "They shall all know me from the least of them, to the greatest
of them," has been introduced as an argument of universal salvation, because,
to know God is life eternal. But those words of Jeremiah refer not to the state
of things after the general judgment, but to the millenial state, and are
equivalent to Isai. xi. 9. "For the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the
Lord, as the waters cover the sea;" and to Hab. ii. 14. -- But it is not
pretended, that universal salvation will be effected on this earth, or before
the general judgment, which is to be in the air, not on this globe. It is
granted that in the general resurrection, some will come forth to the
resurrection of damnation. Therefore universal salvation will not take place
before that period.

A further argument has been drawn from Rev. v. 13. "Every creature which is
in heaven, and on earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and
all that are in them, heard I, saying, blessing, and honor," etc. It is said
that these words show, that all men will finally unite in hymns of praise to
God and the Lamb and therefore will be saved. But this text says nothing
particularly of all men: it speaks of all creature* rational and irrational,
animate and inanimate, and represents them as joining with the angels, the four
beasts, and elders, in a hymn of praise, and is an instance of the figure
called prosopopaeia, similar to that in Psalm. xix. 1. and in Psalm. cxlviii. 1
-- 11. It is therefore nothing to the purpose of the salvation of all men. --
Besides; this text as much implies the salvation of all devils, as of all men,
and so if it prove any thing, proves too much for those by whom it is quoted in
the present question.

Phil. ii. 10. "That at the name of Jesus, every knee should bow, of things in
heaven, and things on earth, and things under the earth, and that every tongue
should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord," etc. Is supposed to imply the
salvation of all men. But this is a mere declaration of Christ's exaltation,
and of the subjection of all things to him, and is tantamount to those texts
before quoted, which declare, that he is made head over all things to the
church; and that all things are put under his feet. But these passages do not
imply, that all men will voluntarily submit to him. See also Romans xiv.9 -- 13.

From "the restitution of all things," mentioned in Acts iii. 21. it has been
argued, that all men will be restored to the favor of God. On this I observe,

That these words might well have been rendered, The completion or comsummation
of all things, and are so rendered and interpreted by some of the best
commentators. -- If they be taken strictly according to the present
translation, they will prove that all devils are to be restored to the divine
favor, as well as all men. Therefore they prove too much for those with whom I
am at present concerned. -- But the original puts this text entirely out of the
present question. Without insisting on a different rendering of the word
translated restitution, the sense according to the original is this Pantoon oon
elaleesen.
; the times of the restitution of all those things which God has spoken by the
mouth of all his prophets. So that if the restoration of all men be a doctrine
taught by the prophets, this text declares, that the time will come, when such
a restoration will be effected. Otherwise it says nothing concerning it. --
This text is sometimes introduced in this manner; "The restitution of all
things is declared by all the prophets from the foundation of the world:" Which
is a perversion of the text, and shows either great dishonesty, or great
inattention to the original.

These are the principal scriptures on which the doctrine of universal
salvation, as lately published among us, is supposed to be founded, and whether
they be a sufficient foundation, I now appeal to every candid man, who is but
tolerably acquainted with the scriptures.

III. I am to mention some passages of scripture which appear to be
irreconcilable with the salvation of all men.

Matt. xxv. 31 -- 46. especially v. 41. "Depart ye cursed into everlasting
fire, prepared for the devil and his angels." It is pretended that the goats on
the left hand, in this passage, are the devils; that the sheep on the right,
are all mankind, and that the devils are condemned to everlasting fire, because
they restrained men from acts of charity. -- Why then is it not said, Depart,
ye cursed, etc. not because I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat; but
because I was an hungered and ye restrained others from giving me meat? -- And
why was it not said, Depart, ye cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for you?
not, for the devil and his angels, implying, that they were different persons
from those to whom the Judge was speaking. -- But the 32d. v. puts this matter
out of all dispute, "Before him shall be gathered all nations; and he shall
separate them one from another, as a shepherd divides his sheep from the
goats." What is the antecedent of them? not surely the devils, for they are not
mentioned in the context. It is the nations; and to say that them refers to any
other antecedent, is a violation of all the rules of grammatical construction.
-- But to such shifts as these, the advocates for universal salvation are
reduced, to reconcile their doctrine with the scriptures! Surely that doctrine
must be very foreign from the scriptures, which can be no better reconciled
with them, than universal salvation can with this passage in the 25th of
Matthew.

Rev. xiv. 11. "And the smoke of their torment ascends up forever and ever:
and they have no rest day nor night, who worship the beast and his image." --
If the beast mean what is commonly understood by it, Rome heathen and papal,
the worshippers are not merely the devils, but some men are comprehended in the
number. -- If the beast mean the devil himself, still some men are comprehended
in the number of his worshippers. See I. Cor. x. 20. Thus on every supposition,
this text declares that some men will be tormented forever and ever.

Isai. lxvi. 24. "They shall go forth and look upon the carcases of the men,
that have transgressed against me; for their worm dies not, and their fire is
not quenched." -- These were not devils; they are expressly called men, and
were clothed with carcases, or bodies, which is not true of the devils.

Phil. iii. 18, 19. "The enemies of the cross of Christ, whose end is
destruction, whose God is their belly." -- The end or last state of these
persons is destruction, not salvation; and they cannot be the devils, because
they have no bellies.

II. These. i. 8, 9. "In flaming fire, taking vengance on them that know not
God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction." -- The devils, however they are obliged
to obey the law, are not obliged to obey the gospel and to believe in Christ.
Therefore this passage means men and not devils.

II. Cor. xi. 15. "Whose end shall be according to their works." -- The persons
spoken of are false-apostles, evil-workers, v. 13. and in v. 22. are declared
to be Hebrews, Israelites, the seed of Abraham. Therefore they could not be
devils. But their end is said to be according to their works, as false-apostles
and evil-workers; which end must doubtless be an evil one, not the good end of
salvation.

II. Pet. iii. 7. "The heavens and the earth -- are -- reserved unto fire --
and perdition of ungodly men." -- Men not devils.

Luke xvi. 22, 23. "The rich man -- in hell -- lift up his eyes being in
torments." -- This was a rich man, not a rich devil; v. 19. Anthropos; and he
was confined in hell by an impassible gulf, v. 26.

I. Cor. i. 18. "The preaching of the cross is to them that perish foolishness:
but to us which are saved, it is the power of God." These that perish are those
to whom the gospel is foolishness, and such the apostle declares the Jews and
Greeks to be, v. 23.

Heb. x. 38. "We are not of them who draw back unto perdition, but of them that
believe to the saving of the soul." Some then do draw back unto perdition, i.
e. from a professed faith, as is manifest from the verse preceding, "The just
shall live by faith, but if any man draw back," i. e. from the faith, or the
profession of it; "my soul has do pleasure in him." But the fallen angels do
not draw back from the faith, or the profession of it; because they never
pretended to have received it. Therefore the persons who draw back unto
perdition, are men and not devils.

Luke xiii. 25 -- 29. We are here informed of some who shall be shut out of
heaven, and shall in vain seek admission. But who are these? Not the devils
surely, because Christ addresses them in the second person, "and ye begin to
stand without;" "I know you not, whence you are, all ye workers of iniquity;"
which shows that they were the men with whom he was then in conversation. --
How is this reconcilable with the salvation of all men?

Dan. xii. 2. "And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall
awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt."
This is spoken of those who sleep in the dust of the earth, who cannot be the
devils, but men. Some of these are to awake to everlasting contempt.

These are only a few of the many sacred passages which might be adduced on
this occasion. -- And can we suppose that a God of infinite goodness, delights
to vex and worry mankind with groundless fears? Or that a God of inviolable
truth will denounce threatenings, which he never means to execute? Would not
such a construction of the threatenings, weaken the credibility of all the
promises of the gospel too? If God does not declare what is about to be in one
case, how know we that he does in another?

Besides the supposition that devils only are intended in some of the
threatenings, the advocates for universal salvation, whom I oppose, have several
other evasions. According to them, in some instances in which death is
threatened to sinners, no more is intended than that they shall die as sinners,
i. e. shall repent and forsake their sins. -- In others, they shall die, be
damned, etc. as they shall be condemned in their own consciences, and shall
expect and fear eternal death. -- In others, it is only declared, that they
should die in Christ, as in this text, "The soul that sins it shall die."

On the first mode of evasion, I observe, that repentence is no death of men,
or of the soul; on the other hand, it is a resurrection to spiritual life, the
proper life of man. Again; that repentance is no token of divine displeasure,
but is a sure token of divine favor; Acts. xi. 18. "They glorified God,
saying, Then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life." It
cannot therefore be made the subject of a threatening; but whenever it is
predicted, is promised as a blessing. Again; it cannot be said, that in this
sense, the worm of the wicked shall not die; that their smoke shall ascend
forever and ever; that they are fixed in torment by an impassable gulf; that
they shall be punished with everlasting destruction; that they shall seek
admission into heaven, but seek in vain.

On the second mode of evasion, That sinners shall be damned in their own
consciences and die in expectation, I observe, that by the same rule of
construction, we have no warrant to suppose, that the promises of the gospel,
mean any more than that some men will be confident of their good estate, or
favor with God, and so pronounce a sentence of justification on themselves, in
the expectation or strong hope of eternal life. If it be said, that they that
do evil shall come forth to the resurrection of damnation, only as they shall
pronounce a sentence of condemnation on themselves, and shall expect and fear
eternal damnation; I will say, that they that do good shall come forth to the
resurrection of life, only as they shall, in a confidence of the divine favor,
pronounce sentence of justification on themselves, and shall expect and hope
for eternal life, yet shall never enjoy it, any more than the wicked shall
suffer eternal punishment. If "he that believes not, shall be damned," mean
only, that he shall be condemned in his own mind; then, "he that believes,
shall be saved," means only, that he shall be saved in his own mind or
expectation. Besides, according to this sense of the threatenings, how can the
wicked be said to be the subjects of the never dying worm? or to be in a place
of torment from which they can never escape? or to be punished with those
torments the smoke of which shall ascend forever and ever? Surely, according to
the doctrine which I oppose, they will not forever and ever expect punishment:
nor can they be supposed to be the subjects, forever and ever, of any other
self-condemnation, than that which is implied in true repentence, which is
consistent with perfect and eternal happiness, and therefore cannot be made the
matter of threatening.

On the last mode of evasion, That sinners shall die in Christ only, I observe,
That it is applicable only to those texts, which were written before the death
of Christ, not to any which were written after that event and are expressed in
the future tense; as these, II. These. i. 9. " Shall be punished with an
everlasting destruction," etc. Phil. iii. 19. "Whose end is destruction." II.
Cor. xi. 15. "Whose end shall be according their works." -- Again; dying in
Christ, i. e. that Christ should die for a sinner, is no proper subject of
threatening, as it is the greatest blessing ever granted to a fallen world; as
well might we be threatened with the inheritance of heaven. -- Again; that this
threatening, if it be so called, might as well have been denounced on the
righteous, as on the wicked; it being granted on all hands, that Christ died
for the penitent and believing. -- Once more; that if these words, "the soul
that sins it shall die," mean that such a soul should die in Christ, as
Christ should die in its stead, and the soul personally should not die: with as
much authority will I say, that these words, "He is just, he shall surely
live," mean only that he shall live in Christ, as Christ shall live in his
stead, but the man personally shall not live at all.

Thus these men, while they attempt to reduce or annihilate the threatenings of
scripture, equally annihilate the promises, and entirely overthrow that very
universal salvation, for which they so earnestly plead.

There is still another mode of evading the texts of scripture, which assert a
future punishment; this is by supposing that the sins of men are to be
separated from the men themselves, and to be sent to hell, while the men who
committed those sins are to be taken to heaven. Thus the chaff in Matt. iii.
12. Luke iii. 17. is said to mean the sins of mankind: these sins are to be
separated from the wheat, which is the men themselves, and to be burnt up with
unquenchable fire. The carcases of the men, who have transgressed against God,
in Isai. lxvi. 24. are said to be the sins of those transgressors. -- On this,
I observe,

1. That it is difficult to conceive how this interpretation can be reconciled
with most of those texts quoted above, or with others which may be quoted; as
Phil. iii. 18, 19. Those whose end is destruction, are said to be the enemies
of the cross of Christ, whose God is their belly. Sins are indeed acts of
enmity, but not enemies, nor have they any bellies to be their Gods. -- Those
who, according to II. These. i. 8, 9. are to be punished with everlasting
destruction, are not lifeless actions, but persons (oitines, in the masculine
gender) who know not God, and obey not the gospel. But sins are capable of
neither knowledge nor obedience. In II. Cor. xi. 15. False apostles and evil
workers, who were Hebrews, Israelites, the seed of Abraham, are said to come to
an end according to their works. But sins are neither false nor true apostles,
neither good nor evil workers, are neither Israelites, Hebrews, nor the seed of
Abraham; nor can they perform any works, according to which their end shall be.
II. Pet. iii. 7. speaks of the perdition not of sins, but men. Surely the Jews
and Greeks to whom the gospel was foolishness, and who therefore perished, were
not sins* but sinners. And what an absurdity to say, that the sins of men draw
back from the gospel faith unto perdition, according to Heb. x. 39

2. It is equally difficult to reconcile the idea of sin's suffering, or being
tormented, with common sense. How can the sins of transgressors be eaten by
worms, or burnt with fire, while the transgressors themselves are in heaven?
How can an act of murder, or fornication, or blasphemy, be tormented forever
and ever in fire and brimstone, while the authors of those actions are in
perfect bliss? If such punishments are feasible, and answer the end of
punishment, why are they not adopted by human legislators? Why is not felony
hanged, or cropped and branded, and the felons suffered to go free? -- But the
absurdity sufficiently appears: it would be altogether as good sense to talk of
punishing the north-west wind, or tormenting the sound of a trumpet.

3. With regard to that text in Isai. lxvi. 24. it seems to be very unluckily
chosen to prove, that sins are to be tormented, but the sinners saved. I will
undertake to prove from the same text, with much more plausibility, that the
sins of mankind are all to be saved, and to be happy in heaven forever, while
all men without exception are to be sent to eternal torments in hell. -- For
the words immediately preceding are, "All flesh shall come to worship before
me, says the Lord." As the prophet had been just speaking of the new heavens
and new earth, these words, I suppose on all hands are allowed to be
descriptive of the heavenly state. Therefore all flesh shall be admitted into
the heavenly state. But flesh in scripture very commonly signifies the sin or
wickedness of men. Therefore all the sins of all men, will be taken to heaven.
But the worm of those who have transgressed against God shall never die, and
their fire shall never be quenched. Now all men without exception have
transgressed against God. Therefore all men without exception, shall suffer
eternal torments in hell, while their sins shall enjoy eternal peace and
happiness in heaven. -- Thus we see to what conclusions we are led, by taking
no greater liberty with the scriptures, than those take with whom I am now
concerned.

IV. I am to point out some of the consequences which will follow from this
system.

1. It follows from this system, that the confinement of the sinners of the old
world in the prison of hell, till the death of Christ, and the similar
treatment of those who die in impenitence and unbelief, is a direct violation
of justice, and can no more be reconciled with it, than the eternal punishment
of a great part of mankind. The reason why it is supposed to be inconsistent
with justice, that any men should be eternally punished, is, that Christ as the
substitute of all mankind, has taken the whole punishment of sin on himself,
and has paid for all men the whole debt. Therefore payment being made by the
substitute, it is unjust to exact payment of any sinner in his own person.

This would be to exact double payment. -- On the same principle I argue, that
if Christ has so paid the whole debt for all men, that it is unjust to inflict
the whole punishment of sin on the person of any sinner, it is also unjust to
inflict on the person of any sinner a part of the punishment; as this would be
so far to exact double payment of the debt: and to exact double payment for a
part of a debt is as real injustice, though not so great a degree of it, as to
exact double payment for the whole. -- Therefore justice was entirely violated,
in confining the sinners of the old world, in the prison of hell, for more than
two thousand years.

2. It follows from this system, that the divine justice is violated also by
all the tokens of divine wrath or displeasure, which are ever inflicted on men,
in this life. That there have been many tokens of divine wrath inflicted on
men, in this life, cannot be denied, to be sure, by those who believe the
divine authority of the scriptures: such was the destruction of the old world,
of Sodom and Gomarrah, of the Canaanites, of Pharaoh and his army in the
Red Sea, of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, and afterward by the Romans, when
wrath came upon them to the uttermost; the death of Nadab and Abihu, of Hophni
and Phinehas, of Ananias and Sapphira, etc. etc. These are plain instances of
punishment of sin inflicted by God; but how can these, on the system which I
oppose, be reconciled with divine jusstice, any more than the everlasting
punishment of sin? If these punishments were just, it follows that Christ has
not so paid the whole debt, but that it is consistent with justice that sinners
should be punished in their own persons: and therefore the argument in favor
of universal salvation, drawn from the consideration of Christ's having paid
the whole debt, entirely falls to the ground.

I may also mention the calamities to which all mankind are liable, and which
they constantly suffer; the sickness, pains and sorrows, the vexations and
disappointments, which await us all; the pangs of childbirth, the agonies of
death, etc. To say that these are the necessary consequences of sin and could
not have been prevented by the Deity, is an affront to reason and an
impeachment of the divine Omnipotence. It was in the power of Omnipotence, to
have constituted things in such a manner, that childbearing and death should
have been without the least pain, or that we should all have been translated
without tasting death. -- With equal ease could God have prevented every other
temporal calamity. -- To say that these calamities are mere parental
chastisements designed for our good, and therefore not punishments or tokens of
divine displeasure, is contradictory. For no good parent ever chastised a
child, but for some fault, at which he was displeased.

What then are all these calamities of life and agonies of death, but so many
tokens of God's displeasure at sin? But such tokens of God's displeasure can
never be reconciled with justice, on the supposition that Christ so paid the
whole debt of punishment for all mankind, that justice will not allow, that
they be punished in their own persons. And if justice will allow that men be
punished in their own persons, it is a matter of grace, sovereign grace, that
any of mankind are saved; and if any, who and how many.

3. It follows from this system, that we have an absolute and immediate right,
on the footing of justice, to the inheritance of heaven and all its
blessedness, and that we are injured by the Deity, in being kept out of it for
a day or an hour. Christ has purchased heaven for us, equally as an escape from
hell. But to be kept out of a glorious inheritance, to which we have an entire
and absolute right on the sooting of justice, and at the same time, to be
detained a state of imprisonment, as is in the case with a great part of
mankind (Zach. ix. 12.) or in such a state that even the best of men groan
being burdened, and are in bondage, (Romans viii. 23. and II. Cor. v. 2, -- 5.
and Heb. ii. 14, 15.) is not merely to be injured, but to suffer an injury
which is great and oppressive. -- If, to avoid this consequence, it should be
said, that doubtless Christ in the covenant between him and the father,
consented that his redeemed should be kept out of the possession of heaven for
a season; this would be to open a door at which certain guests, very unwelcome
to the advocates for universal salvation, may easily enter. For in this
concession it is granted, that the purchase of Christ is not absolute and
unconditional, but limited with stipulations and conditions. Hence at once
arises this question; What are the stipulations and conditions, on which an
inheritance of the blessings of Christ's purchase is to be obtained? Is not
that purchase so limited, that none can enjoy the saving blessings of it, who
die in impenitence and unbelief. Doubtless he who had a right to consent, that
all men should for a season be kept from the enjoyment of the blessings
purchased by Christ, had a right to consent that some men should be kept from
them forever. And if, this being the case, no injury is done those who are
excluded from those blessings for a season, neither is any injury done those
who are finally excluded: because the conditions of the purchase in either case
are fulfilled. It remains therefore to be shown, what are, and what are not,
the conditions of enjoying the blessings purchased by Christ; and the argument
from the absolute purchase, whether of escape from hell, or of the possession
of heaven entirely falls to the ground.

4. It follows from this system, that we have a right on the footing of
justice, to immediate complete sanctification, and are constantly injured so
long as we are kept in a state of depravity or imperfection. Perfection in
holiness is a part of the purchase of Christ. (Heb. xii. 23. and Rev. xxi. 27.)
But the foundation of the argument, that we cannot consistently with justice,
suffer the penalty of the law, is, that we have a right on the footing of
justice, to whatever Christ has purchased for us. Therefore we have a right to
immediate and complete sanctification. -- If here too it should be said, that
Christ has consented, that we should be kept out of this privilege for a while;
I answer, as under the preceding article, that with as much reason, I may say,
he has consented that some should remain without it for ever.

5. It follows from this system, that we are under no obligation to obey the
divine law. -- Christ has equally obeyed the law for us, as he has suffered the
penalty. He has equally paid the debt of obedience, as the debt of punishment.
Now if, since Christ has paid the debt of punishment, to exact punishment of
men personally, be to exact double payment of the debt; then, since Christ has
paid the debt of obedience, to exact obedience of men personally, is to exact
double payment of the debt of obedience; which is unjust, tyrannical and
oppressive, and can never consist with the divine rectitude and perfection. It
follows therefore that we are under no obligation to obey the divine law in any
particular, whether as it respects God or men. -- We are under no obligation to
love the Lord our God with all our heart, to observe his Sabbath, his
ordinances of public or private worship, or to comply with any precept of the
first table. Equally free are we from obligation to love our neighbor as
ourselves, to speak the truth, to practice justice, fidelity, humanity,
charity, temperance, sobriety, or any other virtue. -- And where there is no
law, there is no transgression. -- Therefore, according to this system, we are
not capable of committing sin; and though we should fall into profaneness,
perjury, blasphemy; though we should practice injustice, fraud, theft, malice,
revenge, murder, they would be no sin, but would be as perfectly innocent, as
those which are esteemed the most amiable virtues.

6. It follows from this system, that grace is in a great measure excluded from
the plan or salvation published in the gospel. In the late exhibition of
universal salvation in this place, the preacher himself declared, "that however
some hoped to be saved by free grace, he expected to be saved in the way of
strict justice." This declaration is perfectly consistent with his general
system, and necessarily implied in it. For if we have a right on the footing of
justice, to deliverance from hell, and admission to heaven, we doubtless have
the same right to conversion, pardon, justification, the teachings and
assistance of the spirit, in short, to every blessing which Christ has
purchased. -- If so, where is the grace in communicating these blessings?
Manifestly there is no grace in the communication of any of them. They are due
to us, and, according to the system which I am opposing, in communicating them,
God does but discharge his debts. But is not this grating to the ear of every
christian? It most directly contradicts the whole gospel, the language of which
is, "By grace are ye saved" -- "Being justified freely by his grace" -- "in
whom we have -- forgiveness according to the riches of his grace," etc. etc.
etc.

7. It follows from this doctrine, that there is no foundation for thanksgiving
or praise, on account of any of the forementioned blessings of conversion,
pardon, justification, victory over the world, over our lusts, over satan, or
final and eternal glory. We are not obliged to thank any man for giving us our
dues: nor are we any more obligated to render thanks to God if he only give us
our dues. Therefore all that is said in the Psalms, or any other parts of
scripture, in the way of praise or gratitude, on account of these blessings, is
without reason or foundation, and the inspired writers herein show their great
ignorance of the truth.

8. It follows from this doctrine, that there is no foundation for prayer. To
pray is to ask a favor. But all spiritual blessings being purchased for us by
Christ, we have a right to them on the footing of justice, and therefore may
properly demand them; and to pray for them, is to act out of character. For the
same reason, there is no propriety in praying for temporal blessings, if they
are purchased by Christ, as they are generally allowed to be. -- Again, as we
are under no obligation to obey the divine law, and are incapable of sin, we
are of course, in our own persons, perfectly innocent, and being innocent, we
deserve none of of the calamities to which we are liable in the world, which
are tokens of God's displeasure. We may therefore demand exemption from them.
As to those calamities, which are tokens of the divine complacency or
approbation, if any such there be, surely no man in his senses would pray to be
preserved or delivered from them. -- From this induction of particulars, it
appears, that there is nothing in the universe, whether good or evil, whether
of a temporal or a spiritual nature, which according to this system, can with
propriety be made the subject of prayer.

9. This doctrine takes off all restraints on wickedness, arising either from a
sense of sin or moral evil, or from the prospect of punishment in the future
state. Because the doctrine not only asserts, that there is to be no future
punishment, but as I have already shown, implies that men are not under moral
obligation and consequently are incapable of sin. There is therefore no reason
why men should avoid any actions, either through fear of future punishment, or
through fear of contracting the guilt and turpitude of sin. -- Nay, this
doctrine greatly diminishes, if it do not entirely annihilate the the force of
civil punishments. The greatest and last of them is death. But if death be a
sure transition to complete and eternal happiness, what is there in it
terrible? The mere pains of death by the hands of the executioner, are so
momentary and all sensibility is so soon past, that they cannot justly excite
any great terror. Thus this doctrine cuts the sinews of all civil government,
and throws off almost every restraint by which mankind, in the present depraved
state, are kept in tolerable order.

Having now finished what I proposed on this subject, I leave it with the
candid reader to determine, whether I have done justice to those sacred texts,
which I suppose to have been perverted to support the doctrine of universal
salvation; whether of the many texts which seem to declare a future punishment,
the few which I have found room to insert in these observations, do
sufficiently establish it; whether the remarks, which I have made on the
several modes of evading the force of those and similar texts, be pertinent;
whether the consequences, which I have mentioned, do not necessarily follow
from the doctrine which I oppose; and finally, whether, if the consequences are
absurd and even shocking, the doctrine itself from which they follow, is not so
too.

I hope and pray, that the promulgation of universal salvation in this city,
may be the means of happily exciting the attention of the citizens, to the
important subject of a future state in general, and of future punishment in
particular; that they may enquire for themselves, make the scriptures the
foundation of their faith, imitate the example of the noble Bereans in
searching the scriptures daily, with respect to this subject; and that in the
issue they may be established on "The foundation of God, which stands sure,
having this seal, The Lord knows them that are his."

ERRATA.
Page 5. Line 23d. For brake read break; Page 8. Line 8th. For foundetion read
foundation; Page 15. Line 4th. For impassible read impassable.


