A DISCOURSE, FROM The First Epistle of THESSALONIANS, Second Chapter and
Thirteenth Verse: IN WHICH IS SHOWN, The CAUSE and CURE of all religious
Melancholy, Horrors of Conscience and Despondings, which the first Christians
were so great Strangers to: AN ATTEMPT To OVERTURN the pernicious Doctrine of
JUSTIFICATION BY WORKS, by one Scriptural Argument: THE Polite Doctrine which
teaches, that it was not NECESSARY CHRIST should die for our Sins, is WEIGHED
IN THE BALANCE.

Notice is also taken, Of the STRANGE DOCTRINES which have been preached among
us, and done so much Mischief.

By A. CROSWELL, V. D. M. First preached in Part to his own Congregation, and
now published with Enlargements.

JUDE Verse iiid. Earnestly contend for the Faith which was once delivered to
the Saints.

BOSTON: Printed by E. RUSSELL, for the AUTHOR. 1784. Sold by said RUSSELL,
near Liberty-Pole, and by PHILIP FREEMAN, in Union-street, near the Mill-Bridge.

1 THESSALONIANS, ii. 13. When ye received the Word of GOD, which ye heard of
us, ye received it not as the word of men, but, as it is in truth, the Word of
GOD, which effectually works also in you that believe.


WITHOUT speaking to the Context, which we may, at our leisure, read with
pleasure and profit; by the blessing of GOD, I shall immediately come to my
Text, in which Paul tells the Thessalonians that, when he, and Silas and
Timothy preached the Gospel among them, they received it not as the word of
men, but, as it was in truth, the Word of GOD, which wrought effectually in
them, as it did in all true believers. In speaking to these words I shall show,

FIRST. What we are to understand by the Word, or Gospel, which is evidently
intended by it.

SECONDLY. That this Gospel is the very Word of GOD.

THIRDLY. That Believers (...) receive^ as such.

FOURTHLY. That it works effectually on all such Believers.

LASTLY. To improve the subject.

Is It. I AM to show what we are to understand by the Word or Gospel. Our SAVIOR
gives us a clear description of it, John iii. 16; where he tells Nichodemus,
that GOD so loved the world* that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. It is implied
here, that fallen man was in a perishing condition: That GOD gave his Son for
us, that we might not perish, but be saved eternally; and also that he
purchased salvation for us by his death. The Scripture tells us, that CHRIST by
his suffering became the Author of eternal salvation. It is asserted also, that
this was owing to the great love of GOD. For GOD so loved the world, etc. With
so great a love, that men nor angels cannot conceive: Only GOD, in his infinite
mind, can comprehend the full meaning of the little word so in this place: And
lastly, that Believers only are benefited by this salvation; this blessedness
only comes by faith. If a man should do good works a thousand years to obtain
salvation, he would miss of it; but whoever believes the Gospel, and wants
nothing but the death of CHRIST to recommend him to the favor of GOD shall
certainly be justified and saved. For GOD can be just in justifying and saving
such: They having, in their Surety, answered the demands of the law both penal
and preceptive.

IIdly. I AM to show, that the Gospel is the very Word of GOD, as in truth it
is the Word of GOD: The Scripture again and again calls it the Word of GOD, and
it is called the Word of CHRIST who is GOD; and the Ministers sent by him to
preach have all along declared, that it was the Word of GOD which they
preached; and such Ministers know it is the Word of GOD by the effects of it. A
miracle has been wrought in their souls by the name of JESUS; believing in him
they were made new creatures, haters of sin and lovers of GOD; they have also
that joy and peace in believing, which they know GOD alone is the Author of;
knowing therefore that the Gospel is of GOD, they preach it with boldness, and
authority, and not as the Scribes.

IIIdly. I AM to show, that when any one truly believes, he always receives the
Gospel as the Word of GOD; as we may know by the effects of faith, that the
Gospel is the Word of GOD, of which I have been speaking, so we may know that
the Gospel is divine, previous to our trusting in CHRIST for salvation.
Sometimes when men have no uncommon sense of the worth of their souls, but are
thinking of CHRIST and salvation, the Gospel comes to them in power, in much
assurance, and in the HOLY GHOST; by the Spirit of GOD they are insured, not
that they shall be saved by CHRIST, but that there is salvation in CHRIST for
the chief of sinners under Heaven; nor can they deliberately doubt of this any
more then they can doubt whether they have souls in their bodies; such is the
demonstration of the spirit.

IVthly. THIS faith is said to work effectually,; that which is immediately
wrought on the soul is trusting in JESUS CHRIST, at the same time believing
that there is salvation in JESUS CHRIST for the chief of sinners; and that GOD
himself is the Author of the good news! a trust in JESUS CHRIST for salvation,
and thereby set to their seals that GOD is true: And as there is no believing
that the Gospel is the Word of GOD without trusting in CHRIST, the
scripture-name for Believers is that of Truster.

IN him shall the Gentiles trust: And this is their Old Testament and their New
Testament name. Paul delights in calling them Trusters: Which word was designed
by GOD to teach us this lesson, viz. That when the Gospel comes to the soul and
conscience with a Thus says the LORD, we always trust in CHRIST immediately
and are justified, and heirs of eternal life. This is the Gospel of GOD. What
then shall we think of their gospel who teach, that men are justified by faith
and works together? This is another gospel very little akin to the Gospel of
GOD, which teaches, that men are justified by faith only; and that says and
justification are so near together, that there can be no room for any good
works to be between them. Indeed those that attain to what they call the
believing part of justification, if they really do believe they are justified
by GOD before they attempt to do any thing of the doing part of it. According
to their divinity, let us suppose a man to have attained the believing part of
justification, and also for sometime to have been engaged in doing the doing
part; this man runs well; he is more than half justified already. Let us also
suppose him not to be weary in well-doing, but that he is up and doing, and is
resolved to keep doing the doing part, 'till he is quite justified: The
question is, How long this poor man must keep doing hard justifying work; (for
only they who are justified can do them with pleasure;) I say how long must he
keep doing hard justifying works 'till he is completely justified? The most
learned man upon earth will not think himself casuist enough to answer this
question. It is impossible that those who hold justification by works, and know
how to think, should think much of their own doctrine, without thinking
sometimes what is called reductio ad absurdum; or their being reduced to
downright absurdity. The Author has for many years thought it his duty to
magnify CHRIST with his tongue and pen, by disputing against justification by
works; and now in his old age he has attacked it with a New Argument with
brevity, and he hopes not ineffectually. For the men of this device must make
it appear, that faith and justification are not so near together as the
Scripture places them, otherwise their beloved divinity must die the death.
Nothing can save the life of it but doing that which is impossible. It will be
as hard to make a world, as to prove by Scripture, that there is any doing good
justifying works between faith and justification. The Apostle Paul, speaking of
CHRIST, says, By him all that believe are justified, Acts xiii. 39: By which he
could not mean, that they would be justified soon after by their good
justifying works tacked to faith; Paul abominated such stuff. He writes in the
present tense or time, meaning, that all are justified when they are believers;
or that as soon as they believe, they are that very moment justified persons.
Common sense and conscience will own the words can bear no other meaning; the
mouth of the LORD spoke these words to us by Paul. Therefore, justification by
works which is the great Diana of Christendom, is. killed by the words Paul
spoke in the name of the LORD, if the Scripture can kill it. -- Love is also
wrought in the soul at the same time. We do not love first and then believe: It
is not consistent with Scripture nor with the Protestant doctrine. The Author
recollects with pleasure, that in his younger years he drew his pen against it
more than once. We believe and then love GOD, and then we love CHRIST who is
GOD; we love him for all his perfections. Some love him because they hope he
died for them, and they shall be saved by him: These are haters of CHRIST; and
we love him also with a superlative love. If we do not love him above all other
beloveds, we are not true lovers; and with a practical love.

THIS is the love of GOD that we keep his commandments; we keep them by his
grace not to be justified by them, for we see we are justified by CHRIST. We
are constrained to keep them by his love, and we keep all his commandments.
Then shall I not be ashamed when I have respect to all his commandments. They
are very careful to observe the New Commandment of Brotherly Love: For we are
taught of GOD to love one another; and they love all the Saints. Some high
Professors care but little for those that fear GOD and keep his commandments:
They can be bitter as if under the influence of the star called wormwood;
though at the same time they can caress all those who are of their party; of
their side, and follow with them. One may have enough and enough of such
Brotherly Love without any Christianity at all. It is religion to get rid of
such religion as this: And this is an associating love; the sheep of CHRIST,
like literal sheep, love to be together. All shyness is contrary to that great
commandment, Love the Brotherhood. He that is shy of his brother, has done him
some harm, spoke evil of him, or has an evil frame of heart toward him; if we
have done them no harm, nor allow ourselves to speak evil of them; but have
that love for them which the Apostle calls the fruit of the Spirit, we shall
find it impossible for us to be shy of the members of CHRIST; and shall pity
the shy ones who are sick of a bad distemper. This love is also a love of
service; we shall serve the Brethren spiritually and temporally to the utmost
of our power with pleasure and delight: We shall serve CHRIST and keep his
commandments courageously.

PAUL and his Fellow-laborers were not disheartened from serving CHRIST by
preaching the Gospel, by the trial of cruel mockings and other persecutions
which were made their lot; and so it has been and will be with all other
Ministers and private Christians, men, women and children, when called to
suffer persecution for CHRIST; they are divinely hardened and will endure
hardness as good soldiers, rejoicing that they are accounted worthy to suffer
for his name sake. A certain Bishop has informed the world, that Christians
nowadays are not persecuted for their religion: That the world is now so
reconciled to it, they love them the better for it; and that this is the reason
that men have so little of the comforts of the HOLY GHOST to what the first
Christians had, because they will never be persecuted. A blind Guide! And the
faith of these Christians will work effectually; they will not draw back unto
perdition, because their faith is the operation of GOD. CHRIST dwells in
their hearts by faith, and they shall receive the end of their faith, the
salvation of their souls. When they die they enter into life, and at the second
coming of CHRIST they shall be raised to glory, honor and immortality: As we
all know by the abundant testimony of the Holy Scriptures, therefore I shall
recite no passages in proof of it. -- But it is time to improve the subject; and

(1st.) WE learn from what has been said, that the Gospel is properly styled
glad tidings of good things, the sound of the Gospel is the joyfullest sound
that ever was heard by the children of men; it proclaims that when a sinful
world was perishing GOD saved us by the death of his dear Son, and all that
believe in him shall obtain eternal salvation: And not only the good news, but
the Author of it, makes the Gospel worthy of all acceptance: For man is not
the author of it but GOD himself: It is the faithful saying of GOD, with whom
it is impossible to lie. We are told by him, that if the worst men and women
out of Hell want nothing but the death of CHRIST to recommend them to the
divine favor, they shall as certainly be saved as there is a GOD in Heaven. May
this glorious Gospel of the blessed GOD be preached to every creature under
Heaven! May the Preachers of this great salvation insist much on the amazing
love of GOD to enemies, which caused it! Showing, that we were in so low an
estate, that were it not for the death of CHRIST we must have perished forever.
Some will think the last expression is a strong one. It is a strong one, and
was intended for a strong one: Though the whole tribe of Socinians, Arians,
etc. etc. will be against it: And some, who are thought orthodox, will
sometimes be so modish as to speak lightly of it. Let us weigh it in the
balance. The Scripture knows but of two ways of justification, by the works of
the law and by CHRIST's dying for us. If there had been a law which could have
given life, then righteousness should have come by the law: But by the deeds of
the law could no flesh living be justified; therefore, GOD who is rich in
mercy, for the great love wherewith he loved us, sent his Son JESUS CHRIST, who
was GOD as well as man, and whose blood is in Scripture called the blood of
GOD, with his consent to die a sacrifice and curse for our sins: He has
redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us; and by him
all that believe are justified. But the question may be asked, Whether CHRIST's
death was so necessary, that if he had not died we must have perished? I answer
yes. He himself tells us so in what he says to Nichodemus, in the third chapter
of John; where he says, As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so
must the Son of Man be lifted up, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish: -- And afterward, that GOD so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son that they should not perish; -- which is as much as if CHRIST had
said, man must have perished, must have perished, if I had not died for his
justification. Our opponents will not say we are not justified by the death of
CHRIST, but cannot see his death was necessary, so necessary that if he had not
died man must have perished. This is a hard saying; too strong meat; they
cannot bear there should be a must in the case.

THE truth is, these men believe that though none could be justified by their
works, and though CHRIST had never died for our justification, that GOD could
and would have justified and made us happy some other way. What other way? He
had power to love, justify and make us happy without showing any resentment
against sin. Be astonished Oh ye Heavens at this! Had any Preachers in Paul's
time employed all their wit and powers of their mind, to prove it was not
necessary CHRIST should die for our sins, they would hardly have escaped his
anathema maranatha. GOD did justify us by the death of his Son; nor could he
justify us in a Christless Way. Omnipotence itself could not give a being to
it; there is no beauty of holiness in that Way: Therefore, an infinitely holy
GOD could not be the Author of it. If we only suppose it as existing, this will
prove it never could exist. Let us suppose GOD had justified man in such a
Christless Way; could he have glorified his holiness thereby? Every man must
say no; but quite the reverse. Then the Angels could not have cried one to
another holy, holy, holy is the LORD. Then the innumerable company of Angels
and Spirits of just men made perfect, could not have magnified him in their
songs, as a GOD of purer eyes than to behold iniquity. We read, There was
silence in Heaven for the space of half an hour; but there must have been an
everlasting silence in Heaven, as to such praises and hallelujahs, had not GOD
redeemed us by the death of his dear Son.

To suppose that man could have been justified without any atonement for sin is
a monster in divinity, created in the imagination of man's heart by the evil
one, to disparage CHRIST; and yet how has this monster been hugged and
caressed by Christians! It has been matter of much wonder, grief and just
indignation, that learned men, Divines as well as others, should employ their
mental powers to prove there was no necessity of CHRIST's shedding his blood
for the remission of our sins: By which perverse disputing, instead of
magnifying CHRIST with Paul, they diminish him, rob him of his glory and make
sport for the worst enemies he has in the whole world.

LORD JESUS what will thou do for thy great Name! Send forth thy light and thy
truth; destroy this Monster every where under the whole Heavens! -- I shall
finish with only saying, what I can say with a good conscience, that I am
persuaded there is not one man upon earth who knows that he is justified by his
blood, but will say to his honor, that the blood of CHRIST could not be
dispensed with, and were it not for that precious blood he himself could not be
justified: And consequently, that whatever proselites may be made to the polite
Divinity, there will never be so much as one out of the many thousands of
Israel who know that they are justified by GOD, and that the blood of JESUS
CHRIST his Son cleanses them from all sin.

(2.) WE learn the dignity of the Ministers who are employed to preach the
Gospel, which is the Word of GOD himself. GOD speaks by them: They are GOD's
mouth to the people. We read of an Angel's flying through the midst of Heaven,
having the everlasting Gospel. The highest Angel in Heaven would think it a
great honor to be employed in preaching the Gospel of GOD; but GOD would not
speak to us by Angels, whose terror would make us afraid, but by men subject to
like passions with ourselves. And what an honor is it to them that JESUS CHRIST
was the first Preacher of the Gospel, who was sent by his Father to preach! As
he sent them, they are employed the same way in which CHRIST was employed while
he was in the world, which was made by him. Every one of his Ministers thinks
this a greater honor to him than if CHRIST had made him Emperor over the whole
world. And besides, they are dignified with the office and title of
Ambassadors, 2 Cor. v. 20; For we are Ambassadors for CHRIST. Kings and
Potentates send Ambassadors to Rebels and Traitors, to let them know there is
an act of indemnity in their savor, that they may return to their allegiance
and be happy in the favor of their Sovereign. JESUS CHRIST was the first
Ambassador: GOD who sent him to make atonement for our sins by his death, sent
him also to be his Ambassador, to proclaim free remission of sins by the
sacrifice of himself, and whosoever should believe in him should be reconciled
unto GOD and eternally blessed. After he ascended to Heaven, he made his
Apostles and all his Ministers Ambassadors to proclaim the good news of pardon,
peace and reconciliation by the blood of the cross; and Paul says, he and the
other Ambassadors have besought sinners as though GOD himself besought them,
and prayed them as in CHRIST's stead to be reconciled to GOD, who had made him
to be sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of
GOD in him. When men do believe that Ambassadors do beseech them in GOD's
stead, and pray them in CHRIST's stead to be reconciled to GOD, they are in a
moment reconciled and are real Saints. May JESUS CHRIST be with his
Ambassadors, and make them more faithful and successful than ever; that
thousands and thousands may be reconciled to GOD, love GOD and be eternally in
his favor!

(3dly and lastly.) LET us all be exhorted not to be contented with being
almost Christians, thinking ourselves something while we are nothing at all;
men and their faith may perish together. May we have that faith of the
Thessalonians, of which I have been speaking; they believed the Gospel was not
the word of men, but the word of GOD himself, as in truth it was, which works
effectually in all Believers, producing those blessed effects both inwardly and
outwardly, which will end in eternal salvation. Our Savior says, What shall it
profit a man to gain the whole world and lose his own soul. Solemn words!
Implying, every man has a soul to save or to lose; and that is the one thing
needful, that our souls are saved. Once people believed this to be true:
People's concern about the world and the things of it was of a secondary
nature; their main care was that they might lay up in store a good foundation
against the time to come, and lay hold on eternal life! But how great is the
alteration; never did men despise their own souls and neglect the great
salvation more than they do at this day! Religion never was at so low an ebb
since America was America; especially in these parts! It has been said that men
have no more souls to save than the beasts that perish. Some manifest their
Atheism like them in Scripture, of whom we read, The fool has said in his
heart there is no GOD. They have done abominable works; they are forever doing
the works of darkness; the works of the flesh, and the works of the Devil;
committing all iniquity with greediness. Others manifest the same by their
profane and blasphemous speeches, cursing and damning: Their common talk is the
language of Hell. Sometime ago a number of these wretches, having their tongues
set on fire of Hell, a serious woman reproving them, they justified themselves
by saying there was no Hell, nor any Devil, but an Heaven, and that they knew
they should all go to Heaven and be happy forever. See how the Devil's children
love the doctrine of Universal Salvation! See how they are encouraged by it to
continue in sin! This sweet doctrine can operate no other way. The Devil laughs
at those Ministers who think they shall be able to prevail with wicked and
carnal men to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously and godly in the world, by preaching the doctrine of Universal
Salvation, and that Heaven will be the everlasting home of all those who, while
on earth, were Devils incarnate. No man can force himself to believe that the
Apostles carried on the work of the LORD, by preaching this Gospel, any more
than he can force himself to believe that two and two make an hundred. How have
the ways of Zion mourned for the fewness of those that walk in them! And how
have the children of Zion sighed and cried for the abominations among us! It is
the mind of many serious and godly people, that Deism and Atheism with all
their cursed effects have been very much owing to certain strange Doctrines
which have been preached among us with too great acceptance. I shall therefore
spend some time in speaking of these doctrines, and warning against them.

THE principal is the Doctrine of Universal Salvation; or at the second coming
of CHRIST all flesh shall be saved eternally. I shall mention only one of the
many passages that I might mention, which speaks of the end and design of his
coming at the last day, viz. Acts xvii. 31. Where it is said, that GOD has
appointed a day in which he will judge the world in righteousness by that Man
whom he has ordained; whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in that he
has raised him from the dead. There we are told, that GOD has ordained CHRIST
to be the Judge of the world, who is well qualified as being GOD and man; and
that he will judge the world in righteousness, rendering to every man according
to his deeds: Indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish to every soul of
man that does evil; but glory, honor and peace to them that do well. And that
GOD has appointed the very day in which the world shall be judged, which will
be a blessed day to the righteous; but a tremendous day to the wicked: And that
we may be as certain of all this, as we are that GOD raised his Son from the
dead. The Universalists do not profess themselves to be Deists, but Believers
of the Scripture: And yet they do not believe that the judgment shall be set
and the books opened, and that men shall then be judged according to what they
have done in the body, whether good or evil, any more than if they were Deists
and Infidels. That blessed day in which GOD's people and the Devil's people are
to be eternally happy, is supposed to be very near at hand. It has been
asserted, that their writers for thirty years together have declared, that we
might be almost continually looking for CHRIST as coming in the clouds of
Heaven, which must be matter of sweet consolation even to those who have grown
old and grey-headed in the service of the Devil; giving them hopes that they
might enjoy the pleasures of sin for a longer season, even until the coming of
CHRIST, and then, though they knew themselves to be the children of the Devil,
they should certainly appear with him in glory. This is part of that hope which
their Teachers set before them. But what if our LORD delays his coming, and
wicked men are doomed to Tophet? It has been strongly asserted, that the
punishment of Hell does not consist so much in torment as in suffering much
darkness and ignorance: However this suffering cannot last longer than the
second coming of CHRIST, which most Divines think cannot be far off: And then
their afflictions and sufferings which have been but for a moment, in
scripture-stile, will not be worthy to be compared with the glory which shall
be revealed. What glory? They shall be raised with bodies fashioned like unto
the glorious body of JESUS CHRIST, they shall be presented before the throne of
glory with exceeding joy: They shall see GOD as he sees them, and know GOD as
he knows them. They shall know the height, length, depth and breadth of his
love: And they and all the heavenly host being filled with love to GOD and love
to one another, shall sing praises and hallelujahs to him that sits upon the
throne and unto the LAMB. Nor will there be any interruption or period to their
bliss; it will be commensurate with the days of eternity.

THIS must be reviving to the sons of Belial, who bless themselves in their
heart, and say they shall have peace, though they walk in the imagination of
their heart, and in the sight of their eyes: For though such hardened men have
no firm belief of a future punishment, this doctrine must comfort them, that
the punishment in Hell is infinitely shorter in duration, than the happiness of
the heavenly world, which will follow and is eternal. They will not think it
worth while to be much concerned about a punishment which will be more than a
hundred thousand million times less than a moment. The sons of darkness no
doubt do comfort themselves, and will comfort themselves and one another with
such consolations as these. And who can say they are not strong consolations,
if the dear, dear doctrine of Universal Salvation is true, which they hear
preached with so much pleasure and delight. Not that Preachers are to be
faulted if people take pleasure in hearing them preach: It is part of our
office, we are helpers of their joy; we ought to comfort others with the
consolations wherewith we ourselves are comforted of GOD. The Preachers of
Universal Salvation are great comforters; every individual is a Barnabas, a son
of consolation: They preach no terror: They never address their hearers as Paul
addressed the Corinthians; We must all appear before the judgment seat of
CHRIST, that every one may receive the things done in the boay, according to
that he has done, whether it be good or bad: Knowing therefore the terror of
the LORD we persuade men. If any one of their Teachers should preach in such a
strain, how greatly would it be resented! He would indeed be guilty of joining
with Paul in overturning the doctrine of Universal Salvation; and would
undoubtedly be excommunicated for that zeal and love to the souls of men, which
were conspicuous in the Apostle Paul: They are never in their element, but when
they are preaching comfort; in this they have an advantage above other
Ministers, though not an honorable one. Other Ministers are limited: They can
only say, Blessed and happy are all those people whose GOD is the LORD: But
these men can say, Blessed and happy are all those people whose GOD is the
LORD; and at the same time blessed are all those people whose God is the Devil.
For they all hold, the whole human race are entitled to that Salvation which is
by CHRIST, which cannot be lost* If it is supposed it may be lost, they are
like the foolish woman who pulled down the house which she built with her own
hands. The worst of men have that title to salvation, which is of more worth
than the whole world; they have that good part that can never be taken from
them. If a man has a vast estate which is firm by law, how is he loved,
esteemed and regarded as a rich man? That man therefore that has such a good
part in CHRIST which can never be taken away, must be looked upon even in this
world as rich toward GOD and happy. Their durable riches are in reversion;
they are to be put in possession of them at the second coming of CHRIST. All
bliss, glory and happiness is to be their portion; there will be no
interruption or period to the heavenly glory; it will be commensurate with the
days of eternity.

IT may be said, you have asserted the eternity of their happiness before, but
have not proved it; It is absolutely certain that it is without any period?
Indeed it is, You that are acquainted with your bibles know that besides its
being called everlasting life, it is styled an incorruptible; that is, an
eternal inheritance, everlasting consolations, eternal redemption, etc. Its
being called ( Heb. ii. 3.) so great salvation implies as much; for if it had
not been an eternal salvation, it would have been infinitely less: It would
have been a little Salvation. To which we may add, the testimony of all
Christians, who declare with joy, that those who are redeemed by CHRIST shall
be with GOD, and eternally happy in his love. After they have been with GOD in
glory as many thousands of ages as there are spires of grass on the ground,
they will be no nearer the period to their bliss than when they were at first
admitted to it. And after they have enjoyed it as many thousands of ages more
as there are drops of water in the ocean, they have approached no nearer to a
period. The same may be said with regard to their enjoying this felicity as
many thousands of ages as there are sands on the sea shore. Oh eternity!
eternity! eternity! One cannot think of their happiness without calling them
blessed. Blessed, eternally blessed are the people in such a case! And yet
these eternally blessed ones while they lived on earth, (who can believe it?)
had no other GOD but the Devil. This is the Creed of the Universalists. But it
is contrary to the Word which assures us that GOD is of purer eyes than to
behold iniquity: That the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of GOD; and
that no unholy persons shall ever dwell with him. Such blasphemous contempt of
the truth and holiness of GOD ought to be shocking to all Christians. There are
many Christians who would not oppose the truth and holiness of GOD, so much as
is necessary to hold Universal Salvation for the whole World: The Author is one
of them* Their Religion is also contrary to the very light of nature, which
teaches, that none are happy after death but those who have lived virtuous and
moral lives. These blind men are blinder than the blind Heathens! The Apostle
Paul could never preach any other doctrine but this, that they and they only
who have their fruit unto holiness shall have their end eternal life. If any of
these Universalists had lived in Paul's day, and declared that thousands and
millions will live with GOD in Heaven, who lived without GOD in the world, and
served the Devil to their latest breath, Paul would have cursed their Religion
heartily in the name of the LORD. I believe my Readers will join in saying that
Paul would have cursed that Religion with a curse. Possibly some of the
Universalists may be of the same mind, and yet not think it worth while to
alter their Religion for so small a matter as Paul's being against them. It
appears by what has been said now as before, that these men must shine and be
imminent for comforting those who are cast down. The truth is, they are
qualified by their own divinity, not by GOD's divinity, to out-comfort all the
Ministers upon the face of the earth. The Scripture teaches us to distinguish
between Comforters and Comforters. GOD, says, Isa. xl. 1. Comfort ye, comfort
ye my people. He would have them comforted by knowing that their iniquities are
pardoned, and that they shall be happy forever.

WE read of some who comfort others by prophesying smooth things, ( Isa. xxx.
10,) but not right things. Such are the Comforters I am speaking of. Oh what
smooth, pallatable and flesh and blood doctrine do they preach, that their
people may be always rejoicing! Do they never bid them rejoice with fear and
trembling? I say no: This would be to murder their own divinity. How do they
quiet them with regard to that text, Heb. iv. 1. Let us therefore fear, lest a
promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to come
short of it? By telling them they need not fear missing the heavenly rest. That
it is impossible any one should come short of it; for then the gospel of
Universal Salvation would not be true. All the people of GOD therefore, and all
the Devil's people shall as certainly enjoy that rest forever, as if they were
in present possession of it. Our Savior speaks of it in Matt. xvi. as a
dreadful thing for a man to lose his own soul. How will they pacify them as to
this? By telling them that learned and critical Divines may put such a meaning
to CHRIST's words as may be consistent with Universal Salvation. What miserable
streights and shifts are these men put to to keep their beloved doctrine alive?
There are no signs of life in it: It is dead, dead, dead. And as to being
prepared for the day of judgment, which has been the concern of serious people
from the beginning, these merry Teachers can tell their merry Disciples, that
all the world, even the worst of the Devil's children are prepared for what is
called the judgment of the great day, and will be able to stand before the Son
of Man, who comes not to condemn them, but to make them blessed and happy
forever. So that the day of the wrath of GOD and the revelation of his
righteous judgment, will be a time of refreshing to all the children of wrath;
and none are more sure that they are living in this world and serving the
Devil, than they are sure that when CHRIST comes they shall appear with him in
glory. Such sweet cordials do these sons of consolation administer to all the
Devil's children in the Universe! Satan would not desire to have them comforted
more; and wonders how Christian Ministers can comfort them so much: But they
comfort them by prophesying smooth things and not right things, and are
therefore miserable comforters. The Prophet describes them as sewing pillows
under all arm-holes; and weak and wicked people being much comforted by them
are in danger of being comforted into Hell. None are in danger but those who
despise their own souls.

I HAVE finished what I had to say of the doctrine that all flesh shall be
happy forever at the second coming of CHRIST, which has caused much grief and
sorrow of heart to many serious and godly persons, and no wonder, for they love
CHRIST and want that all men should honor him from the rising of the sun to the
going down of the same. They cannot bear that any should dishonor him by
preaching a gospel in his name contrary to truth and his divine perfections;
they love the souls of men. They have some of that spirit of CHRIST, that
infinite Lover of souls, which causes them to long for their salvation. Their
hearts desire and prayer to GOD is, that Ministers by preaching may save their
own souls and the souls of them that hear them.

THERE is another doctrine that has grieved their hearts, called Origin's
Doctrine, akin to the former; which is this, that at the second coming of
CHRIST the saints shall obtain eternal salvation; but the wicked shall be
turned into Hell, suffering the wrath of GOD and the torments of Hell until
they are purified and fit for Heaven. I have said there is a likeness between
them; let us consider wherein they are alike, and wherein they differ. They all
preach and believe one and the same gospel; they all hold that CHRIST being
made perfect by suffering, is become the Author of eternal salvation to all
them that obey him, and to all them who do not obey him. This gospel does not
sound well; the sound is better then the sense, for the sense is a most
horrible contradiction to the truth of GOD.

THEY agree likewise in holding the absolute, infallible and eternal Salvation
of the whole human race. But while others hold that Universal Salvation will be
immediately after the second appearance of CHRIST, Origen's people declare,
that at the last day the wicked shall be turned into Hell, and suffer the wrath
of GOD and the vengeance of Hellfire for hundreds of years; and that for
suffering these torments so long and so well, and especially for the true
holiness which they attain to by Hellfire. Horrible absurdity! They are
admitted to Heaven, although but little indebted to CHRIST, and are happy
forever. This is PURGATORY! This is PURGATORY! and I may add with the Prophet,
this is WICKEDNESS. It is founded on the insufficiency of CHRIST's sacrifice
and man's merit. Origin intended it as an engine to beat down justification by
faith only, through grace, without the deeds of the law. This is the Gospel of
GOD! And this is the Gospel of us Protestants which ought to be dear to us as
our own lives. Formerly it had been dearer to some than their own lives. When
any people by hearing the word preached, or by any other means believe in
Purgatory, they hope that if their lives should not be according to the Gospel
they shall go to Heaven by the way of Purgatory. This is the common hope of
those who are called after Origin's name: They seem to have a sure hope that if
they turn their backs upon godliness, and serve satan till death, they shall be
eternally happy; and they rejoice in this hope: it is owing to the same
antinomian boldness that they have decided, that all that have ever lived, or
shall live wicked lives in this world, shall infallibly obtain salvation, with
eternal glory, by the idol called PURGATORY. I have called it an idol. God's
word don't own it: to honor that would be to dishonor him. And now God, in
his providence, suffers that antichristian idol to come amongst us protestants
The learned Theophilus Gale assures us, that when Origin preached purgatory in
Alexandria, which he learned in Plato's school (not by reading his bible) he
was looked on as the most eminent man for promoting papisim and
antichristianism. A protestant therefore as a protestant, cannot wish success
to those who are preaching up Origen's purgatory among us.
(no man as a protestant, can wish it god speed) we should be on our guard
against it, for though that idol can never save one soul, many judge it has
already slain its thousands; for nothing is more easy than for a man to loose
his own soul, by way of Purgatory. God says, other foundation can no man lay,
than that which is LAID, which is Jesus Christ.

The death of Christ is our only hope toward God, if any therefore add
Purgation to it, as the manner of some is, Christ shall profit them nothing,
for it will be false doctrine as long as the world stands, to assert that a
christian man is one who makes Jesus Christ his hope and purgatory too. Let
wise and serious men weigh this in the balance, and speak their minds. The
friends of purgatory should tell us, if they are able, whence it is that the
same wrath of the Almighty which hardens evil angels, should soften the wicked
men in hell, make them real saints, and lovers of an holy God. But they are not
able, they have not one word to say. The doctrine which teaches that men learn
to be lovers of God, by being damned in hell with the devil and his angels, is
monstrous! By the way, is it not strange that learned divines and others who
are afraid of all mystery in religion, should swallow Origen's monster! There
is no monster in religion more hedious than this. Let us take a view ot it, how
came any of us to love God, we love him in God's way, not in Origen's way. He
loved us first, and sent his son to be a propitiation for us. We believed the
love and kindness of God and our Savior, and returned love for love. So God
tells us by his prophet Hosea, that he draws us with the cords of a man, and
with the bands of love. Here is nothing but love, love, love. This divinity is
from Heaven; that which teaches that we love God by being damned with devils is
from beneath. We may boldly say it is an abomination to the Lord. Origin, Above
fourteen hundred years ago Origin turned hell into a purgatory, and ever since
he and all his followers have been furnished with a purgatory, as well as the
heathens; for heathens always had a purgatory. The Latin poets tell us the
heathens believed no other hell but a purgatory; and Origen's christians
believed no other hell but a purgatory.
the creator of Purgatory, created it: his Purgatory could not exist without
it, therefore the hearty friends of purgatory are hearty friends to that
religion which the soul of God hates.

One would think that the tasting of the second death and the pains of hell,
instead of creating love to God would cause the haters of God to hate him more.
The scriptures call all wicked men haters of God, they hate him for his
holiness, and for his preparing a hell for the workers of iniquity; how much
more then will they hate him when they open their eyes in hell, being in
torments, and feel that God is a consuming fire? -- they will have no rest day
nor night, but the smoke of their torment will ascend continually. Enmity must
therefore increase, by falling into the hands of the living God, and by knowing
what it is to dwell with devouring fire. Add to this, that we are again and
again told, in the book of the Revelations, what effects God's wrath and
torments will have upon the wicked, viz. they will gnaw their tongues for pain,
look upwards to Heaven, but will not repent of their wickedness. It is a maxim
in philosophy, that the same causes will for ever produce the same effects.
This therefore alone would be sufficient to kill purgatory stone dead, if it
were not already dead. Origen's divinity is sometimes contrary to scripture,
reason and common sense. This is applicable not only to his purgatory, etc. but
to his doctrine of worshipping all the angels of heaven, and praying to
departed saints, which duties we may suppose the blind, zealous man, practiced
every day. His prayer to the angels, and his prayer to St. Job, which are not
without blasphemy, will be presented to the reader in a blank page at the end.
Origen's wild notions in religion make up the creed of his most serious
followers, though they do not come to them with a thus says the Lord; they
come to them with a thus says Origin. It is strange to think with what deep
contempt and indignation the Origenists treat their brethren, who hold that all
flesh shall be saved by Christ when he comes again, not showing any respects to
the holy ordinance of purgatory learned by Origin from the writings of an
heathen philosopher. They represent them as working against God, and as
teaching people to turn his grace into wantonness, which is the way to fill the
world with sin and wickedness. The author has nothing to say for them; their
religion borders on atheism; the partition between is but thin. Nor have they
much to say for themselves; but the author is bound in conscience to say what
follows, viz. that an understanding man who reads his bible may know assuredly,
that Universal Salvation is an heinous contradiction to the truth of God by
many scriptures; the author will mention but one. We all know that when Christ
commanded his apostles to preach salvation by faith, they were to finish with
these dreadful words, He that believes not shall be damned. By which words he
let Nicodemus know, that he meant, he that believes not shall perish. Our late
preachers are quite contrary to Jesus Christ. He whose word was the word of
God, declares once and again, that they that do not believe on him shall perish
(going to purgatory is not perishing) Christ's antagonists say, that no
unbelievers shall perish, no not so much as one. These contradictors will say
that they have the mind of Christ, and they really preach that preaching, that
Christ bids them preach. Their gospel is not according to godliness. It is
directly against godliness, and tends to promote all manner of ungodliness, as
natural as the sparks fly upwards. The worthy parsons therefore, before
mentioned, look on universal Salvation, Origen's way or any way, to be only
religious trumpery, and antichristian stuff, calculated to stupify conscience,
harden men's hearts, to corrupt their morals, and to make them worse and worse.
They know to their grief that such divinity has produced such effects, and are
persuaded that it will produce such effects wherever it is, and wherever it may
be permitted to spread and be encouraged. From what has been said against
these tenets, the word of exhortation to us all is, to beware that we be not
carried away with them, if we are acquainted with our bibles we shall know they
are contrary to the current of scripture. May we be kept from all these and all
other errors, and be sound in the faith. May our faith be that which is from
God, which brings men to God, and makes them happy in God forever. Such was the
faith of the Thessalonians, who received the gospel as the word of God, which
always works effectually; we should be jealous over our selves, lest our
faith should be only the effect of custom and education; if God's word is
received by us as his word, we shall find it easy to trust in Christ, though
our sins are more in number than the hairs of our heads, and instead of trying
and trying to love Christ, our hearts will be drawn out to love him, and to
live to him as real saints do, and we shall be happy in this world, and in the
world to come most blessed forever. Blessed be God if we have been made
partakers of this precious faith. Paul, and his fellow laborers, thanked God
continually for bestowing it on the Thessalonians, and if we have clear
evidence that our faith is the same, we shall thank God for it every day and
hour of our lives. May the lives we live in the flesh be by the faith of the
Son of God, who loved us and gave himself for us. May we be every day
constrained by faith and love, to live to Christ, against all opposition from
earth and hell, whereby we shall answer the end of Christ's giving himself a
ransom for us; for he did not die merely to deliver us from hell, and the wrath
to come -- then he would have been the minister of sin; but he died to redeem
us from all iniquity, and that we might not live any longer to our selves, but
to him who died for our sin, and rose again for our justification. All
believers have been taught this religion of God. Paul says we live to the Lord,
and yet how small a part of our time do we live to him! only that part when we
have respect to all his commandments: when we keep them by his grace, and aim
at his honor and glory. We have all reason to blush before our divine Master.
May we resolve, depending upon his strength, that we will live to him more than
ever, as long as he shall hold our souls in life. And to animate us, let us
consider that this is a reasonable life, an honorable life, a joyful and a
blessed life. 1st. It is a reasonable life: come now let us reason together
says the Lord; and the religion of Jesus Christ is said to be a reasonable
service, Romans xii. 1 verse. Nothing can be more reasonable than that we should
live to Christ, who died for our salvation. When wicked men gratify their
lusts, they are condemned* in their own consciences, for being what the
scripture calls wicked and unreasonable men, 2 Thessa. iii. 2. but when we live
to Christ, conscience applauds for yielding a reasonable service. Nor can we
ever repent of that reasonable service, whatever dangers, difficulties and
persecutions may be the consequence. Nay, if we are called to seal his truth
with our blood, it must be pleasing to us to think that we die for his sake,
who loved us with a love stronger than death. 2d. It is an honorable life,
this is the consequence of its being a reasonable life. The scripture calls it
the life of God. It is in some sort such a life as they live in heaven. Whereas
they who are governed by their lusts are fellow commoners with the beasts that
perish. Horace calls them hogs; and Cicero calls them horses. The scripture
which gives to every one his just character, styles them brutish men, Psalm.
xlix. 10 as if they were a sort of quadrupeds, and accordingly, Antiochus who
took upon himself the name of Epiphanes, illustrious as if he outshined all the
kings upon earth, is, by God, called a vile person, Dan. xi. 21. And the people
of God look upon all such selfish, sensual men, as vile persons, though raised
to the top of the world. The same scripture allows the saints to be honorable:
they are the only right honorable ones upon earth. What honorable names are
given to them by God? some of which, are kings and priests unto God. He also
honors them internally. He says to them well done good and faithful servants.
They have the applauses of God and their own consciences, and are consent with
the honor which comes from God alone. Mr. Hugh Peter's, says, that after he was
a true believer, and consequently was no stranger to internal honors, he never
thought the honors of this world worth minding. Such men are high born: they
are born from above; they are acquainted with high life; they look down upon
crowns, scepters and diadems, with contempt, as little things which can give
but small satisfaction to believers, who are all men of great souls.

Grandeur of soul for ever brings contempt of sublunary things. God delights to
honor them, who, like their Savior, seek not honor to themselves, he causes
them to be esteemed by the excellent ones of the earth: who regard them much
because they do not live like the men of the world, to themselves; but unto the
Lord, honoring him and themselves too at the same time. Nay, sometimes great
men who have no religion regard them much. They see in them a more excellent
spirit than the spirit that is in the world: they see in them that tenderness
of conscience, and that nice sense of honor which they can find in no other
men; and they honor them with many honors. 3d. This is a joyful and a blessed
life. The scriptures speak much of the joy of believers; they rejoice greatly,
they are ready to pity those that go to the world for their joy: for it seems
to them comparatively, that nothing deserves the name of joy, but joy in the
Holy Ghost. I need not spend time in quoting the passages, to set forth the
exceeding great joys of the first believers. Those who read their bibles can
easily quote many of them and would not be helped by my quotations. An
important question naturally arises here, viz. whether we christians in these
days have joys and comforts equal to those of the first christians. It will
take some time to answer it; I hope it will not be time lost. Those believers
who have assurance of their justification, which was common in those early
days, rejoice and triumph in Christ as they did; but alas! how few are there,
who can adopt Paul's triumphant language in behalf of believers: It is God who
justifies, it is Christ that died, etc. etc. Romans viii. Most serious christians
will own that their religion has not made them happy, yet they at best go on
between hope and fear, and must be in bondage through fear of death. Nay, some
that have rejoiced greatly and for a long time, sink into the horrible pit, and
into the miry clay. They go mourning without the sun, and refuse to be
comforted. We do not learn from the apostolic writings, that any conscientious
christians were filled with horrors of conscience and fears of hell. To the
benefit of the first christians a sort of divinity, which existed afterward,
had no existence then, viz. That great distresses and humiliations are
necessary to faith, and that men must be so greatly humbled as to acquiesce in
some sense, in thinking of their own damnation. As there was no such divinity
then, it is reasonable to think there was no such horrors and distresses among
the christians; had it been otherwise the first enemies of Christ would have
availed themselves of it. They would have proclaimed it aloud, that
christianity was enemical to the peace and quiet of mankind; that its votaries
were a gloomy sort of mortals, and that it would not be strange if some of the
most serious christians should pine away with grief, and die with their new
religion. The silence of the apologists is proof enough, that from the
beginning it was not so. The first christians magnified Christ by their
conscientious and joyful lives. What is the reason then, that many now adays,
hang down their heads like bulrushes, and by their sorrowful countenances and
sighings frighten away others from the joyful religion of Christ? they get
under the law and keep under the law, with regard to the great scripture
doctrine of justification by faith without works. When they believe this, as
Paul and other christians did, there could be no distress and horrors of
darkness among those who name the name of Christ. Christians have a sense of
the worth of their souls, and sometimes a great sense, but they cannot submit
to the righteousness which is of God by faith. They do not seem to be holy and
humble enough yet to employ the Mediator, this is a common source of trouble to
serious persons, sometimes of long continuance; and those who endeavor to heal
them oftentimes make them more melancholy and self righteous than ever. The
truth is, they keep away from the Mediator, who is the Consolation of Israel.
How then can they be comforted! There is but one way, and that is by believing
the gospel to be true. It will be said, Is this enough to cure all distressed,
melancholy, desponding christians through christendom? only to believe that
the gospel is true, the true word of God? Most certainly Paul tells the
Thessalonians, that they who had received the gospel as the word of God were
true believers. The same Paul declares over and over, that all believers are
trusters in Christ. If men could believe the gospel to be the true and faithful
word of God without trusting in Christ, he could have had no ground for these
sinonomies; but it is impossible in the nature of the thing to believe that the
gospel came down from heaven, without trusting in Christ. If I dare not trust
in Christ because I am so great a sinner, I do not believe the gospel is from
God. When I am convinced in my soul and conscience that God himself is the
author of the good news, all the devils in hell cannot stop me from trusting in
Christ one moment longer. This was Paul's own experience, when he believed God
himself was the author of the news, that the chief of sinners were welcome to
salvation. He trusted in Christ that moment, without staying to see himself
better. There is not that man living upon the face of God's earth, who knows
that he has trusted in Christ, and when he began to trust in him, but will own
that he trusted in him not as a saint, nor as a piece of a saint, but as a
sinner. We have proved that all that have received the gospel as the word of
God, are trusters in Jesus Christ; and we know the scriptures are full of
expressions of the joy, peace and comfort of those who trust in him. Sometimes
they are said to be filled with joy, and their joy is said to be unspeakable
and glorious. But peace, rest and comfort are every where said to be the
experience of those who trust that through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
they themselves shall be saved. The point therefore is settled, that all
dejected, distressed, and desponding christians must be comforted, when they
are taught of God to believe, that the gospel is his very word. Doubts and
distresses must all flee away like darkness before the sun. For then they will
see that the worst men and women out of hell, if they want nothing but the
death of Christ to recommend them, will be accepted of God; they themselves
want nothing but the death of Christ. This is making the Lord Jesus Christ
their trust, before, they were afraid to trust him, it may be for years
together; but now the number and greatness of their sins do not keep them away.
Nay, if besides all their other guilt they have been murderers of fathers and
murderers of mothers, such complicated wickedness could not discourage them
from making Christ their trust. For they would know this to be the word of God,
That where sin has abounded, grace has abounded much more: and that sin is
not so mighty to condemn as the blood of Christ is mighty to justify and save.
They would be sprinkled from an evil and condemning conscience, and would serve
Christ with gladness of heart.

Oh Christ! thou great Light of the world, shine forth. Let the gospel come in
much assurance, and in the holy ghost; that being received as the word of God
and of Christ. Thousands and thousands of poor and distressed souls may be
brought out of darkness into marvelous light; and, like the first christians,
glorify thee by their conscientious, and joyful lives. I have now answered the
question more largely then I intended at first: though I hope not unprofitably,
for I have not only shown that the first christians were vastly superior to us
in peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, and the reasons why we are so little
acquainted with the consolations of God, but have also shown what will be the
certain and infallible cure. I hope my concession will not discourage any, and
make them contended, though the consolations of God are but small. May it have
no worse effect upon an of us but this, to make us determine that by the grace
of Christ we will not let him go till we drink deeper of the cup of
consolation; if we (...) wrestle with him, his grace will be sufficient (...)
us. May we observe that injunction, that they which believe should be careful
to maintain good works: and may we fill up our time with evangelical duties.
The comforts of our holy religion are to be found only in the practice of the
duties of it. Those whom the scripture speaks of as so much filled with the
joys of the Holy Ghost did not live to Christ now and then as we are prone to
do; but daily, hourly and habitually. If we can adopt their language and say,
that for us to live is Christ, and that we want to live in the world, that he
may be magnified by us in our mortal bodies. We shall have those joys also that
will make us blessed. Where is the blessedness which ye spoke of? That great
philosopher Seneca, wrote much on the subject of a blessed life: other learned
philosophers did the same; but all their learning was no better than learned
ignorance, for they knew nothing of the blessedness that comes by faith. A
believer is reconciled to God by the death of his Son: he has the love of God
shed abroad in his heart by the Holy Ghost. He shouts for joy -- God makes him
exceeding glad with the light of his countenance. God is his God, not only to
worship and serve, but to enjoy and make him happy in this howling wilderness.
He knows that when he is absent from the body he shall be present with the
Lord, which is far better. By dying he goes to God, to God his exceeding joy;
and, with all the heavenly host, shall be in his immediate presence, where is
fullness of joy, and at his right hand, where are pleasures for ever more. This
is the blessedness which comes by faith, which Seneca and the other
philosophers could have no idea of: are we acquainted with it? Blessed be God
for it, the more we are acquainted with it, the more we shall glorify him. God
is glorified by the way in which we attain to it, and by the blessedness
itself. He is glorified in the way by which it is attained: it is by faith, by
strong faith, and faith, especially strong faith, is for the glory of God.
Strong love accompanies such faith. We shall be constrained to yield that exact
obedience to the commands of God which no man can yield, who keeps them to be
justified by them. Our Savior says, when we bring forth much fruit, our
heavenly Father is glorified by us; and speaking of himself says, I am
glorified in them. Christ will manifest himself to them, and God will shine
into their souls, and cause them to know that his loving kindness is better
than life. And this blessedness will be for the glory of God, and the honor of
Christ's divine religion. When men are full of worldly joy they cannot hide it
-- when men are filled with joy in the Holy Ghost, it cannot be concealed from
their acquaintance. Humility will not conceal it: the high and lofty One who
inhabits eternity, will comfort the humble and contrite. Humility is the
spiritual vacuum; the more any are emptied of themselves, the more will they be
filled with the joys of heaven. Others therefore beholding them, and seeing
that they live in all good conscience, and go on their way to heaven rejoicing,
may be convinced that God is with them of a truth, and glorify God with them in
the day of their visitation, whereby they will be partakers with them in their
joys while in this world, and in the everlasting joys of the kingdom of Heaven,
which God of his infinite mercy grant may be the portion of us all for Jesus
Christ's sake.

AMEN.
ORIGEN's Form of Prayer to Angels:
COME, O Angel, receive one, in word, converted from his former error, from the
doctrine of devils, from iniquity, speaking highly; and receiving him as a good
physician -- Cherish and instruct him; he is a little one, he is born to day,
an old man growing young again; and receive, retributing to him, the baptism of
the second regeneration; and call to thee other companions of thy ministry that
all ye equally may instruct in the faith who were sometimes deceived.

Homil. 1. in Ezekiel, fol. 133.4. ORIGIN directs a Prayer to St. Job in this
manner:
O BLESSED Job, living for ever with God, abiding in the presence of the King
and Lord; pray for us miserable ones, that also the terrible majesty of God may
protect us in all tribulations, and deliver us from all the oppressions of the
wicked one, number us with the just, and write us with them who are saved, and
make us rest with them in his Kingdom, where we may perpetually magnify him
with the saints.


