MR. BRECK'S CENTURY SERMON.

Past Dispensations of PROVIDENCE called to Mind. In A SERMON, DELIVERED in the
first Parish in SPRINGFIELD, on the 16th of October 1775. Just one hundred
Years from the burning of the Town by the Indians.

BY ROBERT BRECK, A. M. Pastor of the Church there.

We have heard with our ears, O GOD, our fathers have told us what works thou
did in their days, in the times of old. HARTFORD: PRINTED BY BARLOW and
BABCOCK, M,DCC,LXXXIV.

THE author of the following sermon, for the sake of preserving the memory of
some ancient facts, more particularly relative to the town of Springfield, upon
application made to him therefore in the time of his last sickness, consented to
the publication of it: But at such a period of his illness that he was unable
to pay the least attention to the revising and preparing of it for the press:
which, had it been otherwise, no doubt would have appeared to much greater
advantage.

A CENTURY SERMON.
JOSHUA IV, 4 -- 7. Then Joshua called the twelve men, whom he had prepared of
the children of Israel, out of every tribe a man. And Joshua said unto them,
pass over before the ark of the Lord your God into the midst of Jordan, and
take ye up every man of you a stone upon his shoulder, according unto the
number of the tribes of the children of Israel: That this may be a sign among
you, that when your children ask their fathers in time to come, saying, what
mean you by these stones? Then ye shall answer them, That the waters of Jordan
were cut off before the ark of the covenant of the Lord, when it passed over
Jordan the waters of Jordan were cut off; and these stones shall be for a
memorial unto the children of Israel forever.
IT is a great truth, and highly important, that the same GOD who created the
universe governs it. We have the fullest evidence that divine providence
superintends all human affairs: and that, as GOD is the author of all the good
which is enjoyed or seen in this world, so there is no evil in the world and
the LORD has not done it. He forms the light and creates darkness, he makes
peace and creates evil; the LORD does all these things. Nothing comes to pass
in the world, but by the ordering or permission of divine providence. It would
be well if we could always maintain a sense of this great truth. But it is
lamentably true, that we are very apt to look only at means and instruments,
both in mercies and judgments, and take no notice of the hand that steers and
conducts all things. I remember to have read a history of a voyage round the
world, in which they who made it went through many and great perils and
dangers, and were many times most marvellously delivered, and yet, which was a
most unpardonable omission, not the least notice taken of GOD or providence. It
is certainly our duty and wisdom to be careful observers of the works of divine
providence. The psalmist, after mentioning some of the works of providence,
says, Whosoever is wise and will observe these things, even they shall understand
the loving kindness of the LORD. Psalm. 107, 43.

IT is profitable, not only to observe the occurrences of our own day, but to
read history, and examine the records of past ages; to take notice of the
dealings of divine providence toward former generations. And while we are
reading, we should not forget what the Apostle says when he had been speaking
of GOD's dealings toward the ancient Jews. All these things happened unto them
for ensamples: and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of
the world are come. 1 Cor. 10. 10.

GOD'S dealings with the Jews are one continued series of wonders: and great
care was taken in the sacred history, to transmit the knowledge of them to
posterity. They are not only registered in the sacred records, but God directed
that there should be some visible signs, and lasting monuments erected, to
perpetuate the memory of some of his mighty acts. Thus he instituted the
passover, to be a memorial of the deliverance of his people out of their
Egyptian bondage: and the LORD'S supper, to be an everlasting memorial of the
death of CHRIST, whereby we are delivered from a bondage infinitely worse than
that of Egypt. And when he divided Jordan for his people to go over and take
possession of the promised land, he directed that a monument of stone should be
erected, to be a memorial of this miraculous event, and to transmit the
knowledge of it down to latest posterity, as we learn from our text.

PRESENT things so engage our attention that we are apt to forget the past; we
therefore need some signs, some visible signs, to be remembrancers to us. And
it is well that they should be durable signs; otherwise the knowledge of them
will die, if not with the present, yet before many generations are past. The
children of Israel therefore were directed to erect a monument of stone,
meterials which decay not with time, so that if their children in after ages
should ask their fathers, what mean you by these stones, they might answer
them, that the waters of Jordan were cut off before the ark of the covenant of
the LORD, when it passed over Jordan: and these stones were designed to be a
memorial of this event. The dividing of Jordan was a very notable miracle, and
worthy to be kept in remembrance.

But not only the miraculous works of GOD, but many other works of divine
providence, both merciful and corrective, are worthy to be had in everlasting
remembrance. There are no people but what, at one time or mother, are the
subjects of remarkable providence; some of remarkable judgments, others of
signal mercies and deliverances: these ought to be carefully noticed in the
time of them, and faithful annals kept of them, that so children may know what
GOD did, for or against their fathers in their day. And it would be well that
not only the facts themselves should be registered, but the moral causes both
of mercies, and judgments traced out, as far as we are capable of understanding
them.

And here lies the peculiar excellency of the sacred history. Many profane
historians give us a true and faithful account of the events which happened in
the times of which they wrote; and perhaps they point out truly the way and
manner in, and means by which these events were brought on: but the sacred
history, in addition to these, opens and explains to us the moral reasons, why
the great governor of the world conferred this public blessing, or granted this
signal deliverance, or visited his people with this sore judgment. It is
evident to every one who reads his bible, that GOD'S public dealing with the
Jews was suited to their moral state. If virtue generally prevailed among them,
they flourished and were happy; if vice and wickedness gained ground among
them, they were visited with judgments of one kind or another: and if one
judgment was not sufficient to reform them, GOD sent more and heavier, and as
he threatened, Levit. 26. punished them seven times more for their sins. When
they reformed he lightened his hand; and when they proved finally incorrigible,
he gave them up to utter ruin. And GOD has, I doubt not, dealt much in the same
way with other nations of the world, though their historians have been two
negligent of making observations. They have given a faithful narration of the
notable events which have happened, of the signal mercies and deliverance
received, and of the calamities suffered, and of the immediate instruments by
which they were brought about; but, which I think to have been a very great
neglect, the moral causes have not been attended to or noticed by them.

IF the moral state of past ages had been carefully noticed, and the consequent
dealings of GOD with them faithfully transmitted down to posterity, it would
have been highly useful to us, and have had, by the blessing of GOD, happy
influence upon our own moral conduct. When we observed that in a course of
virtue, our fathers flourished and were happy, it must afford a powerful motive
to their children to immitate them in their virtues and tread in their steps.
When we saw their failings and their sufferings on that account, it would
naturally tend to put us upon our guard, and make us watchful not to split upon
the same rock. When we saw how quick the bright morning of prosperity was
sometimes succeeded by a dark night of adversity, and that hours of rejoicing
were followed with days, yea months of mourning and weeping, one would suppose
that we could not, in a time of prosperity, flatter ourselves that our mountain
stands strong, and that we shall never be moved; that to morrow shall be as
this day and much more abundant: but that we should live constantly dependant
upon GOD; and that although we should rejoice in a day of prosperity, yet we
should rejoice as though we rejoiced not. When we took notice of any signal
appearances of heaven for our fathers, in consequence of their application to
GOD and return to him, it would afford a mighty encouragement to us, to secure
an interest in his special love and favor; to cry to him in our straits; and
to make our peace with him by a sincere repentance, and thorough reformation.
When we read the accounts of the straits, difficulties and dangers which our
fathers underwent, and took notice how they were preserved and carried through
them, and delivered from them, it would afford the best security against
sinking and dispondency in the day of trouble; it would tend to inspire us with
courage and fortitude in a time of difficulty and danger. And when we took
notice how, when they were ready to faint, GOD supported them, and when they
were in perplexities and knew not what to do, and had their eyes unto him he
appeared, and perhaps in ways unexpected, unthought of, brought deliverance to
them, and surprised them with it, so that they were like men that dreamed; if
any thing will, I should think this would beget a firm unshaken trust in GOD,
under the greatest trials and dangers; and excite us to make GOD our refuge at
all times, and repair to him, who is a present help in time of trouble: saying
as in Hab. 3. 17, 18. 19. Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither
shall fruit be in the vine, though the labor of the olive shall fail; and the
field shall yield no meat, and the flock shall be cut of from the field, and
there shall be no herd in the stalls; yet I will rejoice in the LORD, I will
joy in the GOD of my salvation. The LORD GOD is my strength, and he will make
my feet like hinds feet, and he will make me to walk upon mine high places.

THE study of history is very pleasant. There are very few, who have not some
curiosity to look back into past time, and make themselves acquainted with what
was done before they were born. And people in general are peculiarly
entertained with the history of their own country; they are fond of knowing
their own origin, and pleased to be informed of every little incident which
befell their own progenitors. We view ourselves as particularly concerned in
the events which befell our parents; and though others may take no share in
them, yet children feel themselves deeply interested in them.

I HAVE often heard it lamented, that no more care was taken in the first
settlement of this country, to preserve the memory of the early transactions of
our forefathers, of the many hardships and difficulties they endured in this
wilderness, of the perils and dangers they endured, of the signal deliverances
granted to them, and of the distinguishing blessings conferred upon them, both
of a spiritual and temporal nature. It cannot be expected that the history of a
new and infant settlement would be filled with the accounts of such armies,
battles and revolutions as are to be found in the annals of ancient states and
great kingdoms. But however unentertaining a minute, particular history of
New England might be to strangers and foreigners, yet it would be read with
pleasure by us, and it might be read with profit and advantage to us. And
perhaps no country of the same age has afforded more remarkables than
New England has to speak of.

IT is now not quite one hundred and fifty six years since our fathers first
began to form a settlement at Plymouth. The first settlers were puritans,
dissatisfied with the ecclesiastical government of the church of England, and
scrupulous of conforming to the ceremonies which were injoined in their
worship. For their nonconformity they were persecuted in their Ecclesiastical
Courts. To escape persecution, they first fled to Holland, and continued some
years at Leyden. Disliking their situation there, they concluded to remove to
America. In the summer of 1620 they set out on their voyage; and on the ninth
of November discovered the land of Cape Cod. They had designed to form a
settlement further to the southward; but being brought hither, and the winter
near at hand, they concluded to set down here. After beating about upon the
coast for diverse weeks, and finding no place which suited them to make a
settlement in, they at length pitched upon Plymouth; and in the latter end of
December they went to work to prepare shelter for themselves, their families
and goods.

IT is observed, as a smile of heaven upon them, that contrary to their own
intentions they were brought hither; had they gone further southward, as they
intended, to Hudson's River, the country was full of savages: but here, GOD had
before prepared room for them, by a sweeping pestilence which had depopulated
the country.

THERE were no more than one hundred and one souls, who arrived in the harbor
of Cape Cod. Winter was now set in, and they were utterly unprovided with every
accommodation: and no other English settlement on the continent, than a small
poor colony at Virginia; they six or seven hundred miles distant, and not able
to afford them any help or relief. Under these circumstances, they must have a
most dismal prospect: Wherever they turned their eyes nothing but distress
surrounded. However liberty of conscience was, with them, the grand object:
they could not enjoy it in England; and if they might only enjoy it here, it
would make amends for all; they therefore engaged with cheerfulness, in the new
settlement, and underwent incredible hardships, with fortitude; soon were
reduced to great straits, and within five months, one half their number were
dead.

BESIDES the natural increase, there were from time to time, some additions
made to them, by the arrival of some of their friends from England. But
although the increase was but small yet it is observable, that whereas diverse
other attempts had been before made, from purely secular views, to make
settlements within what was then called North Virginia, they had failed; this
small colony, who were influenced by religious motives, stood their ground, and
were slowly increasing; though greatly distressed; at sometimes threatened to
be cut off by the Natives, at other times greatly straitened for want of bread;
if I mistake not, never receiving any supplies from Europe from the very
beginning.

THUS things went till the year 1628; when the consul for New England, having
obtained a patent of the lands in the Massachusetts Bay, sent Mr. Endicott,
with his wife and a small company, to begin a settlement at Salem. The next
year, they sent three ships full of passengers, amounting to between two and
three hundred; and among them four ministers: these safely arrived, and took up
their habitation chiefly at Salem; though some of them soon removed to
Charlestown, and with them one of the ministers.

IN the spring of the Year 1639, there sailed from England 10 or 11 ships, some
of them very large, filled with passengers of every useful occupation, with
many live cattle. In this fleet, which safely arrived early in the summer, were
many people of substance; among whom were Governor Winthrop, Deputy Governor
Dudley, and many of the patentees of the colony: and I find that William
Pynchon Esquire. who was Treasurer of the Colony, and father of this town of
Springfield, was one among them. Mr. Hubbard, in his history, says, that about
this time there was such increase made, by the occasion of many hundreds who
every year flocked after them, that in five or six years there were twenty
considerable towns built and peopled; and many of the towns first planted
became so filled with inhabitants, that like bees they were ready to swarm into
new plantations.

ONE of the swarms of which Mr. Hubbard speaks, pitched in this town. It is
strange that any, in the then present state of the country, should be willing
to be separated so far from their brethren: but so early as May 1635, some of
the inhabitants of Roxbury, Dorchester, New-Town and Watertown prayed the
General Court, (then sitting at New-Town, now called Cambridge) that they might
have liberty to remove to Connecticut River. This was granted to them, provided
they would continue under their jurisdiction. The grant is dated May 6th 1635.
In consequence of this grant, the petitioners made their way, with their wives
and children, into this wilderness, and laid the foundation of the towns of
Weathersfield, Hartford, Windsor and Springfield.

THEY that planted themselves down in this town came from Roxbury. It seems
there were only eight men who came at first, one of which was the
beforementioned William Pynchon Esquire. a pattentee of the colony. They were here
early in the year 1636. They entered into covenant with each other, which
covenant is now upon your public records; it is dated May 14th and signed by
William Pynchon and seven others, who probably did not long continue here, as
there is not, nor has been for many years, any of either of the names remaining
among us. The first article in the covenant was, that they would, as soon as
might be, provide a minister to carry on the work of GOD among them. Though
they were thus few in number, in the midst of the savages, not an English
inhabitant within twenty miles, and they now beginning a settlement, yet they
resolved not to live without the Gospel; an evidence of a true christian zeal,
which does honor to them, and is worthy of the attention and imitation of
others.

THEY began well, and GOD blessed their beginnings. Some of their friends soon
followed them from Roxbury; and many of the progenitors of the present
inhabitants were early here: insomuch that, although at their first sitting
down, they did not think of having more than forty, or at farthest fifty
families, yet I find by your public records, that in February 1664, there were
no less than seventy three male inhabitants in the town. And according to their
covenant, they did early supply themselves with a worthy minister, the Rev. Mr.
George Moxon, who had, before he came to America, received, ordination in the
church of England.

AT what time a church was first gathered in the town, I cannot ascertain; but
it appears, by your records, that Mr. Moxon was in the town in the year 1637,
and continued here with his family fifteen years, till in the year 1652; when
Mr. Pynchon, the father of the town, having received some ill treatment from
the province on account of his religious principles, he with Capt. Smith his
son in law, went to England, and with them went the minister of the town, the
Rev. Mr. Moxon, never to return. This was a day of darkness with this town; I
remember to have formerly heard some of the aged people, who had it from their
forefathers say, that it went near to break up the settlement. But Mr. Pynchon
left behind him a son, who was afterward a great blessing and very useful, not
only here, but in the province. He lived to an advanced age, was had in the
highest veneration by your fathers, and remembered by some who are now living.

AFTER Mr. Moxon's departure, this town was destitute of a settled minister
nine years. Mr. Hooker (probably he who afterward settled at Farmington) for
some time preached to the people. One Mr. Thompson also preached among them,
some part of the time; so that they were not for this space destitute of the
gospel. At length Mr. Peletiah Glover a native of Dorchester, came among them.
I find by a note of Col. John Pynchon, that the first sermon he preached in the
town was on July 3d 1659 from Jer. 4, 14. He continued officiating here till
1661, when he was ordained to the ministry of the town. Mr. Hubbard gives this
character of Mr. Glover, that he was a great student, and much given to books.
He lived in great harmony with your fathers, and highly esteemed, till March
29, 1692, when he gave up his charge, and the ghost, and went to rest.

IN his time that great calamity befell the town, which is the special occasion
of our assembling this day. From the beginning of the country, our fathers had
much trouble from the natives. They were often threatening them, frequently
commencing hostilities against them, and many were killed in one place and
another; and indeed it is marvelous that they were not all destroyed. If it had
not been the LORD who was on our side, now may New England say, If it had not
been the LORD who was on our side, when the Indians rose up against us; then
they had swallowed us up, when their wrath was kindled, against us.

HOWEVER, it is to be observed, that the people on Connecticut River lived in
great harmony and peace with their Indian neighbors, till about the year 1675:
When Philip's Indians, (this Philip was a great warrior, and a bitter enemy to
the English; his place of residence was at Mount Hope, now Bristol) and those
called Nipnets, being driven from the lower parts of the province, came
westward; and after destroying Brookfield, mixed themselves with the Indians of
this river, and soon disaffected them to the English. The people of this town,
and the towns above were alarmed, and began to fortify and prepare for their
own defense. There were now settlements formed at Westfield, Hadley,
Northampton, Hatfield, Deerfield and Northfield: though all weak* and
especially the two latter.

THE Hadley Indians first of all, deserted their sort and habitations, and
joined the enemy. The English who were under Captains Lothrop, and Bears were
so insensed that they pursued them, and had a fight with them, at a place which
was then, and is now called Sugar Loaf, opposite to the town of Sunderland;
wherein nine or ten of the English were slain, and about twenty six Indians.
About seven days after on the first of Sept. 1675 they beset the town of
Deerfield, killed one man, and laid most of the houses in ashes. Two or three
days after, they made an attack upon Northfield, and killed nine or ten of the
people; and the rest hardly escaped into the garrisoned house. The next day,
Capt. Bears with thirty six men was going to Northfield to secure the garrison
there, when, about three miles on this side the town, he was waylaid by the
enemy, and himself and about twenty of his men were killed, the rest flying
back to Hadly. On the eighteenth of the same month, as Capt. Lathrop, with
about eighty men, was guarding several carts, laden with corn and other goods,
from Deerfield to Hadley, they were suddenly attacked, and almost all cut off,
not above seven or eight escaping. On the spot where they were buried, at a
place called Muddy-Brook, was erected a monument of stone, which now remains.

THESE things gave some alarm to the inhabitants of Springfield: though they
were loath to distrust their own Indians, with whom they had lived in great
peace and amity for the space of near forty years. However they were not wholly
unprovided: they had some garrisons, though I believe, not more than three in
the town. The inhabitants treated with the Indians, and received from them, the
firmest assurance of their friendship: and the Indians gave some hostages as a
security for their peaceable behavior; which hostages were sent to Hartford,
there to remain. These hostages made their escape; and three hundred of
Philip's Men were secretly received into the Indian fort upon Long-Hill. Their
designs against the town were revealed by a Windsor Indian whose name was Toto;
tidings of which, were in all haste sent to Springfield in the night: otherwise
the inhabitants of the town probably had been cut off, as well as their
substance distroyed. The town was thrown into great consternation, by the
alarming advice from Windsor, and fled to their garrisons for safety. But two
men, more unbelieveing than the rest, (on the morning of the 5th of October
1675, according to old style, now the 16th, this day one hundred years since)
resolved to go to the Indian fort, and see whether these things were so. They
set out; but had not come to Mill-River, before the Indians fired upon them,
killed one on the spot, and mortally wounded the other: However he got back to
a fort at the lower end of the street, and soon died. The Indians immediately
set fire to the ungarrisoned houses, and to the barns; and on that day laid
almost the whole town in ashes.

DEACON Burt, who was an eye witness, in a note made in the book of records, to
purpetuate the memory of this melancholy event, says there were 29 dwelling
houses burnt; the number of barns he does not ascertain. Major, afterward Col.
John Pynchon, who a few days before went to Hadley with a few soldiers to take
care of the people in those parts, in a letter which he wrote 15 days after the
destruction of the town, to his son Joseph then in England, gives a most
melancholy account of their state; he says there were about 30 or 32 dwelling
houses burnt, and 25 barns full of corn and hay; and that although his own
dwelling house was spared, his mills and barns and out houses were all
consumed, with all his corn and hay; so that he had nothing left for food for
man or beast. This letter I have in my hands; and it breathes such a quiet,
submissive, patient, excellent spirit, that were there time, I would read the
whole of it to you. Doctor Mather says, there were above 30 dwelling houses,
and above 20 out houses burnt. Mr. Hubbard says 32 houses were consumed.
Whether any buildings in this part of the town, except the fortified houses,
were saved, I am uncertain. Major Treat soon came from Westfield for their
assistance, but for want of boats, could not pass the river. Major Pynchon with
some forces from Hadley was with them as quick as possible, but too late to
save the town.

BESIDES the two already mentioned, there was one woman killed, and several men
wounded, one of which died soon after. There were some few inhabitants at
Long-Meadow and I suppose some on the west side of the river; both these
escaped.

IT is easy to see that this was a dismal day with the forefathers of this
town; that they were reduced to great distress. It came upon them at a season
when all the fruits of the earth were gathered in; so that there year's stock
of provision was consumed, and they had little or nothing left for man or
beast; and none near them had any thing to spare to them. However, they did not
faint: by the good providence of GOD they were carried through the winter. It
was said by the ancient people, that the following winter was remarkably
favorable; insomuch that they plowed their lands in the midst of winter. The
town was soon rebuilt, and returned to its former state; and has never since,
suffered greatly by the Indians.

THERE was afterward a Leonard killed on the west side of the river; I suppose
it was the father of those of that name who now reside there. At Pecowsick were
six killed, the spring following the destruction of the town, three outright;
two women with their children, who were captivated, were overtaken, and one
woman with the children killed; the other woman wounded, but recovered, and
lived to an advanced age. And within the memory of some of you, (July 26 1708)
three persons were killed in one house, at Skipmug; and a fourth that was
captivated was soon after killed, and a lad, Benjamin Wright. Besides these, I
do not know that the Indians have done any other mischief, except wounding one
or two persons, and captivating a few.

THERE was, in the winter or spring following the destruction of the town, a
youth of the name of Edward Stebbins, (the grandfather of some here present)
taken captive by the Indians at Long-Meadow; which, because it was attended
with some important consequences, I particularly mention. He was carried to the
Indian headquarters, which were then at the falls in this river a few miles
above Deerfield. This youth with another whose name was Gilbert, found means to
make their escape, and gave notice of the Indians place of rendezvous, and of
the security in which they lived. Whereupon Capt. Turner, who, I take it, had
the command of the soldiers in the garrisons, and Capt. Holyoke of this town,
collecting about 150 men, partly out of the garrisons and partly from among the
inhabitants, went against them: and a little before break of day on the 19th of
May 1676, fell upon the Indians undiscovered, fired into their wigwams, and
killed many on the place, many others in their fright plunged into the river,
were carried headlong down the falls, and perished in the waters; and many who
took shelter under the bank of the river were killed with the swords of our
men. Mr. Hubbard says, that Capt. Holyoke killed five here with his own hand.
We lost 38 men in this fight: and some of their prisoners afterward owned, that
they lost more than 300, some of them principal men, Sachems, and some of their
best warriors. It is observed, that they never recovered this defeat, but their
ruin immediately followed. In reward of this signal service, a township of land
where the fight was, now called Barnardston, was granted to their posterity.

I cannot find that more than ten or twelve persons have been killed by the
Indians, within the limits of this town: save that Mr. Hubbard says, six or
seven of our people, after our mills were burnt, going to mill at Westfield,
and going with out arms, three of them were killed by the enemy. I have not
been able to get any account who they were, nor any further account of this
matter.

BUT the town has labored under other, and grievous calamities at diverse
times. It is a grievous and mortal sickness which is now among us, and has put
many parents into mourning. In the year 1760 and 1761, we were visited with a
sore fever, which took of many useful and valuable men, in the midst of their
usefulness, and greatly weakened our strength. But the most destressing time
the town ever saw by reason of sickness, was in the year 1683, eight years
after the town was burnt, (which by the ancient people of the town, was called
the sickly winter) when a violent fever raged in the town, to that degree that
there were scarcely enough well to tend the sick; the public worship was for
some time suspended, and twenty grown persons died. In the year 1711, there was
also a mortal sickness which in the winter season raged here, greatly
distressed the people, and carried off a number of the principal men. It was a
distressing time with you in the year 1733, when your worthy Pastor, and my
Rev. Father and immediate predecessor, Mr. Brown, after having served you in
the work of the ministry forty years, died, and with him a number of worthy
men. Mr. Brewer was ordained your minister May 16, 1693, and continued with you
till Nov. 5th, 1733, when he departed this life.

To him through the providence of GOD, I though unworthy succeeded. The first
sermon I preached was on the 26th of May 1734. I received ordination January
27th 1735, 6: And though exercised with much weakness and many infirmities, yet
having obtained help from GOD, I continue until this time. I suppose, I have
lived with you longer than either of my predecessors; and longer than any
minister in any part of the town, except the Rev. Dr. Williams, who is here
present in the 83d year of his age, and has nearly completed the 59th year of
his ministry; in a comfortable state of health, and full possession of his
intellectual powers, he promises to be useful for years yet to come.

SINCE my entrance into the ministry here 476 have died, 1034 have received
baptism, 298 have been admitted to full communion; there are only four, who are
now living and continue with us, that were communicants at the time of my
ordination. My work is near to an end: may I ask your prayers, that I may be
useful while I live, faithful to death, and then receive the crown of life.

THIS town is now 131 years old. The first settlers expected that the town
would contain only 50 families at the most: but I presume there may be, at this
day, 600 within the ancient limits of Springfield.

THE town was early divided into two parishes. In June School, a church was
gathered in the 2d parish, and Mr. John Woodbridge ordained their Pastor. He
continued 20 years in the ministry, and died in June 1718. To him succeeded the
Rev. Samuel Hopkins, who was ordained pastor June 1st, 17^0, and died October
6, 1755: a truly worthy man, and much beloved and esteemed. On the 25th day of
the following August, the Rev. Joseph Lathrop was ordained, pastor of that
church: he still lives, and has entered upon the 20th year of his ministry.

ON Feb. 17, 1713 Long-Meadow was made a parish: on the 16th of October (...) a
church was gathered there, and the Rev. Stephen Williams was ordained their
pastor.

ON June 24th 1741, a church was gathered in the fourth parish in Springfield;
and the Rev. Noah Merick was ordained their pastor. He is still living. This
parish was made a town in the year 1763

ON Sept. 27, 1752, a church was gathered in a fifth parish in the town; and
the Rev. John Mc. Kinstry was ordained their pastor.

ON Nov. 10, 1762 a church was gathered in a sixth parish in Springfield; and
on the 17th the Rev. Silvanus Griswold was ordained their pastor.

ABOUT two years since, another district was made in the town, by the name of
Ludlow, which remains destitute of a settled minister. So that there are now,
within the ancient limits of this town, seven worshipping assemblies, besides
one who profess themselves Baptists.

HOW greatly are we increased beyond the expectation of our forefathers? The
first settlers of the town, were they now upon earth, might with propriety
adopt the language of Jacob and say, with our staves passed with through this
wilderness, and now we are become, not two, but seven bands.

MAY we be suitably affected with all the dealings of divine providence toward
our fathers and us, both merciful and corrective. We have mercies to speak of
as well as judgments: we have enjoyed the gospel from the beginning; have had
as much health as most towns; and perhaps no town has enjoyed more internal
peace, with fewer interruptions, than the ancient town of Springfield. Though
we have been divided into several parishes, for many years, and have had
distinct interests; yet from my earliest acquaintance with the town, your
fathers looked upon one another as brethern, and regard to the public interest
was the governing principle. I have ever thought it a very happy circumstance,
that the leading men of this town have, from time to time, been not only men of
ability, but really friendly, both to your civil and religious interests.

FOR my own part, I have ever esteemed it a smile of Providence, that my lot
was early cast in the town of Springfield; and hope I may never have occasion
to change my sentiments. I came here in my youth, not 21 years of age; and
shall ever retain a grateful remembrance of the candor with which your fathers
treated me, and many kind offices which they did me. But few of that generation
remain. They are in the grave: and I cannot forbear droping a tear at the
remembrance of them. They were a worthy set of people: but they are gone; and
this place which has known them, shall know them no more. And the children are
risen up in the stead of their fathers: may you, my dear people, prove
yourselves worthy of such ancestors.

How short is human life? How quick does one generation succeed another? there
are now upon the stage, some of the eighth generation of the family of the
Pynchons in 139 years. My brethern, former generations are passed away, and
this present generation must soon follow them, and make way for others. Within
a few years, every single person in this assembly will be in the grave. It is
extreme folly in us, to set our hearts upon a world we must so soon leave; and
it is our highest wisdom to lay up treasure in heaven; and prepare for that
eternal state, which succeeds this short life.

HOWEVER though we should not be careful of the many things of this world, to
the neglect of the one thing needful, yet our present prosperity and happiness
is not to be wholly overlooked. And we ought to carry our views beyond the time
of our own continuance here, and confess the good and happiness of those who
shall succeed us on the stage of life. If we regard the happiness of posterity,
let us take care to give our children a religious education, and fit them to
act their part well upon the theater of the world, after we are retired to rest
and sleep with our fathers.

NEW ENGLAND has seen days of prosperity, they have also had their seasons of
adversity. In their troubles, they trusted in GOD, and he has repeatedly
granted them signal deliverances. Our fathers greatest troubles were from the
Natives, who, by the instigation of the French were often inserting our
frontier settlements. And multitudes have died by their barbarous hands.

When, by the blessing of GOD upon our arms, in the last war with France,
Canady was subjected to the obedience of the Crown of Great Britain, we were
ready to flatter ourselves that our troubles were at an end; and that now we
should enjoy continual sunshine and peace: but the clouds are soon gathered
again. It is now a day of darkness, not only with New England, but the cloud
has overspread all America: though we may expect to bear the weight of the
storm. Let us follow the good example of our pious progenitors: wait upon the
LORD, and see to it that our ways please him, and we may hope that he will
cause the enemies of America to be at peace with us.

FINIS.

