THREE YEARS TRAVELS, THROUGH THE INTERIOR PARTS OF NORTH AMERICA, FOR MORE
THAN FIVE THOUSAND MILES, CONTAINING, An ACCOUNT of the great Lakes, and all
the Lakes, Islands, and Rivers, Cataracts, Mountains, Minerals, Soil and
Vegetable Productions of the North-West Regions of the vast Continent; WITH A
DESCRIPTION of the BIRDS, BEASTS, REPTILES, INSECTS, and FISHES peculiar to the
COUNTRY.

TOGETHER WITH A CONCISE HISTORY of the GENIUS, MANNERS, and CUSTOMS of the
INDIANS Inhabiting the Lands that lie adjacent to the Heads and to the Westward
of the great River Mississippi; AND AN APPENDIX, Describing the ^^cul^^rated
PARTS of AMERICA that are the most proper for forming Settlements.

By CAPTAIN JONATHAN CARVER, OF THE PROVINCIAL TROOPS IN AMERICA.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK IN MARKET-STREET, AND
ROBERT BELL, IN THIRD-STREET. M DCC LXXXIV.

TO JOSEPH BANKS, Esquire PRESIDENT OF THE ROYAL SOCIETY.
SIR,
WHEN the Public are informed that I have long had the Honor of your
Acquaintance -- that my Design in publishing the following Work has received
your Sanction -- that the Composition of it has stood the Test of your Judgment
-- and that it is by your Permission a Name so deservedly eminent in the
Literary World is prefixed to it, I need not be apprehensive of its Success; as
your Patronage will unquestionably give them Assurance of its Merit.

For this public Testimony of your Favor, in which I pride myself, accept,
Sir, my most grateful Acknowledgmen^s; and believe me to be, with great Respect,

Your obedient humble Servant, J. CARVER.

AN ADDRESS TO THE PUBLIC. THE SECOND EDITION.
THE favorable reception this Work has met with, claims the Author's most
grateful acknowledgments. A large edition having run off in a few months, and
the sale appearing to be still unabated, a new impression is become necessary.
On this occasion was he to conceal his feelings, and pass over, in silence, a
distinction so beneficial and flattering, he would justly incur the imputation
of ingratitude. That he might not do this, he takes the opportunity, which now
presents itself, of conveying to the Public (though in terms inadequate to the
warm emotions of his heart) the sense he entertains of their favor; and thus
transmits to them his thanks.

In this new edition* care has been taken to rectify those errors which have
unavoidably proceeded from the hurry of the press, and likewise any
incorrectness in the language that has found its way into it.

The credibility of some of the incidents related in the following pages, and
some of the stories introduced therein, having been questioned, particularly
the prognostication of the Indian priest on the banks of Lake Superior, and the
story of the Indian and his rattle snake, the author thinks it necessary to
avail himself of the same opportunity, to endeavor to eradicate any
impressions that might have been made on the minds of his readers, by the
apparent improbability of these relations.

As to the former, he has related it just as it happened. Being an eyewitness
to the whole transaction (and, he flatters himself, at the time, free from
every trace of skeptical obstinacy or enthusiastic credulity) he was
consequently able to describe every circumstance minutely and impartially. This
he has done; but without endeavoring to account for the means by which it was
accomplished. Whether the prediction was the result of prior observations, from
which certain consequences were expected to follow by the sagacious priest, and
the completion of it merely accidental; or whether he was really endowed with
supernatural powers, the narrator left to the judgment of his ^eaders; whose
conclusions, he supposes, var^ed according as the mental faculties of each were
disposed to admit or reject facts that cannot be accounted for by natural
causes.

The story of the rattle snake was related to him by a French gentleman of
undoubted veracity; and were the readers of this work as thoroughly acquainted
with the sagacity and instinctive proceedings of that animal, as he is, they
would be as well assured of the truth of it. It is well known, that those
snakes which have survived through the summer the accidents reptiles are liable
to, periodically retire to the woods, at the approach of winter; where each (as
curious observers have remarked) takes possession of the cavity it had occupied
the preceding year. As soon as the season is propitious, enlivened by the
invigorating rays of the sun, they leave these retreats, and make their way to
the some spot, though ever so distant, on which they bef^^e had found
subsistence, and the means of ^ropagating their species. Does it then require
any extraordinary exertions of the mind to believe, that one of these regular
creatures, after having been kindly treated by its master, should return to the
box, in which it had usually been supplied with food, and had met with a
comfortable abode, and that neatly about the time the Indian, from former
experiments, was able to guess at? It certainly does not; nor w^ll the liberal
and ingenuous doubt the truth of a story so well authenticated, because the
circumstances appear extraordinary in a country where the subject of it is
scarcely known.

These explanations the author hopes will suffi^^ to convince his readers, that
he has not, as travelers are sometimes supposed to do, amused them with
improbable tales, or wished to acquire importance by making his adventures
savor of the mavelous.

CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTION, Page 17 The Author sets out from Boston on his Travels, Page 23
Description of Fort Michillimackinac, ibid. -- Fort Le Bay, Page 24 -- the
Green Bay, Page 25 -- Lake Michigan, Page 27 Arrives at the Town of the
Winnebagoes Page 28 Excurs^on of the Winnebagoes toward the Spanish
Settlements, Page 29 Description of the Winnebago Lake, Page 30 Instance of
Resolution of an Indian Woman, Page 31 Description of the Fox River, ib.
Remarkable Story of a Rattle Snake, Page 32 The great Town of the Saukies, Page
33 Upper Town of the Ottagaumies, Page 34 Description of the Ouisconsin River,
ib. Lower Town of the Ottagaumies, or La Prairie Le Chien, ^b. An Attack by
some Indian Plunderers, Page 35 Description of the Mississippi from the Mouth
of the Ouisconsin to Lake Pepin, Page 36 -- Lake Pepin, ib. Remarkable Ruins of
an ancient Fortification, Page 37 The River Bands of the Naudowessie Indians,
Page 38 Adventure with a Party of these, and some of the Chipeways, ib.
D^^^^iption of a remarkable Cave, Page 39 Uncommon Behavior of the Prince of
the Winn^bagoes at the Falls of St. Anthony, Page 40 Description of the Falls,
Page 41 Extent of the Author's Travels, Page 42 Description of the River St.
Pierre, Page 43 Sources of the Four great Rivers of North America, Page 44
Reflections on their Affinity, ib. The Noudowessies of the Plains, with whom
the Author wintered in the Year 1766, Page 45 The Author returns to the Mouth
of the River St. Pierre, Page 47 Account of a violent Thunder storm, ib. Speech
made by the Author in a Council held by the Naudowessies at the great Cave,
Page 48 Adventure with a Party of Indians near Lake Pepin, Page 51 Description
of the Country adjacent to the River St. Pierre, Page 53 Account of different
Clays found near the Marble River, ib. Description of the Chipeway River, ib.
Extraordinary Effects of a Hurricane, Page 54 The Author arrives at the Grand
Portage on the North-west Borders of Lake Superior, Page 55 Account of the
Lakes lying f^rther to the North west: Lake Bour^^n, Lake-Winnepeck, Lake Du
Bois, Lake La Pluye, Red-Lake* etc. ib. Account of a Nation of Indians supposed
to have been tributary to the Mexican Kings, Page 59 -- the shining Mountains,
Page 60 A singular Prediction of the Chief Priest of the Killistinoes verified
Page 61 D^^^^iption of Lake Superior, Page 64 (...) of the two C^^peways
landing on the Island of Ma^ropas, Page 65 Account of great Quantities of
Copper Ore, Page 67 Description of the Falls of St. Marie, Page 68 -- Lake
Huron, ib. -- Saganaum and Thunder Bays, Page 69 Extraordinary Phenomenon in
the Straights of Michillimackinac, Page 70 Description of Lake St. Claire, Page
71 Description of the River, Town, and Fort of Detroit, Page 71 Remarkable Rain
at Detroit, Page 72 Attack of Fort Detroit by Pontiac, ib. Description of Lake
Erie, Page 77 -- the River and Falls of Niag^na, Page 78 -- Lake Ont^rio, ib.
-- the Oniada Lake, Lake Champlain, and Lake George, Page 79 Account of a Tract
of Land granted to Sir Ferdinando Gorges, and Captain John Mason, Page 80 The
Author's Motives for (...) his Travels, Page 81
CHAPTER I.
The Origin of the Indians, Page 83 Sentiments of various Writers on this
Point, Page 84 -- Monsieur Charlevoix, Page 87 -- James Adair, Esquire Page 91 --
the Author of this Work, Page 93 Corroboration of the latter by Doctor
Robertson Page 96
CHAPTER II.
Of the Persons, Dress, etc. of the Indians, Page 97 An Account of those who
have written on this Subject, ib. Description of the Persons of the Indians,
Page 99 -- their Dress, Page 100 -- the Dress of the Ottaga^mies, Page 101 --
the Dress of the Naudowessies, ib. The Manner in which they build their Tents
and Huts. Page 102 Their ^^mestic Utensils, ib.
CHAPTER III.
Of the Manners, Qualifications, etc. of the Indians, Page 103 Peculiar Customs
of the Women, ib. The circumspect and stoical Disposition of the Men, Page 104
Their amazing Sagacity, Page 106 The Liberality of the Indians, and their
Opinion respecting Money Page 107
CHAPTER IV.
Their Method of reckoning Time, etc. Page 108 The Names by which they
distinguish the Months, Page 109 Their Idea of the Use of Figures, ib.
CHAPTER V.
Of their Government, etc. Page 110 Their Division into Trib^^ ib. The Chiefs
of their Bands, Page 111 The Membe^^ that compose their Councils, Page 112
CHAPTER VI.
Of their Feasts, Page 113 their usual Food, ib. their Manner of dre^^^^g and
eating their Victuals, ib.
CHAPTER VII.
Of their Dances, Page 114 The Manner in which they dance, Page 115 The Pipe or
Calumate Dance, ib. The War Dance, ib. The Pawwaw Dance, Page 116 An uncommon
Admission into a Society among the Naudowessies, ib. The Dance of the Indians
on the Banks of the Mississippi, referred to in the Journal, Page 119 The Dance
of the Sacrifice, Page 120
CHAPTER VIII.
Of their Hunting, Page 121 Their Preparation before they set out, ib. Their
Manner of hunting the Bear, Page 122 -- Buffalo, Deer, etc. ib. -- Beaver, Page
123
CHAPTER IX.
Of their Manner of making War, etc. Page 125 The Indian Weapons, ib. Their
Motives for making War, Page 126 Preparations before they take the Field, Page
128 The Manner in which they solicit other Nations to become their Auxiliaries,
Page 129 Their Manner of declaring War, Page 130 The Method of engaging their
Enemies, Page 131 An Instance of the Efficacy of it in the Defeat of General
Braddock, ib. A Detail of the Massacre at Fort William-Henry in the Year 1757,
Page 132 Acuteness and Alacrity of the Indians in pursuing their Enemies, ^^7
Their Manner of Scalping, ib. The Manner in which they retreat and carry off
their Prisoners, Page 138 A remarkable Instance of Heroism in a Female
Prisoner, Page 139 Treatment of their Prisoners, Page 140 The Origin of their
selling Slaves, Page 144
CHAPTER X.
Of their Manner of making Peace, etc. Page 14^ Account of an Engagement
between the Iroquois and the Ottagaumies and Saukies, ib. Manner in which they
conduct a Treaty of Peace, Page 148 Description of the Pipe of Peace, Page 149
-- Belts of Wampum, Page 150
CHAPTER XI.
Of their Games, Page 150 The Game of the Ball, Page 151 -- Bowl or Platter,
ib.
CHAPTER XII.
Of their Marriage Ceremonies, Page 152 The Manner in which the Tribes near
Canada celebrate their Marriages, Page 153 The Form of Marriage among the
Naudowessies, Page 154 Their Manner of carrying on an Intrigue, Page 155 Of the
Indian Names, Page 156
CHAPTER XIII.
Of their Religion, Page 157 Their Ideas of a Supreme Being, ib. -- future
State, Page 158 Of their Priests, ib. The Sentiments of Others on the religious
Principles of the Indians opposed, Page 159
CHAPTER XIV.
Of their Diseases, etc. Page 160 The Complaints to which they are chiefly
subject, Page 161 The Manner in which they construct their Sweating Stoves,
Page 161 The Methods in which they treat their Diseases, ib. An extraordinary
Instance of the Judgment of an Indian Woman in a desperate Case, Page 163
CHAPTER XV.
The Manner in which they treat their Dead, Page 164 A Specimen of their
Funeral Harangues, ib. Their Method of burying the Dead, Page 165 A singular
Instance of parental Affection in a Naudowessie Woman, Page 166
CHAPTER XVI.
A concise Character of the Indians, Page 167 Their personal and mental
Qualifications, Page 168 Their public Character as Members of a Community, Page
169
CHAPTER XVII.
Of their Language, Hieroglyphics, etc. Page 170 Of the Chipeway Tongue, ib.
Descriptive Specimen of the Hieroglyphics, etc. Page 171 Vocabulary of the
Chipew^^ ^^nguage, Page 172 -- Naudowessie Language, Page 176
CHAPTER XVIII.
Of the Beasts, Birds, Fishes, Reptiles, and Insects, which are found in the
Interior Parts of North America, Page 179
BEASTS.
The Tiger. The Bear, Page 179 The Wolf. The Fox, Page 180 Dogs. The Cat of the
Mountain. The Buffalo, ib. The Deer, The Elk. The Moose, Page 181 The Carrabou,
The Carcasou. The Skunk, Page 182 The Porcupine, The Woodchuck. The Racoon,
Page 183 (...) Martin. The Musquas^. Squirrels, Page 184 (...) Beaver, Page 185
The ^^ter. The Mink, Page 187
BIRDS.
The Eagle. The Night Hawk, Page 188 The Fish Hawk. The Whipperwill, ib. The
Owl. The Crane. Ducks. The To^l. The Loon, Page 189 The Partridge. The
Woodpecker. The Wood Pigeon, Page 190 The Blue Jay. The Wakon Bird, ib. The
Blackbird. The Redbird, Page 191 The Whetsaw. The King Bird. The Humming Bird,
ib.
FISHES.
The Sturgeon. The Cat Fish, Page 192 The Carp. The Chub, Page 193
SERPENTS.
The Rattle Snake, Page 193 The Long Black Snake. The (...) Garter Snake. The
Water Snake. Page 1^^ The Hissing Snake. The (...) ^nake. The Thorn-tail Snake.
The Speckled Snake. The Ring Snake. The Two-headed Snake. The Tortoise or Land
Turtle, Page 196
LIZARDS.
The Swift Lizard. The Slow Lizard. The Tree Toad, Page 196, 197
INSECTS.
The Silk Worm. The Tobacco Worm. The Be, Page 197 The Lightning Bug or Fire
Fly. The Water Bug. The Horned Bug. Locust, Page 198
CHAPTER XIX.
Of the Trees, Shrubs, Roots, Herbs, Flowers, ^^^
TREES.
The Oak. The Pine Tree, Page 199 The Maple. The Ash. The Hemlock Tree. The
Bass or White Wood, Page 200 The Wickopick or Suckwick. The Button Wood, Page
201
NUT TREES.
The Butte^ or Oil Nut. The Beech Nut, Page 201 The Pecan Nut. The Hickory,
Page 202
FRUIT TREES.
The Vine. The Mulberry Tree. The Crab Apple Tree. The Plum Tree. The Cherry
Tree, Page 202 The Sweet Gum Tree, Page 203
SHRUBS.
The Willow. Skin Wood, Page 203 The Sassafras. The Prickly Ash. (...) Moose
Wood. The Spoon Wood. The Elder, Page 204 The Shrub Oak. The Witch (...) The
Myrtle Wax Tree. Winter Green. The Fever (...) The Cranberry Bush, Page 205 The
Choke Berry, Page 206
ROOTS and PLANTS.
Spikenard. Sarsaparilla. Ginsang, Page 206 Gold Thread. Solomon's Seal.
Devil's Bit. Blood Root, Page 207
HERBS.
(...) Rattle Snake Plantain, Poor Robin's Plantain. Toad Plantain. Rock
Liverwort. Gargit or Skoke. Skunk Cabbage or Poke, Page 208 Wake Robin. Wild
Indigo. Cat Mint, Page 209 FLOWERS, ib.
FARINACEOUS and LEGUMINOUS ROOTS, etc.
Maize or Indian Corn. Wild Rice, Page 210 Beans. The Squash Page 211
APPENDIX.
The Probability of the interior Parts of North America becoming Commercial
Colonies, Page 212 The Means by which this might be effected. ib. Tracts of
Land pointed out, on which Colonies may be established with the greatest
Advantage, Page 213 Dissertation on the Discovery of a (...) Passage, Page 216
The most certain Way of attaining (...) ib. Plan proposed by Richard Whit^^rth,
Esquire for making an Attempt from a Quarter hitherto (...), Page 217 The Reason of
its being (...) ib.
INTRODUCTION.
NO sooner was the late War with France concluded, and Peace established by the
Treaty of Versailles in the Year 1763, than I began to consider (having
rendered my country some services during the war) how I might continue still
serviceable, and contribute, as much as lay in my power, to make that vast
acquisition of territory, gained by Great Britain, in North America
advantageous to it. It appeared to me indispensably needful, that Government
should be acquainted in the first place with the true state of the dominions
they were now become possessed of. To this purpose, I determined, as the next
proof of my z^al, to explore the most unknown parts of them, and to spare no
trouble or expense in acquiring a knowledge that promised to be so useful to my
countrymen. I knew that many obstructions would arise to my scheme from the
want of good Maps and Charts; for the French, whilst they retained their power
in North America, had taken every artful method to keep all other nations,
particularly the English, in ignorance of the concerns of the interior parts of
it: and to accomplish this design with the greater certainty, they had
published inaccurate maps and false accounts; calling the different nations of
the Indians by nicknames they had given them, and not by those really
appertaining (...) them. Whether the intention of the French in doing this,
(...) to prevent these nations from being discovered and traded with, or to
conceal their discourse, when they talked to each other of the Indian concerns,
in their presence, I will not determine; but whatsoever was the cause from
which it arose, it tended to mislead.

As a proof that the English had been greatly deceived by these accounts, and
that their knowledge relative to Canada had usually been very confined; --
before the conquest of Crown-Point in 1759, it had been esteemed an impregnable
fortress: but no sooner was it taken, than we were convinced that it had
acquired its greatest security from false reports, given out by its possessors,
and might have been battered down with a few four pounders. Even its situation,
which was represented to be so very adva^^^geous, was found to owe its
advantages to the same source. It cannot be denied but that some maps of these
countries have been published by the French with an appearance of accuracy; but
these are of so small a size and drawn on so minute a scale, that they are
nearly inexplicable. The sources of the Mississippi, I can assert from my own
experience, are greatly misplaced; for when I had explored them, and compared
their situation with the French Charts, I found them very erroneously
represented, and am satisfied that these were only copied from the rude
sketches of the Indians.

Even so lately as their evacuation of Canada they continued their schemes to
deceive; leaving no traces by which any knowledge might accrue to their
conquerors: for though they were well acquainted with all the Lakes,
particularly with Lake Superior, having constantly a vessel of considerable
burden thereon, yet their plans of them are very incorrect. I discovered many
errors in the descriptions given therein of its islands and bays, during a
progress of eleven hundred miles that I coasted it in canoes. They likewise, on
giving up the possession of them, took care to leave the places they had
occupied in the same uncultivated state they had found them; at the same time
destroying all their naval force. I observed myself part of the hulk of a very
large vessel, burnt to the water's edge, just at the opening from the Straits
of St. Marie's into the Lake.

These di^^^culties, however, were not sufficient to deter me from the
un^^^taking, and I made preparations for setting out. What I chiefly had in
view, after gaining a knowledge of the manners, customs, languages, soil, and
natural productions of the different nations that inhabit the back of the
Mississippi, was to ascertain the breadth of that vast continent, which extends
from the Atlantic to the Pacific Ocean, in its broadest part between 43 and 46
degrees northern latitude. Had I been able to accomplish this, I intended to
have proposed to government to establish a post in some of those parts about
the Straits of Anni^n, which having been first discovered by Sir Francis Drake,
of course belong to the English. This I am convinced would greatly facilitate
the discovery of a Northwest Passage, or a communication between Hudson's Bay
and the Pacific Ocean. An event so desirable, and which has (...) so often
sought for, but without success. Besides this important end, a settlement on
that extremity of America would answer many good purposes, and repay every
expense the establishment of it might occasion. For it would not only disclose
new sources of trade, and promote many useful discoveries, but would open a
passage for conveying intelligence to China, and the English settlements in the
East Indies, with greater expedition than a tedious voyage by the Cape of Good
Hope, or the Straits of Magellan will allow of.

How far the advantages arising from such an enterprise may extend, can only be
ascertained by the favorable concurrence of future events. But that the
completion of the scheme, I have had the honor of first planning and
attempting, will some time or other be effected, I make no doubt. From the
unhappy divisions that at present subsist between Great Britain and America, it
will probably be some years before the attempt is repeated; but whenever it is,
and the execution of it carried on with propriety, those who are so fortunate
as to succeed, will reap, exclusive of the national advantages that must ensue,
emoluments beyond their most sanguine expectations. And whilst their spirits
are elated by their success, perhaps they may bestow some commendations and
blessings on the person that first pointed out to them the way. These, though
but a shadowy recompense for all my toil, I shall receive with pleasure.

To what power or authority this new world will become dependent, after it has
arisen from its present uncultivated (...), time alone can discover. But as the
seat of Empire from time immemorial has been gradually progressive toward the
West, there is no doubt but that at some future period, mighty kingdoms will
emerge from these wildernesses, and stately palaces and solemn temples, with
gilded spires reaching the skies, supplant the Indian huts, whose only
decorations are the barbarous trophies of their vanquished enemies.

As some of the preceding passages have already informed the reader that the
plan I had laid down for penetrating to the Pacific Ocean, proved abortive, it
is necessary to add that this proceeded not from its impracticability (for the
farther I went the more convinced I was that it could certainly be
accomplished) but from unforeseen disappointments. However, I proceeded so far,
that I was able to make such discoveries as will be useful in any future
attempt, and prove a good foundation for some more fortunate successor to build
upon. These I shall now lay before the public in the following pages; and am
satisfied that the greatest part of them have never been published by any
person that has hitherto treated of the interior nations of the Indians;
particularly, the account I give of the Naudowessies, and the situation of the
heads of the four great rivers that take their rise within a few leagues of
each other, nearly about the center of this great continent; viz. The River
Bourbon, which empties itself into Hudson's Bay; the waters of Saint Lawrence;
the Mississippi, and the River Oregon, or the River of the West, that falls
into the Pacific Ocean, at the Straits of Annian.

The impediments that occasioned my returning, before I had accomplished my
purposes, were these. On my arrival at Michillimackinac, the remotest English
post, in September 1766, I applied to Mr. Rogers, who was then governor of it,
to furnish me with a proper assortment of goods, as presents for the Indians
who inhabit the track I intended to pursue. He did this only in part; but
promised to supply me with such as were necessary, when I reached the Falls of
Saint Anthony. I afterward learned that the governor fulfilled his promise in
ordering the goods to be delivered to me; but those to whose care he entrusted
them, instead of conforming to his orders, disposed of them elsewhere.

Disappointed in my expectations from this quarter, I thought it necessary to
return to La Prairie Le Chien; for it was impossible to proceed any further
without presents to ensure me a favorable reception. This I did in the
beginning of the year 1767, and finding my progress to the westward thus
retarded, I determined to direct my course northward. I took this step with a
view of finding a communication from the Heads of the Mississippi into Lake
Superior, in order to meet, at the grand Portage on the North-west side of that
lake, the traders that usually come, about this season, from Michillimackinac.
Of these I intended to purchase goods, and then to pursue my journey from that
quarter by way of the lakes de Pluye, Dubois, and Ounip^que to the Heads of the
river of the West, which, as I have said before, falls into the Straits of
Annian, the termination of my intended progress.

I accomplished the former part of my design, and reached Lake Superior in
proper time; but unluckily the traders I met there acquainted me, that they had
no goods to spare; those they had with them being barely sufficient to answer
their own demands in these remote parts. Thus disappointed a second time, I
found myself obliged to return to the place from whence I began my expedition,
which I did after continuing some months on the (...) and east borders of Lake
Superior, and exploring the bay^ and rivers that empty themselves into this
large body of water.

As it may be expected that I should lay before the public the reasons that
these discoveries, of so much importance to every one who has any connections
with America, have not been imparted to them before, notwithstanding they were
made upwards of ten years ago, I will give them to the world in a plain and
candid manner, and without mingling with them any complaints on account of the
ill treatment I have received.

On my arrival in England, I presented a petition to his Majesty in council,
praying for a reimbursement of those sums I had expended in the service of
government. This was referred to the Lords Commissioners of Trade and
Plantations. Their Lordships from the tenor of it thought the intelligence I
could give of so much importance to the nation, that they ordered me to appear
before the Board. This message I obeyed, and underwent a long examination; much
I believe to the satisfaction of every Lord present. When it was finished, I
requested to know what I should do with my papers; without hesitation the first
Lord replied, That I might publish them whenever I pleased. In consequence of
this permission, I disposed of them to a bookseller: but when they were nearly
ready for the press, an order was issued from the council board, requiring me
to deliver, without delay, into the Plantation Office, all my Charts and
Journals, with every paper relative to the discoveries I had made. In order to
obey this command, I was obliged to re-purchase them from the bookseller at a
very great expense, and deliver them up. This fresh disbursement I endeavored
to get annexed to the account I had already delivered in; but the request was
denied me, notwithstanding I had only acted, in the disposal of my papers,
conformably to the permission I had received from the Board of Trade. This
loss, which amounted to a very considerable sum, I was obliged to bear, and to
rest satisfied with an indemnification for my other expenses.

Thus situated, my only expectations are from the favor of a generous public;
to whom I shall now communicate my plans, journals, and observations, of which
I luckily kept copies, when I delivered the originals into the Plantation
Office. And this I do the more readily, as I hear they are mislaid; and there
is no probability of their ever being published. To those who are interested in
the concerns of the interior parts of North America, from the contiguity of
their possessions, or commercial engagements, they will be extremely useful,
and fully repay the sum at which they are purchased. To those, who, from a
laudable curiosity, wish to be acqainted with the manners and customs of every
inhabitant of this globe, the accounts here given of the various nations that
inhabit so vast a tract of it, a country hitherto almost unexplored, will
furnish an ample fund of amusement and gratify their most curious expectations.
And I flatter myself they will be as favorably received by the public, as
descriptions of islands, which afford no other entertainment than (...) arises
from their novelty; and discoveries, that seem to promise very few advantages
to this country, though acquired at an immense expense.

To make the following work as comprehensible and entertaining as possible, I
shall first give my readers an account of the route I pursued over this immense
continent, and as I pass on, describe the number of inhabitants, the situation
of the rivers and lakes, and the productions of the country: Having done this,
I shall treat, in distinct chapters, of the manners, customs, and languages of
the Indians, and to complete the whole, add a vocabulary of the words mostly in
use among them.

And here it is necessary to bespeak the candor of the learned part of my
readers in the perusal of it, as it is the production of a person unused, from
opposite avocations, to literary pursuits. He therefore begs they would not
examine it with too critical an eye; especially when he assures them that his
attention has been more employed on giving a just description of a country that
promises, in some future period, to be an inexhaustible source of riches to
that people who shall be so fortunate as to possess it, than on the style or
composition; and more careful to render his language intelligible and explicit,
than smooth and florid.

A JOURNAL OF THE TRAVELS, WITH A DESCRIPTION OF THE COUNTRY, LAKES, etc.
IN June 1766, I sat out from Boston, and proceeded by way of Albany and
Niagara, to Michillimackinac; a fort situated between the Lakes Huron and
Michigan, and distant from Boston 1300 miles. This being the uttermost of our
factories toward the north-west, I considered it as the most convenient place
from whence I could begin my intended progress, and enter at once into the
regions I designed to explore.

Referring my readers to the publications already extant for an account of
those parts of North America, that, from lying adjacent to the back
settlements, have been frequently described, I shall confine myself to a
description of the more interior parts of it, which having been but seldom
visited, are consequently but little known. In doing this, I shall in no
instance exceed the bounds of truth, or have recourse to those useless and
extravagant exaggerations too often made use of by travelers, to excite the
curiosity of the public, or to increase their own importance. Nor shall I
insert any observations, but such as I have made ^^self, or, from the
credibility of those by whom they were relate^ am enabled to vouch for their
authenticity.

Michilli^ackinac, from whence I began my travels, is a fort composed of a
strong stockade, and is usually ^efended by a garrison of one hundred men. It
contains about thirty houses, one of which belongs to the governor, and another
to the commissary. Several traders also dwell within its fortifications, who
find it a convenient situation to traffic with the neighboring nations.
Michillimackinac, in the language of the Chipeway Indians, signifies a
Tortoise; and the place is supposed to receive its name from an island, lying
about six or seven miles to the north-east, within sight of the fort, which has
the appearance of that animal.

During the Indian war that followed soon after the conquest of Canada in the
year 1763, and which was carried on by an army of confederate nations composed
of the Hurons, Miamies, Chipeways, Ottowaws, Pontowattimies, Mississauges, and
some other tribes, under the direction of Pontiac, a celebrated Indian warrior,
who had always been in the French interest, it was taken by surprise in the
following manner: The Indians having settled their plan, drew near the fort,
and began a game at ball, a pastime much used among them, and not unlike
tennis. In the height of their game at which some of the English officers, not
suspecting any deceit, stood looking on, they struck the ball, as if by
accident, over the stockade; this they repeated two or three times, to make the
deception more complete; till at length, having by this means lulled every
suspicion of the centry at the south gate, a party rushed by him; and the rest
soon following, they took possession of the fort, without meeting with any
opposition. Having accomplished their design, the Indians had the humanity to
spare the lives of the greatest part of the garrison and traders, but they made
them all prisoners, and carried them off. However some time after they took
them to Montreal, where they were redeemed at a good price. The fort also was
given up again to the English at the peace made with Pontiac, by the commander
of Detroit the year following.

Having here made the necessary dispositions for pursuing my travels, and
obtained a credit from Mr. Rogers, the governor, on some English and Canadian
traders who were going to trade on the Mississippi, and received also from him
a promise of a fresh supply of goods when I reached the falls of Saint Anthony,
I left the fort on the 3d of September, in company with these traders. It was
agreed that they should furnish me with such goods as I might want, for
presents to the Indian chiefs, during my continuance with them, agreeable to
the governor's order. But when I arrived at the extent of their route, I was to
find other guides, and to depend on the goods the governor had promised to
supply me with.

We accordingly set out together, and on the 18th arrived at Fort La Bay. This
fort is situated on the southern extremity of a bay in Lake Michigan, termed by
the French the Bay of Puants; but which, since the English have gained
possession of all the settlements on this part of the continent, is called by
them the Green Bay. The reason of its being thus denominated, is from its
appearance; for on leaving Michillimackinac in the spring season, though the
trees there have not even put forth their buds, yet you find the country around
La Bay, notwithstanding the passage has not exceeded fourteen days, covered
with the finest verdure, and vegetation as forward as it could be were it
summer.

This fort also is only surrounded by a stockade, and being much decayed is
scarcely defensible against small arms. It was built by the French for the
protection of their trade, some time before they were forced to relinquish it;
and when Canada and its dependencies were surrendered to the English, it was
immediately garrisoned with an officer and thirty men. These were made
prisoners by the Menomonies soon after the surprise of Michillmackinac, and the
fort has neither been garrisoned or kept in repair since.

The bay is about ninety miles long, but differs much in its breadth; being in
some places only fifteen miles, in others from twenty to thirty. It lies nearly
from north-east to south-west. At the entrance of it from the lake are a string
of islands, extending from north to south, called the Grand Traverse. These are
about thirty miles in length, and serve to facilitate the passage of canoes, as
they shelter them from the winds, which sometimes come with violence across the
Lake. On the side that lies to the south-east is the nearest and best
navigation.

The islands of the Grand Traverse are mostly small and rocky. Many of the
rocks are of an amazing size, and appear as if they had been fashioned by the
hands of artists. On the largest and best of these islands stands a town of the
Ottowaws, at which I found one of the most considerable chiefs of that nation,
who received me with every honor he could possibly show to a stranger. But
what appeared extremely singular to me at the time, and must do so to every
person unacquainted with the customs of the Indians, was the reception I met
with on landing. As our canoes approached the shore, and had reached within
about three score rods of it, the Indians began a feu-de-joy; in which they
fired their pieces loaded with balls; but at the same time they took care to
discharge them in such a manner as to fly a few yards above our heads: during
this they ran from one tree or stump to another, shouting and behaving as if
they were in the heat of battle. At first I was greatly surprised, and was on
the point of ordering my attendants to return their fire, concluding that their
intentions were hostile; but being undeceived by some of the traders, who
informed me that this was their usual method of receiving the chiefs of other
nations, I considered it in its true light, and was pleased with the respect
thus paid me.

I remained here one night. Among the presents I made the chiefs, were some
spirituous liquors; with which they made themselves merry, and all joined in a
dance, that lasted the greatest part of the night. In the morning when I
departed, the chief attended me to the shore, and, as soon as I had embarked,
offered up, in an audible voice, and with great solemnity, a fervent prayer in
my behalf. He prayed "that the Great Spirit would favor me with a prosperous
voyage; that he would give me an unclouded sky, and smooth waters, by day, and
that I might lie down, by night, on a beaver blanket, enjoying uninterrupted
sleep, and pleasant dreams; and also that I might find continual protection
under the great pipe of peace." In this manner he continued his petitions till
I could no longer hear them.

I must here observe, that notwithstanding the inhabitants of Europe are apt to
entertain horrid ideas of the ferocity of th^^e savages, as they are termed, I
received from every tribe of them in the interior parts, the most hospitable
and courteous treatment; and am convinced, that till they are contaminated by
the example and spirituous liquors of their more refined neighbors, they
retain this friendly and inoffensive conduct toward strangers. Their
inveteracy and cruelty to their enemies I acknowledge to be a great abatement
of the favorable opinion I would wish to entertain of them; but this failing
is hereditary, and having received the sanction of immemorial custom, has taken
too deep root in their minds to be ever extirpated.

Among this people I eat of a very uncommon kind of bread. The Indians, in
general, use but little of this nutritious food: whilst their corn is in the
milk, as they term it, that is, just before it begins to ripen, they slice off
the kernels from the cob to which they grow, and knead them into a paste. This
they are enabled to do without the addition of any liquid, by the milk that
flows from them; and when it is effected, they parcel it out into cakes, and
enclosing them in leaves of the basswood tree, place them in hot embers, where
they are soon baked. And better flavoured bread I never eat in any country.

This place is only a small village containing about twenty-five houses and
sixty or seventy warriors. I found nothing there worthy of further remark.

The land on the south-east side of the Green Bay is but very indifferent,
being overspread with a heavy growth of hemlock, pine, spruce and fir trees.
The communication between Lake Michigan and the Green Bay has been reported by
some to be impracticable for the passage of any vessels larger than canoes or
boats, on account of the shoals that lie between the islands in the Grand
Traverse; but on sounding it I found sufficient depth for a vessel of sixty
tons, and the breadth proportionable.

The land adjoining to the bottom of this bay is very fertile, the country in
general level, and the perspective view of it pleasing and extensive.

A few families live in the fort, which lies on the west side of the Fox-River,
and opposite to it, on the east side of its entrance, are some French settlers
who cultivate the land, and appear to live very comfortably.

The Green Bay or Bay of Puants is one of those places to which the French, as
I have mentioned in the introduction, have given nicknames. It is termed by the
inhabitants of its coast^^ the Menomonie Bay; but why the French have
denominated (...) the Puant or Stinking Bay I know not. The reason they
them^selves give for it is, that it was not with a view to mislead stran^gers,
but that by adopting this method they could converse with each other,
concerning the Indians, in their presence, without being understood by them.
For it was remarked by the persons who first traded among them, that when they
were speaking to each other about them, and mentioned their proper name, they
instantly grew suspicious, and concluded that their visiters were either
speaking ill of them, or plotting their destruction. To remedy this they gave
them some other name. The only bad consequence arising from the practice then
introduced is, that English and French Geographers, in their plans of the
interior parts of America, give different names to the same people, and thereby
perplex those who have occasion to refer to them.

Lake Michigan, of which the Green Bay is a part, is divided on the north-east
from Lake Huron by the Straits of Michillimackinac; and is situated between
forty-two and forty-six degrees of (...), and between eighty-four and
eighty-seven degrees of we^^^longitude. Its greatest length is two hundred and
eighty miles, its breadth about forty, and its circumference nearly six
hundred. There is a remarkable string of small islands, beginning over against
Askin's Farm, and running about thirty miles south-west into the Lake. These
are called the Beaver Islands. Their situation is very pleasant, but the soil
is bare. However they afford a beautiful prospect.

On the north-west parts of this lake the waters branch out into two bays. That
which lies toward the north is the Bay of Noquets, and the other the Green Bay
just described.

The waters of this as well as the other great lakes are clear and wholesome,
and of sufficient depth for the navigation of large ships. Half the space of
the country that lies to the east, and extends to Lake Huron, belongs to the
Ottowaw Indians. The line that divides their territories from the Chipeways,
runs nearly north and south, and reaches almost from the southern extremity of
this lake, across the high lands, to Michillimackinac, through the center of
which it passes. So that when these two tribes happen to meet at the factory,
they each encamp on their own dominions, at a few yards distance from the
stockade.

The country adjacent either to the east or west side of this lake is composed
but of an indifferent soil, except where small brooks or rivers empty
themselves into it; on the banks of these it is extremely fertile. Near the
borders of the lake grow a great number of sand cherries, which are not less
remarkable for their manner of growth, than for their exquisite flavor. They
grow upon a small shrub, not more than four feet high, the boughs of which are
so loaded that they lie in clusters on the sand. As they grow only on the sand,
the warmth of which probably contributes to bring them to such perfection; they
are called by the French, cherries de sable, or sand cherries. The size of them
does not exceed that of a small musket ball, but they are reckoned superior to
any other sort for the purpose of steeping in spirits. There also grow around
the lake gooseberries, black currants, and an abundance of juniper, bearing
great quantities of berries of the finest sort.

Sumack likewise grows here in great plenty; the leaf of which, gathered at
Michaelmas when it turns red, is much esteemed by the natives. They mix about
an equal quantity of it with their tobacco, which causes it to smoke
pleasantly. Near this lake, and indeed about all the great lakes, is found a
kind of willow, termed by the French, bois rouge, in English red wood. Its
bark, when only of one year's growth, is of a fine scarlet color, and appears
very beautiful; but as it grows older, it changes into a mixture of gray and
red. The stalks of this shrub grow many of them together, and rise to the
height of six or eight feet, the largest not exceeding an inch diameter. The
bark being scraped from the sticks, and dried and powdered, is also mixed by
the Indians with their tobacco, and is held by them in the highest estimation
for their winter smoking. A weed that grows near the great lakes, in rocky
places, they use in the summer season. It is called by the Indians, Segockimac,
and creeps like a vine on the ground, sometimes extending to eight or ten feet,
and bearing a leaf about the size of silver penny, nearly round; it is of the
substance and color of the laurel, and is, like the tree it resembles, an
evergreen. These leaves, dried and powdered, they likewise mix with their
tobacco; and, as said before, smoke it only during the summer. By these three
succedaneums the pipes of the Indians are well supplied through every season of
the year; and as they are great smoakers, they are very careful in properly
gathering and preparing them.

On the 20th of September I left the Green Bay, and proceeded up Fox River,
still in company with the traders and some Indians. On the 25th I arrived at
the great town of the Winnebagoes, situated on a small island, just as you
enter the east end of Lake Winnebago. Here the queen who presided over this
tribe instead of a Sach^^^ received me with great civility, and entertained me
in a very distinguished manner, during the four days I continued with her.

The day after my arrival I held a council with the chiefs, of whom I asked
permission to pass through their country, in my way to more remote nations, on
business of importance. This was readily granted me, the request being esteemed
by them as a great compliment paid to their tribe. The queen sat in the
council, but only asked a few questions, or gave some trifling directions in
matters relative to the state; for women are never allowed to sit in their
councils, except they happen to be invested with the supreme authority, and
then it is not customary for them to make any formal speeches as the chiefs do.
She was a very ancient woman, small in stature, and not much distinguished by
her dress from several young women that attended her. These her attendants
seemed greatly pleased whenever I showed any tokens of respect to their queen,
particularly when I saluted her, which I frequently did to acquire her favor.
On these occasions the good old lady endeavored to assume a juvenile gaiety,
and by her smiles showed she was equally pleased with the attention I paid her.

The time I tarried here, I employed in making the best observations possible
on the country, and in collecting the most certain intelligence I could of the
origin, language, and customs of this people. From these enquiries I have
reason to conclude, that the Winnebagoes originally resided in some of the
provinces belonging to New Mexico; and being driven from their native country,
either by intestine divisions, or by the extensions of the Spanish conquests,
they took refuge in these more northern parts about a century ago.

My reason for adopting this supposition, are, first from their unalienable
attachment to the Naudowessie Indians (who, they say, gave them the earliest
succors during their emigration) notwithstanding their present residence is
more than six hundred miles distant from that people.

Secondly, that their dialect totally differs from every other Indian nation
yet discovered; it being a very uncouth guttural jargon, which none of their
neighbors will attempt to learn. They converse with other nations in the
Chipeway tongue, which is the prevailing language throughout all the tribes,
from the Mohawks of Canada, to those who inhabit the borders of the
Mississippi, and from the Hurons and Illinois to such a dwell near Hudson's Bay.

Thirdly, from their inveterate hatred to the Spaniards. Some of them informed
me that they had many excursions to the south-west, which took up several
moons. An elderly chief more particularly acquainted me, that about forty-six
winters ago, he marched at the head of fifty warriors, toward the south-west,
for three moons. That during this expedition, whilst they were crossing a
plain, they discovered (...) of men on horseback, who belonged to the Black
People; for so they call the Spaniards. As soon as they perceived them, they
proceeded with caution, and concealed themselves till night came on; when they
drew so near as to be able to discern the number and situation of their
enemies. Finding they were not able to cope with so great a superiority by
daylight, they waited till they had retired to rest; when they rushed upon
them, and, after having killed the greatest part of the men, took eighty horses
loaded with what they termed white stone. This I suppose to have been silver,
as he told me the horses were shod with it, and that their bridles were
ornamented with the same. When they had satiated their revenge, they carried
off their spoil, and being got so far as to be out of the reach of the
Spaniards that had escaped their fury, they left the useless and ponderous
burden, with which the horses were loaded, in the woods, and mounting
themselves, in this manner returned to their friends. The party they had thus
defeated, I conclude to be the caravan that annually conveys to Mexico, the
silver which the Spaniards find in great quantities on the mountains lying near
the heads of the Coleredo River: and the plains where the attack was made,
probably, some they were obliged to pass over in their way to the heads of the
River St. Fee, or Rio del Nord, which falls into the Gulf of Mexico, to the
west of the Mississippi.

The Winnebagoes can raise about two hundred warriors. Their town contains
about fifty houses, which are strongly built with palisades, and the island on
which it is situated nearly fifty acres. It lies thirty-five miles, reckoning
according to the course of the river, from the Green Bay.

The river, for about four or five miles from the bay, has a gentle current;
after that space, till you arrive at the Winnebago Lake, it is full of rocks
and very rapid. At many places we were obliged to land our canoes, and carry
them a considerable way. Its breath, in general, from the Green Bay to the
Winnebago Lake, is between seventy and a hundred yards: the land on its borders
very good, and thinly wooded with hickory, oak, and hazel.

The Winnebago Lake is about fifteen miles long from east to west, and six
miles wide. At its south-east corner, a river falls into it that takes its rise
near some of the northern branches of the Illinois River. This I called the
Crocodile River, in consequence of a story that prevails among the Indians, of
their having destroyed, in some part of it, an animal, which from their
description must be a crocodile or an alligator.

The land adjacent to the Lake is very fertile, abounding with grapes, plums,
and other fruits, which grow spontaneously. The Winnebagoes raise on it a great
quantity of Indian corn, beans, pumpkins, squash, and water melons, with some
tobacco. The lake itself abounds with fish, and in the fall of the year, with
geese, ducks, and teal. The latter, which resort to it in great numbers are
r^^^^kably good and extremely fat, and are much better flavoured than those
that are found near the sea, as they acquire their excessive fatness by feeding
on the wild rice, which grow so plentifully in these parts.

Having made some acceptable presents to the good old queen, and received her
blessing, I left the town of the Winnebagoes on the 29th of September, and
about twelve miles from it arrived at the place where the Fox River enters the
Lake on the north side of it. We proceeded up this river, and on the 7th of
October reached the great Carrying Place, which divides it from the Ouisconsin.

The Fox River, from the Green Bay to the Carrying Place, is about one hundred
and eighty miles. From the Winnebago Lake to the Carrying Place the current is
gentle, and the depth of it considerable; notwithstanding which, it is in some
places with difficulty that cannoes can pass, through the obstructions they
meet with from the rice stalks, which are very large and thick, and grow here
in great abundance. The country around it is very fertile and proper in the
highest degree for cultivation, excepting in some places near the river, where
it is rather too low. It is in no part very woody, and yet can supply
sufficient to answer the demands of any number of inhabitants. This river is
the greatest resort for wild fowl of every kind that I met with in the whole
course of my travels; frequently the sun would be obscured by them for some
minutes together.

About forty miles up this river, from the great town of the Winnebagoes,
stands a smaller town belonging to that nation.

Deer and bears are very numerous in these parts, and a great many beavers and
other furs are taken on the streams that empty themselves into this river.

The river I am treating of, is remarkable for having been, about eighty years
ago, the residence of the united bands of the Ottigaumies and the Saukies, whom
the French had nicknamed, according to their wonted custom, Des Sacs and Des
Reynards, the Sacks and the Foxes, of whom the following anecdote was related
to me by an Indian.

About sixty years ago, the French missionaries and traders having received
many insults from these people, a party of French and Indians, under the
command of Captain Morand marched to revenge their wrongs. The Captain set out
from the Green Bay in the winter, when they were unsuspicious of a visit of
this kind, and pursuing his route over the snow to their villages, which lay
about fifty miles up the Fox River, came upon them by surprise. Unprepared as
they were, he found them an easy conquest, and consequently killed or took
prisoners the greatest part of them. On the return of the French to the Green
Bay, one of the Indian chiefs in alliance with them, who had a considerable
band of the prisoners under his care, stopped to drink at a brook; in the mean
time his companions went on: which being observed by one of the women whom they
had made captive, she suddenla seized him with (...) her hands, whilst he
stooped to drink, by an exquisitely susceptible part, and held him fast till he
expired on the spot. As the chief, from the extreme torture he suffered, was
unable to call out to his friends, or to give any alarm, they passed on without
knowing what had happened; and the woman having cut the bands of those of her
fellow prisoners who were in the rear, with them made her escape. This heroine
was ever after treated by her nation as their deliverer, and made a chiefess in
her own right, with liberty to entail the same honor on her descendants: an
unusual distinction, and permitted only on extraordinary occasions.

About twelve miles before I reached the Carrying Place, I observed several
small mountains which extended quite to it. These indeed would only be esteemed
as mol^hills when compared with those on the back of the colonies, but as they
were the first I had seen since my leaving Niagara, a track of nearly eleven
hundred miles, I could not leave them unnoticed.

The Fox River, where it enters the Winnebago Lake, is about fifty yards wide,
but it gradually decreases to the C^^rying Place, where it is no more than five
yards over, except in a few places where it widens into small lakes, though
still of a considerable depth. I cannot recollect any thing else that is
remarkable in this river, except that it is so serpentine for five miles, as
only to gain in that place one quarter of a mile.

The Carrying Place between the Fox and Ouisconsin Rivers is in breadth not
more than a mile and three quarters, though in some maps it is so delineated as
to appear to be ten miles. And here I cannot help remarking, that all the maps
of these parts, I have ever seen, are very erroneous. The rivers in general are
described as running in different directions from what they really do; and many
branches of them, particularly of the Mississippi, omitted. The distances of
places, likewise, are greatly misrepresented. Whether this is done by the
French geographers (for the English maps are all copied from theirs) through
design, or for want of a just knowledge of the country, I cannot say; but I am
satisfied that travelers who depend upon them in the parts I visited, will
find themselves much at a loss.

Near one half of the way, between the rivers, is a morass overgrown with a
kind of long grass, the rest of it a plain with some few oak and pine trees
growing thereon. I observed here a great number of rattle-snakes. Mons.
Pinnisance, a French trader, told me a remarkable story concerning one of these
reptiles, of which, he said, he was an eyewitness. An Indian, belonging to the
Menomonie nation, having taken one of them, found means to tame it; and when he
had done this, treated it as a Deity; calling it his Great Father, and carrying
it with him in a box wherever he went. This the Indian had done for several
summers, when Mons. Pinnisance accidentally met with him at this Carrying
Place, just as he was setting off for a winter's hunt. The French gentleman was
surprised, one day, to see the Indian place the box which contained his god on
the ground, and opening the door give him his liberty; telling him, whilst he
did it, to be sure and return by the time he himself should come back, which
was to be in the month of May following. As this was but October, Monsieur told
the Indian, whose simplicity astonished him, that he fancied he might wa^^ long
enough when May arrived, for the arrival of his great father- The Indian was so
confident of his creature's obedience* that he offered to lay the Frenchman a
wager of two gallons of rum, that at the time appointed he would come and crawl
into his box. This was agreed on, and the second week in May following fixed
for the determination of the wager. At that period they both met there again;
when the Indian set down his box, and called for his great father. The snake
heard him not; and the time being now expired, he ackowledged that he had lost.
However, without seeming to be discouraged, he offered to double the bett if
his great father came not within two days more. This was further agreed on;
when behold on the second day* about one o'clock, the snake arrived, and, of
his own accord crawled into the box, which was placed ready for him. The French
gentleman vouched for the truth of this story, and from the accounts I have
often received of the docility of those creatures, I see do reason to doubt his
veracity.

I observed that the main body of the Fox River came from the south-west, that
of the Ouisconsin from the north-east; and also that some of the small branches
of these two rivers, in descending into them, doubled, within a few feet of
each other, a little to the south of the Carrying Place. That two such rivers
should take their rise so near each other, and after running such different
courses, empty themselves into the sea, at a distance so amazing (for the
former having passed through several great lakes, and run upwards of two
thousand miles, falls into the Gulf of St. Lawrence, and the other, after
joining the Mississippi, and having run an equal number of miles, disembogues
itself into the Gulf of Mexico) is an instance scarcely to be met in the
extensive continent of North America. I had an opportunity the year following,
of making the same observations on the affinity of various head branches of the
waters of the St. Lawrence and the Mississippi to each other; and now bring
them as a proof, that the opinion of those geographers, who assert, that rivers
taking their rise so near each other, must spring from the same source, is
erroneous. For I perceived a visibly distinct separation in all of them,
notwithstanding, in some places, they approached so near, that I could have
stepped from one to the other.

On the 8th of October we got our canoes into the Ouisconsin River, which at
this place is more than a hundred yards wide; and the next day arrived at the
Great Town of the Saukies. This is the largest and best built Indian town I
ever saw. It contains about ninety houses, each large enough for several
families. These are built of hewn plank, neatly jointed, and covered with bark
so compactly as to keep out the most penetrating rains. Before the doors are
placed comfortable sheds, in which the inhabitants sit, when the weather will
permit, and smoke their pipes. The streets are regular and spacious; so that it
appears more like a civilized town than the abode of savages. The land near the
town is very good. In their plantations, which lie adjacent to their houses,
and which are neatly laid out, they raise great quantities of Indian corn,
beans, melons, etc. so that this place is esteemed the best market for traders
to furnish themselves with provisions, of any within eight hundred miles of it.

The Saukies can raise about three hundred warriors, who are generally employed
every summer in making incursions into the territories of the Illinois and
Pawnee nations, from whence they return with a great number of slaves. But
those people frequently retaliate, and, in their turn, destroy many of the
Saukies, which I judge to be the reason that they increase no faster.

Whilst I staid here, I took a view of some mountains tha^ lie ^^out fifteen
miles to the southward, and abound in lead ore. I ascended on one of the
highest of these, and had an extensive view of the country. For many miles
nothing was to be seen but lesser mountains, which appeared at a distance like
haycocks, they being free from trees. Only a few groves of hickery, and stunted
oaks, covered some of the valleys. So plentiful is lead here, that I saw large
quantities of it lying about the streets in the town belonging to the Saukies,
and it seemed to be as good as the produce of other countries.

On the 10th of October we proceeded down the river, and the next day reached
the first town of the Ottigaumies. This town contained about fifty houses, but
we found most of them deserted, on account of an epidemical disorder that had
lately raged among them, and carried off more than one half of the inhabitants.
The greater part of those who survived had retired into the woods, to avoid the
contagion.

On the 15th we entered that extensive river the Mississippi. The Ouisconsin,
from the Carrying Place to the part where it falls into the Mississippi, flows
with a smooth but strong current; the water of it is exceedingly clear, and
through it you may perceive a fine and sandy bottom, tolerably free from rocks.
In it are a few islands, the soil of which appeared to be good, though somewhat
woody. The land near the river also seemed to be, in general, excellent; but
that at a distance is very full of mountains, where it is said there are many
lead mines.

About five miles from the junction of the rivers, I observed the ruins of a
large town in a very pleasing situation. On ^nquiring of the neighboring
Indians why it was thus deserted, I was informed, that about thirty years ago,
the Great Spirit had appeared on the top of a pyramid of rocks, which lay at a
little distance from it, toward the west, and warned them to quit their
habitations; for the land on which they were built belonged to him, and he had
occasion for it. As a proof that he, who gave them these orders, was really the
Great Spirit, he further told them, that the grass should immediately spring up
on those very rocks from whence he now addressed them, which they knew to be
bare and barren. The Indians obeyed, and soon after discovered that this
miraculous alteration had taken place. They showed me the spot, but the growth
of the grass appeared to be no ways supernatural. I apprehend this to have been
a stratagem of the French or Spaniards to answer some selfish view; but in what
manner they effected their purposes I know not.

This people, soon after their removal, built a town on the bank of the
Mississippi, near the mouth of the Ouisconsin, at a place called by the French
La Prairies les Chiens, which signifies the Dog Plains; it is a large town, and
contains about three hundred families; the houses are well built after the
Indian manner, and pleasantly situated on a very rich soil, from which the^
raise every necessary of life in great abundance. I saw here many horses of a
good size and shape. This town is the great mart where all the adjacent tribes,
and even those who inhab^^ the most remote branches of the Mississippi, annully
assemble about the latter end of May, bringing with them their furs to dispose
of to the traders. But it is not always that they conclude their sale here;
this is determined by a general council of the chiefs, who consult whether it
would be more conducive to their interest, to sell their goods at this place,
or carry them on to Louisiana, or Michillimackinac. According to the decision
of this council they either proceed further, or return to their different homes.

The Mississippi, at the entrance of the Ouisconsin, near which stands a
mountain of considerable height, is about half a mile over; but opposite to the
last mentioned town it appears to be more than a mile wide, and full of
islands, the soil of which is extraordinary rich, and but thinly wooded.

A little farther to the west, on the contrary side, a small river falls into
the Mississippi, which the French call Le Jaun Riviere, or the Yellow River.
Here the traders who had accompanied me hitherto, took up their residence for
the winter. I then bought a canoe, and with two servants, one a French
Canadian, and the other a Mohawk of Canada, on the 19th proceeded up the
Mississippi.

About ten days after I had parted from the traders, I landed as I usually did
every evening, and having pitched my tent, I ordered my men, when night came
on, to lay themselves down to sleep. By a light that I kept burning I then sat
down to copy the minutes I had taken in the course of the preceding day. About
ten o'clock, having just finished my memorandums, I stepped out of my tent to
see what weather it was. As I cast my eyes toward the bank of the river, I
thought I saw by the light of the stars, which shone bright, something that had
the appearance of a herd of beasts coming down a descent at some distance;
whilst I was wondering what they could be, one of the number suddenly sprung
up, and discovered to me the form of a man. In an instant they were all on
their legs, and I could count about ten or twelve of them running toward me. I
immediately re-entered the tent, and having awakened my men, ordered them to
take their arms, and follow me. As my first apprehensions were for my canoe, I
ran to the water's side, and found a party of Indians (for such I now
discovered them ^o be) on the point of plundering it. Before I reached them I
commanded my men not to fire till I had given the word, being unwilling to
begin hostilities unless occasion absolutely required. I accordingly advanced
with resolution, close to the points of their spears, they had no other
weapons, and brandishing my hanger, asked them with a stern voice, what they
wanted? They were staggered at this, and perceiving they were like to meet with
a warm reception, turned about and precipitately retreated. We pursued them to
an adjacent wood, which they entered, and we (...) no more of them. However,
for fear of their return, we watched alternately during the remainder of the
night. The next day my servants were under great apprehensions, and earnestly
entreated me to return to the traders we had lately left. But I told them, that
if they would not be esteemed old women (a term of the greatest reproach among
the Indians) they must follow me; for I was determined to pursue my intended
route, as an Englishman, when once engaged in an adventure, never retreated.
On this they got into the canoe, and I walked on the shore to guard them from
any further attack. The party of Indians who had thus intended to plunder me, I
afterward found to be some of those straggling bands, that having been driven
from among the different tribes to which they belonged for various crimes, now
associated themselves together, and, living by plunder, prove very troublesome
to travelers who pass this way; nor are even Indians of every tribe spared by
them. The traders had before cautioned me to be upon my guard against them, and
I would repeat the same caution to those whose business might call them into
these parts.

On the first of November I arrived at Lake Pepin, which is rather an extended
part of the River Mississippi, that the French have thus denominated, about two
hundred miles from the Ouisconsin. The Mississippi below this Lake flows with a
gentle current, but the breadth of it is very uncertain, in some places it
being upwards of a mile, in others not more than a quarter. This river has a
range of mountains on each side throughout the whole of the way; which in
particular parts approach near to it, in others lie at a greater distance. The
land betwixt the mountains, and on their sides, is generally covered with grass
with a few groves of trees interspersed, near which large droves of deer and
elk are frequently seen feeding.

In many places pyramids of rocks appeared, resembling old ruinous towers; at
others amazing precipices; and what is very remarkable, whilst this scene
presented itself on one side, the opposite side of the same mountain was
covered with the finest herbage, which gradually ascended to its summit. From
thence the most beautiful and extensive prospect that imagination can form
opens to your view. Ve^dant plains, fruitful meadows, numerous islands, and all
these abounding with a variety of trees that yield amazing quantities of fruit,
without care or cultivation; such as the nut-tree, the maple which produces
sugar, vines loaded with rich grapes, and plum-trees bending under their
blooming burdens, but above all, the fine river flowing gently beneath, and
reaching as far as the eye can extend, by turns attract your admiration and
excite your wonder.

The Lake is about twenty miles long, and near six in breadth; in some places
it is very deep, and abounds with various kinds of fish. Great numbers of fowl
frequent also this Lake and rivers adjacent; such as storks, swans, geese,
brants, and ducks: and in the groves are found great plenty of turkeys and
partridges. On the plains are the largest buffaloes of any in America. Here I
observed the ruins of a French factory, where it is said Captain St. Pierre
resided, and carried on a very great trade with the Naudowessies, before the
reduction of Canada.

About sixty miles below this Lake is a mountain remarkably situated; for it
stands by itself exactly in the middle of the River, and looks as if it had
slidden from the adjacent shore into the stream. It cannot be termed an island,
as it rises immediately from the brink of the water to a considerable height.
Both the Indians and the French call it the Mountain in the River.

One day having landed on the shore of the Mississippi, some miles below Lake
Pepin, whilst my attendants were preparing my dinner, I walked out to take a
view of the adjacent country. I had not proceeded far, before I came to a fine,
level, open plain, on which I perceived at a little distance, a partial
elevation that had the appearance of an intrenchment. On a nearer inspection I
had greater reason to suppose that it had really been intended for this many
centuries ago. Notwithstanding it was now covered with grass, I could plainly
discern that it had once been a breast-work of about four feet in height,
extending the best part of a mile, and sufficiently capacious to cover five
thousand men. Its form was somewhat circular, and its flanks reached to the
River. Though much defaced by time, every angle was distinguishable, and
appeared as regular, and fashioned with as much military skill, as if planned
by Vauban himself. The ditch was not visible, but ^hought on examining more
curiously, that I could perceive there certainly had been one. From its
situation also, I am convinced that it must have been designed for this
purpose. It fronted the country, and the rear was covered by the River; nor was
there any rising ground for a considerable way that commanded it; a few
straggling oaks were alone to be seen near it. In many places small tracts were
worn across it by the feet of the elks and deer, and from the depth of the bed
of earth by which it was covered, I was able to draw certain conclusions of its
great antiquity. I examined all the angles and every part with great attention,
and have often blamed myself since, for not encamping on the spot, and drawing
an exact plan of it. To show that this description is not the offspring of a
heated imagination, or the chimerical tale of a mistaken traveller, I find on
enquiry since my return, that Mons. St. Pierre and several traders have, at
different times, taken notice of similar appearances, on which they have formed
the same conjectures, but without examining them so minutely as I did. How a
work of this kind could exist in a country that has hitherto (according to the
general received opinion) been the seat of war to untutored Indians alone,
whose whole stock of military knowledge has only, till within two centuries,
amounted to drawing the bow, and whose only breast-work even at present is the
thicket, I know not. I have given as exact an account as possible of this
singular appearance, and leave to future explorers of these distant regions to
discover whether it is a production of nature or art.

Perhaps the hints I have here given might lead to a more perfect investigation
of it, and give us very different ideas of the ancient state of realms that we
at present believe to have been from the earliest period only the habitations
of savages.

The Mississippi, as far as the entrance of the River St. Croix, thirty miles
above Lake Pepin, is very full of islands; some of which are of a considerable
length. On these, also, grow great numbers of the maple or sugar tree, and
around them vines loaded with grapes creeping to their very tops. From the Lake
upwards few mountains are to be seen, and those but small. Near the River St.
Croix reside three bands of the Naudowessie Indians, called the River Bands.

This nation is composed, at present, of eleven bands. They were originally
twelve; but the Assinipoils some years ago revolting, and separating themselves
from the others, there remain only at this time eleven. Those I met here are
termed the River Bands; because they chiefly dwell near the banks of this
River: the other eight are generally distinguished by the title Naudowessies of
the Plains, and inhabit a country that lies more to the westward. The names of
the former are the Nehogatawonahs, the Mawtawbauntowahs, and the
Shahsweentowahs, and consist of about four hundred warriors.

A little before I met with these three bands, I fell in with a pa^^y of the
Mawtawbauntowahs, amounting to forty warriors and their families. With these I
resided a day or two, during which time five or six of their number, who had
been out on an excursion, returned in great haste, and acquainted their
companions that a large party of the Chipeway warriors, "enough," as they
expressed themselves, "to swallow them "all up," were close at their heels, and
on the point of attacking their little camp. The chiefs applied to me, and
desired I would put myself at their head, and lead them out to oppose ^^eir
enemies. As I was a stranger, and unwilling to excite the anger of either
nation, I knew not how to act; and never found myself in a greater dilemma. Had
I refused to assist the Naudowessies I should have drawn on myself their
displeasure, or had I met the Chipeways with hostile intentions, I should have
made that people my foes, and had I been fortunate enough to have escaped their
arrows at this time, on some future occasion should probably have experienced
the severity of their revenge. In this extremity I chose the middle course, and
desired that the Naudowessies would suffer me to meet them, that I might
endeavor to avert their fury. To this they reluctantly assented, being
persuaded, from the inveteracy which had long prevailed between them, that my
remonstrances would be in vain.

Taking my Frenchman with me, who could speak their language, I hastened
toward the place where the Chipeways were supposed to be. The Naudowessies
during this kept at a distance behind. As I approached them with the pipe of
peace, a small party of their chiefs, consisting of about eight or ten, came in
a friendly manner toward me; with whom, by the means of my interpreter, I held
a long conversation; the result of which was, that their rancour being by my
persuasions in some measure mollified, they agreed to return back without
accomplishing their savage purposes. During our discourse I could perceive, as
they lay scattered about, that the party was very numerous, and many of them
armed with muskets.

Having happily succeeded in my undertaking, I returned without delay to the
Naudowessies, and desired they would instantly remove their camp to some other
part of the country, lest their enemies should repent of the promise they had
given, and put their intentions in execution. They accordingly followed my
advice, and immediately prepared to strike their tents. Whilst they were doing
this, they loaded me with thanks; and when I had seen them on board their
canoes I pursued my route.

To this adventure I was chiefly indebted for the friendly reception I
afterward met with from the Naudowessies of the Plains, and for the respect
and honors I received during my abode among them. And when I arrived many
months after at the Chipeway village, near the Ottowaw lakes, I found that my
fame had rea^^ed that place before me. The chiefs received me with great
cordiality, and the elder part of them thanked me for the mischief I had
prevented. They informed me, that the war between their nation and the
Naudowessies had continued without interruption for more than forty winters.
That they had long wished to put an end to it, but this was generally prevented
by the young warriors of either nation, who could not restrain their ardour
when they met. They said, they should be happy if some chief of the same
pacific disposition as myself, and who possessed an equal degree of resolution
and coolness, would settle in the country between the two nations; for by the
interference of such a person, an accommodation, which on their parts they
sincerely desired, might be brought about. As I did not meet any of the
Naudowessies afterward, I had not an opportunity of forwarding so good a work.

About thirty miles below the Falls of St. Anthony, at which I arrived the
tenth day after I left Lake Pepin, is a remarkable cave of an amazing depth.
The Indians term it Wakon-teebe, that is, the Dwelling of the Great Spirit. The
entrance into it is about ten feet wide, the height of it five feet. The arch
within is near fifteen feet high and about thirty feet broad. The bottom of it
consists of fine clear sand. About twenty feet from the entrance begins a lake,
the water of which is transparent, and extends to an unsearchable distance; for
the darkness of the cave prevents all attempts to acquire a knowledge of it. I
threw a small pebble toward the interior parts of it with my utmost strength:
I could hear that it fell into the water, and notwithstanding it was of so
small a size, it caused an astonishing and horrible noise that reverberated
through all those gloomy regions. I found in this cave many Indian
hieroglyphics, which appeared very ancient, for time had nearly covered them
with moss, so that it was with difficulty I could trace them. They were cut in
a rude manner upon the inside of the walls, which were composed of a stone so
extremely soft that it might easily be penetrated with a knife: a stone every
where to be found near the Mississippi. The cave is only accessible by
asscending a narrow, steep passage that lies near the brink of the river.

At a little distance from this dreary cavern is the burying-place of several
bands of the Naudowessie Indians: though these people have no fixed residence,
living in tents, and abiding but a few months on one spot, yet they always
bring the bones of their dead to this place; which they take the opportunity of
doing when the chiefs meet to hold their councils, and to settle all public
affairs for the ensuing summer.

Ten miles below the Falls of St. Anthony the River St. Pierre, called by the
natives the Waddapawmenesotor, falls into the Mississippi from the West. It is
not mentioned by Father Hennipin, although a large fair river: this omission I
conclude, must have proceeded from a small island that is situated exactly at
its entrance, by which the sight of it is intercepted. I should not have
discovered this river myself, had I not taken a view, when I was searching for
it, from the high lands opposite, which rise to a great height.

Nearly over against this river I was obliged to leave my canoe, on account of
the ice, and travel by land to the Falls of St. Anthony, where I arrived on the
17th of November. The Mississippi from the St. Pierre to this place is rather
more rapid than I had hitherto found it, and without islands of any
consideration.

Before I left my canoe I overtook a young prince of the Winnebago Indians, who
was going on an embassy to some of the bands of the Naudowessies. Finding that
I intended to take a view of the Falls, he agreed to accompany me, his
curiosity having been often excited by the accounts he had received from some
of his chiefs: he accordingly left his family (for the Indians never travel
without their households) at this place, under the care of my Mohawk servant,
and we proceeded together by land, attended only by my Frenchman, to this
celebrated place.

We could distinctly hear the noise of the water full fifteen miles before we
reached the falls; and I was greatly pleased and surprised, when I approached
this astonishing work of nature: but I was not long at liberty to indulge these
emotions, my attention being called o^ by the behavior of my companion.

The prince had no sooner gained the point that overlooks this wonderful
cascade, than he began with an audible voice to address the Great Spirit, one
of whose places of residence he imagined this to be. He told him that he had
come a long way to pay his adorations to him, and now would make him the best
offerings in his power. He accordingly first threw his pipe into the stream;
then the roll that contained his tobacco; after these, the bracelets he wore on
his arms and wrists; next an ornament that encircled his neck, composed of
beads and wires; and at last the earrings from his ears; in short, he
presented to his god every part of his dress that was valuable: during this he
frequently smote his breast with great violence, threw his arms about, and
appeared to be much agitated.

All this while he continued his adorations and at length concluded them with
servent petitions that the Great Spirit would constantly afford us his
protection on our travels, giving us a bright sun, a blue sky, and clear
untroubled waters: nor would he leave the place till we had smoaked together
with my pipe in honor of the Great Spirit.

I was greatly surprised at beholding an instance of such elevated devotion in
so young an Indian, and instead of ridiculing the ceremonies attending it, as I
observed my catholic servant tacitly did, I looked on the prince with a greater
degree of respect for these sincere proofs he gave of his piety; and I doubt
not but that his offerings and prayers were as accep^^ble to the universal
Parent of mankind, as if they had been made with greater pomp, or in a
consecrated place.

Indeed, the whole conduct of this young prince at once amazed and charmed me.
During the few days we were together his attention seemed totally to be
employed in yielding me every assistance in his power: and even in so short a
time he gave me innumerable proofs of the most generous and disinterested
friendship; so that on our return I parted from him with great reluctance.
Whilst I beheld the artless, yet engaging manners of this unpolished savage, I
could not help drawing a comparison between him and some of the more refined
inhabitants of civilized countries, not much, I own, in favor of the latter.

The Falls of St. Anthony received their name from Father Louis Hennipin; a
French missionary, who traveled into these parts about the year 1680, and was
the first European ever seen by the natives. This amazing body of waters, which
are above 250 yards over, form a most pleasing cataract; they fall
perpendicularly about thirty feet, and the rapids below, in the space of 300
yards more, render the descent considerably greater; so that when viewed at a
distance they appear to be much higher than they really are. The
abovementioned traveller has laid them down at above sixty feet; but he has
made a greater error in calculating the height of the Falls of Niagara; which
he asserts to be 600 feet; whereas from latter observations accurately made, it
is well known that it does not exceed 140 feet. But the good father I fear too
often had no other foundation for his accounts than report, or, at b^st, a
slight inspection.

In the middle of the Falls stands a small island, about forty feet broad and
somewhat longer, on which grow a few cragged hemlock and spruce trees; and
about half way between this island and the eastern shore is a rock, lying at
the very edge of the Fall, in an oblique position, that appeared to be about
five or six feet broad, and thirty or forty long. These Falls vary much from
all the others I have seen, as you may approach close to them without finding
the least obstruction from any intervening hill or precipice.

The country around them is extremely beautiful. It is not an u^interrupted
plain where the eye finds no relief, but composed of many gentle ascents, which
in the summer are covered with the finest verdure, and interspersed with little
groves, that give a pleasing variety to the prospect. On the whole, when the
Falls are included, which may be seen at the distance of four miles, a more
pleasing and picturesque view cannot, I believe, be found throughout the
universe. I could have wished that I had happened to enjoy this glorious sight
at a more seasonable time of the year, whilst the trees and hillocks were clad
in nature's gayest livery, as this must have greatly added to the pleasure I
received; however, even then it exceeded my warmest expectations. I have
endeavored to give the reader as just an idea of this enchanting spot as
possible; but all description, whether of the pencil or the pen, must fall
infinitely short of the original.

At a little distance below the Falls stands a small island, of about an acre
and an half, on which grow a great number of oak trees, every branch of which,
able to support the weight, was full of eagles nests. The reason that this kind
of birds resort in such numbers to this spot, is that they are here secure from
the attacks either of man or beast, their retreat being guarded by the rapids,
which the Indians never attempt to pass. Another reason is, that they find a
constant supply of food for themselves and their young, from the animals and
fish which are dashed to pieces by the falls, and driven on the adjacent shore.

Having satisfied my curiosity, as far as the eye of man can be satisfied, I
proceeded on, still accompanied by my young friend, till I had reached the
River St. Francis, near sixty miles above the Falls. To this river Father
Hennipin gave the name of St. Francis, and this was the extent of his travels,
as well as mine, toward the north-west. As the season was so advanced, and the
weather extremely cold, I was not able to make so many observations on these
parts as I otherwise should have done.

It might however, perhaps, be necessary to observe, that in the little tour I
made about the Falls, after traveling fourteen miles, by the side of the
Mississippi, I came to a river nearly twenty yards wide, which ran from the
north-east, called Rum-River. And on the 20th of November came to another
termed Goose-River, about twelve yards wide. On the 21st I arrived at the St.
Francis, which is about thirty yards wide. Here the Mississippi itself grows
narrow, being not more than ninety yards over; and appears to be chiefly
composed of small branches. The ice prevented me from noticing the depth of any
of these three rivers.

The country in some places is hilly, but without large mountains; and the land
is tolerably good. I observed here many deer and carriboos, some elk, with
abundance of beavers, otters, and other furs. A little above this, to the
north-east, are a number of small lakes called the Thousand Lakes; the parts
about which, though but little frequented, are the best within many miles for
hunting, as the hunter never fails of returning loaded beyond his expectations.

The Mississippi has never been explored higher up than the River St. Francis,
and only by Father Hennipin and myself thus far. So that we are obliged solely
to the Indians, for all the intelligence we are able to give relative to the
more northern parts. As this River is not navigable from the sea for v^^sels of
any considerable burden, much higher up than the Forks of the Ohio, and even
that is accomplished with great difficulty, owing to the rapidity of the
current, and the windings of the river, those settlements that may be made on
the interior branches of it, must be indisputably secure from the attacks of
any maritime power. But at the same time the settlers will have the advantage
of being able to convey their produce to the seaports with great facility, the
current of the river from its source to its entrance into the Gulf of Mexico,
being extremely favorable for doing this in small craft. This might also in
time be facilitated by canals or shorter cuts; and a communication opened by
water with New York, Canada, etc. by way of the lakes. The Forks of the Ohio
are about nine hundred miles from the mouth of the Mississippi, following the
course of the river; and the Messorie two hundred miles above these. From the
latter it is about twenty miles to the Illinois River, and from that to the
Ouisconsin, which I have given an account of about eight hundred more.

On the 25th I returned to my canoe, which I had left at the mouth of the River
St. Pierre; and here I parted with regret from my young friend the prince of
the Winnebagoes. This river being clear of ice by reason of its southern
situation, I found nothing to obstruct my passage. On the 28th, being advanced
about forty miles, I arrived at a small branch that fell into it from the
north; to which, as it had no name that I could distinguish it by, I gave my
own. About forty miles higher up I came to the Forks of Verd and Red Marble
Rivers, which join at some little distance before they enter the St. Pierre.

The River St. Pierre, at its junction with the Mississippi, is about a hundred
yards broad, and continues that breadth nearly all the way I sailed upon it. It
has a great depth of water, and in some places runs very briskly. About fifty
miles from its mouth are some rapids, and much higher up there are many others.

I proceeded up this river about two hundred miles to the country of the
Naudowessies of the Plains, which lies a little above the Forks formed by the
Verd and Red Marble Rivers, just mentioned, where a branch from the south
nearly joins the Messorie River. By the accounts I received from the Indians, I
have reason to believe that the River St. Pierre and the Messorie, though they
enter the Mississippi twelve hundred miles from each other, take their rise in
the same neighborhood; and this within the space of a mile.

The River St. Pierre's northern branch rises from a number of lakes near the
shining mountains; and it is from some of these, also, that a capital branch of
the River Bourbon, which runs into Hudson^s Bay, has its sources.

From the intelligence I gained from the Naudowessie Indians, among whom I
arrived the 7th of December, and whose language I perfectly acquired during a
residence of five months; and also from the accounts I afterward obtained from
the Assinipoils, who speak the same tongue, being a revolted band of the
Naudowessies; and from the Killistinoes, neighbors of the Assinipoils, who
speak the Chipeway language, and inhabit the heads of the River Bourbon; I say
from these nations, together with my own observations, I have learned that the
four most capital rivers on the Continent of North America, viz. the St.
Lawrence, the Mississippi, the river Bourbon, and the Oregon of the river of
the West (as I hinted in my Introduction) have their sources in the same
neighborhood. The waters of the three former are within thirty miles of each
other; the latter, however, is rather farther west.

This shows that these parts are the highest lands in North America; and it is
an instance not to be paralleled on the other three quarters of the globe, that
four rivers of such magnitude should take their rise together, and each, after
running separate courses, discharge their waters into different oceans at the
distance of two thousand miles from their sources. For in their passage from
this spot to the bay of St. Lawrence, east, to the bay of Mexico, south, to
Hudson's Bay, north, and to the bay at the Straights of Annian, west, each of
these traverse upwards of two thousand miles.

I shall here give my Readers such reflections as occurred to me, when I had
received this interesting information, and had by numberless enquiries,
ascertained the truth of it; that is, as far as it was possible to arrive at a
certainty without a personal investigation.

It is well known that the Colonies, particularly those of New England and
Canada, are greatly affected, about the time their winter sets in, by a
north-west wind, which continues for several months, and renders the cold much
more intense there than it is in the interior parts of America. This I can,
from my own knowledge, assert, as I found the winter, that I passed to the
westward of the Mississippi, far from severe; and the north-west wind blowing
on those countries considerably more temperate than I have often experienced it
to be nearer the coast. And that this did not arise from an uncertainty of the
seasons, but was annually the case, I conclude, both from the small quantity of
snow that then fell, and a total difuse of snow shoes by these Indians, without
which none of the more eastern nations can possibly travel during the winter.

As naturalists observe, that air resembles water in many respects,
particularly by often flowing in a compact body; an^ that this is generally
remarked to be with the current of lar^^ streams, and seldom across them, may
not the winds that set violently into the Bay of Mexico about the latter end of
the year, take their course over the continent in the same direction as the
Mississippi does; till meeting with the north winds (that from a similar cause
blow up the Bourbon from Hudson's Bay) they are forced across the great lakes,
down the current of the waters of the St. Lawrence* and united, commit those
ravages, and occasion those severe winters, experienced in the beforementioned
countries? During their progress over the lakes they become expanded, and
consequently affect a greater tract of land than they otherwise would do.

According to my scanty knowledge of natural philosophy, this does not appear
improbable. Whether it is agreeable to the laws established by naturalists to
account for the operations of that element, I know not. However, the
description here given of the situation of these vast bodies of water, and
their near approach to each other, with my own undigested suppositions of their
effect on the winds, may prove perhaps, in able^ hands, the means of leading to
many useful discoveries.

On the 7th of December, I arrived (as I said before) at the utmost extent of
my travels toward the west; where I met with a large party of the Naudowessie
Indians, among whom I resided seven months. These constituted a part of the
eight bands of the Naudowessies of the Plains; and are termed the
Wawpeentowahs, the Tintons, the Asrahcootans, the Mawhaws, and the Schians. The
other three bands, whose names are the Schianese, the Chongousceton, and the
Waddapawjesti^, dwell higher up, to the west of the River St. Pierre, on plains
that, according to their account, are unbounded; and probably terminate on the
coast of the Pacific Ocean. The Naudowessie nation, when united, consists of
more than two thousand warriors. The Assinipoils* who revolted from them,
amount to about three hundred; and leagued with the Killistinoes, live in a
continual state of enmity with the other eleven bands.

As I proceeded up the River St. Pierre, and had nearly reached the place where
these people were encamped, I observed two or three canoes coming down the
stream; but no sooner had the Indians that were on board them discovered us,
than they rowed toward the land, and leaping ashore with precipitation, left
their canoes to float as the current drove them. In a few minutes I perceived
some others; who, as soon as they came in sight, followed, with equal speed,
the example of their countrymen.

I now thought it necessary to proceed with caution; and therefore kept on the
side of the river opposite to that on which the Indians had landed. However, I
still continued my course, satisfied that the pipe of peace, which was fixed at
the head of my canoe, and the English colors that were flying at the stern,
would prove my security. After rowing about half a mile far^^er, in turning a
point, I discovered a great number of tents, and more than a thousand Indians,
at a little distance from the shore. Being now nearly opposite to them, I
ordered my men to pull directly over, as I was willing to convince the Indians
by such a step, that I placed some confidence in them.

As soon as I had reached the land, two of the chiefs presented their hands to
me, and led me, amidst the astonished multitude, who had most of them never
seen a white man before, to a tent. Into this we entered, and according to the
custom that universally prevails among every Indian nation, began to smoke the
pipe of peace. We had not sat long before the crowd became so great, both
around, and upon the tent, that we were in danger of being crushed by its fall.
On this we returned to the plain, where, having gratified the curiosity of the
common people, their wonder abated, and ever after they treated me with great
respect.

From the chiefs I met with the most friendly and hospitable reception; which
induced me, as the season was so far advanced, to take up my residence among
them during the winter. To render my stay as comfortable as possible, I first
endeavored to learn their language. This I soon did, so as to make myself
perfectly intelligible, having before acquired some slight knowledge of the
language of those Indians that live on the back of the settlements; and in
consequence met with every accommodation their manner of living would afford.
Nor did I want for such amusements as tended to make so long a period pass
cheerfully away. I frequently hunted with them; and at other times beheld with
pleasure their recreations and pastimes, which I shall describe hereafter.

Sometimes I sat with the chiefs, and whilst we smoked the friendly pipe,
entertained them, in return for the accounts they gave me of their wars and
excursions, with a narrative of my own adventures, and a description of all the
battles fought between the English and the French in America, in many of which
I had a personal share. They always paid great attention to my details, and
asked many pertinent questions relative to the European methods of making war.

I held these conversations with them in a great measure to procure from them
some information relative to the chief point I had constantly in view, that of
gaining a knowledge of the situation and produce, both of their own country,
and those that lay to the westward of them. Nor was I disappointed in my
designs; for I procured from them much useful intelligence. They likewise drew
for me plans of all the countries with which they were acquainted; but as I
entertained no great opinion of their geographical knowledge, I placed not much
dependence on them, and therefore think it unnecessary to give them to the
public. They draw with a piece of burnt coal, taken from the hearth, upon the
inside bark of the birch tree; which is as smooth as paper, and answers the
same purposes, notwithstanding it is of a yellow cast. Their sketches are made
in a rude manner, but they seem to give us as just an idea of a country,
although the plan is not so exact, as more experienced draughtsmen could do.

I left the habitations of these hospitable Indians the latter end of April
1767; but did not part from them for several days, as I was accompanied on my
journey by near three hundred of them, among whom were many chiefs, to the
mouth of the River St. Pierre. At this season, these bands annually go to the
Great Cave, before mentioned, to hold a grand council with all the other bands;
wherein they settle their operations for the ensuing year. At the same time
they carry with them their dead for interment, bound up in buffaloes skins.
Besides those that accompanied me, others were gone before, and the rest were
to follow.

Never did I travel with so cheerful and happy a company. But their mirth met
with a sudden and temporary allay from a violent storm that overtook us one day
on our passage. We had just landed, and were preparing to set up our tents for
the night, when a heavy cloud overspread the heavens, and the most dreadful
thunder, lightning, and rain issued from it, that ever I beheld.

The Indians were greatly terrified, and ran to such shelter as they could
find; for only a few tents were as yet erected. Apprehensive of the danger that
might ensue from standing near any thing which could serve for a conductor, as
the cloud appeared to contain such an uncommon quantity of electrical fluid, I
took my stand as far as possible from any covering; choosing rather to be
exposed to the peltings of the storm, than to receive a fatal stroke. At this
the Indians were greatly surprised, and drew conclusions from it not
unfavourable to the opinion they already entertained of my resolution. Yet I
acknowledge that I was never more affected in my life; for nothing scarcely
could exceed the terrific scene. The peals of thunder were so loud that they
shook the earth; and the lightning flashed along the ground in streams of
sulphur; so that the Indian chiefs themselves, although their courage in war is
usually invincible, could not help trembling at the horrid combustion. As soon
as the storm was over, they flocked around me, and informed me, that it was a
proof of the anger of the evil spirits, whom they were apprehensive that they
had highly offended.

When we arrived at the Great Cave, and the Indians had deposited the remains
of their deceased friends in the burial-place that stands adjacent to it, they
held their great council, into which I was admitted, and at the same time had
the honor to be installed or adopted a chief of their bands. On this occasion
I made the following speech, which I insert to give my readers a specimen of
the language and manner in which it is necessary to address the Indians, so as
to engage their attention, and to render the speaker's expressions consonant to
their ideas. It was delivered on the first day of May 1767.

My brothers, chiefs of the numerous and powerful Naudowessies! I rejoice that
through my long abode with you, I can now speak to you (though after an
imperfect manner) in your own tongue, like one of your own children. I rejoice
also that I have had an opportunity so frequently to inform you of the glory
and power of the Great King that reigns over the English and other nations; who
is descended from a very ancient race of sovereigns, as old as the earth and
waters; whose feet stand on two great islands, larger than any you have ever
seen, amidst the greatest waters in the world; whose head reaches to the sun,
and whose arms encircle the whole earth. The number of whose warriors are equal
to the trees in the valleys, the stalks of rice in yonder marshes, or the
blades of grass on your great plains. Who has hundreds of canoes of his own, of
such amazing bigness, that all the waters in your country would not suffice for
one of them to swim in; each of which have guns, not small like mine, which you
see before you, but of such magnitude, that an hundred of your stoutest young
men would with difficulty be able to carry one. And these are equally
surprising in their operation against the great kings enemies when engaged in
battle; the terror they carry with them your language wants words to express.
You may remember the other day when we were encamping, at Wadawpawmenesoter,
the black clouds, the wind, the fire, the stupendous noise, the horrible
cracks, and the trembling of the earth, which then alarmed you, and gave you
reason to think your gods were angry with you; not unlike these are the warlike
implements of the English, when they are fighting the battles of their great
King.

Several of the chiefs of your bands have often told me, in times past, when I
dwelt with you in your tents, that they much wished to be counted among the
children and allies of the great King my master. You may remember how often you
have desired me, when I return again to my own country, to acquaint the great
King of your good disposition toward him and his subjects, and that you wished
for traders from the English to come among you.

Being now about to take my leave of you, and to return to my own country, a
long way toward the rising sun, I again ask you to tell me whether you
continue of the same mind as when I spoke to you in council last winter; and as
there are now several of your chiefs here, who came from the great plains
toward the setting of the sun, whom I have never spoke with in council before,
I ask you to let me know if you are all willing to acknowledge yourselves the
children of my great master the King of the English and other nations, as I
shall take the first opportunity to acquaint him of your desires and good
intentions.

I charge you not to give heed to bad reports; for there are wicked birds
flying about among the neighboring nations, who may whisper evil things in
your ears against the English, contrary to what I have told you; you must not
believe them, for I have told you the truth.

And as for the chiefs that are about to go to Michillimackinac, I shall take
care to make for them and their suite, a straight road, smooth waters, and a
clear sky; that they may go there, and smoke the pipe of Peace, and rest secure
on a beaver blanket under the shade of the great tree of Peace. Farewell!

To this speech I received the following answer, from the mouth of the
principal chief:

Good brother! I am now about to speak to you with the mouths of these my
brothers, chiefs of the eight bands of the powerful nation of the Naudowessies.
We believe and are well satisfied in the truth of every thing you have told us
about your great nation, and the Great King our greatest father; for whom we
spread this beaver blanket, that his fatherly protection may ever rest easy and
safe amongst us his children: your colors and your arms agree with the
accounts you have given us about your great nation. We desire that when you
return, you will acquaint the Great King how much the Naudowessies wish to be
counted among his good children.

You may believe us when we tell you that we will not open our ears to any who
may dare to speak evil of our Great Father the King of the English and other
nations.

We thank you for what you have done for us in making peace between the
Naudowessies and the Chipeways, and hope when you return to us again, that you
will complete this good work; and quite dispelling the clouds that intervene,
open the blue sky of peace, and cause the bloody hatchet to be deep buried
under the roots of the great tree of peace.

We wish you to remember to represent to our Great Father, how much we desire
that traders may be sent to abide among us, with such things as we need, that
the hearts of our young men, our wives, and children may be made glad. And may
peace subsist between us, so long as the sun, the moon, the earth, and the
waters shall endure. Farewell!

I thought it necessary to caution the Indians against giving heed to any bad
reports that may reach them from the neighboring nations to the disadvantage
of the English, as I had heard, at different places through which I passed,
that emissaries were still employed by the French to detach those who were
friendly to the English from their interest. And I saw, mys^^f* several belts
of Wampum that had been delivered for this purpose to some of the tribes I was
among. On the delivery of each of these a Talk was held, wherein the Indians
were told that the English, who were but a petty people, had stolen that
country from their Great Father the king Of France whilst he was asleep; but
that he would soon awake, and take them again under his protection. These I
found were sent from Canada by persons who appeared to be well affected toward
the government under which they lived.

Whilst I tarried at the mouth of the River St. Pierre with these friendly
Indians, I endeavored to gain intelligence whether any goods had been sent
toward the Falls of St. Anthony for my use, agreeable to the promise I had
received from the governor when I left Michillima^^inac. But finding from some
Indians, who passed by in their return from those parts, that this agreement
had not been fulfilled, I was obliged to give up all thoughts of proceeding
farther to the north-west by this route, according to my original plan. I
therefore returned to La Prairie le Chien, where I procured as many goods from
the traders I left there the preceding year as they could spare.

As these however were not sufficient to enable me to renew my first design, I
determined to endeavor to make my way across the country of the Chipeways to
Lake Superior; in hopes of meeting at the Grand Portage on the north side of
it, the traders that annually go from Michillimackinac to the north-west; of
whom I doubted not but that I should be able to procure goods enough to answer
my purpose, and also to penetrate through those more northern parts to the
Straights of Annian.

And I the more readily returned to La Prairie le Chien, as I could by that
means the better fulfill the engagement I had made to the party of Naudowessies
mentioned at the conclusion of my speech.

During my abode with this people, wishing to secure them entirely in the
interest of the English, I had advised some of the chiefs to go to
Michillimackinac, where they would have an opportunity of trading, and of
hearing the accounts that I had entertained them with of my countrymen,
confirmed. At the same time I had furnished them with a recommendation to the
governor, and given them every direction necessary for their voyage.

In consequence of this, one of the principal chiefs, and twenty-five of an
inferior rank, agreed to go the ensuing summer. This they took an opportunity
of doing, when they came with the rest of their band to attend the grand
council at the mouth of the River St. Pierre. Being obliged, on account of the
disappointment I had just been informed of, to return so far down the
Mississippi, I could from thence the more easily set them on their journey.

As the intermediate parts of this river are much frequented by the Chipeways,
with whom the Naudowessies are continually at war, they thought it more
prudent, being but a small party, to take the advantage of the night, than to
travel with me by day; accordingly no sooner was the grand council broke up,
than I took a friendly leave of these people, from whom I had received
innumerable civilities, and pursued once more my voyage.

I reached the eastern side of Lake Pepin the same night, where I went ashore
and encamped as usual. The next morning, when I had proceeded some miles
farther, I perceived at a distance before me a smoke, which denoted that some
Indians were near; and in a short time discovered ten or twelve tents not far
from the bank of the river. As I was apprehensive that this was a party of the
Rovers I had before met with, I knew not what course to pursue. My a^^endants
persuaded me to endeavor to pass by them on the opposite side of the river;
but as I had hitherto found that the best way to ensure a friendly reception
from the Indians, is to meet them boldly, and without showing any tokens of
fear, I would by no means consent to their proposal. Instead of this I crossed
directly over, and landed in the midst of them, for by this time the greatest
part of them were standing on the shore.

The first I accosted were Chipeways inhabiting near the Ottowaw Lakes; who
received me with great cordiality, and shook me by the hand in token of
friendship. At some little distance behind these stood a chief remarkably tall
and well made, but of so stern an aspect, that the most undaunted person could
not behold him without feeling some degree of terror. He seemed to have passed
the meridian of life, and by the mode in which he was painted and tatowed, I
discovered that he was of high rank. However, I approached him in a courteous
manner, and expected to have met with the same reception I had done from the
others: but to my great surprise, he withheld his hand, and looking fiercely
at me, said in the Chipeway tongue, "Cawin nishishin saganosh," that is, The
English are no good. As he had his tomahawk in his hand, I expected that this
laconick sentence would have been followed by a blow; to prevent which, I drew
a pistol from my belt, and, holding it in a careless position, passed close by
him, to let him see I was not afraid of him.

I learned soon after from the other Indians, that this was a chief, called by
the French the Grand Sautor. or the Great Chipeway Chief, for they denominate
the Chipeways Sautors. They likewise told me that he had been always a steady
friend to that people, and when they delivered up Michillimackinac to the
English on their evacuation of Canada, the Grand Sautor had sworn that he would
ever remain the avowed enemy of its new possessors, as the territories on which
the fort is built belonged to him.

Finding him thus disposed, I took care to be constantly upon my guard whilst I
staid; but that he might not suppose I was driven away by his frowns, I took up
my abode there for the night. I pitched my tent at some distance from the
Indians, and had no sooner laid myself down to rest, than I was awakened by my
French servant. Having been alarmed by the sound of Indian music, he had run to
the outside of the tent, where he beheld a party of the young savages dancing
toward us in an extraordinary manner, each carrying in his hand a torch fixed
on the top of a long pole. But I shall defer any further account of this
uncommon entertainment, which at once surprised and alarmed me till I treat of
(...) Indian dances.

The next morning I continued my voyage, and before night reached La Prarie le
Chien; at which place the party of Naudowessies soon overtook me. Not long
after the Grand Sautor also arrived, and before the Naudowessies left that
place to continue their journey to Michillimackinac, he found means, in
conjunction with some French traders from Louisiana, to draw from me about ten
of the Naudowessie chiefs, whom he prevailed upon to go toward those parts.

The remainder proceeded, according to my directions, to the English fort; from
whence I afterward heard that they returned to their own country without any
unfortunate accident befalling them, and greatly pleased with the reception
they had met with. Whilst not more than half of those who went to the
southward, through the difference of that southern climate from their own,
lived to reach their abode. And since I came to England I have been informed,
that the Grand Sautor having rendered himself more and more disgustful to the
English, by his inveterate enmity toward them, was at length stabbed in his
tent, as he encamped near Michillimackinac, by a trader to whom I had related
the foregoing story.

I should have remarked, that whatever Indians happen to meet at La Prairie le
Chien. the great mart to which all who inhabit the adjacent countries resort,
though the nations to which they belong are at war with each other, yet they
are obliged to restrain their enmity, and to forbear all hostile acts during
their stay there. This regulation has been long established among them for
their mutual convenience, as without it no trade could be carried on. The same
rule is observed also at the Red Mountain (afterward described) from whence
they get the stone of which they make their pipes: these being indispensable to
the accommodation of every neighboring tribe, a similar restriction becomes
needful, and is of public utility.

The River St. Pierre, which runs through the territories of the Naudowessies,
flows through a most delightful country, abounding with all the necessaries of
life, that grow spontaneously; and with a little cultivation it might be made
to produce even the luxuries of life. Wild rice grows here in great abundance;
and every part is filled with trees bending under their loads of fruits, such
as plums, grapes, and apples; the meadows are covered with hops, and many sorts
of vegetables; whilst the ground is stored with useful roots, with angelica,
spikenard, and ground-nuts as large as hens eggs. At a little distance from the
sides of the river are eminences, from which you have views that cannot be
exceeded even by the most beautiful of those I have already described; amidst
these are delightful groves, and such amazing quantities of maples, that they
would produce sugar sufficient for any number of inhabitants.

A little way from the mouth of this river, on the north side of it, stands a
hill, one part of which, that toward the Mississippi, is composed entirely of
white stone, of the same soft nature as that I have before described; for such,
indeed, is all the stone in this country. But what appears remarkable is, that
the color of it is as white as the driven snow. The outward part of it was
crumbled by the wind and weather into heaps of sand, of which a beautiful
composition might be made; or, I am of opinion that, when properly treated, the
stone itself would grow harder by time, and have a very noble effect in
architecture.

Near that branch which is termed the Marble River, is a mountain, from whence
the Indians get a sort of red stone, out of which they hew the bowls of their
pipes. In some of these parts is found a black hard clay, or rather stone, of
which the Naudowessies make their family utensils. This country likewise
abounds with a milk-white clay, of which China ware might be made equal in
goodness to the Asiatic; and also with a blue clay that serves the Indians for
paint, with this last they contrive, by mixing it with the red stone powdered,
to paint themselves of different colors. Those that can get the blue clay here
mentioned, paint themselves very much with it; particularly when they are about
to begin their sports and pastimes. It is also esteemed by them a mark of
peace, as it has a resemblance of a blue sky, which with them is a symbol of
it, and made use of in their speeches as a figurative expression to denote
peace. When they wish to show that their inclinations are pacific toward other
tribes, they greatly ornament both themselves and their belts with it.

Having concluded my business at La Prairie le Chien, I proceeded once more up
the Mississippi, as far as the place where the Chipeway River enters it a
little below Lake Pepin. Here, having engaged an Indian pilot, I directed him
to steer toward the Ottawaw Lakes, which lie near the head of this river. This
he did, and I arrived at them the beginning of July.

The Chipeway River, at its junction with the Mississippi, is about eighty
yards wide* but is much wider as you advance into it. Near thirty miles up it
separates into two branches, and I took my course through that which lies to
the eastward.

The country adjoining to the river, for about sixty miles, is very level, and
on its banks lie fine meadows, where larger droves of buffaloes and elks were
feeding, than I had observed in any other part of my travels. The track between
the two branches of this river is termed the Road of War between the Chipeway
and Naudowessie Indians.

The country to the Falls is almost without any timber, and above that very
uneven and rugged, and closely wooded with pines, beach, maple and birch. Here
a most remarkable and astonishing sight presented itself to my view. In a wood,
on the east of the river, which was about three quarters of a mile in length,
and in depth farther than my eye could reach, I observed that every tree, many
of which were more than six feet in circumference, was lying flat on the
ground, torn up by the roots. This appeared to have been done by some
extraordinary hurricane, that came from the west some years ago; but how many I
could not learn, as I found no inhabitants near it, of whom I could gain
information. The country on the west side of the river, from being less woody,
had escaped in a great measure this havoc, as only a few trees were blown down.

Near the heads of this river is a town of the Chipeways, from whence it takes
its name. It is situated on each side of the river (which at this place is of
no considerable breadth) and lies adjacent to the banks of a small lake. This
town contains about forty houses, and can send out upwards of one hundred
warriors, many of whom were fine stout young men. The houses of it are built
after the Indian manner, and have neat plantations behind them; but the
inhabitants, in general, seemed to be the nastiest people I had ever been
among. I observed that the women and children indulged themselves in a custom,
which though common, in some degree, throughout every Indian nation, appears to
be, according to our ideas, of the most nauseous and indelicate nature; that of
searching each other's head, and eating the prey caught therein.

In July I left this town, and having crossed a number of small lakes and
carrying places that intervened, came to a head branch of the River St. C^oix.
This branch I descended to a fork, and then ascended another to its source. On
both these rivers I discovered several mines of virgin copper, which was as
pure as that found in any other country.

Here I came to a small brook, which my guide thought might be joined at some
distance by streams that would at length render it navigable. The water at
first was so scanty, that my canoe would by no means ^wim in it; but having
stopped up several old beaver dams, which had been broken down by the hunters,
I was enabled to proceed for some miles, till by the conjunction of a few
brooks, these aids became no longer necessary. In a short time the water
increased to a most rapid river, which we descended till it entered into Lake
Superior. This river I named after a gentleman that desired to accompany me
from the town of the Ottagaumies to the Carrying Place on Lake Superior,
Goddard's River.

To the west of this is another small river, which also empties itself into the
Lake. This I termed Strawberry River, from the great number of strawberries of
a good size and flavor that grew on its banks.

The country from the Ottawaw Lakes to Lake Superior is in general very uneven
and thickly covered with woods. The soil in some places is tolerably good, in
others but indifferent. In the heads of the St. Croix and the Chipeways Rivers
are exceeding fine sturgeon. All the wilderness between the Mississippi and
Lake Superior is called by the Indians the Moschettoe country, and I thought it
most justly named; for, it being then their season, I never saw or felt so many
of those insects in my life.

The latter end of July I arrived, after having coasted through West Bay, at
the Grand Portage, which lies on the north-west borders of Lake Superior. Here
those who go on the north-west trade, to the Lakes De Pluye, Dubois, etc. carry
over their canoes and baggage about nine miles, till they come to a number of
small lakes, the waters of some of which descend into Lake Superior, and others
into the River Bourbon. Lake Superior from West Bay to this place is bounded by
rocks, except toward the south-west part of the Bay where I first entered it,
there it was tolerably level.

At the Grand Portage is a small bay, before the entrance of which lies an
island that intercepts the dreary and uninterrupted view over the Lake which
otherwise would have presented itself, and makes the bay serene and pleasant.
Here I met a large party of the Killistinoe and Assinipoil Indians, with their
respective kings and their families. They were come to this place in order to
meet the traders from Michillimackinac, who make this their road to the
north-west. From them I received the following account of the Lakes that lie to
the north-west of Lake Superior.

Lake Bourbon, the most northern of those yet discovered, received its name
from the French traders who accompanied a party of Indians to Hudson's Bay some
years ago; and was thus denominated by them in honor of the royal family of
France. It is composed of the waters of the Bourbon River, which, as I have
before observed, rises a great way to the southward, not far from the northern
heads of the Mississippi.

This lake is about eighty miles in length, north and south, and is nearly
circular. It has no very large islands on it. The land on the eastern side is
very good; and to the south-west there are some mountains: in many other parts
there are barren plains, bogs and morasses. Its latitude is between fifty-two
and fifty-four degrees north, and it lies nearly south-west from Hudson's Bay.
As through its northern situation the weather there is extremely cold, only a
few animals are to be found in the country that borders on it. They gave me but
an indifferent account either of the beasts, birds, or fishes. There are indeed
some buffaloes of a small size which are fat and good about the latter end of
summer, with a few moose and carribboo deer; however this deficiency is made up
by the furs of every sort that are to be met with in great plenty around the
lake. The timber growing here is chiefly ^ir, cedar, spruce, and some maple.

Lake Winnepeek, or as the French write it Lac Ouinipique, which lies nearest
to the foregoing, is composed of the same waters. It is in length about two
hundred miles north and south; its breadth has never been properly ascertained,
but is supposed to be about one hundred miles in its widest part. This lake is
very full of islands; these are, however, of no great magnitude. Many
considerable rivers empty themselves into it, which, as yet, are not
distinguished by any names. The waters are stored with fish, such as trout and
sturgeon, and also with others of a smaller kind, peculiar to these lakes.

The land on the south-west part of it is very good, especially about the
entrance of a large branch of the River Bourbon, which flows from the
south-west. On this river there is a factory that was built by the French,
called Fort la Reine, to which the traders from Michillimackinac resort to
trade with the Assinipoils and Killistinoes. To this place the Mahahs, who
inhabit a country two hundred and fifty miles south-west, come also to trade
with them; and bring great quantities of Indian corn, to exchange for knives,
tomakawks, and other articles. Those people are supposed to dwell on some of
the branches of the River of the West.

Lake Winnepeek has on the north-east some mountains, and on the east many
barren plains. The maple or sugar tree grows here in great plenty, and there is
likewise gathered an amazing quantity of rice, which proves that grain will
flourish in these northern climates as well as in warmer. Buffaloes, carriboo,
and moose deer, are numerous in these parts. The buffaloes of this country
differ from those that are found more to the south only in size; the former
being much smaller: just as the black cattle of the northern parts of
Great Britain differ from English oxen.

On the waters that fall into this Lake, the neighboring nations take great
numbers of excellent furs. Some of these they carry to the factories and
settlements belonging to the Hudson's Bay Company, situated above the entrance
of the Bourbon River; but this they do with reluctance on several accounts; for
some of the Assinipoils and Killistinoes, who usually traded with the Company's
servants, told me, that if they could be sure of a constant supply of goods
from Michillimackinac, they would not trade any where else. They showed me some
cloth and other articles that they had purchased at Hudson's Bay, with which
they were much dissatisfied, thinking they had been greatly imposed upon in the
barter.

Allowing that their accounts were true, I could not help joining in their
opinion. But this dissatisfaction might probably proceed, in a great measure,
from the intrigues of the Canadian traders: for whilst the French were in
possession of Michillimackinac, having acquired a thorough knowledge of the
trade of the north-west countries, they were employed on that account, after
the reduction of Canada, by the English traders there, in the establishment of
this trade with which they were themselves quite unacquainted. One of the
methods they took to withdraw these Indians from their attachment to the
Hudson's Bay Company, and to engage their good opinion in behalf of their new
employers, was by depreciating on all occasions the Company's goods, and
magnifying the advantages that would arise to them from trafficking entirely
with the Canadian traders. In this they too well succeeded, and from this,
doubtless, did the dissatisfaction the Assinipoils and Killistinoes expressed
to me, partly proceed. But another reason augmented it; and this was the length
of their journey to the Hudson's Bay factories, which, they informed me, took
them up three months, during the summer heats to go and return, and from the
smallness of their canoes they could not carry more than a third of the beavers
they killed. So that it is not to be wondered at, that these Indians should
wish to have traders come to reside among them. It is true that the parts they
inhabit are within the limits of the Hudson's Bay territories; but the Company
must be under the necessity of winking at an encroachment of this kind, as the
Indians would without doubt protect the traders when among them. Besides, the
passports granted to the traders that go from Michillimackinac give them
liberty to trade to the north-west about Lake Superior; by which is meant Fort
La Reine, Lake Winnepeek, or any other parts of the waters of the Bourbon
River, where the Couriers de Bois, or Traders, may make it most convenient to
reside.

Lac du Bois is commonly termed by the French in their maps, or in English the
Lake of the Wood, is so called from the multiplicity of wood growing on its
banks; such as oaks, pines, firs, spruce, etc. This Lake lies still higher upon
a branch of the River Bourbon, and nearly east from the south end of Lake
Winnepeek. It is of great depth in some places. Its length from east to west
about seventy miles, and its greatest breadth about forty miles. It has but few
islands, and these of no great magnitude. The fishes, fowls, and quadrupeds
that are found near it, vary but little from those of the other two lakes. A
few of the Killistinoe Indians sometimes encamp on the borders of it to fish
and hunt.

This Lake lies in the communication between Lake Superior, and the Lakes
Winnepeek and Bourbon. Its waters are not esteemed quite so pure as th^se of
the other lakes, it having, in many places, a muddy bottom.

Lac La Pluye, so called by the French, in English the Rainy Lake, is supposed
to have acquired this name from the first ^ravellers, that passed over it,
meeting with an ^ncommon deal of rain; or, as some have affirmed, from a ^ist
like rain, occasioned by a perpendicular water-fall that empties itself into a
river which lies to the south-west.

This Lake appears to be divided by an isthmus, near the middle, into two
parts: the west part is called the Great Rainy Lake, the east, the Little Rainy
Lake, as being the least division. It lies a few miles farther to the eastward,
on the same branch of the Bourbon, than the last-mentioned Lake. It is in
general very shallow in its depth. The broadest part of it is not more than
twenty miles, its length, including both, about three hundred miles. In the
west part the water is very clear and good; and some excellent fish are taken
in it. A great many fowl resort here at the fall of the year. Moose deer are to
be found in great plenty, and likewise the carriboo; whose skin for breeches or
gloves exceeds by far any other to be met with in North America. The land on
the borders of this Lake is esteemed in some places very good, but rather too
thickly covered with wood. Here reside a considerable band of the Chipeways.

Eastward from this Lake lie several small ones, which extend in a string to
the great carrying place, and from thence into Lake Superior. Between these
little Lakes are several carrying places, which renders the trade to the
north-west difficult to accomplish, and exceedingly tedious, as it takes two
years to make one voyage from Michillimackinac to these parts.

Red Lake is a comparatively small lake at the head of a branch of the Bourbon
River, which is called by some Red River. Its form is nearly round, and about
sixty miles in circumference. On one side of it is a tolerable large island,
close by which a small river enters. It bears almost south-east both from Lake
Winnepeek and from Lake du Bois. The parts adjacent are very little known, or
frequented, even by the savages themselves.

Not far from this Lake, a little to the south-west, is another called White
Bear Lake, which is nearly about the size of the last mentioned. The waters
that compose this Lake are the most northern of any that supply the
Mississippi, and may be called with propriety its most remote source. It is fed
by two or three small rivers, or rather large brooks.

A few miles from it, to the south^e^st, are a great number of small lakes,
none of which are more than ten miles in circumference, that are called the
Thousand Lakes In the adjacent country is reckoned the finest hunting for f^rs
of any on this continent; the Indians who hunt here seldom returning without
having their canoes loaded as deep as they can swim.

Having just before observed that this Lake is the utmost northern source of
the Mississippi, I shall here further remark, that before this river enters the
Gulf of Mexico, it has not run less, through all its meanderings, than three
thousand miles; or, in a strait line from north to south, about twenty degrees,
which is nearly fourteen hundred English miles.

These Indians informed me, that to the north-west of Lake Winnepeek lies
another, whose circumference vastly exceeded any they had given me an account
of. They describe it as much larger than Lake Superior. But as it appears to be
so far to the north-west, I should imagine that it was not a lake, but rather
the Archipelago or broken waters that form the communication between Hudson's
Bay and the northern parts of the Pacific Ocean.

There are an infinite number of small lakes, on the more western parts of the
western head-branches of the Mississippi, as well between these and Lake
Winnepeek, but none of them are large enough to suppose either of them to be
the lake or waters meant by the Indians.

They likewise informed me, that some of the northern branches of the Messorie
and the southern branches of the St. Pierre have a communication with each
other, except for a mile; over which they carry their canoes. And by what I
could learn from them, this is the road they take when their war parties make
their excursions upon the Pawnees and Pawnawnees, nations inhabiting some
branches of the Messorie River. In the country belonging to these people it is
said, that Mandrakes are frequently found, a species of root resembling human
beings of both sexes; and that these are more perfect than such as are
discovered about the Nile in Nether-Ethiopia.

A little to the north-west of the heads of the Messorie and the St. Pierre,
the Indians further told me, that there was a nation rather smaller and whiter
than the neighboring tribes, who cultivate the ground, and, (as far as I could
gather from (...) expressions) in some measure, the arts. To this account they
added that some of the nations, who inhabit those parts that lie to the west of
the Shining Mountains, have gold so plenty among them that they make their most
common utensils of it. These mountains (which I shall describe more
particularly hereafter) divide the waters that fall into the South Sea from
those that run into the Atlantic.

The people dwelling near them are supposed to be some of the different tribes
that were tributary to the Mexican Kings, and who fled from their native
country, to seek an asylum in these parts, about the time of the conquest of
Mexico by the Spaniards, more than two centuries ago.

As some confirmation of this supposition it is remarked, that they have chosen
the most interior parts for their retreat, being still prepossessed with a
notion that the seacoasts have been inf^sted ever since with monsters vomiting
fire, and hurling about thunder and lightning; from whose bowels issued men,
who, with unseen instruments, or by the power of magic, killed the harmless
Indians at an astonishing distance. From such as these, their forefathers
(according to a tradition among them that still remains unimpaired) fled to the
retired abodes they now inhabit. For as they found that the floating monsters,
which had thus terrified them could not approach the land, and that those who
had descended from their sides did not care to make excursions to any
considerable distance from them, they formed a resolution to betake themselves
to some country, that lay far from the seacoasts, where only they could be
secure from such diabolical enemies. They accordingly set out with their
families, and after a long peregrination, settled themselves near these
mountains, where they concluded they had found a place of perfect security.

The Winnebagoes, dwelling on the Fox River (whom I have already treated of)
are likewise supposed to be some strolling band from the Mexican countries. But
they are able to give only an imperfect account of their original residence.
They say they formerly came a great way from the westward, and (...) driven by
wars to take refuge among the Naudowessies; but as they are entirely ignorant
of the arts, or of the value of gold, it is rather to be supposed, that they
were driven from their ancient settlements by the abovementioned emigrants, as
they passed on toward their present habitation.

These suppositions, however, may want confirmation; for the smaller tribes of
Indians are subject to such various alterations in their places of abode, from
the wars they are continually engaged in, that it is almost impossible to
ascertain, after half a century, the original situation of any of them.

That range of mountains, of which the Shining Mountains are a part, begin at
Mexico, and continuing northward on the back, or to the east of California,
separate the waters of those numerous rivers that fall either into the Gulf of
Mexico, or the Gulf of California. From thence continuing their course still
northward, between the sources of the Mississippi and the rivers that run into
the South Sea, they appear to end in about forty-seven or forty-eight degrees
of north-latitude; where a number of rivers arise, and empty themselves either
into the South Sea, into Hudson's Bay, or into the waters that communicate
between these two seas.

Among these mountains, those that lie to the west of the River St. Pierre, are
called the Shining Mountains, from an infinite number of crystal stones, of an
amazing size, with which they are covered, and which, when the sun shines full
upon them, sparkle so as to be seen at a very great distance.

This extraordinary range of mountains is calculated to be more than three
thousand miles in length, without any very considerable intervals, which I
believe surpasses any thing of the kind in the other quarters of the globe.
Probably in future ages they may be found to contain more riches in their
bowels, than those of Indostan and Malabar* or that are produced on the golden
coast of Guinea; nor will I except even the Peruvian mines. To the west of
these mountains, when explored by future Columbuses or Raleighs, may be found
other lakes, rivers, and countries, full fraught with all the necessaries or
luxuries of life; and where future generations may find an asylum, whether
driven from their country by the ravages of lawless tyrants, or by religious
persecutions, or reluctantly leaving it to remedy the inconveniences arising
from a superabundant increase of inhabitants; whether, I say, impelled by
these, or allured by hopes of commercial advantages, there is little doubt but
their expectations will be fully gratified in these rich and unexhausted climes.

But to return to the Assinipoils and Killistinoes, whom I left at the Grand
Portage, and from whom I received the foregoing account of the lakes that lie
to the north-west of this place.

The traders we expected being later this season than usual, and our numbers
very considerable, for there were more than three hundred of us, the stock of
provisions we had brought with us was nearly exhausted, and we waited with
impatience for their arrival.

One day, whilst we were all expressing our wishes for this desirable event,
and looking from an eminence in hopes of seeing them come over the lake, the
chief priest belonging to the band of the Killistinoes told us, that he would
endeavor to obtain a conference with the Great Spirit, and know from him when
the traders would arrive. I paid little attention to this declaration,
supposing that it would be productive of some juggling trick, just sufficiently
covered to deceive the ignorant Indians. But the king of that tribe telling me
that this was chiefly undertaken by the priest to alleviate my anxiety, and at
the same time to convince me how much interest he had with the Great Spirit I
thought it nececessary to restrain my animad-versions on his design.

The following evening was fixed opon for this spiritual conference. When every
thing had been properly prepared, the king came to me and led me to a capacious
tent, the covering of which was drawn up, so as to render what was transacting
within visible to those who stood without. We found the tent surrounded by a
great number of the Indians, but we readily gained admission, and seated
ourselves on skins laid on the ground for that purpose.

In the center I observed that there was a place of an oblong shape, which was
composed of stakes stuck in the ground, with, intervals between, so as to form
a kind of chest or coffin, large enough to contain the body of a man. These
were of a middle size, and placed at such a distance from each other, that
whatever lay within them was readily to be discerned. The tent was perfectly
illuminated by a great number of torches made splinters cut from the pine or
birch tree, which the Indians held in their hands.

In a few minutes the priest entered; when an amazing large elk's skin being
spread on the ground, just at my feet, he laid himself down upon it, after
having stripped himself of every garment except that which he wore close about
his middle. Being now prostrate on his back, he first laid hold of one side of
the skin, and folded it over him, and then the other; leaving only his head
uncovered. This was no sooner done, than two of the young men who stood by,
took about forty yards of strong cord, made also of an elk's hide, and rolled
it tight round his body, so that he was completely swathed within the skin.
Being thus bound up like an Egyptian Mummy, one took him by the heels, and the
other by the head and lifted him over the pales into the enclosure. I could
also now discern him as plain as I had hitherto done, and I took care not to
turn my eyes a moment from the object before me, that I might the more readily
detect the artifice; for such I doubted not but that it would turn out to be.

The priest had not lain in this situation more than a few seconds, when he
began to mutter. This he continued to do for some time, and then by degrees
grew louder and louder, till at length he spoke articulately; however what he
uttered was in such a mixed jargon of the Chipeway, Ottowaw, and Killistinoe
languages, that I could understand but very little of it. Having continued in
this tone for a considerable while, he at last exerted his voice to its utmost
pitch, sometimes raving, and sometimes praying, till he had worked himself into
such an agitation, that he foamed at his mouth.

After having remained near three quarters of an hour in the place, and
continued his vociferation with unabated vigor, he seemed to be quite
exhausted, and remained speechless. But in an instant he sprung upon his feet,
notwithstanding at the time he was put in, it appeared impossible for him to
move either his legs or arms, and shaking off his covering, as quick as if the
bands with which it had been bound were burned asunder, he began to address
those who stood around, in a firm and audible voice. "My brothers," said he,
the Great Spirit has deigned to hold a Talk with his servant at my earnest
request. He has not, indeed, told me when the persons we expect, will be here;
but tomorrow, soon after the sun has reached his highest point in the heavens,
a canoe will arrive, and the people in that will inform us when the traders
will come.

Having said this, he stepped out of the enclosure, and after he had put on his
robes, dismissed the assembly. I own I was greatly astonished at what I had
seen; but as I obseved that every eye in the company was fixed on me with a
view to discover my sentiments, I carefully concealed every emotion.

The next day the sun shone bright, and long before noon all the Indians were
gathered together on the eminence that overlooked the lake. The old king came
to me and asked me, whether I had so much confidence in what the priest had
foretold, as to join his people on the hill, and wait for the completion of it?
I told him I was at a loss what opinion to form of the prediction, but that I
would readily attend him. On this we walked together to the place where the
others were assembled. Every eye was again fixed by turns on me and on the
lake; when just as the sun had reached his zenith, agreeable to what the priest
had foretold, a canoe came round a point of land about a league distant. The
Indians no sooner beheld it, than they set up an universal shout, and by their
looks seemed to triumph in the interest their priest thus evidently had with
the Great Spirit.

In less than an hour the canoe reached the shore, when I attended the king and
chiefs to receive those who were on board. As soon as the men were landed, we
walked all together to the king's tent, when, according to their invariable
custom, we began to smoke; and this we did, notwithstanding our impatience to
know the tidings they brought, without asking any questions; for the Indians
are the most deliberate people in the world. However, after some trivial
conversation, the king enquired of them, whether they had seen any thing of the
traders? The men replied, that they had parted from them a few days before, and
that they proposed being here the second day from the present. They accordingly
arrived at that time greatly to our satisfaction, but more particularly so to
that of the Indians, who found by this event the importance both of their
priest and of their nation, greatly augmented in the sight of a stranger.

This story I acknowledge appears to carry with it marks of great credulity in
the relator. But no one is less tinctured with that weakness than myself. The
circumstances of it, I own, are of a very extraordinary nature; however, as I
can vouch for their being free from either exaggeration or misrepresentation,
being myself a cool and dispassionate observer of them all, I thought it
necessary to give them to the public. And this I do without wishing to mislead
the judgment of my readers, or to make any superstitious impressions on their
minds, but leaving them to draw from it what conclusions they please.

I have already observed that the Assinipoils with a part of whom I met here,
are a revolted band of the Nandowessies; who on account of some real or
imagined grievances, for the Indians in general are very tenacious of their
liberty, had separated themselves from their countrymen, and sought for freedom
at the expense of their ease. For the country they now inhabit about the
borders of Lake Winnepeek, being much farther north, is not near so fertile or
agreeable as that they have relinquished. They still retain the language and
manners of their former associates.

The Killistinoes, now the neighbors and allies of the Assinipoils, for they
also dwell near the same lake, and on the waters of the River Bourbon, appear
to have been originally a tribe of the Chipeways, as they speak their language,
though in a different dialect. Their nation consists of about three or four
hundred warriors, and they seem to be a hardy brave people. I have already
given an account of their country when I treated of Lake Winnepeek. As they
reside within the limits of Hudson's Bay, they generally trade at the factories
which belong to that company, but, for the reasons mentioned before, they
frequently come to the place where I happened to join them, in order to meet
the traders from Michillimackinac.

The anxiety I had felt on account of the traders delay, was not much
alleviated by their arrival. I again found my expectations disappointed, for I
was not able to procure the goods I wanted from any of them. I was therefore
obliged to give over my designs, and return to the place from whence I first
began my extensive circuit. I accordingly took leave of the old king of the
Killistinoes, with the chiefs of both bands, and departed. This prince was
upwards of sixty years of age, tall and slightly made, but he carried himself
very erect. He was of a courteous, affable disposition, and treated me, as did
all the chiefs, with great civility.

I observed that this people still continued a custom, that appeared to have
been universal before any of them became acquainted with the manners of the
Europeans, that of complimenting strangers with the company of their wives; and
this is not only practiced by the lower ranks, but by the chiefs themselves,
who esteem it the greatest proof of courtesy they can give a stranger.

The beginning of October, after having coasted round the north and east
borders of Lake Superior, I arrived at Cadot's Fort, which adjoins to the Falls
of St. Marie, and is situated near the south-west corner of it.

La^e Superior, formerly termed the Upper Lake from its northern situation, is
so called on account of its being superior in magnitude to any of the Lakes on
that vast continent. It might justly be termed the Caspian of America, and is
supposed to be the largest body of fresh water on the globe. Its circumference,
according to the French charts, is about fifteen hundred miles; but I believe,
that if it was coasted round, and the utmost extent of every bay taken, it
would exceed sixteen hundred.

After I first entered it from Goddard's River on the west Bay, I coasted near
twelve hundred miles of the north and east shores of it* and observed that the
greatest part of that extensive tract was bounded by rocks and uneven ground.
The water in general appeared to lie on a bed of rocks. When it was calm, and
the sun shone bright, I could sit in my canoe, where the depth was upwards of
six fathoms, and plainly see huge piles of stone at the bottom, of different
shapes, some of which appeared as if they were hewn. The water at this time was
as pure and transparent as air; and my canoe seemed as if it hung suspended in
that element. It was impossible to look attentively through this limpid medium
at the rocks below, without finding, before many minutes were elapsed, your
head swim, and your eyes no longer able to behold the dazzling scene.

I discovered also by accident another extraordinary property in the waters of
this lake. Though it was in the month of July that I passed over it, and the
surface of the water, from the heat of the superambient air, impregnated with
no small degree of warmth, yet on letting down a cup to the depth of about a
fathom, the water drawn from thence was so excessively cold, that it had the
same effect when received into the mouth as ice.

The situation of this Lake is variously laid down; but from the most exact
observations I could make, it lies between forty-six and fifty degrees of
north-latitude, and between eighty-four and ninety-three degrees of west
longitude from the meridian of London.

There are many islands in this lake, two of which are very large; and if the
land of them is proper for cultivation, there appears to be sufficient to form
on each a considerable province; especially on Isle Royal, which cannot be less
than an hundred miles long, and in many places forty broad. But there is no way
at present of ascertaining the exact length or breadth of either. Even the
French, who always kept a small schooner on this lake, whilst they were in
possession of Canada, by which they could have made this discovery, have only
acquired a slight knowledge of the external parts of these islands; at least
they have never published any account of the internal parts of them, that I
could get intelligence of.

Nor was I able to discover from any of the conversations which I held with the
neighboring Indians, that they had ever made any settlements on them, or even
landed there in their hunting excursions. From what I could gather by their
discourse, they suppose them to have been, from their first information, the
residence of the Great Spirit; and relate many ridiculous stories of
enchantment and magical tricks that had been experienced by such as were
obliged through stress of weather to take shelter on them.

One of the Chipeway chiefs told me, that some of their people being once
driven on the island of Mauropas, which lies toward the north-east part of the
lake, found on it large quantities of a heavy shining yellow sand, that from
their description must have been gold dust. Being struck with the beautiful
appearance of it, in the morning, when they re-entered their canoe, they
attempted to bring some away; but a spirit of an amazing size, according to
their account sixty feet in height, strode in the water after them, and
commanded them to deliver back what they had taken away. Terrified at his
gigantic stature, and seeing that he had nearly overtaken them, they were glad
to restore their shining treasure; on which they were suffered to depart
without further molestation. Since this incident, no Indian that has ever heard
of it, will venture near the same haunted coast. Besides this, they recounted
to me many other stories of these islands, equally fabulous.

The country on the north and east parts of Lake Superior is very mountainous
and barren. The weather being intensely cold in the winter, and the sun having
but little power in the summer, vegetation there is very slow; and consequently
but little fruit is to be found on its shore. It however produces some few
species in great abundance. Whirtleberries of an uncommon size, and fine
flavor, grow on the mountains near the lake in amazing quantities; as do black
currants and goosberries in the same luxuriant manner.

But the fruit which exceeds all the others, is a berry resembling a rasberry
in its manner of growth, but of a lighter red, and much larger; its taste is
far more delicious than the fruit I have compared it too, notwithstanding that
it is so highly esteemed in Europe: it grows on a shrub of the nature of a
vine, with leaves similar to those of the grape; and I am persuaded that was it
transplanted into a warmer and more kindly climate, it would prove a most rare
and delicious fruit.

Two very large rivers empty themselves into this lake, on the north and
north-east side; one is called the Nipegon River, or, as the French pronounce
it, the Allanipegon, which leads to a band of the Chipeways, inhabiting a lake
of the same name, and the other is termed the Michipicooton River, the source
of which is situated toward James's Bay, from whence there is but a short
carriage to another river, which empties itself into that bay, at a fort
belonging to the company. It was by this passage that a party of French from
Michillimackinac invaded the settlements of that society in the reign of Queen
Anne. Having taken and destroyed their forts, they brought the cannon which
they found in them to the ^o^tress from whence they had issued; these were
small brass-pieces, and remain there to this present time; having, through the
usual revolutions of fortune, returned to the possession of their former
masters.

Not far from the Nipegon is a small river, that just before it enters the
lake, has a perpendicular fall from the top of a mountain, of more than six
hundred feet. Being very narrow, it appears at a distance like a white garter
suspended in the air.

A few Indians inhabit round the eastern borders of this lake, supposed to be
the remains of the Algonkins, who formerly possessed this country, but who have
been nearly extirpated by the Iroquois of Canada. Lake Superior has near forty
rivers that fall into it, some of which are of a considerable size. On the
south side of it is a remarkable point or cape, of about sixty miles in length,
called Point Chegomegan. It might as properly be termed a peninsula, as it is
nearly separated from the continent, on the east side, by a narrow bay that
extends from east to west. Canoes have but a short portage across the isthmus,
whereas if they coast it round, the voyage is more than an hundred miles.

About that distance to the west of the cape just described, a considerable
river falls into the lake, the head of which is composed of a great assemblage
of small streams. This river is remarkable for the abundance of virgin copper
that is found on and near its banks. A metal which is met with also in several
other places on this coast. I observed that many of the small islands,
particularly those on the eastern shores, were covered with copper ore. They
appeared like beds of copperas, of which many tuns lay in a small space.

A company of adventurers from England began, soon after the conquest of
Canada, to bring away some of this metal, but the distracted situation of
affairs in America has obliged them to relinquish their scheme. It might in
future times be made a very advantageous trade, as the metal, which costs
nothing on the spot, and requires but little expense to get it on board, could
be conveyed in boats or canoes through the Falls of St. Marie, to the Isle of
St. Joseph, which lies at the bottom of the Straights near the entrance into
Lake Huron; from thence it might be put on board larger vessels, and in them
transported across that lake to the Falls of Niagara; there being carried by
land across the Portage, it might be conveyed without much more obstruction to
Quebec. The cheapness and ease with which any quantity of it may be procured,
will make up for the length of way that is necessary to transport it before it
reaches the sea coast, and enable the proprietors to send it to foreign markets
on as good terms as it can be exported from other countries.

Lake Superior abounds with a variety of fish, the principal and best are the
trout and sturgeon, which may be caught at almost any season in the greatest
abundance. The trouts in general weigh about twelve pounds, but some are caught
that exceed fifty. Besides these, a species of white fish is taken in great
quantities here, that resemble a shad in their shape, but they are rather
thicker, and less bony; they weigh about four pounds each, and are of a
delicious taste. The best way of catching these fish is with a net; but the
trout might be taken at all times with the hook. There are likewise many sorts
of smaller fish in great plenty here, and which may be taken with ease; among
these is a sort resembling a herring, that are generally made use of as a bait
for the trout. Very small crabs, not larger than half a crown piece, are found
both in this and Lake Michegan.

This Lake is as much affected by storms as the Atlantic Ocean; the waves run
as high, and are equally as dangerous to ships. It discharges its waters from
the south-east corner, through the Straights of St. Marie. At the upper end of
these Straights stands a fort that receives (...) name from them, commanded by
Mo^s. Cadot, a French Canadian, who being proprietor of the soil, is still
permitted to keep possession of it. Near this fort is a very strong rapid,
against which, though it is impossible for canoes to ascend, yet when conducted
by careful pilots, they might pass down without danger.

Though Lake Superior, as I have before observed, is supplied by near forty
rivers, many of which are considerable ones, yet it does not appear that one
tenth part of the waters which are conveyed into it by these rivers, are
carried off at this evacuation. How such a superabundance of waters can be
disposed of as it must certainly be by some means or other, without which the
circumference of the lake would be continually enlarging, I know not: that it
does not empty itself, as the Mediterranean sea is supposed to do, by an under
current, which perpetually counteracts that near the surface, is certain; for
the stream which falls over the rock is not more than five or six feet in
depth, and the whole of it passes on through the Straights into the adjacent
lake; nor is it probable that so great a quantity can be absorbed by
exhalations; consequently they must find a passage through some subterranean
cavities, deep, unfathomable, and never to be explored.

The Falls of St. Marie do not descend perpendicularly as those of Niagara or
St. Anthony do, but consist of a rapid which continues near three quarters of a
mile, over which canoes well piloted might pass.

At the bottom of these Falls, Nature has formed a most commodious station for
catching the fish which are to be found there in immense quantities. Persons
standing on the rocks that lie adjacent to it, may take with dipping nets,
about the months of September and October, the white fish before mentioned; at
that season, together with several other species, they crowd up to this spot in
such amazing shoals, that enough may be taken to supply, when properly cured,
thousands of inhabitants throughout the year.

The Straights of St. Marie are about forty miles long, bearing south-east, but
varying much in their breadth. The current between the Falls and Lake Huron is
not so rapid as might be expected, nor do they prevent the navigation of ships
of burden as far up as the island of St. Joseph.

It has been observed by travelers that the entrance into Lake Superior, from
these Straights, affords one of the most pleasing prospects in the world. The
place in which this might be viewed to the greatest advantage, is just at the
opening of the lake, from whence may be seen on the left, many beautiful little
islands that extend a considerable way before you; and on the right, an
agreeable succession of small points of land, that project a little way into
the water, and contribute, with the islands, to render this delightful basin
(as it might be termed) calm and secure from the ravages of those tempestuous
winds by which the adjoining lake is frequently troubled.

Lake Huron, into which you now enter from the Straights of St. Marie, is the
next in magnitude to Lake Superior. It lies between forty-two and forty-six
degrees of north latitude, and seventy-nine and eighty-five degrees of west
longitude. Its shape is nearly triangular, and its circumference about one
thousand miles.

On the north side of it lies an island that is remarkable for being near an
hundred miles in length, and no more than eight miles broad. This island is
known by the name of Manataulin, which signifies a Place of Spirits, and is
considered by the Indians as sacred as those already mentioned in Lake Superior.

About the middle of the south-west side of this lake, is Saganaum Bay. The
capes that separate this bay from the lake, are about eighteen miles distant
from each other; near the middle of the intermediate space stand two islands,
which greatly tend to facilitate the passage of canoes and small vessels, by
affording them shelter, as without this security it would not be prudent to
venture across so wide a sea; and the coasting round the bay would make the
voyage long and tedious. This bay is about eighty miles in length, and in
general about eighteen or twenty miles broad.

Nearly half way between Saganaum Bay and the north-west corner of the Lake,
lies another, which is termed Thunder Bay. The Indians, who have frequented
these parts from time immemorial, and every European traveller that has passed
through it, have unanimously agreed to call it by this name, on account of the
continual thunder they have always observed here. The bay is about nine miles
broad, and the same in length, and whilst I was passing over it, which took me
up near twenty-four hours, it thundered and lightened during the greatest part
of the time to an excessive degree.

There appeared to be no visible reason for this that I could discover, nor is
the country in general subject to thunder; the hills that stood around were not
of a remarkable height, neither did the external parts of them seem to be
covered with any sulphurous substance. But as this phenomenon must originate
from some natural cause, I conjecture that the shores of the bay, or the
adjacent mountains, are either impregnated with an uncommon quantity of
sulphurous matter, or contain some metal or mineral apt to attract in a great
degree, the electrical particles that are hourly borne over them by the passant
clouds. But the solution of this, and those other philosophical remarks which
casua^^y occur throughout these pages, I leave to the discussion of abler heads.

The fish in Lake Huron are much the same as those in Lake Superior. Some of
the land on its banks is very fertile, and proper for cultivation, but in other
parts it is sandy and barren. The promontory that separates this lake from Lake
Michegan, is composed of a ^^st plain, upwards of one hundred miles long, but
varying in its breadth, being from ten to fifteen miles broad. This tract, as I
have before observed, is divided into almost an equal portion between the
Ottowaw and Chipeway Indians. At the north-east corner this lake has a
communication with Lake Michegan, by the Straits of Michillimackinac already
described.

I had like to have omitted a very extraordinary circumstance, relative to
these Straights. According to observations made by the French, whilst they were
in possession of the sort: although there is no diurnal flood or ebb to be
perceived in these waters, yet* from an exact attention to their state, a
periodical alteration in them has been discovered. It was observed that they
arose by gradual, but almost imperceptible degrees till they had reached the
height of about three feet. This was accomplished in seven years and a half;
and in the same space they as gently decreased, till they had reached their
former situation; so that in fifteen years they had completed this inexplicable
revolution.

At the time I was there, the truth of these observations could not be
confirmed by the English, as they had then been only a few years in possession
of the fort; but they all agreed that some alteration in the limits of the
Straights was apparent. All these lakes are so affected by the winds, as
sometimes to have the appearance of a tide, according as they happen to blow;
but this is only temporary and partial.

A great number of the Chipeway Indians live scattered around this Lake,
particularly near Saganaum Bay. On its banks are found an amazing quantity of
the sand cherries, and in the adjacent country nearly the same fruits as those
that grow about the other lakes.

From the Falls of St. Marie I leisurely proceeded back to Michillimackinac,
and arrived there the beginning of November 1767, having been fourteen months
on this extensive tour, traveled near four thousand miles, and visited twelve
nations of Indians lying to the west and north of this place. The winter
setting in soon after my arrival, I was obliged to tarry there till the June
following, the navigation over Lake Huron for large vessels not being open, on
account of the ice, till that time. Meeting here with sociable company, I
passed these months very agreeably, and without finding the hours tedious.

One of my chief amusements was that of fishing for trouts. Though the
Straights were covered with ice, we found means to make holes through it, and
letting down strong lines of fifteen yards in length, to which were fixed three
or four hooks baited with the small fish before described, we frequently caught
two at a time of forty pounds weight each; but the common size is ^^om ten to
twenty pounds. These are most delicious food. The method of preserving them
during the three months the winter generally lasts, is by hanging them up in
the air; and in one night they will be frozen so hard that they will keep as
well as if they were cured with salt.

I have only pointed out in the plan of my travels the circuit I made from my
leaving Michillimackinac till I arrived again at that fort. Those countries
that lie nearer to the colonies have been so often and so minutely described,
that any further account of them would be useless. I shall therefore only give
my Read^^s in the remainder of my journal, as I at first proposed, a
description of the other great lakes of Canada, many of which I have navigated
over, and relate at the same time a few particular incidents that I trust will
not be found inapplicable or unentertaining.

In June 1768 I left Michillimackinac, and returned in the Gladwyn Schooner, a
vessel of about eighty tons burden, over Lake Huron to Lake St. Claire, where
we left the ship, and proceeded in boats to Detroit. This lake is about ninety
miles in circumference, and by the way of Huron River, which runs from the
south corner of Lake Huron, receives the waters of the three great lakes,
Superior, Michegan, and Huron. Its form is rather round, and in some places it
is deep enough for the navigation of large vessels, but toward the middle of
it there is a bar of sand, which prevents those that are loaded from passing
over it. Such as are in ballast only may find water sufficient to carry them
quite through; the cargoes, however, of such as are freighted must be taken
out, and after being transported across the bar in boats, re-shipped again.

The river that runs from Lake St. Claire to Lake Erie (or rather the Straight,
for thus it might be termed from its name) is called Detroit, which is in
French, the Straight. It runs nearly south, has a gentle current, and depth of
water sufficient for ships of considerable burden. The town of Detroit is
situated on the western banks of this river, about nine miles below Lake St.
Claire.

Almost opposite on the eastern shore, is the village of the ancient Hurons: a
tribe of Indians which have been treated of by so many writers, that adhering
to the restrictions I have laid myself under of only describing places and
people little known, or incidents that have passed unnoticed by others, I shall
omit giving a description of them. A missionary of the order of Carthusian
Friars, by permission of the bishop of Canada, resides among them.

The banks of the River Detroit, both above and below these towns, are covered
with settlements that extend more than twenty miles; the country being
exceedingly fruitful, and proper for the cultivation of wheat, Indian corn,
oats and peace. It has also many spots of fine pasturage; but as the
inhabitants, who are chiefly French that submitted to the English government,
after the conquest of these parts by General Amherst, are more attentive to the
Indian trade than to farming, (...) is but badly cultivated.

The town of Detroit contains upwards of one hundred houses. The streets are
somewhat regular, and have a range of very convenient and handsome barracks,
with a spacious parade at the south end. On the west side lies the King's
garden, belonging to the governor, which is very well laid out and kept in good
order. The fortifications of the town consist of a strong stockade, made of
round piles, fixed firmly in the ground, and lined with palisades. These are
defended by some small bastio^^, on which are mounted a few indifferent cannon
of an inconsiderable size, just sufficient for its defense against the Indians,
or an enemy not provided with artillery.

The garrison, in time of peace, consists of two hundred men, commanded by a
field officer, who acts as chief magistrate under the governor of Canada. Mr.
Turnbull, captain of the 60th regiment, or Royal Americans, was commandant when
I happened to be there. This gentleman was deservedly esteemed and respected,
both by the inhabitants and traders, for the propriety of his conduct; and I am
happy to have an opportunity of thus publicly making my acknowledgments to him
for the civilities I received from him during my stay.

In the year 1762, in the month of July, it rained on this town and the parts
adjacent, a sulphurous water of the color and consistence of ink; some of
which being collected into bottles, and wrote with appeared perfectly
intelligible on the paper, and answered every purpose of that useful liquid.
Soon after, the Indian wars already spoken of, broke out in these parts. I mean
not to say that this incident was ominous of them, notwithstanding it is well
known that innumerable well attested instances of extraordinary phoenomena
happening before extraordinary events, have been recorded in almost every age
by historians of veracity; I only relate the circumstances as a fact of which I
was informed by many persons of undoubted probity, and leave my readers, as I
have hitherto done, to draw their own conclusions from it.

Pontiac, under whom the party that surprised Fort Michillimackinac, as related
in the former part of this work, acted, was an enterprizing chief or
head-warrior of the Miames. During the late war between the English and the
French, he had been a steady friend to the latter, and continued his inveteracy
to the former, even after peace had been concluded between these two nations.
Unwilling to put an end to the depredations he had been so long engaged in, he
collected an army of consederate Indians, consisting of the nations before
enumerated, with an intention to renew the war. However, instead of openly
attacking the English settlements, he laid a scheme for taking by surprise
those forts on the extremities which they had lately gained possession of.

How well the party he detached to take Fort Michillimackinac suc^^eded, the
reader already knows. To get into his hands Detroi^* a place of greater
consequence, and much better guarded, required greater resolution, and more
consummate art. He of course took the management of this expedition on himself,
and drew near it with the principal body of his troops, He was however
prevented from carrying his designs into execution by an apparently trivial and
unforeseen circumstance. On such does the fate of mighty Empires frequently
depend!

The town of Detroit, when Pontiac formed his plan* was garrisoned by about
three hundred men, commanded by Major Gladwyn, a gallant officer. (...) at that
time every appearance of war was at an end, and the Indians seemed to be on a
friendly footing, Pontiac approached the Fort, without exciting any suspicions
in the breast of the governor or the inhabitants. He encamped at a little
distance from it, and sent to let the commandant know that he was come to
trade; and being desirous of brightening the chain of peace between the English
and his nation, desired that he and his chiefs might be admitted to hold a
council with him. The governor still unsuspicious, and not in the least
doubting the sincerity of the Indians, granted their general's request, and
fixed on the next morning for their reception.

The evening of that day, an Indian woman who had been employed by Major
Gladwyn, to make him a pair of Indian shoes, out of curious elk-skin, brought
them home. The Major was so pleased with them, that, intending these as a
present for a friend, he ordered her to take the remainder back, and make it
into others for himself. He then directed his servant to pay her for those she
had done, and dismissed her. The woman went to the door that led to the street,
but no further; she there loitered about as if she had not finished the
business on which she came. A servant at length observed her, and asked her why
she staid there; she gave him, however, no answer.

Some short time after, the governor himself saw her; and enquired of his
servant what occasioned her stay. Not being able to get a satisfactory answer,
he ordered the woman to be called in. When she came into his presence he
desired to know what was the reason of her loitering about, and not hastening
home before the gates were shut, that she might complete in due time the work
he had given her to do. She told him, after much hesitation, that as he had
always behaved with great goodness toward her, she was unwilling to take away
the remainder of the skin, because he put so great a value upon it; and yet had
not been able to prevail upon herself to tell him so. He then asked her, why
she was more reluctant to do so now, than she had been when she made the former
pair. With increased reluctance she answered, that she never should be able to
bring them back.

His curiosity being now excited, he insisted on her disclosing to him the
secret that seemed to be struggling in her bosom for utterance. At last, on
receiving a promise that the intelligence ^he was about to give him should not
turn to her prejud^^^, and that if it appeared to be beneficial she should be
rewarded for it, she informed him, that at the council to be held with the
Indians the following day, Pontiac and his chiefs intended to murder him; and,
after having massacred the garrison and inhabitants, to plunder the town. That
for this purpose all the chiefs who were to be admitted into the council-room
had cut their guns short, so that they could conceal them under their blankets;
with which, at a signal given by their general, on delivering the belt, they
were all to (...) up, and instantly to fire on him and his attendants. Having
effected this, they were immediately to rush into the town, where they would
find themselves supported by a great number of their warriors, that were to
come into it during the sitting of the council, under pretense of trading, but
privately armed in the same manner. Having gained from the woman every
necessary particular relative to the plot, and also the means by which she
acquired a knowledge of them, he dismissed her with injunctions of secrecy, and
a promise of fulfilling on his part with punctuality the engagements he had
entered into.

The intelligence the governor had just received, gave him great uneasiness;
and he immediately consulted the officer who was next to him in command on the
subject. But that gentleman considering the information as a story invented for
some artful purposes, advised him to pay no attention to it. This conclusion
however had happily no weight with him. He thought it prudent to conclude it to
be true, till he was convinced that it was not so; and therefore, without
revealing his suspicions to any other person, he took every needful precaution
that the time would admit of. He walked round the fort during the whole night,
and saw himself that every sentinel was on duty, and every weapon of defense in
proper order.

As he traversed the ramparts which lay nearest to the Indian camp, he heard
them in high festivity, and, little imagining that their plot was discovered,
probably pleasing themselves with the anticipation of their success. As soon as
the morning dawned, he ordered all the garrison under arms; and then imparting
his apprehensions to a few of the principal officers, gave them such directions
as he thought necessary. At the same time he sent round to all the traders, to
inform them, that as it was expected a great number of Indians would enter the
town that day, who might be inclined to plunder, he desired they would have
their arms ready, and repel every attempt of that kind.

About ten o'clock, Pontiac and his chiefs arrived; and were conducted to the
council chamger, where the governor and his principa^ officers, each with
pistols in their belts, awaited his arrival. As the Indians passed on, they
could not help observing that a greater number of troops than usual were drawn
up on the parade, or marching about. No sooner were they entered, and seated on
the skins prepared for them, than Pontiac asked the governor on what occasion
his young men, meaning the sol^iers, were thus drawn up, and parading the
streets. He received for answer, that it was only intended to keep them perfect
in their exercise.

The Indian chief-warrior now began his speech, which contained the strongest
professions of friendship and good will toward the English; and when he came
to the delivery of the belt of wampum, the particular mode of which, according
to the woman's information, was to be the signal for his chiefs to fire, the
governor and all his attendants drew their swords halfway out of their
scabbards; and the soldiers at the same instant made a clattering with their
arms before the doors, which had been purposely left open. Pontiac, though one
of the boldest of men, immediately turned pale, and trembled; and instead of
giving the belt in the manner proposed, delivered it according to the usual
way. His chiefs, who had impatiently expected the signal, looked at each other
with astonishment, but continued quiet, waiting the result.

The governor in his turn made a speech; but instead of thanking the great
warrior for the professions of friendship he had just uttered, he accused him
of being a traitor. He (...) him that the English, who knew every thing, were
convinced of his treachery and villainous designs; and as a proof that they
were well acquainted with his most secret thoughts and intentions, he stepped
toward the Indian chief that sat nearest to him, and drawing aside his blanket
discovered the shortened firelock. This entirely disconcerted the Indians, and
frustrated their design.

He then continued to tell them, that as he had given his word at the time they
desired an audience, that their persons should be safe, he would hold his
promise inviolable, though they so little deserved it. However he advised them
to make the best of their way out of the fort, lest his young men, on being
acquainted with their treacherous purposes, should cut every one of them to
pieces.

Pontiac endeavored to contradict the accusation, and to make excuses for his
suspicious conduct; but the governor, satisfied of the falsity of his
protestations, would not listen to him. The Indians immediately left the fort,
but instead of being senbsile of the governor's generous behavior, they threw
off the mask, and the next day made a regular attack upon it.

Major Gladwyn has not escaped censure for this mistaken lenity; for probably
had he kept a few of the principal chiefs prisoners, whilst he had them in his
power, he might have been able to have brought the whole confederacy to terms,
and have brought the whole confederacy to terms, and have prevented a war. But
he atoned for this oversight, by the gallant defense he made for more than a
year, amidst a variety of discouragements.

During that period some very smart skirmishes happened between the besiegers
and the garrison, of which the following was the principal and most bloody:
Captain Delzel, a brave officer, prevailed on the governor to give him the
command of about two hundred men, and to permit him to attack the enemy's camp.
This being complied with, he sallied from the town before daybreak; but
Pontiac, receiving from some of his swift-footed warriors, who were constantly
employed in watching the motions of the garrison, timely intelligence of their
design, he collected together the choicest of his troops, and met the
detachment at some distance from his camp, near a place since called
Bloody-Bridge.

As the Indians were vastly superior in numbers to captain Delzel's party, he
was soon overpowered and driven back. Being now nearly surrounded, he made a
vigorous effort to regain the bridge he had just crossed, by which alone be
could find a retreat; but in doing this he lost his life, and many of his men
fell with him. However, Major Rogers, the second in command, assisted by
Lieutenant Breham, found means to draw off the shattered remains of their
little army, and (...)* them into the fort.

Thus considerably reduced, it was with difficulty the Major could defend the
town; notwithstanding which, he held out against the Indians till he was
relieved, as after this they made but few attacks on the place, and only
continued to blockade it.

The Gladwyn Schooner (that in which I afterward took my passage from
Michillimackinac to Detroit, and which I since learn was lost with all her crew
on Lake Erie, through the obstinacy of the commander, who could not be
prevailed upon to take in sufficient ballast) arrived about this time near the
town with a reinforcement and necessary supplies. But before this vessel could
reach the place of its destination, it was most vigorously attacked by a
detachment from Pontiac's army. The Indians surrounded it in their canoes, and
made great havoc among the crew.

At length the captain of the schoone^, with a considerable number of his men
being killed, and the savages beginning to climb up the sides from every
quarter, the Lieutenant (Mr. Jacobs, who afterward commanded, and was lost in
it) being determined that the stores should not fall into the enemy's hands,
and seeing no other alternative, ordered the gunner to set fire to the
powder-room, and blow the ship up. This order was on the point of being
executed, when a chief of the Hurons, who understood the English language, gave
out to his friends the intention of the commander. On receiving this
intelligence, the Indians hurried down the sides of the ship with the greatest
precipitation, and got as far from it as possible; whilst the commander
immediately took advantage of their consternation, and arrived without any
further obstruction at the town.

This seasonable supply gave the garrison fresh spirits; and Pontiac being now
convinced that it would not be in his power to reduce the place, proposed an
accommodation; the governor wishing as much to get rid of such troublesome
enemies, who obstructed the intercourse of the traders with the neighboring
nations, listened to his proposals, and having procured advantageous terms,
agreed to a peace. The Indians soon after separated, and returned to their
different provinces; nor have they since thought proper to disturb, at least in
any great degree, the tranquillity of these parts.

Pontiac henceforward seemed to have laid aside the animosity he had hitherto
borne toward the English, and apparently became their zealous friend. To
reward this new attachment, and to insure a continuance of it, government
allowed him a handsome pension. But (...) restless and intriguing (...) not
suffer him to be grateful for this allowance, and his conduct at length grew
suspicious; so that going, in the year 1767, to hold a council in the country
of the Illinois, a faithful Indian, who was either commissioned by one of the
English governors, or instigated by the love he bore the English nation,
attende^ him as a spy; and being convinced from the speech Pontiac made in the
council, that he still retained his former prejudices against those for whom he
now professed a friendship, he plunged his knife into h^s heart, as soon as he
had done speaking, and laid him dead on the spot. But to return from this
digression.

Lake Erie receives the waters by which it is supplied from the three great
lakes, through the Straights of Detroit, that lie at its north-west corner.
This lake is situated between forty-one and forty-three degrees of north
latitude, and between seventy-eight and eighty-three degrees of west longitude.
It is near 300 miles long from east to west, and about forty in its broadest
part: and a remarkable long narrow point lies on its north side, that projects
for several miles into the lake toward the south-east.

There are several islands near the west end of it so infested with
rattle-snakes, that it is very dangerous to land on them. It is impossible that
any place can produce a greater number of all kinds of these reptiles than this
does, particularly of the water-snake. The Lake is covered near the banks of
the islands with the large pond-lily; the leaves of which lie on the surface of
the water so thick, as to cover it entirely for many acres together; and on
each of these lay, when I passed over it, wreaths of water-snakes basking in
the sun, which amounted to myriads.

The most remarkable of the different species that infest this lake, is the
hissing-snake, which is of the small speckled kind, and about eighteen inches
long. When any thing approaches, it flattens itself in a moment, and its spots,
which are of various dies, become visibly brighter through rage; at the same
time it blows from its mouth, with great force, a subtle wind, that is
reported to be of a nauseous smell; and if drawn in with the breath of the
unwary traveller, will infallibly bring on a decline, that in a few months must
prove mortal, there being no remedy yet discovered which can counteract its
ba^^ful influence.

The stones and pebbles on the shores of this lake are most of them tinged, in
a greater or less degree, with spots that resemble bras^ in their color, but
which are of a more sulphurous nature. Small pieces, about the size of
hazle-nuts, of the same kinds of ore, are found on the sands that lie on its
banks, and under the water.

The navigation of this lake is esteemed more dangerous than any of the others,
on account of many high lands that lie on the borders of it, and project into
the water, in a perpendicular direction for many miles together; so that
whenever sudden storms (...) and boats are frequently lost, as there is no
place for the^^ to find a shelter.

This Lake discharges its waters at the north-east end, into the River Niagara,
which runs north and south, and is about thirty-six miles in length; from
whence it falls into Lake Onta^^o. At the entrance of this river, on its
eastern shore, lies Fort Niagara; and, about eighteen miles further up, those
remarkable Falls which are esteemed one of the most extraordinary productions
of nature at present known.

As these have been visited by so many travelers, and so frequently described,
I shall omit giving a particular description of them, and only observe, that
the waters by which they are supplied, after taking their rise near two
thousand miles to the north-west, and passing through the Lakes Superior,
Michegan, Huron, and Erie, during which they have been receiving constant
accumulations, at length rush down a stupendous precip^^e of one hundred and
forty feet perpendicular; and in a strong rapid, that extends to the distance
of eight or nine miles below, fall nearly as much more: this River soon after
empties itself into Lake Ontario.

The noise o^ these Falls may be heard an amazing way. I could plainly
distinguish them in a calm morning more than twenty miles. Others have said
that at particular times, and when the wind sits fair, the sound of them
reaches fifteen leagues.

The land about the Falls is exceedingly hilly and uneven, but the greatest
part of that on the Niagara River is very good, especially for grass and
pasturage.

Fort Niagara stands nearly at the entrance of the west end of Lake Ontario,
and on the east part of the Straights of Niagara. It was taken from the French
in the year 1759, by the forces under the command of Sir William Johnson, and
at present is defended by a considerable garrison.

Lake Ontario is the next, and least of the five great Lakes of Canada. Its
situation is between forty-three and forty-five degrees of latitude, and
between seventy-six and seventy-nine degrees of west longitude. The form of it
is nearly oval, its greatest length being from north-^ast to south-west, and in
circumference, about six hundred miles. Near the south-east part it receives
the waters of the Oswego River, and on the north-east discharges itself into
the River Cataraqui. Not far from the place where it issues, Fort Frontenac
formerly stood, which was taken from the French during the last war, in the
year 1758, by a small army of Provincials under Col. Bradstreet.

At the entrance of Oswego river stands a fort of the same name, garrisoned
only at present by an inconsiderable party. This fort was taken in the year
1756, by the French, when a great part of the garrison, which consisted of the
late Shirley's and Pepperil's regiments, were massacred in cold blood by the
savages.

In Lake Ontario are taken many sorts of fish, amon^ which is the Oswego Bass,
of an excellent flavor, and weighing about three or four pounds. There is also
a sort called the Cat-head or Pout, which are in general very large, some of
them weighing eight or ten pounds; and they are esteemed a rare dish when
properly dressed.

On the north-west part of this Lake, and to the south-east of Lake Huron, is a
tribe of Indians called Missisauges, whose town is denominated Toronto, from
the lake on which it lies; but they are not very numerous. The country about
Lake Ontario, especially the more north and eastern parts, is composed o^ good
land, and in ^^me may make very flourishing settlements.

The Oniada Lake, situated near the head of the River Oswego, receives the
waters of Wood-Creek, which takes its rise not far from the Mohawks River.
These two lie so adjacent to each other, that a junction is effected by sluices
at Fort Stanwix, about twelve miles from the mouth of the former. This lake is
about thirty miles long from east to west, and near fifteen broad. The country
around it belongs to the Oniada Indians.

Lake Champlain, the next in size to Lake Ontario, and which lies nearly east
from it, is about eighty miles in length, north and south, and in its broadest
part fourteen. It is well stored with fish, and the lands that lie on all the
borders of it, or about its rivers, very good.

Lake George, formerly called by the French Lake St. Sacrament, lies to the
south west of the last-mentioned lake, and is about thirty-five miles long from
north-east to south-west, but of no great breadth. The country around it is
very mountainous, but in the valleys the land is tolerably good.

When these two lakes were first discovered, they were known by no other name
than that of the Iroquois Lakes; and I believe in the first plans taken of
those parts were so denominated. The Indians also that were then* called the
Iroquois, are since known by the name of the Five Mohawk nations, and the
Mohawks of Canada. In the la^e war, the former, which consist of the
Onondagoes, the Oniadas, the Senecas, the Tuscarories, and ^^oondocks, fought
on the side of the English: the latter, which are called the Cohnawaghans, and
St. Francis Indiana, joined the French.

A vast tract of land that lies between the two last mentioned lakes, and Lake
Ontario, was granted in the year 1629, by the Plymouth Company, under a patent
they had received from King James I. to Sir Ferdinando Gorges, and to Captain
John Mason, the head of that family, afterward distinguished from others of
the same name by the Masons of Connecticut. The countries specified in this
grant are said to begin ten miles from the heads of the rivers that run from
the east and south into Lake George and Lake Champlain; and continuing from
these in a direct line westward, extend to the middle of Lake Ontario; from
thence, being bounded by the Cataraqui, or river of the Iroquois, they take
their course to Montreal, as far as Fort Sorrel, which lies at the junction of
this river with the Richlieu; and from that point are enclosed by the
last-mentioned river till it returns back to the two lakes.

This immense space was granted, by the name of the Province of Laconia, to the
aforesaid gentlemen on specified conditions, and under certain penalties; but
none of these amounted, in case of omission in the fulfillment of any part of
them, to forfeiture, a fine only could be exacted.

On account of the continual wars to which these parts have been subject, from
their situation between the settlements of the Engli, the French, and the
Indians, this grant has been suffered to l^e dormant by the real proprietors.
Notwithstanding which, several towns have been settled since the late war, on
the borders of Lake Champlain, and grants made to different people by the
governor of New York, of part of these territories, which are now become
annexed to that province.

There are a great number of lakes on the north of Canada, between Labrador,
Lake Superior; and Hudson's Bay, but these are comparatively small. As they lie
out of the track that I pursued, I shall only give a summary account of them.
The most westerly of these are the Lakes Nipising and Tamiscaming. The first
lies at the head of the French River, and runs into Lake Huron; the other on
the Ottowaw River, which empties itself into the Cataraqui, at Montreal. These
Lakes are each about one hundred miles in circumference.

The next is Lake Mistassin, on the head of Rupert's River, that falls into
James's Bay. This Lake is so irregular from the large points of land by which
it is intersected on every side, that it is difficult either to describe its
shape, or to ascertain its size. It however appears on the whole to be more
than two hundred miles in circumference.

Lake St. John, which is about eighty miles round, and of a circular form, lies
on the Saguenay River, directly north of Quebec, and falls into the St.
Lawrence, somewhat north-east of that city. Lake Manikouagone lies near the
head of the Black River, which empties itself into the St. Lawrence to the
eastward of the last-mentioned river, near the coast of Labrador, and is about
sixty miles in circumference. Lake Pertibi, Lake Wincktagan, Lake Etchelaugon*
and Lake Papenouagane, with a number of other small lakes, lie near the heads
of the Bustard River to the north of the St. Lawrence. Many others, which it is
unnecessary to particularize here, are also found between the Lakes Huron and
Ontario.

The whole of those I have enumerated; amounting to upwards of twenty, are
within the limits of Canada; and from this account it might be deduced, that
the northern parts of North America, through these numerous inland seas,
contain a greater quantity of water than any other quarter of the globe.

In October 1768 I arrived at Boston, having been absent from it on this
expedition two years and five months, and during that time traveled near seven
thousand miles. From thence, as soon as I had properly digested my Journal and
Charts, I set out for England, to communicate the discoveries I had made, and
to render them beneficial to the kingdom. But the prosecution of my plans for
reaping these advantages have hitherto been obstructed by the unhappy divisions
that have been fomented between Great Britain and the Colonies by their mutual
enemies. Should peace once more be restored, I doubt not but that the countries
I have described will prove a more abun^ant source of riches to this nation
than either its East or West Indian settlements; and I shall not only pride
myself, but sincerely rejoice in being the means of pointing out to it so
valuable an acquisition.

I cannot conclude the account of my extensive travels, without expressing my
gratitude to that beneficent Being who invisibly protected me through those
perils which unavoidably attend so long a tour among fierce and untutored
savages.

At the same time let me not be accused of vanity or presumption, if I declare
that the motives alleged in the introduction of this work, were not the only
ones that induced me to engage in this arduous undertaking. My views were not
solely confined to the advantages that might accrue either to myself, or the
community to which I belonged; but nobler purposes contributed principally to
urge me on.

The confined state, both with regard to civil and religious improvements, in
which so many of my fellow creatures remained, aroused within my bosom an
irresistible inclination to explore the almost unknown regions which they
inhabited; and as a preparatory step toward the introduction of more polished
manners, and more humane sentiments, to gain a knowledge of their language,
customs, and principles.

I confess that the little benefit too many of the Indian nations have hitherto
received from their intercourse with those who denominate themselves
Christians, did not tend to encourage my charitable purposes; yet as many,
though not the generality, might receive some benefit from the introduction
among them of the polity and religion of the Europeans, without retaining only
the errors or vices that from the depravity and perversion of their professors
are unhappily attendant on these, I determined to persevere.

Nor could I flatter myself that I should be able to accomplish alone this
great design; however, I was willing to contribute as much as lay in my power
toward it. In all public undertakings would every one do this, and furnish
with alacrity his particular share toward it, what stupendous works might not
be completed.

It is true that the Indians are not without some sense of religion, and such
as proves that they worship the Great Creator, with a degree of purity unknown
to nations who have greater opportunities of improvement; but their religious
principles are far from being so faultless as described by a learned writer, or
unmixed with opinions and ceremonies that greatly lessen their excellency in
this point. So that could the doctrines of genuine and vital Christianity be
introduced among them, pure and untainted as it flowed from the lips of its
Divine Institutor* it would certainly tend to clear away that superstitious or
idolatrous dross by which the rationality of their religious tenets are
obscured. Its mild and beneficent precepts would likewise conduce to soften
their implacable dispositions, and to refine their savage manners; an event
most desirable; and happy shall I esteem myself if this publication shall prove
the means of pointing out the path by which salutary instructions may be
conveyed to them, and the conversion, though but of a few, be the consequence.

Conclusion of the JOURNAL, etc.

OF THE ORIGIN, MANNERS, CUSTOMS, RELIGION AND LANGUAGE OF THE INDIANS.
CHAPTER I. Of their ORIGIN.
THE means by which America received its first inhabitants, have, since the
time of its discovery by the Europeans, been the subject of numberless
disquisitions. Was I to endeavor to collect the different opinions and
reasonings on the various writers that have taken up the pen in defense of
their conjectures, the enumeration would much exceed the bounds I have
prescribed myself, and oblige me to be less explicit on points of greater
moment.

From the obscurity in which this debate is enveloped, through the total difuse
of letters among every nation of Indians on this extensive continent, and the
uncertainty of oral tradition at the distance of so many ages, I fear, that
even after the most minute investigation we shall not be able to settle it with
any great degree of certainty. And this apprehension will receive additional
force, when it is considered that the diversity of language, which is
apparently distinct between most of the Indians, tends to ascertain that this
population was not effected from one particular country, but from several
neighboring ones, and completed at different periods.

Most of the historians or travelers that have treated on the American
Aborigines disagree in their sentiments relative to them. Many of the ancients
are supposed to have known that this quarter of the globe not only existed, but
also that it was inhabited. Plato in his Timaeus has asserted, that beyond the
island which he calls Atalantis, and which according to his description was
situated in the western Ocean, there were a great number of other islands, and
behind those a vast continent.

Oviedo, a celebrated Spanish author of a much later date, has made no scruple
to affirm that the Antilles are the famous Hesperides so often mentioned by the
poets; which are at length restored to the kings of Spain, the descendants of
king Hesperus, who lived upwards of three thousand years ago, and from whom
these islands received their name.

Two other Spaniards, the one, Father Gregorio Garcia, a Dominican, the other,
Father Joseph De Acosta, a Jesuit, have written on the origin of the Americans.

The former, who had been employed in the missions of Mexico and Peru,
endeavored to prove from the traditions of the Mexicans, Peruvians, and
others, which he received on the spot, and from the variety of characters,
customs, languages, (...) religion observable in the different countries of the
new (...), that different nations had contributed to the peopling (...) it.

The latter, Father De Acosta, in his examination of the means by which the
first Indians of America might have found a passage to that continent,
discredits the conclusions of those who have supposed it to be by sea, because
no ancient author has made mention of the compass: and concludes, that it must
be either by the north of Asia and Europe, which adjoin to each other, or by
those regions that lie to the southward of the Straights of Magellan. He also
rejects the assertions of such as have advanced that it was peopled by the
Hebrews.

John De Laet, a Flemish writer, has controverted the opinions* of these
Spanish fathers, and of many others who have written on the same subject. The
hypothesis he endeavors to establish, is, that America was certainly peopled
by the Scythians or Tartars; and that the transmigration of these people
happened soon after the dispersion of Noah's grandsons. He undertakes to show,
that the most northern Americans have a greater resemblance, not only in the
features of their countenances, but also in their complexion and manner of
living, to the Scythians, Tartars, and Samoeides, than to any other nations.

In answer to Grotius, who had asserted that some of the Norwegians passed into
America by way of Greenland, and over a vast continent, he says, that it is
well known that Greenland was not discovered till the year 964; and both Gomera
and Herrera inform us that the Chichimeques were settled on the Lake of Mexico
in 721. He adds, that these savages, according to the uniform tradition of the
Mexicans who dispossessed them, came from the country since called New Mexico,
and from the neighborhood of California; consequently North America, must have
been inhabited many ages before it could receive any inhabitants from Norway by
way of Greenland.

It is no less certain, he observes, that the real Mexicans founded their
empire in 902, after having subdued the Chichimeques, the Otomias, and other
barbarous nations, who had taken possession of the country round the Lake of
Mexico, and each of whom spoke a language peculiar to themselves. The real
Mexicans are likewise supposed to come from some of the countries that lie near
California, and that they performed their journey for the most part by land; of
course they could not come from Norway.

De Laet further adds, that though some of the inhabitants of North America may
have entered it from the north-west, yet, as it is related by Pliny, and some
other writers, that on many of the islands near the western coast of Africa,
particularly on the Canaries, some ancient edifices were seen, it is highly
probable from their being now deserted, that the inhabitants may have passed
over to America; the passage being neither long nor difficult. This migration,
according to the calculatio^ (...) those authors, must have happened more than
two thou^^^^ years ago, at a time when the Spaniards were much trou^^^ by the
Carthaginians; from whom having obtained a knowledge of navigation, and the
construction of ships, they might have retired to the Antilles, by the way of
the western isles, which were exactly half way on their voyage.

He thinks also that Great Britain, Ireland, and the Orcades were extremely
proper to admit of a similar conjecture. As a proof, he inserts the following
passage from the history of Wales, written by Dr. David Powel, in the year 1170.

This historian says, that Madoc, of the sons of Prince Owen Gwynnith, being
disgusted at the civil wars which broke out between his brothers, after the
death of their father, fitted out several vessels, and having provided them
with every thing necessary for a long voyage, went in quest of new lands to the
westward of Ireland; there he discovered very fertile countries, but destitute
of inhabitants; when landing part of his people, he returned to Britain, where
he raised new levies, and afterward transported them to his colony.

The Flemish Author then returns to the Scythians, between whom and the
Americans he draws a parallel. He observes that several nations of them to the
north of the Caspian Sea, a wandering life; which, as well as many other of
their customs, and way of living, agrees in many circumstances with the Indians
of America. And though the resemblances are not absolutely perfect, yet the
emigrants, even before they left their own country, differed from each other,
and went not by the same name. Their change of abode effected what remained.

He further says, that a similar likeness exists between several American
nations, and the Samoeides who are settled, according to the Russian accounts,
on the great River Oby. And it is more natural, continues he, to suppose that
Colonies of these nations passed over to America by crossing the icy sea on
their s^edges, than for the Norwegians to travel all the way Grotius has marked
out for them.

This writer makes many other remarks that are equally sensible and which
appear to be just; but he intermixes with these some that are not so well
founded.

Emanuel de Moraez, a Portugeuze, in his history of Brazil, asserts, that
America has been wholly peopled by the Carthaginians and Israelites. He brings
as a proof of this assertion, the discoveries the former are known to have made
at a great distance beyond the coast of Africa. The progress of which being put
a stop to by the senate of Carthage, those who happened to be then in the newly
discovered countries, being cut off from all communication with their
countrymen* and destitute of many necessaries of life, fell into a state of
barbarism. As to the Israelites, this author thinks that nothing but
circumcision is wanted in order to constitute a perfect resemblance (...) them
and the Brazilians.

(...) De Hornn, a learned Dutchman, has likewise written (...) subject. He
sets out with declaring, that he does not believe it possible America could
have been peopled before the stood, considering the short space of time which
elapsed between the creation of the world and that memorable event. In the next
place he lays it down as a principle, that after the del^ge, men and other
terrestrial animals penetrated into that country both by sea and by land; some
through accident, and some from a formed design. That birds got thither by
flight; which they were enabled to do by resting on the rocks and islands that
are scattered about in the Ocean.

He further observes, that wild beasts may have found a free passage by land;
and that if we do not meet with horses or cattle, (to which he might have added
elephants, camels, rhinoceros, and beasts of many other kinds) it is because
those nations that passed thither, were either not acquainted with their use,
or had no convenience to support them.

Having totally excluded many nations that others have admitted as the probable
first settlers of America, for which he gives substantial reasons, he supposes
that it began to be peopled by the north; and maintains, that the primitive
colonies spread themselves by the means of the isthmus of Panama through the
whole extent of the continent.

He believes that the first founders of the Indian Colonies were Scythians.
That the Phoenicians and Carthaginians afterward got footing in America across
the Atlantic Ocean, and the Chinese by way of the Pacific. And that other
nations might from time to time have landed there by one or other of these
ways, or might possibly have been thrown on the coast by tempests: since,
through the whole extent of that Continent, both in its northern and southern
parts, we meet with undoubted marks of a mixture of the northern nations with
those who have come from other places. And lastly, that some Jews and
Christians might have been carried there by such like events, but that this
must have happened at a time when the whole of the New World was already
peopled.

After all, he acknowledges that great difficulties attend the determination of
the question. These, he says, are occasioned in the first place by the
imperfect knowledge we have of the extremities of the globe, toward the north
and south pole; and in the next place to the havoc which the Spaniards, the
first discoverers of the new world, made among its most ancient monuments; as
witness the great double road betwixt Quito and Cuzco, an undertaking so
stupendous, that even the most magnificent of those executed by the Romans,
cannot be compared to it.

He supposes also another migration of the Phoenicians, than those already
mentioned, to have taken place; and this was during a three years voyage made
by the Tyrian fleet in the (...) of King Solomon. He asserts on the authority
(...), that the port at which this embarkation was mad^ (...) in the
Mediterranean. The fleet, he adds, went in que^^ (...) elephants teeth and
peacocks to the western Coast of Africa, which is Tarsish; then to Ophir for
gold, which is Haite, or the island of Hispaniola; and in the latter opinion he
is supported by Columbus, who, when he discovered that island, thought he could
trace the furnaces in which the gold was refined.

To these migrations which preceded the Christian era, he adds many others of
a later date from different nations, but these I have not time to enumerate.
For the same reason I am obliged to pass over numberless writers on this
subject; and shall content myself with only giving the sentiments of two or
three more.

The first of these is Pierre De Charlevoix, a Frenchman, who, in his journal
of a voyage to North America, made so lately as the year 1720, has
recapitulated the opinions of a variety of authors on this head, to which he
has subjoined his own conjectures. But the latter cannot without some
difficulty be extracted, as they are so interwoven with the passages he has
quoted, that it requires much attention to discriminate them.

He seems to allow that America might have received its first inhabitants from
Tartary and Hyrcania. This he confirms, by observing that the lions and tigers
which are found in the former, must have come from those countries, and whose
passage serves for a proof that the two hemispheres join to the northward of
Asia. He then draws a corroboration of this argument, from a story he says he
has often heard related by Father Grollon, a French Jesuit, as an undoubted
matter of fact.

This father, after having labored some time in the missions of New France,
passed over to those of China. One day as he was traveling in Tartary, he met
a Huron woman whom he had formerly known in Canada. He asked her by what
adventure she had been carried into a country so distant from her own. She made
answer, that having been taken in war, she had been conducted from nation to
nation, till she had reached the place at which she then was.

Monsieur Charlevoix says further, that he had been assured another Jesuit,
passing through Nantz, in his return from China, had related much such another
affair of a Spanish woman from Florida. She also had been taken by certain
Indians, and given to those of a more distant country; and by these again to
another nation, till having thus been successively passed from country to
country, and traveled through regions extremely cold, she at last found
herself in Tartary. Here she had married a Tartar, who had attended the
conquerors in China, where (...) was then settled.

(...) acknowledges as an allay to the probability of these stories, (...)
those who had sailed farthest to the eastward of Asia, by pursuing the Coast of
Jesso or Kamtschatka, have pretended that they had perceived the extremity of
this continent; and from thence have concluded that there could not possibly be
any communication by land. But he adds that Francis Guella, a Spaniard, is said
to have asserted, that this separation is no more than a straight, about one
hundred miles over, and that some late voyages of the Japonese give grounds to
think that this straight is only a bay, above which there is passage over land.

He goes on to observe, that though there are few wild beasts to be met with in
North America, except a kind of tigers without spots, which are found in the
country of the Iroquoise, yet toward the tropics there are lions and real
tigers, which, notwithstanding, might have come from Hyrcania and Tartary; for
as by advancing gradually southward they met with climates more agreeable to
their natures, they have in time abandoned the northern countries.

He quotes both Solinus and Pliny to prove that the Scythian Anthropophagi once
depopulated a great extent of country, as far as the promontory Tabin; and also
an author of later date, Mark Pol, a Venetian, who, he says, tells us, that to
the northeast of China and Tartary there are vast uninhabited countries, which
might be sufficient to confirm any conjectures concerning the retreat of a
great number of Scythians into America.

To this he adds, that we find in the ancients the names of some of these
nations. Pliny speaks of the Tabians; Solinus mentions the Apuleans, who had
for neighbors the Massagetes, whom Pliny since assures us to have entirely
disappeared. Ammianus Marcellinus expressly tells us, that the fear of the
Anthropophagi obliged several of the inhabitants of those countries to take
refuge elsewhere. From all these authorities Monsieur Charlevoix concludes,
that there is at least room to conjecture that more than one nation in America
had a Scythian or Tartarian original.

He finishes his remarks on the authors he has quoted, by the following
observations: It appears to me that this controversy may be reduced to the two
following articles; first, how the new world might have been peopled; and
secondly, by whom, and by what means it has been peopled.

Nothing, he asserts, may be more easily answered than the first. America might
have been peopled as the three other parts of the world have been. Many
difficulties have been formed on this subject, which have been deemed
insolvable, but which are far from being so. The inhabitants of both
hemispheres are certainly the descendants of the same father; the common parent
of mankind received an express command from Heaven to people the whole world,
and accordingly it has been peopled.

To bring this about it was necessary to overcome all difficulties that lay in
the way, and they have been got over. Were these difficulties greater with
respect to peopling the extre^^^ties of Asia, Africa, and Europe, or the
transporting men (...) the islands which lie at a considerable distance from
those continents, than to pass over into America? certainly not.

Navigation, which has arrived at so great perfection within these three or
four centuries, might possibly have been more perfect in those early ages than
at this day. Who can believe that Noah and his immediate descendants knew less
of this art than we do? That the builder and pilot of the largest ship that
ever was, a ship that was formed to traverse an unbounded ocean, and had so
many shoals and quicksands to guard against, should be ignorant of, or should
not have communicated to those of his descendants who survived him, and by
whose means he was to execute the order of the Great Creator; I say, who can
believe he should not have communicated to them the art of sailing upon an
ocean, which was not only more calm and pacific, but at the same time confined
within its ancient limits?

Admitting this, how easy is it to pass, exclusive of the passage already
described, by land from the coast of Africa to Brazil, from the Canaries to the
Western Islands, and from them to the Antilles? From the British Isles, or the
coast of France, to New foundland, the passage is neither long nor difficult; I
might say as much of that from China to Japan; from Japan, or the Phillipines,
to the Isles Mariannes; and from thence to Mexico.

There are islands at a considerable distance from the continent of Asia, where
we have not been surprised to find inhabitants, why then should we wonder to
meet with people in America? Nor can it be imagined that the grandsons of Noah,
when they were obliged to separate, and spread themselves in conformity to the
designs of God, over the whole earth, should find it absolutely impossible to
people almost one half of it.

I have been more copious in my extracts from this author than I intended, as
his reasons appear to be solid, and many of his observations just. From this
encomium, however, I must exclude the stories he has introduced of the Huron
and Floridan women, which I think I might venture to pronounce fabulous.

I shall only add, to give my readers a more comprehensive view of Mons.
Charlevoix's dissertation, the method he proposes to come at the truth of what
we are in search of.

The only means by which this can be done, he says, is by comparing the
languages of the Americans with the different nations, from whence we might
suppose they have peregrinated. If we compare the former with those words that
are considered as primitives, it might possibly set us upon some happy
discovery. And this way of ascending to the original of nations, which is by
far the least equivocal, is not so difficult as might be imagined. We have had,
and still have, travelers and missionaries who have attained the languages
that are spoken in all the provinces of the new world; it would only be
necessary to make a collection of their grammars and vocabularies, and to
collate (...) with the dead and living languages of the old world, that pass
for originals, and the similarity might easily be traced. Even the different
dialects, in spite of the alterations they have undergone, still retain enough
of the mother tongue to furnish considerable lights.

Any enquiry into the manners, customs, religion, or traditions of the
Americans, in order to discover by that means their origin, he thinks would
prove fallacious. A disquisition of that kind, he observes, is only capable of
producing a false light, more likely to dazzle, and to make us wander from the
right path, than to lead us with certainty to the point proposed.

Ancient traditions are effaced from the minds of such as either have not, or
for several ages have been without those helps that are necessary to preserve
them. And in this situation is full one half of the world. New events, and a
new arrangement of things, give rise to new traditions, which efface the
former, and are themselves effaced in turn. After one or two centuries have
passed, there no longer remain any traces of the first traditions; and thus we
are involved in a state of uncertainty.

He concludes with the following remarks, among many others. Unforeseen
accidents, tempests, and shipwrecks, have certainly contributed to people every
habitable part of the world: and ought we to wonder after this, at perceiving
certain resemblances, both of persons and manners between nations that are most
remote from each other, when we find such a difference between those that
border on one another? As we are destitute of historical monuments, there is
nothing, I repeat it, but a knowledge of the primitive languages that is
capable of throwing any light upon these clouds of impenetrable darkness.

By this enquiry we should at least be satisfied, among that prodigious number
of various nations inhabiting America, and differing so much in languages from
each other, which are those who make use of words totally and entirely
different from those of the old world, and who consequently must be reckoned to
have passed over to America in the earliest ages, and those who, from the
analogy of their language with such as are at present used in the three other
parts of the globe, leave room to judge that their migration has been more
recent, and which ought to be attributed to shipwrecks, or to some accident
similar to those which have been spoken of in the course of this treatise.

I shall only add the opinion of one author more, before I give my own
sentiments on the subject, and that is of James Adair, Esquire who resided forty
years among the Indians, and published the history of them in the year 1772. In
his learned and systematical history of those nations, inhabiting the western
parts of the most southern of the American colonies; this gentleman without
hesitation pronounces that the American Aborigines are descended from the
Israelites, either whilst they were a maritime power, or soon after their
general captivity.

This descent he endeavors to prove from their religio^^ rites, their civil
and martial customs, their marriages, their ^^neral ceremonies, their manners,
language, traditions, and from a variety of other particulars. And so complete
is his conviction on this head, that he fancies he finds a perfect and
indisputable similitude in each. Through all these I have not time to follow
him, and shall therefore only give a few extracts to show on what foundation he
builds his conjectures, and what degree of credit he is entitled to on this
point.

He begins with observing, that though some have supposed the Americans to be
descended from the Chinese, yet neither their religion, laws, or customs agree
in the least with those of the Chinese; which sufficiently proves that they are
not of this line. Besides, as our best ships are now almost half a year in
sailing for China (our author does not here recollect that this is from a high
northern latitude, across the Line, and then back again greatly to the
northward of it, and not directly athwart the Pacific Ocean, for only one
hundred and eleven degrees) or from thence to Europe, it is very unlikely they
should attempt such dangerous discoveries, with their supposed small vessels,
against rapid currents, and in dark and sickly Monsoons.

He further remarks, that this is more particularly improbable, as there is
reason to believe that this nation was unacquainted with the use of the
loadstone to direct their course.

China, he says, is about eight thousand miles distant from the American
continent, which is twice as far as across the Atlantic Ocean. And we are not
informed by any ancient writer of their maritime skill, or so much as any
inclination that way, besides small coasting voyages. The winds blow likewise,
with little variation from east to west within the latitudes thirty and odd,
north and south, and therefore these could not drive them on the American
coast, it lying directly contrary to such a course.

Neither could persons, according to this writer's account, sail to America
from the north by the way of Tartary or Ancient Scythia; that, from its
situation, never having been or can be a maritime power; and it is utterly
impracticable, he says, for any to come to America by sea from that quarter.
Besides, the remaining traces of their religious ceremonies, and civil and
martial customs, are quite opposite to the like vestiges of the Old Scythians.

Even in the moderate northern climates there is not to be seen the least trace
of any ancient stately buildings, or of any thick settlements, as are said to
remain in the less healthy regions of Peru and Mexico. And several of the
Indian nations assure us, that they crossed the Mississippi before they made
their present northern settlements; which, connected with the former arguments,
he concludes will sufficiently explode that weak opinion of the American
Aborigines being lineally descended from the Tartars or ancient Scythians.

Mr Adair's reasons for supposing that the Americans derive their origin from
the Jews are,

First, because they are divided into tribes, and have chiefs over them as the
Israelites had.

Secondly, because, as by a strict permanent divine precept, the Hebrew nation
were ordered to worship, at Jerusalem, Jehovah the true and living God, so do
the Indians, stiling him Yohewah. The ancient Heathens, he adds, it is well
known worshipped a plurality of gods, but the Indians pay their religious
devoirs to the Great beneficent, supreme, holy Spirit of Fire, who resides, as
they think, above the clouds, and on earth also with unpolluted people. They
pay no adoration to images, or to dead persons, neither to the celestial
luminaries, to evil spirits, nor to any created beings whatever.

Thirdly, because, agreeable to the theocracy or divine government of Israel,
the Indians think the Deity to be the immediate head of their state.

Fourthly, because, as the Jews believe in the ministration of angels, the
Indians also believe that the higher regions are inhabited by good spirits.

Fifthly, because the Indian language and dialects appear to have the very
idiom and genius of the Hebrew. Their words and sentences being expressive,
concise, emphatical, sonorous, and bold; and often, both in letters, and
signification, are synonimous with the Hebrew language.

Sixthly, because they count their time after the manner of the Hebrews.

Seventhly, because in conformity to, or after the manner of the Jews, they
have their prophets, highpriests, and other religious orders.

Eighthly, because their festivals, fasts, and religious rites have a great
resemblance to those of the Hebrews.

Ninthly, because the Indians, before they go to war, have many preparatory
ceremonies of purification and fasting, like what is recorded of the Israelites.

Tenthly, because the same taste for ornaments, and the same kind, are made use
of by the Indians, as by the Hebrews.

These and many other arguments of a similar nature, Mr. Adair brings in
support of his favorite system; but I should imagine, that if the Indians are
really derived from the Hebrews, among their religious ceremonies, on which he
chiefly seems to build his hypothesis, the principal, that of circumcision,
would never have been laid aside, and its very remembrance obliterated.

Thus numerous and diverse are the opinions of those who have hitherto written
on this subject! I shall not, however, either endeavor to reconcile them, or
to point out the errors of each, but proceed to give my own sentiments on the
origin of the Americans; which are founded on conclusions drawn from the most
rational arguments of the writers I have mentioned, and from my own
observations; the consistency of these I shall leave to the judgment of my
Readers.

The better to introduce my conjectures on this head, it is necessary first to
ascertain the distances between America and those parts of the habitable globe
that approach nearest to it.

The Continent of America, as far as we can judge from all the researches that
have been made near the poles, appears to be entirely separated from the other
quarters of the world. That part of Europe which approaches nearest to it, is
the coast of Greenland, lying in about seventy degrees of north latitude; and
which reaches within twelve degrees of the coast of Labrador, situated on the
north-east borders of this continent. The coast of Guinea is the nearest part
of Africa; which lies about eighteen hundred and sixty miles north-east from
the Brazils. The most eastern coast of Asia, which extends to the Korean Sea on
the north of China, projects north-east through eastern Tartary and Kamschatka
to Siberia, in about sixty degrees of north latitude. Toward which the western
coasts of America, from California to the Straights of Annian, extend nearly
north-west, and lie in about forty-six degrees of the same latitude.

Whether the Continent of America stretches any farther north than these
straights, and joins to the eastern parts of Asia, agreeable to what has been
asserted by some of the writers I have quoted, or whether the lands that have
been discovered in the intermediate parts are only an archipelago of islands,
verging toward the opposite continent, is not yet ascertained.

It being, however, certain that there are many considerable islands which lie
between the extremities of Asia and America, viz. Japon, Jeso or Jedso, Gama's
Land, Behring's Isle, with many others discovered by Tschirikow, and besides
these, from fifty degrees north there appearing to be a cluster of islands that
reach as far as Siberia, it is probable from their proximity to America, that
it received its first inhabitants from them.

This conclusion is the most rational I am able to draw, supposing that since
the Aborigines got sooting on this continent, no extraordinary or sudden change
in the position or surface of it has taken place, from inundations,
earthquakes, or any revolutions of the earth that we are at present
unacquainted with.

To me it appears highly improbable that it should have been peopled from
different quarters, across the Ocean, as others have asserted. From the size of
the ships made use of in those early ages, and the want of the compass, it
cannot be supposed that any maritime nation would by choice venture over the
unfathomable ocean, in search of distant continents. Had this however been
attempted, or had America been first accidentally peopled from ships freighted
with passengers of both sexes, which were driven by strong easterly winds
across the Atlantic, these settlers must have retained some traces of the
language of the country from whence they migrated; and this since the discovery
of it by the Europeans must have been made out. It also appears extraordinary
that several of these accidental migrations, as allowed by some, and these from
different parts, should have taken place.

Upon the whole, after the most critical enquiries, and the maturest
deliberation, I am of opinion, that America received its first inhabitants from
the north-east, by way of the great archipelago just mentioned, and from these
alone. But this might have been effected at different times, and from various
parts* from Tartary, China, Japon, or Kamschatka, the inhabitants of these
places resembling each other in color, features, and shape; and who, before
some of them acquired a knowledge of the arts and sciences, might have likewise
resembled each other in their manners, customs, religion, and language.

The only difference between the Chinese nation and the Tartars lies in the
cultivated state of the one, and the unpolished situation of the others. The
former have become a commercial people, and dwell in houses formed into regular
towns and cities; the latter live chiefly in tents, and rove about in different
hords, without any fixed abode. Nor can the long and bloody wars these two
nations have been engaged in, exterminate their hereditary similitude. The
present family of the Chinise emperors is of Tartarian extraction; and if they
were not sensible of some claim beside that of conquest, so numerous a people
would scarcely sit quiet under the dominion of strangers.

It it very evident that some of the manners and customs of the American
Indians resemble those of the Tartars; and I make no doubt but that in some
future era, and this is not a very distant one, it will be reduced to a
certainty, that during some of the wars between the Tartars and the Chinese, a
part of the inhabitants of the northern provinces were driven from their native
country, and took refuge in some of the isles beforementioned, and from thence
found their way into America. At different periods each nation might prove
victorious, and the conquered by turns fly before their conquerors; and from
hence might arise the similitude of the Indians to all these people, and that
animosity which exists between so many of their tribes.

It appears plainly to me that a great similarity between the Indian and
Chinese is conspicuous in that particular custom of shaving or plucking off the
hair, and leaving only a small tuft on the crown of the head. This mode is said
to have been enjoined by the Tartarian emperors on their accession to the
throne of China, and consequently is a further proof that this custom was in
use among the Tartars; to whom as well as the Chinese, the Americans might be
indebted for it.

Many words also are used both by the Chinese and Indians, which have a
resemblance to each other, not only in their sound, but their signification.
The Chinese call a slave, shungo; and the Naudowessie Indians, whose language
from their little intercourse with the Europeans is the least corrupted, term a
dog, shungush. The former denominate one species of their tea, shousong; the
latter call their tobacco, shousassau. Many other of the words used by the
Indians contain the syllables che, chaw, and chu, after the dialect of the
Chinese.

There probably might be found a similar connection between the language of the
Tartars and the American Aborigines, were we as well acquainted with it as we
are, from a commercial intercourse, with that of the Chinese.

I am confirmed in these conjectures, by the accounts of Kamschatka, published
a few years ago by order of the Empress of Russia. The author of which says,
that the sea which divides that peninsula from America is full of islands; and
that the distance between Tschukotskoi-Noss* a promontory which lies at the
eastern extremity of that country, and the coast of America, is not more than
two degrees and a half of a great circle. He further says, that there is the
greatest reason to suppose that Asia and America once joined at this place, as
the coasts of both continents appear to have been broken into capes and bays,
which answer each other; more especially as the inhabitants of this part of
both resemble each other in their persons, habits, customs, and food. Their
language, indeed, he observes, does not appear to be the same, but then the
inhabitants of each district in Kamschatka speak a language as different from
each other, as from that spoken on the opposite coast. These observations, to
which he adds, the similarity of the boats of the inhabitants of each coast,
and a remark that the natives of this part of America are wholly strangers to
wine and tobacco, which he looks upon as a proof that they have as yet had no
communication with the natives of Europe, he says, amount to little less than a
demonstration that America was peopled from this part of Asia.

The limits of my present undertaking will not permit me to dwell any longer on
this subject, or to enumerate any other proofs in favor of my hypothesis. I am
however so thoroughly convinced of the certainty of it, and so desirous have I
been to obtain every testimony which can be procured in its support, that I
once made an offer to a private society of gentlemen, who were curious in such
researches, and to whom I had communicated my sentiments on this point, that I
would undertake a journey, on receiving such supplies as were needful, through
the north-east parts of Europe and Asia to the interior parts of America, and
from thence to England; making, as I proceeded, such observations both on the
languages and manners of the people with whom I should be conversant, as might
tend to illustrate the doctrine I have here laid down, and to satisfy the
curiosity of the learned or inquisitive; but as this proposal was judged rather
to require a national than a private support, it was not carried into execution.

I am happy to find, since I formed the foregoing conclusions, that they
correspond with the sentiments of that great and learned historian Doctor
Robertson; and though, with him, I acknowledge that the investigation, from its
nature, is so obscure and intricate, that the conjectures I have made can only
be considered as conjectures, and not indisputable conclusions, yet they carry
with them a greater degree of probability than the suppositions of those who
assert that this continent was peopled from another quarter.

One of the Doctor's quotations from the Journals of Behring and Tschirikow,
who sailed from Kamschatka, about the year 1741, in quest of the New World,
appears to carry great weight with it, and to afford our conclusions firm
support: These commanders having shaped their course toward the east,
discovered land, which to them appeared to be part of the American continent;
and according to their observations, it seems to be situated within a few
degrees of the north-west coast of California. They had there some intercourse
with the inhabitants, who seemed to them to resemble the North-Americans; as
they presented to the Russians the Calumet or Pipe of Peace, which is a symbol
of friendship universal among the people of North America, and an usage of
arbitrary institution peculiar to them.

One of this incomparable writer's own arguments in support of his hypothesis,
is also urged with great judgment, and, appears to be nearly conclusive. He
says, We may lay it down as a certain principle in this enquiry, that America
was not peopled by any nation of the ancient continent, which had made
considerable progress in civilization. The inhabitants of the New World were in
a state of society so extremely rude, as to be unacquainted with those arts
which are the first essays of human ingenuity in its advance toward
improvement. Even the most cultivated nations of America were strangers to many
of those simple inventions, which were almost coeval with society in other
parts of the world, and were known in the earliest periods of civil life. From
this it is manifest that the tribes which originally migrated to America, came
off from nations which must have been no less barbarous than their posterity,
at the time when they were first discovered by the Europeans. If ever the use
of iron had been known to the savages of America, or to their progenitors, if
ever they had employed a plough, a loom, or a forge, the utility of these
inventions would have preserved them, and it is impossible that they should
have been abandoned or forgotten.

CHAPTER II. Of their PERSONS, DRESS, etc.
FROM the first settlement of the French in Canada, to the conquest of it by
the English in 1760, several of that nation, who had traveled into the
interior parts of North America, either to trade with the Indians, or to
endeavor to make converts of them have published accounts of their customs,
manners, etc.

The principal of these are Father Louis Hennipin, Mons. Charlevoix, and the
Baron Le Hontan. The first, many years ago, published some very judicious
remarks, which he was the better enabled to do by the assistance he received
from the maps and diaries of the unfortunate M. De la Salle, who was
assassinated whilst he was on his travels, by some of his own party. That
gentleman's journals falling into Father Hennipin's hands, he was enabled by
them to publish many interesting particulars relative to the Indians. But in
some respects he fell very short of that knowledge which it was in his power to
have attained from his long residence among them. Nor was he always (as has
been already observed) exact in his calculations, or just in the intelligence
he has given us.

The accounts published by the other two, particularly those of Charlevoix, are
very erroneous in the geographical parts, and many of the stories told by the
Baron are mere delusions.

Some of the Jesuits, who heretofore traveled into these parts, have also
written on this subject; but as few, if any, of their works have been
translated into the English language, the generality of Readers are not
benefited by them; and, indeed, had this been done, they would have reaped but
few advantages from them, as they have chiefly confined their observations to
the religious principles of the savages, and the steps taken for their
conversion.

Since the conquest of Canada, some of our own countrymen, who have lived among
the Indians, and learned their language, have published their observations;
however as their travels have not extended to any of the interior parts I treat
of, but have only been made among the nations that border on our settlements, a
knowledge of the genuine and uncontaminated customs and manners of the Indians
could not have been acquired by them.

The southern tribes, and those that have held a constant intercourse with the
French or English, cannot have preserved their manners or their customs in
their original purity. They could not avoid acquiring the vices with the
language of those they conversed with; and the frequent intoxications they
experienced through the baneful juices introduced among them by the Europeans,
have completed a total alteration in their characters.

In such as these, a confused medley of principles or usages are only to be
observed; their real and unpolluted customs could be seen among those nations
alone that have held but little communications with the provinces. These I
found in the north-west parts, and therefore flatter myself that I am able to
give a more just account of the customs and manners of the Indians, in their
ancient purity, than any that has been hitherto published. I have made
observations on thirty nations, and though most of these have differed in their
languages, there has appeared a great similiarity in their manners, and from
these have I endeavored to extract the following remarks.

As I do not propose to give a regular and connected system of Indian concerns,
but only to relate such particulars of their manners, customs, etc. as I
thought most worthy of notice, and which interfere as little as possible with
the accounts given by other writers, I must beg my Readers to excuse their not
be-arranged systematically, or treated of in a more copious manner.

The Indian nations do not appear to me to differ so widely in their make,
color, or constitution from each other, as represented by some writers. They
are in general slight made, rather tall and strait, and you seldom see any
among them deformed; their skin is of a reddish or copper color; their eyes
are large and black, and their hair of the same hue, but very rarely is it
curled; they have good teeth, and their breath is as sweet as the air they draw
in; their cheek-bones rather raised, but more so in the women than the men; the
former are not quite so tall as the European women, however you frequently meet
with good faces and agreeable persons among them, although they are more
inclined to be fat than the other sex.

I shall not enter into a particular enquiry whether the Indians are indebted
to nature, art, or the temperature of the climate for the color of their skin,
nor shall I quote any of the contradictory accounts I have read on this
subject; I shall only say, that it appears to me to be the tincture they
received originally from the hands of their Creator; but at what period the
variation which is at present visible, both in the complexion and features of
many nations took place, at what time the European whiteness, the jetty hue of
the African, or the copper cast of the American were given them; which was the
original color of the first inhabitants of the earth, or which might be
esteemed the most perfect, I will not pretend to determine.

Many writers have asserted, that the Indians, even at the maturest period of
their existence, are only furnished with hair on their heads; and that
notwithstanding the profusion with which that part is covered, those parts
which among the inhabitants of other climates are usually the seat of this
excrescence, remain entirely free from it. Even Doctor Robertson, through their
misrepresentations, has contributed to propagate the error; and supposing the
remark justly founded, has drawn several conclusions from it relative to the
habit and temperature of their bodies, which are consequently invalid. But from
minute enquiries, and a curious inspection, I am able to declare, (however
respectable I may hold the authority of these historians in other points) that
their assertions are erroneous, and proceeding from the want of a thorough
knowledge of the customs of the Indians.

After the age of puberty, their bodies, in their natural state, are covered in
the same manner as those of the Europeans. The men, indeed, esteem a beard very
unbecoming, and take great pains to get rid of it, nor is there any ever to be
perceived on their faces, except when they grow old, and become inattentive to
their appearance. Every crinous efflorescence on the other parts of the body is
held unseemly by them, and both sexes employ much time in their extirpation.

The Naudowessies, and the remote nations, pluck them out with bent pieces of
hard wood, formed into a kind of nippers; whilst those who have communication
with Europeans procure from them wire, which they twist into a screw or worm;
applying this to the part, they press the rings together, and with a sudden
twitch draw out all the hairs that are enclosed between them.

The men of every nation differ in their dress very little, from each other,
except those who trade with the Europeans; these exchange their furs for
blankets, shirts and other apparel, which they wear as much for ornament as
necessity. The latter fasten by a girdle around their waists about half a yard
of broadcloth, which covers the middle parts of their bodies. Those who wear
shirts never make them fast either at the wrist or collar; this would be a most
insufferable confinement to them. They throw their blanket loose upon their
shoulders, and holding the upper side of it by the two corners, with a knife in
one hand, and a tobacco pouch, pipe, etc. in the other; thus accoutred they
walk about in their villages or camps: but in their dances they seldom wear
this covering.

Those among the men who wish to appear gayer than the rest, pluck from their
heads all the hair, except from a spot on the top of it, about the size of a
crown piece, where it is permitted to grow to a considerable length: on this
are fastened plumes of feathers of various colors, with silver or ivory
quills. The manner of cutting and ornamenting this part of the head
distinguishes different nations from each other.

They paint their faces red and black, which they esteem as greatly ornamental.
They also paint themselves when they go to war; but the method they make use of
on this occasion differs from that wherein they use it merely as a decoration.

The young Indians, who are desirous of excelling their companions in finery,
slit the outward rim of both their ears; at the same time they take care not to
separate them entirely, but leave the flesh thus cut, still untouched at both
extremities: around this spongy substance, from the upper to the lower part,
they twist brass wire, till the weight draws the amputated rim into a bow of
five or six inches diameter, and drags it almost down to the shoulder. This
decoration is esteemed to be excessively gay and becoming.

It is also a common custom among them to bore their noses, and wear in them
pendants of different sorts. I observed that sea shells were much worn by those
of the interior parts, and reckoned very ornamental; but how they procure them
I could not learn; probably by their traffic with other nations nearer the sea.

They go without any covering for the thigh, except that before spoken of,
round the middle, which reaches down half way the thighs; but they make for
their legs a sort of stocking, either of skins or cloth: these are sewed as
near to the shape of the leg as possible, so as to admit of being drawn on and
off. The edges of the stuff of which they are composed are left annexed to the
seam, and hang loose for about the breadth of a hand; and this part, which is
placed on the outside of the leg, is generally ornamented by those who have any
communication with Europeans, if of cloth, with ribands or lace, if of leather,
with embroidery and porcupine quills curiously colored. Strangers who hunt
among the Indians, in the parts where there is a great deal of snow, find these
stockings much more convenient than any others.

Their shoes are made of the skin of the deer, elk, or buffalo: these, after
being sometimes dressed according to the European manner, at others with the
hair remaining on them, are cut into shoes, and fashioned so as to be easy to
the feet, and convenient for walking. The edges round the ancle are decorated
with pieces of brass or tin fixed around leather strings, about an inch long,
which being placed very thick, make a cheerful tinkling noise either when they
walk or dance.

The women wear a covering of some kind or other from the neck to the knees.
Those who trade with the Europeans wear a linen garment, the same as that used
by the men; the flaps of which hang over the petticoat. Such as dress after
their ancient manner, make a kind of shift with leather, which covers the body
but not the arms. Their petticoats are made either of leather or cloth, and
reach from the waist to the knee. On their legs they wear stockings and shoes,
made and ornamented as those of the men.

They differ from each other in the mode of dressing their heads, each
following the custom of the nation or band to which they belong, and adhering
to the form made use of by their ancestors from time immemorial.

I remarke^ that most of the females, who dwell on the east side of the
Mississippi, decorate their heads by enclosing their hair either in ribands, or
in plates of silver; the latter is only made use of by the higher ranks, as it
is a costly ornament. The silver they use on this occasion is formed into thin
plates of about four inches broad, in several of which they confine their hair.
That plate which is nearest the head is of a considerable width; the next
narrower, and made so as to pass a little way under the other, and in this
manner they fasten into each other, and gradually tapering, descend to the
waist. The hair of the Indian women being in general very long, this proves an
expensive method.

But the women that live to the west of the Mississippi, viz. the Naudowessies,
the Assinipoils, etc. divide their hair in the middle of the head, and form it
into two rolls, one against each ear. These rolls are about three inches long,
and as large as their wrists. They hang in a perpendicular attitude at the
front of each ear, and descend as far as the lower part of it.

The women of every nation generally place a spot of paint, about the size of a
crown-piece, against each ear; some of them put paint on their hair, and
sometimes a small spot in the middle of the forehead.

The Indians, in general, pay a greater attention to their dress, and to the
ornaments with which they decorate their persons, than to the accommodation of
their huts or tents. They construct the latter in the following simple and
expeditious manner.

Being provided with poles of a proper length, they fasten two of them across,
near their ends, with bands made of bark. Having done this, they raise them up,
and extend the bottom of each as wide as they purpose to make the area of the
tent: they then erect others of an equal height, and fix them so as to support
the two principal ones. On the whole they lay skins of the elk or deer, sewed
together, in quantity sufficient to cover the poles, and by lapping over to
form the door. A great number of skins are sometimes required for this purpose,
as some of their tents are very capacious. That of the chief warrior of the
Naudowessies was at least forty feet in circumference, and very commodious.

They observe no regularity in fixing their tents when they encamp, but place
them just as it suits their convenience.

The huts also, which those who use not tents, erect when they travel, for very
few tribes have fixed abodes, or regular towns, or villages, are equally
simple, and almost as soon constructed.

They fix small pliable poles in the ground, and bending them till they meet at
the top and form a semicircle, then lash them together. Th^se they cover with
mats made of rushes platted, or with birch bark, which they carry with them in
their canoes for this purpose.

These cabins have neither chimnies nor windows; there is only a small aperture
left in the middle of the roofs through which the smoke is discharged, but as
this is obliged to be stopped up when it rains or snows violently, the smoke
then proves exceedingly troublesome.

They lie on skins, generally those of the bear, which are placed in rows on
the ground; and if the floor is not large enough to contain beds sufficient for
the accommodation of the whole family, a frame is erected about four or five
feet from the ground, in which the younger part of it sleep.

As the habitations of the Indians are thus rude, their domestic utensils are
few in number, and plain in their formation. The tools wherewith they fashion
them are so awkward and defective, that it is not only impossible to form them
with any degree of neatness or elegance, but the time required in the execution
is so considerable, as to deter them from engaging in the manufacture of such
as are not absolutely necessary.

The Naudowessies make the pots in which they boil their victuals of the black
clay or stone mentioned in my journal; which resists the effects of the fire,
nearly as well as iron. When they roast, if it is a large joint, or a whole
animal, such as a beaver, they fix it as Europeans do, on a spit made of a hard
wood, and placing the ends on two forked props, now and then turn it. If the
piece is smaller they spit it as before, and fixing the spit in an erect but
slanting position, with the meat inclining toward the fire, frequently change
the sides, till every part is sufficiently roasted.

They make their dishes in which they serve up their meat, and their bowls and
pans, out of the knotty excrescences of the maple tree, or any other wood. They
fashion their spoons with a tolerable degree of neatness (as these require much
less trouble than large utensils) from a wood that is termed in America Spoon
Wood, and which greatly resembles box wood.

Every tribe are now possessed of knives, and steels to strike fire with. These
being so essentially needful for the common uses of life, those who have not an
immediate communication with the European traders, purchase them of such their
neighbors as are situated nearer the settlements, and generally give in
exchange for them slaves.

CHAPTER III. Of their MANNERS, QUALIFICATIONS, etc.
WHEN the Indian women sit down, they place themselves in a decent attitude,
with their knees close together; but from being accustomed to this posture,
they walk badly, and appear to be lame.

They have no midwives amongst them, their climate, or some peculiar happiness
in their constitutions; rendering any assistance at that time unnecessary. On
these occasions they are confined but a few hours from their usual employments,
which are commonly very laborious, as the men, who are remarkably indolent,
leave to them every kind of drudgery; even in their hunting parties the former
will not deign to bring home the game, but send their wives for it, though it
lies it a very considerable distance.

The women place their children soon after they are born on boards stuffed with
soft moss, such as is found in morasses or meadows. The child is laid on its
back in one of these kind of cradles, and, being wrapped in skins or cloth to
keep it warm, is secured in it by small bent pieces of timber.

To these machines they fasten strings, by which they hang them to branches of
trees; or if they find not trees at hand, fasten them to a stump or stone,
whilst they transact any needful business. In this position are the children
kept for some months, When they are taken out, the boys are suffered to go
naked, and the girls are covered from the neck to the knees with a shift and a
short petticoat.

The Indian women are remarkably decent during their menstrual illness. Those
nations that are most remote from the European settlements, as the
Naudowessies, etc. are more particularly attentive to this point; though they
all without exception adhere in some degree to the same custom.

In every camp or town there is an appartment appropriated for their retirement
at this time, to which both single and married retreat, and seclude themselves
with the utmost strictness during this period from all society. Afterward they
purify themselves in running streams, and return to their different employments.

The men on these occasions most carefully avoid holding any communication with
them; and the Naudowessies are so rigid in this observance, that they will not
suffer any belonging to them to fetch such things as are necessary, even fire,
from these female lunar retreats, though the want of them is attended with the
greatest inconvenience. They are also so superstitious as to think, if a pipe
stem cracks, which among them is made of wood, that the possessor has either
lighted it at one of these polluted fires, or held some converse with a woman
during her retirement, which is esteemed by them most disgraceful and wicked.

The Indians are extremely circumspect and deliberate in every word and action;
there is nothing that hurries them into any intemperate warmth, but that
inveteracy to their enemies, which is rooted in every Indian heart, and never
can be eradicated. In all other instances they are cool, and remarkably
cautious, taking care not to betray on any account whatever their emotions. If
an Indian has discovered that a friend is in danger of being intercepted and
cut of by one to whom he has rendered himself obnoxious; he does not inform him
in plain and explicit terms of the danger he runs by pursuing the track near
which his enemy lies in wait for him, but he first cooly asks him which way he
is going that day; and having received his answer, with the same indifference
tells him that he has been informed that a dog lies near the spot, which might
probably do him a mischief. This hint proves sufficient; and his friend avoids
the danger with as much caution as if every design and motion of his enemy had
been pointed out to him.

This apathy often shows itself on occasions that would call forth all the
fervor of a susceptible heart. If an Indian has been absent from his family
and friends many months, either on a war or hunting party, when his wife and
children meet him at some distance from his hahitation, instead of the
affectionate sensations that would naturally arise in the breast of more
refined beings, and be productive of mutual congratulations, he continues his
course without paying the least attention to those who surround him, till he
arrives at his home.

He there sits down, and with the same unconcern as if he had not been absent a
day, smokes his pipe; those of his acquaintance who have followed him, do the
same; and perhaps it is several hours before he relates to them the incidents
which have befallen him during his absence, though perhaps he has left a
father, brother, or son on the field, whose loss he ought to have lamented, or
has been unsuccessful in the undertaking that called him from his home.

Has an Indian been engaged for several days in the chase, or on any other
laborious expedition, and by accident continued thus long without food, when he
arrives at the hut or tent of a friend where he knows his wants may be
immediately supplied, he takes care not to show the least symptoms of
impatience, or to betray the extreme hunger by which he is tortured; but on
being invited in, sits contentedly down, and smokes his pipe with as much
composure as if every appetite was allayed, and he was perfectly at ease; he
does the same if among strangers. This custom is strictly adhered to by every
tribe, as they esteem it a proof of fortitude, and think the reverse would
entitle them to the appellation of old women.

If you tell an Indian that his children have greatly signalized themselves
against an enemy, have taken many scalps, and brought home many prisoners, he
does not appear to feel any extraordinary pleasure on the occasion; his answer
generally is, "It "is well," and he makes very little further enquiry about it.
On the contrary, if you inform him that his children are slain or taken
prisoners, he makes no complaints, he only replies, "It "does not signify;" and
probably, for some time at least, asks not how it happened.

This seeming indifference, however, does not proceed from an entire
suppression of the natural affections; for notwithstanding they are esteemed
savages, I never saw among any other people greater proofs of parental or
filial tenderness; and although they meet their wives after a long absence with
the stoical indifference just mentioned, they are not, in general, void of
conjugal affection.

Another peculiarity is observable in their manner of paying their visits. If
an Indian goes to visit a particular person in a family, he mentions to whom
his visit is intended, and the rest of the family immediately retiring to the
other end of the hu^ or tent, are careful not to come near enough to interrupt
them during the whole of the conversation. The same method is pursued if a man
goes to pay his respects to one of the other sex; but then he must be careful
not to let love be the subject of his discourse, whilst the day light remains.

The Indians discover an amazing sagacity, and acquire with the greatest
readiness any thing that depends upon the attention of the mind. By experience
and an acute observation, they attain many perfections to which Europeans are
strangers. For instance, they will cross a forest or a plain which is two
hundred miles in breadth, and reach with great exactness the point at which
they intended to arrive, keeping during the whole of that space in a direct
line, without any material deviations; and this they will do with the same
ease, whether the weather be fair or cloudy.

With equal acuteness will they point to that part of the heavens the sun is
in, though it be intercepted by clouds or fogs. Besides this, they are able to
pursue with incredible facility the traces of man or beast, either on leaves or
grass; and on this account it is with great difficulty a flying enemy escapes
discovery.

They are indebted for these talents not only to nature, but to an
extraordinary command of the intellectual faculties, which can only be acquired
by an unremitted attention, and by long experience.

They are in general very happy in a retentive memory; they can recapitulate
every particular that has been treated of in council, and remember the exact
time when these were held. Their belts of wampum preserve the substance of the
treaties they have concluded with the neighboring tribes for ages back, to
which they will appeal, and refer with as much perspicuity and readiness as
Europeans can to their written records.

Every nation pays great respect to old age. The advice of a father will seldom
meet with any extraordinary attention from the young Indians, probably they
receive it with only a bare assent; but they will tremble before a grandfather,
and submit to his injunction with the utmost alacrity. The words of the ancient
part of their community are esteemed by the young as oracles. If they take
during their hunting parties any game that is reckoned by them uncommonly
delicious, it is immediately presented to the oldest of their relations.

They never suffer themselves to be overburdened with care, but live in a state
of perfect tranquillity and contentment. Being naturally indolent, if provision
just sufficient for their subsistence can be procured with little trouble, and
near at hand, they will not go far, or take any extraordinary pains for it,
though by so doing they might acquire greater plenty, and of a more estimable
kind.

Having much leisure time they indulge this indolence to which they are so
prone, by eating, drinking, or sleeping, and rambling about in their towns or
camps. But when necessity obliges them to take the field, either to oppose an
enemy, or to procure themselves food, they are alert and indefatigable. Many
instances of their activity, on these occasions, will be given when I treat of
their wars.

The infatuating spirit of gaming is not confined to Europe; the Indians also
feel the bewitching impulse, and often lose their arms, their apparel, and
every thing they are possessed of. In this case, however, they do not follow
the example of more refined gamesters, for they neither murmur nor repine; not
a fretful word escapes them, but they bear the frowns of fortune with a
philosophic composure.

The greatest blemish in their character is that savage disposition which
impels them to treat their enemies with a severity every other nation shudders
at. But if they are thus barbarous to those with whom they are at war, they are
friendly, hospitable, and humane in peace. It may with truth be said of them
that they are the worst enemies, and the best friends, of any people in the
whole world.

The Indians in general are strangers to the passion of jealousy; and brand a
man with folly that is distrustful of his wife. Among some bands the very Idea
is not known; as the most abandoned of their young men very rarely attempt the
virtue of married women, nor do these often put themselves in the way of
solicitation. Yet the Indian women in general are of an amorous temperature,
and before they are married are not the less esteemed for the indulgence of
their passions.

The Indians in their common state are strangers to all distinction of
property, except in the articles of domestic use, which every one considers as
his own, and increases as circumstances admit. They are extremely liberal to
each other, and supply the deficiency of their friends with any superfluity of
their own.

In dangers they readily give assistance to those of their band, who stand in
need of it, without any expectation of return, except of those just rewards
that are always conferred by the Indians on merit. Governed by the plain and
equitable laws of nature, every one is rewarded solely according to his
deserts; and their equality of condition, manners, and privileges, with that
constant and sociable familiarity which prevails throughout every Indian
nation, animates them with a pure and truly patriotic spirit, that tends to the
general good of the society to which they belong.

If any of their neighbors are bereaved by death, or by an enemy of their
children, those who are possessed of the greatest number of slaves, supply the
deficiency; and these are adopted by them, and treated in every respect as if
they really were the children of the person to whom they are presented.

The Indians, except those who live adjoining to the European colonies, can
form to themselves no idea of the value of money; they consider it, when they
are made acquainted with the uses to which it is applied by other nations, as
the source of innumerable evils. To it they attribute all the mischiefs that
are prevalent among Europeans, such as treachery, plundering, devastations, and
murder.

They esteem it irrational that one man should be possessed of a greater
quantity than another, and are amazed that any honor should be annexed to the
possession of it. But that the want of this useless metal should be the cause
of depriving persons of their liberty, and that on account of this partial
distribution of it, great numbers should be immured within the dreary walls of
a prison, cut off from that society of which they constitute a part, exceeds
their belief. Nor do they fail, on hearing this part of the European system of
government related, to charge the institutors of it with a total want of
humanity, and to brand them with the names of savages and brutes.

They show almost an equal degree of indifference for the productions of art.
When any of these are shown them, they say, "It is pretty, I like to look at
it," but are not inquisitive about the construction of it, neither can they
form proper conceptions of its use. But if you tell them of a person who is
able to run with great agility, that is well skilled in hunting, can direct
with unerring aim a gun, or bend with ease a bow, that can dexterously work a
canoe, understands the art of war, is acquainted with the situation of a
country, and can make his way without a guide, through an immense forest,
subsisting during this on a small quantity of provisions, they are in raptures;
they listen with great attention to the pleasing tale, and bestow the highest
commendations on the hero of it.

CHAPTER IV. Their Method of reckoning TIME, etc.
CONSIDERING their ignorance of astronomy, time is very rationally divided by
the Indians. Those in the interior parts (and of those I would generally be
understood to speak) count their years by winters; or, as they express
themselves, by snows.

Some nations among them reckon their years by moons, and make them consist of
twelve synodical or lunar months, observing, when thirty moons have waned, to
add a supernumerary one, which they term the lost moon; and then begin to count
as before. They pay a great regard to the first appearance of every moon, and
on the occasion always repeat some joyful sounds, stretching at the same time
their hands toward it.

Every month has with them a name expressive of its season; for instance, they
call the month of March (in which their year generally begins at the first New
Moon after the vernal Equinox) the Worm Month or Moon; because at this time the
worms quit their retreats in the bark of the trees, wood, etc. where they have
sheltered themselves during the winter.

The month of April is termed by them the month of Plants. May, the Month of
Flowers. June, the Hot Moon. July, the Buck Moon. Their reason for thus
denominating these is obvious.

August, the Sturgeon Moon; because in this month they catch great numbers of
that fish.

September, the Corn Moon; because in that month they gather in their Indian
corn.

October, the Traveling Moon; as they leave at this time their villages, and
travel toward the places where they intend to hunt during the winter.

November, the Beaver Moon; for in this month the beavers begin to take shelter
in their houses, having laid up a sufficient store of provisions for the winter
season.

December, the Hunting Moon, because they employ this month in pursuit of their
game.

January, the Cold Moon, as it generally freezes harder, and the cold is more
intense in this than in any other month.

February they call the Snow Moon, because more snow commonly falls during this
month, than any other in the winter.

When the moon does not shine they say the moon is dead; and some call the
three last days of it the naked days. The moon's first appearance they term its
coming to life again.

They make no division of weeks; but days they count by sleeps; half days by
pointing to the sun at noon; and quarters by the rising and the setting of the
sun: to express which in their traditions they make use of very significant
hieroglyphics.

The Indians are totally unskilled in geography as well as all the other
sciences, and yet, as I have before hinted, they draw on their birch bark very
exact charts or maps of the countries with which they are acquainted. The
latitude and longitude is only wanting to make them tolerably complete.

Their sole knowledge in astronomy consists in being able to point out the
pole star; by which they regulate their course when they travel in the night.

They reckon the distance of places, not by miles or leagues, but by a day's
journey, which, according to the best calculations I could make, appears to be
about twenty English miles. These they also divide into halves and quarters,
and will demonstrate them in their maps with great exactness, by the
hieroglyphics just mentioned, when they regulate in council their war parties,
or their most distant hunting excursions.

They have no idea of arithmetic; and though they are able to count to any
number, ^^gures as well as letters appear mysterious to them, and above their
comprehension.

During my abode with the Naudowessies, some of the chiefs observing one day a
draft of an eclipse of the moon, in a book of astronomy which I held in my
hand, they desired I would permit them to look at it. Happening to give them
the book shut, they began to count the leaves till they came to the place in
which the plate was. After they had viewed it, and asked many questions
relative to it, I told them they needed not to have taken so much pains to find
the leaf on which it was drawn, for I could not only tell in an instant the
place, without counting the leaves, but also how many preceded it.

They seemed great^y amazed at my assertion, and begged that I would
demonstrate to them the possibility of doing it. To this purpose I desired the
chief that held the book, to open it at any particular place, and just showing
me the page carefully to conceal the edges of the leaves, so that I might not
be able to count them.

This he did with the greatest caution; notwithstanding which, by looking at
the folio, I told him, to his great surprise, the number of leaves. He counted
them regularly over, and discovered that I was exact. And when, after repeated
trials, the Indians found I could do it with great readiness, and without ever
erring in my calculation, they all seemed as much astonished as if I had raised
the dead. The only way they could account for my knowledge, was by concluding
that the book was a spirit, and whispered me answers to whatever I demanded of
it.

This circumstan^^ (...) as it might appear to those who are less illiterate,
contributed to increase my consequence, and to augment the favorable opinion
they already entertained of me.

CHAPTER V. Of their GOVERNMENT, etc.
EVERY separate body of Indians is divided into bands or tribes; which band or
tribe forms a little community with the nation to which it belongs. As the
nation has some particular symbol by which it is distinguished from others, so
each tribe has a badge from which it is denominated: as that of the Eagle, the
Panther, the Tiger, the Buffalo, etc. etc. One band of the Naudowessie is
represented by a Snake, another a Tortoise, a third a Squirrel, a fourth a
Wolf, and a fifth a Buffalo. Throughout every nation they particularize
themselves in the same manner, and the meanest person among them will remember
his lineal descent, and distinguish himself by his respective family.

Did not many circumstances tend to confute the supposition, I should be almost
induced to conclude from this distinction of tribes, and the particular
attachment of the Indians to them, that they derive their origin, as some have
asserted, from the Israelites.

Besides this, every nation distinguish themselves by the manner of
constructing their tents or huts. And so well versed are all the Indians in
this distinction, that though there appears to be no difference on the nicest
observation made by an European, yet they will immediately discover, from the
position of a pole left in the ground, what nation has encamped on the spot
many months before.

Every band has a chief who is termed the Great Chief or the chief Warrior; and
who is chosen in consideration of his experience in war, and of his approved
valor, to direct their military operations, and to regulate all concerns
belonging to that department. But this chief is not considered as the head of
the state; besides the great warrior who is elected for his warlike
qualifications, there is another who enjoys a pre-eminence as his hereditary
right, and has the more immediate management of their civil affairs. This chief
might with greater propriety be denominated the Sachem; whose assent is
necessary in all conveyances and treaties, to which he affixes the mark of the
tribe or nation.

Though these two are considerd as the heads of the band, and the ^atter is
usually denominated their king, yet the Indians are sensible of neither civil
or military subordination. As every one of them entertains a high opinion of
his consequence, and is extremely tenacious of his liberty, all injunctions
that carry with them the appearance of a positive command, are instantly
rejected with scorn.

On this account, it is seldom that their leaders are so indiscreet as to give
out any of their orders in a peremptory style; a bare hint from a chief that he
thinks such a thing necessary to be done, instantly arouses an emulation among
the inferior ranks, and it is immediately executed with great alacrity. By this
method the disgustful part of the command is evaded, and an authority that
falls little short of absolute sway instituted in its room.

Among the Indians no visible form of government is established; they allow of
no such distinction as magistrate and subject, every one appearing to enjoy an
independence that cannot be controuled. The object of government among them is
rather foreign than domestic, for their attention seems more to be employed in
preserving such an union among the members of their tribe as will enable them
to watch the motions of their enemies, and to act against them with concert and
vigor, than to maintain interior order by any public regulations. If a scheme
that appears to be of service to the community is proposed by the chief, every
one is at liberty to choose whether he will assist in carrying it on; for they
have no compulsory laws that lay them under any restrictions. If violence is
committed, or blood is shed, the right of revenging these misdemeanors are
left to the family of the injured; the chiefs assume neither the power of
inflicting or moderating the punishment.

Some nations, where the dignity is hereditary, limit the succession to the
female line. On the death of a chief, his sister's son sometimes succeeds him
in preference to his own son; and if he happens to have no sister, the nearest
female relation assumes the dignity. This accounts for a woman being at the
head of the Winnebagoe nation, which, before I was acquainted with their laws,
appeared strange to me.

Each family has a right to appoint one of its chiefs to be an assistant to the
principal chief, who watches over the interest of his family, and without whose
consent nothing of a public nature can be carried into execution. These are
generally chosen for their ability in speaking; and such only are permitted to
make orations in their councils and general assemblies.

In this body, with the hereditary chief at its head, the supreme authority
appears to be lodged; as by its determination every transaction relative to
their hunting, to their making war or peace, and to all their public concerns
are regulated. Next to these, the body of warriors, which comprehends all that
are able bear arms, hold their rank. This division has sometimes at its head
the chief of the nation, if he has signalized himself by any renowned action,
if not, some chief that has rendered himself famous.

In their councils, which are held by the foregoing members, every affair of
consequence is debated; and no enterprise of the least moment undertaken,
unless it there meets with the general approbation of the chiefs. They commonly
assemble in a hut or tent appropriated to this purpose, and being seated in a
circle on the ground, the eldest chief rises and makes a speech; when he has
concluded, another gets up; and thus they all speak, if necessary by turns.

On this occasion their language is nervous, and their manner of expression
emphatical. Their style is adorned with images, comparisons, and strong
metaphors, and is equal in allegories to that of any of the eastern nations. In
all their set speeches they express themselves with much vehemence, but in
common discourse according to our usual method of speech.

The young men are suffered to be present at the councils, though they are not
allowed to make a speech till they are regularly admitted: they however listen
with great attention, and to show that they both understand, and approve of the
resolutions taken by the assembled chiefs, they frequently exclaim, "That is
right." "That is good."

The customary mode among all the ranks of expressing their assent, and which
they repeat at the end of almost every period, is by uttering a kind of
forcible aspiration, which sounds like an union of the letters OAH.

CHAPTER. VI. Of their FEASTS.
MANY of the Indian nations neither make use of bread, salt, or spices; and
some of them have never seen or tasted of either. The Naudowessies in
particular have no bread, no^ any substitute for it. They eat the wild rice
which grows in great quantities in different parts of their territories; but
they boil it and eat it alone. They also eat the flesh of the beasts they kill,
without having recourse to any farinaceous substance to absorb the grosser
particles of it. And even when they consume the sugar which they have extracted
from the maple tree, they use it not to render some other food palatable, but
generally eat it by itself.

Neither have they any idea of the use of milk, although they might collect
great quantities from the buffalo or the elk; they only consider it as proper
for the nutriment of the young of these beasts during their tender state. I
could not perceive that any inconveniency attended the total disuse of articles
esteemed so necessary and nutricious by other nations, on the contrary, they
are in general healthy and vigorous.

One dish however, which answers nearly the same purpose as bread, is in use
among the Ottagaumies, the Sau^^ies, and the more eastern nations, where Indian
corn ^^ows, which is not only much esteemed by them, but it is reckoned
extremely palatable by all the Europeans who enter their dominions. This is
composed of their unripe corn as before described, and beans in the same state,
boiled together with bear's flesh, the fat of which moistens the pulse, and
renders it beyond comparison delicious. They call this food Succatosh.

The Indians are far from being canibals, as they are said to be. All their
victuals are either roasted or boiled; and this in the extreme. Their drink is
generally the broth in which it has been boiled.

Their food consists of the flesh of the bear, the buffalo, the elk, the deer,
the beaver, and the racoon; which they prepare in the manner just mentioned.
They usually eat the flesh of the deer which is naturally dry, with that of the
bear which is fat and juicy; and though the latter is extremely rich and
luscious, (...) is never known to cloy.

In the spring of the year the Naudowessies eat the inside bark of a shrub,
that they gather in some part of their country; but I could neither learn the
name of it, or discover from whence they got it. It was of a brittle nature and
easily masticated. The taste of it was very agreeable, and they said it was
extremely nourishing. In flavor it was not unlike the turnip, and when
received into the mouth resembled that root both in its pulpous and frangible
nature.

The lower ranks of the Indians are exceedingly nasty in dressing their
victuals, but some of the chiefs are very neat and cleanly in their apparel,
tents, and food.

They commonly eat in large parties, so that their meals may properly be termed
feasts; and this they do without being restricted to any fixed or regular
hours, but just as their appetites require, and convenience suits.

They usually dance either before or after every meal; and by this cheerfulness
probably render the Great Spirit, to whom they consider themselves as indebted
for every good, a more acceptable sacrifice than a formal and unanimated
thanksgiving. The men and women feast apart: and each sex invite by turns their
companions, to partake with them of the food they happen to have; but in their
domestic way of living the men and women eat together.

No people are more hospitable, kind, and free than the Indians. They will
readily share with any of their own tribe the last part of their provisions,
and even with those of a different nation, if they chance to come in when they
are eating. Though they do not keep one common stock, yet that community of
goods which is so prevalent among them, and their generous disposition, render
it nearly of the same effect.

When the chiefs are convened on any public business, they always conclude with
a feast, at which their festivity and cheerfulness knows no limits.

CHAPTER VII. Of their DANCES.
DANCING is a favorite exercise among the Indians; they never meet on any
public occasion, but this makes a part of the entertainment. And when they are
not engaged in war or hunting, the youth of both sexes amuse themselves (...)
this manner every evening.

They always dance, as I have just observed, at their (...) In these as well as
all their other dances, every man rises in his turn, and moves about with great
freedom and boldness; singing as he does so, the exploits of his ancestors.
During this the company, who are seated on the ground in a circle, around the
dancer, join with him in marking the cadence, by an odd tone, which they utter
all together, and which sounds, "Heh, heh, heh." These notes, if they might be
so termed, are articulated with a harsh accent, and strained out with the
utmost force of their lungs: so that one would imagine their strength must be
soon exhausted by it; instead of which, they repeat it with the same violence
during the whole of their entertainment.

The women, particularly those of the western nations, dance very gracefully.
They carry themselves erect, and with their arms hanging down close to their
sides, move first a few yards to the right, and then back again to the left.
This movement they perform without taking any steps as an European would do,
but with their feet conjoined, moving by turns their toes and heels. In this
manner they glide with great agility to a certain distance* and then return;
and let those who join in the dance be ever so numerous, they keep time so
exactly with each other that no interruption ensues. During this, at stated
periods, they mingle their shrill voices, with the hoarser ones of the men, who
sit around (for it is to be observed that the sexes never intermix in the same
dance) which, with the music of the drums and chichicoes, make an agreeable
harmony.

The Indians have several kinds of dances, which they use on different
occasions, as the Pipe or Ca^^mate Dance, the War Dance, the Marriage Dance,
and the Dance of the Sacrifice. The movements in every one of these are
dissimilar; but it is almost impossible to convey any idea of the points in
which they are unlike.

Different nations likewise vary in their manner of dancing. The Chipeways
throw themselves into a greater variety of attitudes than any other people;
sometimes they hold their heads erect, at others they bend them almost to the
ground; then recline on one side, and immediately after on the other. The
Naudowessies carry themselves more upright, step firmer, and move more
gracefully. But they all accompany their dances with the disagreeable noise
just mentioned.

The Pipe Dance is the principal, and the most pleasing to a spectator of any
of them, being the least frantic, and the movement of it most graceful. It is
but on particular occasions that it is used* as when ambassadors from an enemy
arrive to treat of peace, or when strangers of eminence pass through their
territories.

The War Dance, which they use both before they set out on their war parties,
and on their return from them, strikes terror into strangers. It is performed,
as the others, amidst a cir^le of the warriors; a chief generally begins it,
who moves from the right to the left, singing at the same time both his own
exploits, and those of his ancestors. When he has concluded his account of any
memorable action, he gives a violent blow with his war-club, against a post
that is fixed in the ground, near the center of the assembly, for this purpose.

Every one dances in his turn, and recapitulates the wondrous deeds of his
family, till they all at last join in the dance. Then it becomes truly alarming
to any stranger that happens to be among them, as they throw themselves into
every horrible and terrifying posture that can be imagined, rehearsing at the
same time the parts they expect to act against their enemies in the field.
During this they hold their sharp knives in their hands, with which, as they
whirl about, they are every moment in danger of cutting each others throats;
and did they not shun the threatened mischief with inconceivable dexterity, it
could not be avoided. By these motions they intend to represent the manner in
which they kill, scalp, and take their prisoners. To heighten the scene, they
set up the same hideous yells, cries, and war hoops they use in time of action:
so that it is impossible to consider them in any other light than as an
assembly of demons.

I have frequently joined in this dance with them, but it soon ceased to be an
amusement to me, as I could not lay aside my apprehensions of receiving some
dreadful wound, that from the violence of their gestures must have proved
mortal.

I found that the nations to the westward of the Mississippi, and on the
borders of Lake Superior, still continue to make use of the Pawwaw or Black
Dance. The people of the colonies tell a thousand ridiculous stories of the
Devil being raised in this dance by the Indians. But they allow that this was
in former times, and is now nearly extinct among those who live adjacent to the
European settleme^^s. However I discovered that it was still used in the
interior ^^rts; and though I did not actually see the Devil raised by it, I was
witness to some scenes that could only be performed by such as dealt with him,
or were very expert and dextrous jugglers.

Whilst I was among the Naudowessies, a dance, which they thus termed, was
performed. Before the dance began, one of the Indians was admitted into a
society which they denominated Wakon-Kitchewah, that is, the Friendly Society
of the Spirit. This society is composed of persons of both sexes, but such only
can be admitted into it as are of unexceptionable character, and who receive
the approbation of the whole body. To this admission succeeded the Pawwaw Dance
(in which I saw nothing that could give rise to the reports I had heard) and
the whole, according to their usual custom, concluded with a grand feast.

The initiation being attended with some very singular circumstances, which, as
I have before observed, must be either the effect of magic, or of amazing
dexterity, I shall give a particular account of the whole procedure. It was
performed at the time of the new moon, in a place appropriated to the purpose,
near the center of their camp, that would contain about two hundred people.
Being a stranger, and on all occasions treated by them with great civility, I
was invited to see the ceremony, and placed close to the rails of the enclosure.

About twelve o'clock they began to assemble; when the sun shone bright, which
they considered as a good omen, for they never by choice hold any of their
public meetings unless the sky be clear and unclouded. A great number of chiefs
first appeared, who were dressed in their best apparel; and after them came the
head-warrior, clad in a long robe of rich furs, that trailed on the ground,
attended by a retinue of fifteen or twenty persons, painted and dressed in the
gayest manner. Next followed the wives of such as had been already admitted
into the society; and in the rear a confused heap of the lower ranks, all
contributing as much as lay in their power to make the appearance grand and
showy.

When the assembly was seated, and silence proclaimed, one of the principal
chiefs arose, and in a short but masterly speech informed his audience of the
occasion of their meeting. He acquainted them that one of their young men
wished to be admitted into their society; and taking him by the hand presented
him to their view, asking them, at the same time, whether they had any
objection to his becoming one of their community.

No objection being made, the young candidate was placed in the center, and
four of the chiefs took their stations close to him; after exhorting him, by
turns, not to faint under the operation he was about to go through, but to
behave like an Indian and a man, two of them took hold of his arms, and caused
him to kneel; another placed himself behind him, so as to receive him when he
fell, and the last of the four retired to the distance of about twelve feet
from him exactly in front.

This disposition being completed, the chief that stood before the kneeling
candidate, began to speak to him with an audible voice. He told him that he
himself was now agitated by the same spirit which he should in a few moments
communicate to him; that it would strike him dead, but that he would instantly
be restored again to life; to this he added, that the communication, however
terrifying, was a necessary introduction to the advantages enjoyed by the
community into which he was on the point of being admitted.

As he spoke this, he appeared to be greatly agitated; till at last his
emotions became so violent, that his countenance was distorted, and his whole
frame convulsed. At this juncture he threw something that appeared both in
shape and color like a small bean, at the young man, which seemed to enter his
mouth, and he instantly fell as motionless as if he had been shot. The chief
that was placed behind him received him in his arms, and, by the assistance of
the other two, laid him on the ground to all appearance bereft of life.

Having done this, they immediately began to rub his limbs, and to strike him
on the back, giving him such blows, as seemed more calculated to still the
quick, than to raise the dead. During these extraordinary applications, the
speaker continued his harangue, desiring the spectators not to be surprised, or
to despair of the young man's recovery, as his present inanimate situation
proceeded only from the forcible operation of the spirit, on faculties that had
hitherto been unused to inspirations of this kind.

The candidate lay several minutes without sense or motion; but at length,
after receiving many violent blows, he began to discover some symptoms of
returning life. These, however, were attended with strong convulsions, and an
apparent obstruction in his throat. But they were soon at an end; for having
discharged from his mouth the bean, or whatever it was that the chief had
thrown at him, but which on the closest inspection I had not perceived to enter
it, he soon after appeared to be tolerably recovered.

This part of the ceremony being happily effected, the officiating chiefs
disrobed him of the clothes he had usually worn, and put on him a set of
apparel entirely new. When he was dressed, the speaker once more took him by
the hand, and presented him to the society as a regular and thoroughly
initiated member, exhorting them, at the same time, to give him such necessary
assistance, as being a young member, he might stand in need of. He then also
charged the newly elected brother to receive with humility, and to follow with
punctuality the advice of his elder brethren.

All those who had been admitted within the rails, now formed a circle around
their new brother, and the music striking up, the great chief sung a song,
celebrating as usual their martial exploits.

The only music they make use of is a drum, which is composed of a piece of a
hollow tree curiously wrought, and over one end of which is strained a skin,
this they beat with a single stick, and it gives a sound that is far from
harmonious, but it just serves to beat time with. To this they sometimes add
the chichicoe, and in their war dances they likewise use a kind of fife, formed
of a reed, which makes a shrill harsh noise.

The whole assembly were by this time united, and the dance began; several
singers assisted the music with their voices, and the women joining in the
chorus at certain intervals, they produced together a not unpleasing but savage
harmony. This was one of the most agreeable entertainments I saw whilst I was
among them.

I could not help laughing at a singular childish custom I observed they
introduced into this dance, and which was the only one that had the least
appearance of conjuration. Most of the members carried in their hands an otter
or martin's skin, which being taken whole from the body, and filled with wind,
on being compressed made a squeaking noise through a small piece of wood
organically formed and fixed in its mouth. When this instrument was presented
to the face of any of the company, and the sound emitted, the person receiving
it instantly fell down to appearance dead. Sometimes two or three, both men and
women, were on the ground together; but immediately recovering, they rose up
and joined again in the dance. This seemed to afford, even the chiefs
themselves, infinite diversion. I afterward learned that these were their Di^
Penates or Household Gods.

After some hours spent in this manner the feast began; the dishes being
brought near me, I perceived that they consisted of dog's flesh; and I was
informed that at all their public grand feasts they never made use of any other
kind of food. For this purpose, at the feast I am now speaking of, the new
candidate provides fat dogs, if they can be procured at any price.

In this custom of eating dog's flesh on particular occasions, they resemble
the inhabitants of some of the countries that lie on the north-east borders of
Asia. The author of the account of Kamschatka, published by order of the
Empress of Russia (before referred to) informs us, that the people inhabiting
Koreka, a country north of Kamschatka, who wander about in hords like the
Arabs, when they pay their worship to the evil beings, kill a reindeer or a
dog, the flesh of which they eat, and leave the head and tongue sticking on a
pole with the front toward the east. Also that when they are afraid of any
infectious distemper, they kill a dog, and winding the guts about two poles,
pass between them. These customs, in which they are nearly imitated by the
Indians, seem to add strength to my supposition, that America was first peopled
from this quarter.

I know not under what class of dances to rank that performed by the Indians
who came to my tent when I landed near Lake Pepin, on the banks of the
Mississippi, as related in my Journals. When I looked out, as I there
mentioned, I saw about twenty naked young Indians, the most perfect in their
shape, and by far the handsomest of any I had ever seen, coming toward me, and
dancing as they approached, to the music of their drums. At every ten or twelve
yards they halted, and set up their yells and cries.

When they reached my tent, I asked them to come in; which, without deigning to
make me any answer, they did. As I observed that they were painted red and
black, as they usually are when they go against an enemy, and perceived that
some parts of the war-dance were intermixed with their other movements, I
doubted not but they were set on by the inimical chief who had refused my
salutation: I therefore determined to sell my life as dear as possible. To this
purpose, I received them sitting on my chest, with my gun and pistols beside
me, and ordered my men to keep a watchful eye on them, and to be also upon
their guard.

The Indians being entered, they continued their dance alternately, singing at
the same time of their heroic exploits, and the superiority of their race over
every other people. To enforce their language, though it was uncommonly nervous
and expressive, and such as would of itself have carried terror to the firmest
heart, at the end of every period they struck their war-clubs against the poles
of my tent, with such violence, that I expected every moment it would have
tumbled upon us. As each of them, in dancing round, passed by me, they placed
their right hands over their eyes, and coming close to me, looked me steadily
in the face, which I could not construe into a token of friendship. My men gave
themselves up for lost, and I acknowledge, for my own part, that I never found
my apprehensions more tumultuous on any occasion.

When they had nearly ended their dance, I presented to them the pipe of peace,
but they would not receive it. I then, as my last resource, thought I would try
what presents would do; accordingly I took from my chest some ribands and
trinkets, which I laid before them. These seemed to stagger their resolutions,
and to avert in some degree their anger; for after holding a consultation
together, they sat down on the ground, which I considered as a favorable omen.

Thus it proved, as in a short time they received the pipe of peace, and
lighting it, first presented it to me, and then smoaked with it themselves.
Soon after they took up the presents, which had hitherto lain neglected, and
appearing to be greatly pleased with them, departed in a friendly manner. And
never did I receive greater pleasure than at getting rid of such formidable
guests.

It was not ever in my power to gain a thorough knowledge of the designs of my
visitors: I had sufficient reason to conclude that they were hostile, and that
their visit, at so late an hour, was made through the instigation of the Grand
Sautor; but I was afterward informed that it might be intended as a compliment
which they usually pay to the chiefs of every other nation who happen to fall
in with them, and that the circumstances in their conduct, which had appeared
so suspicious to me, were merely the effects of their vanity, and designed to
impress on the minds of those whom they thus visited an elevated opinion of
their valor and prowess. In the morning before I continued my route, several
of their wives brought me a present of some sugar, for whom I found a few more
ribands.

The Dance of the sacrifice is not so denominated from their offering up at the
same time a sacrifice to any good or evil spirit, but is a dance to which the
Naudowessies give that title from being used when any public fortunate
circumstance befalls them. Whilst I resided among them, a fine large deer
accidentally strayed into the middle of their encampment, which they soon
destroyed. As this happened just at the new moon, they esteemed it a lucky
omen; and having roasted it whole, every one in the camp partook of it. After
their feast, they all joined in a dance, which they termed, from its being
somewhat of a religious nature, a Dance of the sacrifice.

CHAPTER VIII. Of their HUNTING.
HUNTING is the principal occupation of the Indians; they are trained to it
from their earliest youth, and it is an exercise which is esteemed no less
honorable than necessary toward their subsistence. A dextrous and resolute
hunter is held nearly in as great estimation by them as a distinguished
warrior. Scarcely any device which the ingenuity of man has discovered for
ensnaring or destroying those animals that supply them with food, or whose
skins are valuable to Europeans, is unknown to them.

Whilst they are engaged in this exercise, they shake off the indolence
peculiar to their nature, and become active, persevering, and indefatigable.
They are equally sagacious in finding their prey, and in the means they use to
destroy it. They discern the footsteps of the beasts they are in pursuit of,
although they are imperciptible to every other eye, and can follow them with
certainty through the pathless forest.

The beasts that the Indians hunt, both for their flesh on which they subsist,
and for their skins, of which they either make their apparel, or barter with
the Europeans for necessaries, are the buffalo, the elk, the deer, the moose,
carribboo, the bear, the beaver, the otter, the martin, etc. I defer giving a
description of these creatures here, and shall only at present treat of their
manner of hunting them.

The route they shall take for this purpose, and the parties that shall go on
the different expeditions are fixed in their general councils which are held
some time in the summer, when all the operations for the ensuing winter are
concluded on. The chief-warrior, whose province it is to regulate their
proceedings on this occasion, with great solemnity issues out an invitation to
those who choose to attend him; for the Indians, as before observed,
acknowledge no superiority, nor have they any idea of compulsion; and every one
that accepts it prepares himself by fasting during several days.

The Indians do not fast as some other nations do, on the richest and most
luxurious food, but they totally abstain from every kind either of victuals or
drink; and such is their patience and resolution, that the most extreme thirst
could not oblige them to taste a drop of water; yet amidst this severe
abstinence they appear cheerful and happy.

The reasons they give for thus fasting, are, that it enables them freely to
dream, in which dreams they are informed where they shall find the greatest
plenty of game; and also that it averts the displeasure of the evil spirits,
and induces them to be propitious. They also on these occasions blacken those
parts of their bodies that are uncovered.

The fast being ended, and the place of hunting made known, the chief who is to
conduct them, gives a grand feast to those who are to form the different
parties; of which none of them dare to partake till they have bathed
themselves. At this feast, notwithstanding they have fasted so long, they eat
with great moderation; and the chief that presides employs himself in
rehearsing the feats of those who have been most successful in the business
they are about to enter upon. They soon after set out on the march toward the
place appointed, painted or rather bedawbed with black, amidst the acclamations
of all the people.

It is impossible to describe their agility or perseverance, whilst they are in
pursuit of their prey; neither thickets, ditches, torrents, pools, or rivers
stop them; they always go strait forward in the most direct line they possibly
can, and there are few of the savage inhabitants of the woods that they cannot
overtake.

When they hunt for bears, they endeavor to find out their retreats; for,
during the winter, these animals conceal themselves in the hollow trunks of
trees, or make themselves holes in the ground, where they continue without
food, whilst the severe weather lasts.

When the Indians think they have arrived at a place where these creatures
usually haunt, they form themselves into a circle according to their number,
and moving onward, endeavor, as they advance toward the center, to discover
the retreats of their prey. By this means, if any lie in the intermediate
space, they are sure of arousing them, and bringing them down either with their
bows or their guns. The bears will take to flight at sight of a man or a dog,
and will only make resistance when they are extremely hungry, or after they are
wounded.

The Indian method of hunting the buffalo is by forming a circle or a square,
nearly in the same manner as when they search for the bear. Having taken their
different stations, they set the grass, which at this time is rank and dry, on
fire, and these animals, who are extremely fearful of that element, flying with
precipitation before it, great numbers are hemmed in a small compass, and
scarcely a single one escapes.

They have different ways of hunting the elk, the deer, and the carribboo.
Sometimes they seek them out in the woods, to which they retire during the
severity of the cold, where they are easily shot from behind the trees. In the
more northern climates they take the advantage of the weather to destroy the
elk; when the sun has just strength enough to melt the snow, and the frost in
the night forms a kind of crust on the surface, this creature being heavy,
breaks it with his forked hoofs, and with difficulty extricates himself from
it: at this time therefore he is soon overtaken and destroyed.

Some nations have a method of hunting these animals which is more easily
executed, and free from danger. The hunting party divide themselves into two
bands, and choosing a spot near the borders of some river, one party embarks on
board their canoes, whilst the other forming themselves into a semicircle on
the land, the flanks of which reach the shore, let loose their dogs, and by
this means rouse all the game that lies within these bounds; they then drive
them toward the river, into which they no sooner enter, than the greatest part
of them are immediately dispatched by those who remain in the canoes.

Both the elk and the buffalo are very furious when they are wounded, and will
return fiercely on their pursuers, and trample them under their feet, if the
hunter finds no means to complete their destruction, or seeks for security in
flight to some adjacent tree; by this method they are frequently avoided, and
so tired with the pursuit, that they voluntarily give it over.

But the hunting in which the Indians, particularly those who inhabit the
northern parts, chiefly employ themselves, and from which they reap the
greatest advantage, is the beaver hunting. The season for this is throughout
the whole of the winter, from November to April; during which time the fur of
these creatures is in the greatest perfection. A description of this
extraordinary animal, the construction of their huts, and the regulations of
their almost rational community, I shall give in another place.

The hunters make use of several methods to destroy them. Those generally
practiced, are either that of taking them in snares, cutting through the ice,
or opening their causeways.

As the eyes of these animals are very quick, and their hearing exceedingly
accute, great precaution is necessary in approaching their abodes; for as they
seldom go far from the water, and their houses are always built close to the
side of some large river or lake, or dams of their own constructing, upon the
least alarm they hasten to the deepest part of the water, and dive immediately
to the bottom; as they do this they make a great noise by beating the water
with their tails, on purpose to put the whole fraternity on their guard.

They take them with snares in the following manner: though the beavers usually
lay up a sufficient store of provision to serve for their subsistence during
the winter, they make from time to time excursions to the neighboring woods to
procure further supplies of food. The hunters having found out their haunts,
place a trap in their way, baited with small pieces of bark, or young shoots of
trees, which the beaver has no sooner laid hold of, than a large log of wood
falls upon him, and breaks his back; his enemies, who are upon the watch* soon
appear, and instantly dispatch the helpless animal.

At other times, when the ice on the rivers and lakes is about half a foot
thick, they make an opening through it with their hatchets, to which the
beavers will soon hasten, on being disturbed at their houses, for a supply of
fresh air. As their breath occasions a considerable motion in the waters, the
hunter has sufficient notice of their approach, and methods are easily taken
for knocking them on the head the moment they appear above the surface.

When the houses of the beavers happen to be near a rivulet, they are more
easily destroyed: the hunters then cut the ice, and spreading a net under it,
break down the cabins of the beavers, who never fail to make toward the
deepest part, where they are entangled and taken. But they must not be suffered
to remain there long, as they would soon extricate themselves with their teeth,
which are well known to be excessively sharp and strong.

The Indians take great care to hinder their dogs from touching the bones of
the beavers. The reasons they give for these precautions, are, first, that the
bones are so excessively hard, that they spoil the teeth of the dogs; and,
secondly, that they are apprehensive they shall so exasperate the spirits of
the beavers by this permission, as to render the next hunting season
unsuccessful.

The skins of these animals the hunters exchange with the Europeans for
necessaries, and as they are more valued by the latter than any other kind of
furs, they pay the greatest attention to this species of hunting.

When the Indians destroy buffalos, elks, deer, etc. they generally divide the
flesh of such as they have taken among the tribe to which they belong. But in
hunting the beaver a few families usually unite and divide the spoil between
them. Indeed, in the first instance they generally pay some attention in the
division to their own families; but no jealousies or murmurings are ever known
to arise on account of any apparent partiality.

Among the Naudowessies, if a person shoots a deer, buffalo, etc. and it runs
to a considerable distance before it drops, where a person belonging to another
tribe, being nearer, first sticks a knife into it, the game is considered as
the property of the latter, notwithstanding it had been mortally wounded by the
former. Though this custom appears to be arbitrary and unjust, yet that people
cheerfully submit to it. This decision is, however, very different from that
practiced by the Indians on the back of the colonies, where the first person
that hits it is entitled to the best share.

CHAPTER IX. Of their Manner of making WAR, etc.
THE Indians begin to bear arms at the age of fifteen, and lay them aside when
they arrive at the age of sixty. Some nations to the southward, I have been
informed, do not continue their military exercises after they are fifty.

In every band or nation there is a select number who are styled the warriors,
and who are always ready to act either offensively or defensively, as occasion
requires. These are well armed, bearing the weapons commonly in use among them,
which vary according to the situation of their countries. Such as have an
intercourse with the Europeans make use of tomahawks, knives, and firearms;
but those whose dwellings are situated to the westward of the Mississippi, and
who have not an opportunity of purchasing these kinds of weapons, use bows and
arrows, and also the Casse Tete or War-club.

The Indians that inhabit still farther to the westward, a country which
extends to the South Sea, use in fight a warlike instrument that is very
uncommon. Having great plenty of horses, they always attack their enemies on
horseback, and encumber themselves with no other weapon, than a stone of a
middling size, curiously wrought, which they fasten by a string, about a yard
and a half long, to their right arms, a little above the elbow. These stone,
they conveniently carry in their hands, till they reach their enemies, and then
swinging them with great dexterity, as they ride full speed, never fail of
doing execution. The country which these tribes possess, abounding with large
extensive plains, those who attack them seldom return; as the swiftness of the
horses, on which they are mounted, enables them to overtake even the fleetest
of their invaders.

The Naudowessies, who had been at war with this people, informed me, that
unless they found morasses or thickets to which they could retire, they were
sure of being cut off: to prevent this they always took care whenever they made
an onset, to do it near such retreats as were impassable for cavalry, they then
having a great advantage over their enemies, whose weapons would not there
reach them.

Some nations make use of a javelin, pointed with bone, worked into different
forms; but their Indian weapons in general are bows and arrows, and the short
club already mentioned. The latter is made of a very hard wood, and the head of
it fashioned round like a ball, about three inches and a half diameter; in this
rotund part is fixed an edge resembling that of a tomahawk, either of steel or
flint, whichever they can procure.

The dagger is peculiar to the Naudowessie nation, and of ancient construction,
but they can give no account how long it has been in use among them. It was
originally made of flint or bone, but since they have had communication with
the European traders, they have formed it of steel. The length of it is about
ten inches, and that part close to the handle nearly three inches broad. Its
edges are keen, and it gradually tapers toward a point. They wear it in a
sheath made of deer's leather, neatly ornamented with porcupine quills; and it
is usually hung by a string, decorated in the same manner, which reaches as low
only as the breast. This curious weapon is worn by a few of the principal
chiefs alone, and considered both as an useful instrument, and an ornamental
badge of superiority.

I observed among the Naudowessies a few targets or shields made of raw buffalo
hides, and in the form of those used by the ancients. But as the number of
these was small, and I could gain no intelligence of the era in which they
first were introduced among them, I suppose those I saw had descended from
father to son for many generations.

The reasons the Indians give for making war against one another, are much the
same as those urged by more civilized nations for disturbing the tranquillity
of their neighbors. The pleas of the former are however in general more
rational and just, than such as are brought by Europeans in vindication of
their proceedings.

The extension of empire is seldom a motive with these people to invade, and to
commit depredations on the territories of those who happen to dwell near them.
To secure the rights of hunting within particular limits, to maintain the
liberty of passing through their accustomed tracks, and to guard those lands
which they consider from a long tenure as their own, against any infringement,
are the general causes of those dissensions that so often break out between the
Indian nations, and which are carried on with so much animosity.

Though strangers to the idea of separate property, yet the most uncultivated
among them are well acquainted with the rights of their community to the
domains they possess, and oppose with vigor every encroachment on them.

Notwithstanding it is generally supposed that from their territories being so
extensive, the boundaries of them cannot be ascertained, yet I am well assured
that the limits of each nation in the interior parts are laid down in their
rude plans with great precision. By theirs, as I have before observed, was I
enabled to regulate my own; and after the most exact observations and enquiries
found very few instances in which they erred.

But interest is not either the most frequent or most powerful incentive to
their making war on each other. The passion of revenge, which is the
distinguishing characteristic of these people, is the most general motive.
Injuries are felt by them with exquisite sensibility, and vengeance pursued
with unremitted ardour. To this may be added, that natural excitation which
every Indian becomes sensible of as soon as he approaches the age of manhood to
give proofs of his valor and prowess.

As they are early possessed with a notion that war ought to be the chief
business of their lives, that there is nothing more desirous than the
reputation of being a great warrior, and that the scalps of their enemies, or a
number of prisoners are alone to be esteemed valuable, it is not to be wondered
at that the younger Indians are continually restless and uneasy if their ardour
is repressed, and they are kept in a state of inactivity. Either of these
propensities, the desire of revenge, or the gratification of an impulse, that
by degrees becomes habitual to them, is sufficient, frequently, to induce them
to commit hostilities on some of the neighboring nations.

When the chiefs find any occasion for making war, they endeavor to arouse
these habitudes, and by that means soon excite their warriors to take arms. To
this purpose they make use of their martial eloquence, nearly in the following
words, which never fails of proving effectual, The bones of our deceased
countrymen lie uncovered, they call out to us to revenge their wrongs, and we
must satisfy their request. Th^^^ spirits cry out against us. They must be
appeased. The genii, who are the guardians of our honor, inspire us with a
resolution to seek the enemies of our murdered brothers. Let us go and devour
those by whom they were slain. Sit therefore no longer inactive, give way to
the impulse of your natural valor, anoint your hair, paint your faces, fill
your quivers, cause the forests to resound with your songs, console the spirits
of the dead, and tell them they shall be revenged.

Animated by these exhortations the warriors snatch their arms in a transport
of fury, sing the song of war, and burn with impatience to imbrue their hands
in the blood of their enemies.

Sometimes private chiefs assemble small parties, and make excursions against
those with whom they are at war, or such as have injured them. A single
warrior, prompted by revenge or a desire to show his prowess, will march
unattended for several hundred miles, to surprise and cut off a straggling
party.

These irregular sallies, however, are not always approved of by the elder
chiefs, though they are often oblige^ to connive at them; as in the instance
before given of the ^^^dowessie and Chipeway nations.

But when a war is national, and undertaken by the community, their
deliberations are formal and slow. The elders assemble in council, to which all
the head warriors and young men are admitted, where they deliver their opinions
in solemn speeches, weighing with maturity the nature of the enterprise they
are about to engage in, and balancing with great sagacity the advantages or
inconveniences that will arise from it*

Their priests are also consulted on the subject, and even, sometimes, the
advice of the most intelligent of their women is asked.

If the determination be for war, they prepare for it with much ceremony.

The chief warrior of a nation does not on all occasions head the war party
himself, he frequently deputes a warrior of whose valor and prudence he has a
good opinion. The person thus fixed on being first bedawbed with black,
observes a fast of several days, during which he invokes the Great Spirit, or
deprecates the anger of the evil ones, holding whilst it lasts no converse with
any of his tribe.

He is particularly careful at the same time to observe his dreams, for on
these do they suppose their success will in a great measure depend; and from
the firm persuasion every Indian actuated by his own presumptuous thoughts is
impressed with, that he shall march forth to certain victory, these are
generally favorable to his wishes.

After he has fasted as long as custom prescribes, he assembles the ^^rriors,
and holding a belt of wampum in his hand, thus addr^^^es them:

Brothers! by the inspiration of the Great Spirit I now speak unto you, and by
him am I prompted to carry into execution the intentions which I am about to
disclose to you. The blood of our deceased brothers is not yet wiped away;
their bodies are not yet covered, and I am going to perform this duty to them.

Having then made known to them all the motives that induce him to take up arms
against the nation with whom they are to engage, he thus proceeds: I have
therefore resolved to march through the war-path to surprise them. We will eat
their flesh, and drink their blood; we will take scalps, and make prisoners;
and should we perish in this glorious enterprise, we shall not be forever hid
in the dust, for this belt shall be a recompense to him who buries the dead.
Having said this, he lays the belt on the ground, and he who takes it up
declares himself his lieutenant, and is considered as the second in command;
this, however, is only done by some distinguished warrior who has a right, by
the number of his scalps, to the post.

Though the Indians thus assert that they will eat the flesh and drink the
blood of their enemies, the threat is only to be considered as a figurative
expression. Notwithstanding they sometimes devour the hearts of those they
s^ay, and drink their blood, by way of bravado, or to gratify in a more
complete manner their revenge, yet they are not naturally anthropophagi, nor
ever feed on the flesh of men.

The chief is now washed from his sable covering, anointed with bear's fat, and
painted with their red paint, in such figures as will make him appear most
terrible to his enemies. He then sings the war song, and enumerates his warlike
actions. Having done this he fixes his eyes on the sun, and pays his adorations
to the Great Spirit, in which he is accompanied by all the warriors.

This ceremony is followed with dances, such as I have before described; and
the whole concludes with a feast, which usually consists of dogs flesh.

This feast is held in the hut or tent of the chief warrior, to which all those
who intend to accompany him in his expedition send their dishes to be filled;
and during the feast, notwithstanding he has fasted so long, he sits composedly
with his pipe in his mouth, and recounts the valorous deeds of his family.

As the hopes of having their wounds, should they receive any, properly
treated, and expeditiously cured, must be some additional inducement to the
warriors to expose themselves more freely to danger, the priests, who are also
their doctors, prepare such medecines as will prove efficacious. With great
ceremony they carry various roots and plants, and pretend that they impart to
them the power of healing.

Notwithstanding this superstitious method of proceeding, it is very certain
that they have acquired a knowledge of many plants and herbs that are of a
medicinal quality, and which they know how to use with great skill.

From the time the resolution of engaging in a war is taken, to the departure
of the warriors, the nights are spent in festivity, and their days in making
the needful preparations.

If it is thought necessary by the nation going to war, to soli^i^ the alliance
of any neighboring tribe, they fix upon one of their chiefs who speaks the
language of that people well, and who is a good orator, and send to them by him
a belt of wampum, on which is specified the purport of the embassy in figures
that every nation is well acquainted with. At the same time he carries with him
a hatchet painted red.

As soon as he reaches the camp or village to which he is destined, he
acquaints the chief of the tribe with the general tenor of his commission, who
immediately assembles a council, to which the ambassador is invited. There
having laid the hatchet on the ground he holds the belt in his hand, and enters
more minutely into the occasion of his embassy. In his speech he invites them
to take up the hatchet, and as soon as he has finished speaking delivers the
belt.

If his hearers are inclined to become auxiliaries to his nation, a chief steps
forward and takes up the hatchet, and they immediately espouse with spirit the
cause they have thus engaged to support. But if on this application neither the
belt or hatchet are accepted, the emissary concludes that the people whose
assistance he solicits have already entered into an alliance with the foes of
his nation, and returns with speed to inform his countrymen of his ill success.

The manner in which the Indians declare war against each other, is by sending
a slave with a hatchet, the handle of which is painted red, to the nation which
they intend to break with; and the messenger, notwithstanding the danger to
which he is exposed from the sudden fury of those whom he thus sets at
defiance, executes his commission with great fidelity.

Sometimes this token of defiance has such an instantaneous effect on those to
whom it is presented, that in the first transports of their fury a small party
will issue forth, without waiting for the permission of the elder chiefs, and
slaying the first of the offending nation they meet, cut open the body and
stick a hatchet of the same kind as that they have just received, into the
heart of their slaughtered foe. Among the more remote tribes this is done with
an arrow or spear, the end of which is painted red. And the more to exasperate,
they dismember the body, to show that they esteem them not as men but as old
women.

The Indians seldom take the field in large bodies, as such numbers would
require a greater degree of industry to provide for their subsistence, during
their tedious marches through dreary forests, or long voyages over lakes and
rivers, than they would care to bestow.

Their armies are never encumbered with baggage or military stores. Each
warrior, besides his weapons, carries with him only a mat, and whilst at a
distance from the frontiers of the enemy supports himself with the game he
kills or the fish he catches.

When they pass through a country where they have no apprehensions of meeting
with an enemy, they use very little precaution: sometimes there are scarcely a
dozen warriors left together, the rest being dispersed in pursuit of their
game; but though they should have roved to a very considerable distance from
the war-path, they are sure to arrive at the place of rendeavous by the hour
appointed.

They always pitch their tents long before sunset; and being naturally
presumptuous, take very little care to guard against ^ surprise. They place
great confidence in their Manitous, or household gods, which they always carry
with them; and being persuaded that they take upon them the office of
sentinels, they sleep very securely under their protection.

These Manitous, as they are called by some nations, but which are termed
Wakons, that is, spirits, by the the Naudowessies, are nothing more than the
otter and martins skins I have already described, for which, however, they have
a great veneration.

After they have entered the enemies country, no people can be more cautious
and circumspect; fires are no longer lighted, no more shouting is heard, nor
the game any longer pursued. They are not even permitted to speak; but must
convey whatever they have to impart to each other by signs and motions.

They now proceed wholly by stratagem and ambuscade. Having discovered their
enemies, they send to reconnoitre them; and a council is immediately held,
during which they speak only in whispers, to consider of the intelligence
imparted by those who were sent out.

The attack is generally made just before daybreak, at which period they
suppose the foes to be in their soundest sleep. Throughout the whole of the
preceding night they will lie flat upon their faces, without stirring; and make
their approaches in the same posture, creeping upon their hands and feet till
they are got within bow-shot of those they have destined to destruction. On a
signal given by the chief warrior, to which the whole body makes answer by the
most hideous yells, they all start up, and discharging their arrows in the same
instant, without giving their adversaries time to recover from the confusion
into which they are thrown, pour in upon them with their war-clubs or tomahawks.

The Indians think there is little glory to be acquired from attacking their
enemies openly in the field; their greatest pride is to surprise and destroy.
They seldom engage without a manifest appearance of advantage. If they find the
enemy on their their guard, too strongly entrenched, or superior in numbers,
they retire, provided there is an opportunity of doing so. And they esteem it
the greatest qualification of a chief warrior, to be able to manage an attack,
so as to destroy as many of the enemy as possible, at the expense of a few men.

Sometimes they secure themselves behind trees, hillocks, or stones, and having
given one or two rounds retire before they are discovered. Europeans, who are
unacquainted with this method of fighting too often find to their cost the
destructive efficacy of it.

General Braddock was one of this unhappy number. Marching in the year 1755, to
attack Fort Du Quesne, he was intercepted by a party of French and confederate
Indians in their interest, who by this insidious method of engaging found means
to defeat his army, which consisted of about two thousand brave and
well-disciplined troops. So securely were the Indians posted, that the English
scarcely knew from whence or by whom they were thus annoyed. During the whole
of the engagement the latter had scarcely a sight of an enemy; and were obliged
to retreat without the satisfaction of being able to take the least degree of
revenge for the havoc made among them. The General paid for his temerity with
his life, and was accompanied in his fall by a great number of brave fellows;
whilst his invisible enemies had only two or three of their number wounded.

When the Indians succeed in their silent approaches, and are able to force the
camp which they attack, a scene of horror that exceeds description, ensues. The
savage fierceness of the conquerors, and the desperation of the conquered, who
well know what they have to expect should they fall alive into the hands of
their assailants, occasion the most extraordinary exertions on both sides. The
figure of the combatants all besmeared with black and red paint, and covered
with the blood of the slain, their horrid yells, and ungovernable fury, are not
to be conceived by those who have never crossed the Atlantic.

I have frequently been a spectator of them, and once bore a part in a similar
scene. But what added to the horror of it was, that I had not the consolation
of being able to oppose their savage attacks. Every circumstance of the
adventure still dwells on my remembrance, and enables me to describe with
greater perspicuity the brutal fierceness of the Indians when they have
surprised or overpowered an enemy.

As a detail of the massacre at Fort William Henry in the year 1757, the scene
to which I refer, cannot appear foreign to the design of this publication, but
will serve to give my readers a just idea of the ferocity of this people, I
shall take the liberty to insert it, apologizing at the same time for the
length of the digression, and those egotisms which the relation renders
unavoidable.

General Webb, who commanded the English army in North America, which was then
encamped at Fort Edward, having intelligence that the French troops under Mons.
Montcalm were making some movements toward Fort William Henry, he detached a
corpse of about fifteen hundred men, consisting of English and Provincials, to
strengthen the garrison. In this party I went as a volunteer among the latter.

The apprehensions of the English General were not without foundation; for the
day after our arrival we saw Lake George (formerly Lake Sacrament) to which it
lies contiguous, covered with an immense number of boats; and in a few hours we
found our lines attacked by the French General, who had just landed with eleven
thousand Regulars and Canadians, and two thousand Indians. Colonel Monro, a
brave officer, commanded in the Fort, and had no more than two thousand three
hundred men with him, our detachment included.

With these he made a gallant defense, and probably would have been able at
last to preserve the Fort, had he been properly supported, and permitted to
continue his efforts. On every summons to surrender sent by the French General,
who offered the most honorable terms, his answer repeatedly was, That he yet
found himself in a condition to repel the most vigorous attacks his besiegers
were able to make; and if he thought his present force insufficient, he could
soon be supplied with a greater number from the adjacent army.

But the Colonel having acquainted General Webb with his situation, and desired
he would send him some fresh troops, the general dispatched a messenger to him
with a letter, wherein he informed him that it was not in his power to assist
him, and therefore gave him orders to surrender up the Fort on the best terms
he could procure. This packet fell into the hands of the French General, who
immediately sent a flag of truce, desiring a conference with the governor.

They accordingly met, attended only by a small guard, in the center between
the lines* when Mons. Montcalm told the Colonel, that he was com^ (...) person
to demand possession of the Fort, as it belonged to the King his master. The
Colonel replied, that he knew not how that could be, nor should he surrender it
up whilst it was in his power to defend it.

The French General rejoined, at the same time delivering the packet into the
Colonel's hand, By this authority do I make the requisition. The brave Governor
had no sooner read the contents of it, and was convinced that such were the
orders of the commander in chief, and not to be disobeyed, than he hung his
head in silence, and reluctantly entered into a negotiation.

In consideration of the gallant defense the garrison had made, they were to be
permitted to march out with all the honors of war, to be allowed covered
wagons to transport their baggage to Fort Edward, and a guard to protect them
from the fury of the savages.

The morning after the capitulation was signed, as soon as day broke, the whole
garrison, now consisting of about two thousand men, besides women and children,
were drawn up within the lines, and on the point of marching off, when great
numbers of the Indians gathered about, and began to plunder. We were at first
in hopes that this was their only view, and suffered them to proceed without
opposition. Indeed it was not in our power to make any, had we been so
inclined; for though we were permitted to carry off our arms, yet we were not
allowed a single round of ammunition. In these hopes however we were
disappointed: for presently some of them began to attack the sick and wounded,
when such as were not able to crawl into the ranks, notwithstanding they
endeavored to avert the fury of their enemies by their shrieks or groans, were
soon dispatched.

Here we were fully in expectation that the disturbance would have concluded;
and our little army began to move; but in a short time we saw the front
division driven back, and discovered that we were entirely encircled by the
savages. We expected every moment that the guard, which the French, by the
articles of capitulation, had agreed to allow us, would have arrived, and put
an end to our apprehensions; but none appeared. The Indians now began to strip
every one without exception of their arms and clothes, and those who made the
least resistance felt the weight of their tomahawks.

I happened to be in the rear division, but it was not long before I shared the
fate of my companions. Three or four of the savages laid hold of me, and whilst
some held their weapons over my head, the others soon disrobed me of my coat,
waist-coat, hat, and buckles, omitting not to take from me what money I had in
my pocket. As this was transacted close by the passage that led from the lines
on to the plain, near which a French sentinel was posted, I ran to him and
claimed his protection; but he only called me an English dog, and thrust me
with violence back again into the midst of the Indians.

I now endeavored to join a body ^f our troops that were crowded together at
some distance; but innumerable were the blows that were made at me with
different weapons as I passed on; luckily however the savages were so close
together, that they could not strike at me without endangering each other.
Notwithstanding which one of them found means to make a thrust at me with a
spear, which grazed my side, and from another I received a wound, with the same
kind of weapon, in my ankle. At length I gained the spot where my countrymen
stood, and forced myself into the midst of them. But before I got thus far out
of the hands of the Indians, the collar and wristbands of my shirt were all
that remained of it, and my flesh was scratched and torn in many places by
their savage gripes.

By this time the war-hoop was given, and the Indians began to murder those
that were nearest to them without distinction. It is not in the power of words
to give any tolerable idea of the horrid scene that now ensued; men, women, and
children were dispatched in the most wanton and cruel manner, and immediately
scalped. Many of these savages drank the blood of their victims, as it flowed
warm from the fatal wound.

We now perceived, though too late to avail us, that we were to expect no
relief from the French; and that, contrary to the agreement they had so lately
signed to allow us a sufficient force to protect us from these insults, they
tacitly permitted them; for I could plainly perceive the French officers
walking about at some distance, discoursing together with apparent unconcern.
For the honor of human nature I would hope that this flagrant breach of every
sacred law, proceeded rather from the savage disposition of the Indians, which
I acknowledge it is sometimes almost impossible to control, and which might
now unexpectedly have arrived to a pitch not easily to be restrained, than to
any premeditated design in the French commander. An unprejudiced observer
would, however, be apt to conclude, that a body of ten thousand christian
troops, most christian troops, had it in their power to prevent the massacre
from becoming so general. But whatever was the cause from which it arose, the
consequences of it were dreadful, and not to be parallelled in modern history.

As the circle in which I stood enclosed by this time was much thinned, and
death seemed to be approaching with hasty strides, it was proposed by some of
the most resolute to make one vigorous effort, and endeavor to force our way
through the savages, the only probable method of preserving our lives that now
remained. This, however desperate, was resolved on, and about twenty of us
sprung at once into the midst of them.

In a moment we were all separated, and what was the fate of my companions I
could not learn till some months after, when I found that only six or seven of
them effected their design. Intent only on my own hazardous situation, I
endeavored to make my way through my savage enemies in the best manner
possible. And I have often been astonished since, when I have recollected with
what composure I took, as I did, every necessary step for my preservation. Some
I overturned, being at that time young and athletic* and others I passed by,
dexterously avoiding their weapons; till at last two very stout chiefs, of the
most savage tribes, as I could distinguish by their dress, whose strength I
could not resist, laid hold of me by each arm, and began to force me through
the crowd.

I now resigned myself to my fate, not doubting but that they intended to
dispatch me, and then to satiate their vengeance with my blood, as I found they
were hurrying me toward a retired swamp that lay at some distance. But before
we had got many yards, an English gentleman of some distinction, as I could
discover by his breeches, the only covering he had on, which were of fine
scarlet velvet, rushed close by us. One of the the Indians instantly
relinquished his hold, and springing on this new object, endeavored to seize
him as his prey, but the gentleman being strong, threw him on the ground, and
would probably have got away, had not he who held my other arm, quitted me to
assist his brother. I seized the opportunity, and hastened away to join another
party of English troops that were yet unbroken, and stood in a body at some
distance. But before I had taken many steps, I hastily cast my eye toward the
gentleman, and saw the Indian's tomahawk gash into his back, and heard him
utter his last groan; this added both to my speed and desperation.

I had left this shocking scene but a few yards, when a fine boy about twelve
years of age, that had hitherto escaped, came up to me, and begged that I would
let him lay hold of me, so that he might stand some chance of getting out of
the hands of the savages. I told him that I would give him every assistance in
my power, and to this purpose bid him lay hold; but in a few moments he was
torn from my side, and by his shrieks I judge was soon demolished. I could not
help forgetting my own cares for a minute, to lament the fate of so young a
sufferer; but it was utterly impossible for me to take any methods to prevent
it.

I now got once more into the midst of friends, but we were unable to afford
each other any succor. As this was the division that had advanced the furthest
from the fort, I thought there might be a possibility (though but a very bare
one) of my forcing my way through the outer ranks of the Indians, and getting
to a neighboring wood, which I perceived at some distance. I was still
encouraged to hope by the almost miraculous preservation I had already
experienced.

Nor were my hopes in vain, or the efforts I made ineffectual. Suffice it to
say, that I reached the wood; but by the time I had penetrated a little way
into it, my breath was so exhausted that I threw myself into a brake, and lay
for some minutes apparently at the last gasp. At length I recovered the power
of respiration; but my apprehensions returned with all their former force, when
I saw several savages pass by, probably in pursuit of me, at no very great
distance. In this situation I knew not whether it was better to proceed, or
endeavor to conceal myself where I lay, till night came on; fearing, however,
that they would return the same way, I thought it most prudent to get farther
from the dreadful scene of my past distresses. Accordingly, striking into
another part of the wood, I hastened on as fast as the briars and the loss of
one of my shoes would permit me; and after a slow progress of some hours,
gained a hill that overlooked the plain which I had just left, from whence I
could discern that the bloody storm still raged with unabated fury.

But not to tire my readers, I shall only add, that after passing three days
without subsistence, and enduring the severity of the cold dews for three
nights, I at length reached Fort Edward; where with proper care my body soon
recovered its wonted strength, and my mind, as far as the recollection of the
late melancholy events would permit, its usual composure.

It was computed that fifteen hundred persons were killed or made prisoners by
these savages during this fatal day. Many of the latter were carried off by
them and never returned. A few, through favorable accidents, found their way
back to their native country, after having experienced a long and severe
captivity.

The brave Colonel Monro had hastened away, soon after the confusion began, to
the French camp to endeavor to procure the guard agreed by the stipulation;
but his application proving ineffectual, he remained there till General Webb
sent a party of troops to demand and protect him back to Fort Edward. But these
unhappy occurrences, which wou^d probably have been prevented, had he been left
to pursue his own plans, together with the loss of so many brave fellows,
murdered in cold blood, to whose valor he had been so lately a witness, made
such an impression on his mind, that he did not long survive. He died in about
three months of a broken heart, and with truth might it be said, that he was an
honor to his country.

I mean not to point out the following circumstance as the immediate judgment
of heaven, and intended as an atonement for this slaughter; but I cannot omit
that very few of those different tribes of Indians that shared in it ever lived
to return home. The smallpox, by means of their communication with the
Europeans, found its way among them, and made an equal havoc to what they
themselves had done. The methods they pursued on the first attack of that
malignant disorder, to abate the fever attending it, rendered it fatal. Whilst
their blood was in a state of fermentation, and nature was striving to throw
out the peccant matter, they checked her operations by plunging into the water:
the consequence was that they died by hundreds. The few that survived were
transformed by it into hideous objects, and bore with them to the grave deep
indented marks of this much-dreaded disease.

Monsieur Montcalm fell soon after on the plains of Quebec.

That the unprovoked cruelty of this commander was not approved of by the
generality of his countrymen, I have since been convinced of by many proofs.
One only however, which I received from a person who was witness to it, shall I
at present give A Canadian merchant, of some consideration, having heard of the
surrender of the English fort, celebrated the fortunate event with great
rejoicings and hospitality, according to the custom of that county; but no
sooner did the news of the massacre which ensued reach his ears, than he put an
immediate stop to the festivity, and exclaimed in the severest terms against
the inhuman permission; declaring at the same time that those who had connived
at it, had thereby drawn down, on that part of their king's dominions the
vengeance of Heaven. To this he added, that he much feared the total loss of
them would deservedly be the consequence. How truly this prediction has been
verified we all know.

But to return -- Though the Indians are negligent in guarding against
surprises, they are alert and dextrous in surprising their enemies. To their
caution and perseverance and stealing on the party they design to attack, they
add that admirable talent, or rather instinctive qualification, I have already
described, of tracing out those they are in pursuit of. On the smoothest grass,
on the hardest earth, and even on the very sto^^s, will they discover the
traces of an enemy, and by the shape of the foot steps, and the distance
between the prints, distinguish not only whether it is a man or woman who has
passed that way, but even the nation to which they belong. However incredible
this might appear, yet, from the many proofs I received whilst among them of
their amazing sagacity in this point, I see no reason to discredit even these
extraordinary exertions of it.

When they have overcome an enemy, and victory is no longer doubtful, the
conquerors first dispatch all such as they think they shall not be able to
carry off without great trouble, and then endeavor to take as many prisoners
as possible; after this they return to scalp those who are either dead, or too
much wounded to be taken with them.

At this business they are exceedingly expert. They seize the head of the
disabled or dead enemy, and placing one of their feet on the neck, twist their
left hand in the hair; by this means, having extended the skin that covers the
top of the head, they draw out their scalping knives, which are always kept in
good order for this cruel purpose, and with a few dextrous strokes take off the
part that is termed the scalp. They are so expeditious in doing this, that the
whole time required scarcely exceeds a minute. These they preserve as monuments
of their prowess, and at the same time as proofs of the vengeance they have
inflicted on their enemies.

If two Indians seize in the same instant a prisoner, and seem to have an equal
claim, the contest between them is soon decided; for to put a speedy end to any
dispute that might arise, the person that is apprehensive he shall lose his
expected reward, immediately has recourse to his tomahawk or war-club, and
knocks on the head the unhappy cause of their contention.

Having completed their purposes, and made as much havoc as possible, they
immediately retire toward their own country, with the spoil they have
acquired, for fear of being pursued.

Should this be the case, they make use of many stratagems to elude the
searches of their pursuers. They sometimes scatter leaves, sand, or dust over
the prints of their feet; sometimes tread in each others footsteps; and
sometimes lift their feet so high, and tread so lightly, as not to make any
impression on the ground. But if they find all these precautions unavailing,
and that they are near being overtaken, they first dispatch and scalp their
prisoners, and then dividing, each endeavors to regain his native country by a
different route. This prevents all farther pursuit; for their pursuers now
despairing, either of gratifying their revenge, or of releasing those of their
friends who were made captives, return home.

If the successful party is so lucky as to make good their retreat unmolested,
they hasten with the greatest expedition to reach a country where they may be
perfectly secure; and that their wounded companions may not retard their
flight, they carry them by turns in litters, or if it is in the winter season
draw them on sledges.

Their litters are made in a rude manner of the branches of trees. Their
sledges consist of two small thin boards, about a foot wide when joined, and
near six feet long. The forepart is turned up, and the sides are bordered with
small bands. The Indians draw these carriages with great ease, be they ever so
much loaded, by means of a string which passes round the breast. This collar is
called a Metump, and is in use throughout America, both in the settlements and
the internal parts. Those used in the latter are made of leather, and very
curiously wrought.

The prisoners during their march are guarded with the greatest care. During
the day, if the journey is over land, they are always held by some of the
victorious party; if by water, they are fastened to the canoe. In the
nightime they are stretched along the ground quite naked, with their legs,
arms, and neck fastened to hooks fixed in the ground. Besides this, cords are
tied to their arms or legs, which are held by an Indian, who instantly awakes
at the least motion of them.

Notwithstanding such precautions are usually taken by the Indians, it is
recorded in the annals of New England, that one of the weaker sex, almost
alone, and unassisted, found means to elude the vigilance of a party of
warriors, and not only to make her escape from them, but to revenge the cause
of her countrymen.

Some years ago, a small band of Canadian Indians, consisting of ten warriors
attended by two of their wives, made an ^rruption into the back settlements of
New England. They lurked for some time in the vicinity of one of the most
exterior towns, and at length, after having killed and scalped several people,
found means to take prisoner a woman who had with her a son of about twelve
years of age. Being satisfied with the execution they had done, they retreated
toward their native country, which lay at three hundred miles distance, and
carried off with them their two captives.

The second night of their retreat, the woman, whose name, if I mistake not,
was Row, formed a resolution worthy of the most intrepid hero. She thought
she should be able to get from her hands the manacles by which they were
confined, and determined if she did so to make a desperate effort for the
recovery of her freedom. To this purpose, when she concluded that her
conquerors were in their soundest sleep, she strove to slip the cords from her
hands. In this she succeeded; and cautioning her son, whom they had suffered to
go unbound, in a whisper, against being surprised at what she was about to do,
she removed to a distance with great wariness the defensive weapons of the
Indians, which lay by their sides.

Having done this, she put one of the tomahawks into the hands of the boy,
bidding him to follow her example; and taking another herself, fell upon the
sleeping Indians, several of whom she instantly dispatched. But her attempt was
nearly frustrated by the imbecility of her son, who wanting both strength and
resolution, made a feeble stroke at one of them, which only served to awaken
him; she however sprung at the rising warrior, and before he could recover his
arms, made him sink under the weight of her tomahawk; and this she alternately
did to all the rest, except one of the women, who awoke in time, and made her
escape.

The heroine then took off the scalps of her vanquished enemies, and seizing
also those they were carrying away with them as proofs of their success, she
returned in triumph to the town from whence she had so lately been dragged, to
the great astonishment of her neighbors, who could scarcely credit their
senses, or the testimonies she bore of her amazonian intrepidity.

During their march they oblige their prisoners to sing their death-song, which
generally consists of these or similar sentences: I am going to die, I am about
to suffer; but I will bear the severest tortures my enemies can inflict, with
becoming fortitude. I will die like a brave man, and I shall then go to join
the chiefs that have suffered on the same account. These songs are continued
with necessary intervals, until they reach the village or camp to which they
are going.

When the warriors are arrived within hearing, they set up different cries,
which communicates to their friends a general history of the success of the
expedition. The number of the death-cries they give, declares how many of their
own party are lost; the number of war-hoops, the number of prisoners they have
taken.

It is difficult to describe these cries, but the best idea I can convey of
them is, that the former consists of the sound Whoo, Whoo, Whoop, which is
continued in a long shrill tone, nearly till the breath is exhausted, and then
broken off with a sudden elevation of the voice. The latter of a loud cry, of
much the same kind, which is modulated into notes by the hand being placed
before the mouth. Both of them might be heard to a very considerable distance.

Whilst these are uttering, the persons to whom they are designed to convey the
intellegence, continue motionless and all attention. When this ceremony is
performed, the whole village issue out to learn the particulars of the relation
they have just heard in general terms, and according as the news prove mournful
or the contrary, they answer by so many acclamations or cries of lamentation.

Being by this time arrived at the village or camp, the women and children arm
themselves with sticks and bludgeons, and form themselves into two ranks,
through which the prisoners are obliged to pass. The treatment they undergo
before they reach the extremity of the line, is very severe. Sometimes they are
so beaten over the head and face, as to have scarcely any remains of life; and
happy would it be for them if by this usage an end was put to their wretched
beings. But their tormentors take care that none of the blows they give prove
mortal, as they wish to reserve the miserable sufferers for more severe
inflictions.

After having undergone this introductory discipline, they are bound hand and
foot, whilst the chiefs hold a council, in which their fate is determined.
Those who are decreed to be put to death by the usual torments, are delivered
to the chief of the warriors; such as are to be spared, are given into the
hands of the chief of the nation: so that in a short time all the prisoners may
be assured of their fate, as the sentence now pronounced is irrevocable. The
former they term being consigned to the house of death, the latter to the house
of grace.

Such captives as are pretty far advanced in life, and have acquired great
honor by their warlike deeds, always atone for the blood they have spilt, by
the tortures of fire. Their success in war is readily known by the blue marks
upon their breasts and arms, which are as legible to the Indians as letters are
to Europeans.

The manner in which these hieroglyphics are made, is by breaking the skin
with the teeth of fish, or sharpened flints, dipped in a kind of ink made of
the soot of pitch pine. Like those of the ancient Picts of Britain these are
esteemed ornamental; and at the same time they serve as registers of the heroic
actions of the warrior, who thus bears about him indelible marks of his valor.

The prisoners destined to death are soon led to the place of execution, which
is generally in the center of the camp or village; where, being stripped, and
every part of their bodies blackened, the skin of a crow or raven is fixed on
their heads. They are then bound to a stake, with faggots heaped around them,
and obliged, for the last time, to sing their death-song.

The warriors, for such it is only who commonly suffer this punishment, now
perform in a more prolix manner this sad solemnity. They recount with an
audible voice all the brave actions they have performed, and pride themselves
in the number of enemies they have killed. In this rehearsal they spare not
even their tormentors, but strive by every provoking tale they can invent, to
irritate and insult them. Sometimes this has the desired effect, and the
sufferers are dispatched sooner than they otherwise would have been.

There are many other methods which the Indians make use of to put their
prisoners to death, but these are only occasional; that of burning is most
generally used.

Whilst I was at the chief town of the Ottagaumies, an Illinois Indian was
brought in, who had been made prisoner by one of their war parties. I had then
an opportunity of seeing the customary cruelties inflicted by these people on
their captives, through the minutest part of their process. After the previous
steps necessary to his condemnation, he was carried, early in the morning, to a
little distance from the town, where he was bound to a tree.

This being done, all the boys, who amounted to a great number, as the place
was populous, were permitted to amuse themselves with shooting their arrows at
the unhappy victim. As they were none of them more than twelve years old, and
were placed at a considerable distance, they had not strength to penetrate to
the vital parts, so that the poor wretch stood pierced with arrows, and
suffering the consequent agonies, for more than two days.

During this time he sung his warlike exploits. He recapitulated every
stratagem he had made use of to surprise his enemies: he boasted of the
quantity of scalps he possessed, and enumerated the prisoners he had taken. He
then described the different barbarous methods by which he had put the latter
to death, and seemed even then to receive inconceivable pleasure from the
recital of the horrid tale.

But he dwelt more particularly on the cruelties he had practiced on such of
the kindred of his present tormentors, as had fallen into his hands;
endeavoring by these aggravated insults to induce them to increase his
tortures, that he might be able to give greater proofs of fortitude. Even in
the last struggles of life, when he was no longer able to vent in words the
indignant provocation his tongue would have uttered, a smile of mingled scorn
and triumph sat on his countenance.

This method of tormenting their enemies is considered by the Indians as
productive of more than one beneficial consequence. It satiates, in a greater
degree, that diabolical lust of revenge, which is the predominant passion in
the breast of every individual of every tribe, and it gives the growing
warriors an early propensity to that cruelty and thirst for blood, which is so
necessary a qualification for such as would be thoroughly skilled in their
savage art of war.

I have been informed, that an Indian who was under the hands of his
tormentors, had the audacity to tell them, that they were ignorant old woman*
and did not know how to put brave prisoners to death. He acquainted them that
he had heretofore taken some of their warriors, and instead of the trivial
punishments they inflicted on him, he had devised for them the most
excruciating torments; that having bound them to a stake, he had stuck their
bodies full of sharp splinters of turpentine wood, to which he then set fire,
and dancing around them enjoyed the agonizing pangs of the flaming victims.

This bravado, which carried with it a degree of insult, that even the
accustomed ear of an Indian could not listen to unmoved, threw his tormentors
off their guard, and shortened the duration of his torments; for one of the
chiefs ran to him, and ripping out his heart, stopped with it the mouth from
which had issued such provoking language.

Innumerable are the stories that may be told of the courage and resolution of
the Indians, who happen to be made prisoners by their adversaries. Many that I
have heard are so astonishing, that they seem to exceed the utmost limits of
credibility; it is, however, certain that these savages are possessed with many
heroic qualities, and bear every species of misfortune with a degree of
fortitude which has not been outdone by any of the ancient heroes of either of
Greece or Rome.

Notwithstanding these acts of severity exercised by the Indians toward those
of their own species, who fall into their hands, some tribes of them have been
remarked for their moderation to such female prisoners, belonging to the
English colonies as have happened to be taken by them. Women of great beauty
have frequently been carried off by them, and during a march of three or four
hundred miles, through their retired forests, have ^ain by their sides without
receiving any insult, and their chastity has remained inviolate. Instances have
happened where female captives, who have been pregnant at the time of their
being taken, have found the pangs of childbirth come upon them in the midst of
solitary woods, and savages their only companions; yet from these, savages as
they were, have they received every assistance their situation would admit of,
and been treated with a degree of delicacy and humanity they little expected.

This forbearance, it must be acknowledged dees not proceed altogether from
their dispositions, but is only inherent in those who have held some
communication with the French missionaries. Without intending that their
natural enemies, the English, should enjoy the benefit of their labors, these
fathers have taken great pains to inculcate on the minds of the Indians the
general principles of humanity, which has diffused itself through their
manners, and has proved of public utility.

Those prisoners that are consigned to the house of grace, and these are
commonly the young men, women and children, await the disposal of the chiefs,
who, after the execution of such as are condemned to die, hold a council for
this purpose.

A herald is sent round the village or camp, to give notice that such as have
lost any relation in the late expedition, are desired to attend the
distribution which is about to take place. Those women who have lost their sons
or husbands, are generally satisfied in the first place; after these, such as
have been deprived of friends of a more remote degree of consanguinity, or who
choose to adopt some of the youth.

The division being made, which is done, as in other cases, without the least
dispute, those who have received any share lead them to their tents or huts;
and having unbound them, wash and dress their wounds if they happen to have
received any; they then cloth them, and give them the most comfortable and
refreshing food their store will afford.

Whilst their new domestics are feeding, they endeavor to administer
consolation to them; they tell them that as they are redeemed from death, they
must now be cheerful and happy; and if they serve them well, without murmuring
or repining, nothing shall be wanting to make them such atonement for the loss
of their country and friends as circumstances will allow of.

If any men are spared, they are commonly given to the widows that have lost
their husbands by the hand of the enemy, should there be any such, to whom, if
they happen to prove agreeable, they are soon married. But should the dame be
otherwise engaged, the life of him who falls to her lot is in great danger;
especially if she fancies that her late husband wants a slave in the country of
spirits, to which he is gone.

When this is the case, a number of young men take the devoted captive to some
distance, and dispatch him without any ceremony: after he has been spared by
the council, they consider him of too little consequence to be entitled to the
torments allotted to those who have been judged worthy of them.

The women are usually distributed to the men, from whom they do not fail of
meeting with a favorable reception. The boys and girls are taken into the
families of such as have need of them, and are considered as slaves; and it is
not uncommon that they are sold in the same capacity to the European traders,
who come among them.

The Indians have no idea of moderating the ravages of war, by sparing their
prisoners, and entering into a negotiation with the band from whom they have
been taken, for an exchange. All that are captivated by both parties, are
either put to death, adopted, or made slaves of. And so particular are every
nation in this respect, that if any of their tribe, even a warrior, should be
taken prisoner, and by chance be received into the house of grace, either as an
adopted person or a slave, and should afterward make his escape, they will by
no means receive him, or acknowledge him as one of their band.

The condition of such as are adopted differs not in any one instance from the
children of the nation to which they now belong. They assume all the rights of
those whose places they supply, and frequently make no difficulty of going in
the war-parties against their own countrymen. Should, however, any of these by
chance make their escape, and be afterward retaken, they are esteemed as
unnatural children and ungrateful persons, who have deserted and made war upon
their parents and benefactors, and are treated with uncommon severity.

That part of the prisoners which are considered as slaves, are generally
distributed among the chiefs; who frequently make presents of some of them to
the European governors of the outposts, or to the superintendants or
commissaries of Indian affairs. I have been informed that it was the Jesuits
and French missionaries that first occasioned the introduction of these unhappy
captives into the settlements, and who by so doing taught the Indians that they
were valuable.

Their views indeed were laudable, as they imagined that by this method they
should not only prevent much barbarity and bloodshed, but find the
opportunities of spreading their religion among them increased. To this purpose
they encouraged the traders to purchase such slaves as they met with.

The good effects of this mode of proceeding was not however equal to the
expectations of these pious fathers. Instead of being the means of preventing
cruelty and bloodshead, it only caused the dissensions between the Indian
nations to be carried on with a greater degree of violence, and with unremitted
ardour. The prize they fought for being no longer revenge or fame, but the
acquirement of spirituous liquors, for which their captives were to be
exchanged, and of which almost every nation is immoderately fond, they fought
for their enemies with unwonted alacrity, and were constantly on the watch to
surprise and carry them off.

It might still be said that fewer of the captives are tormented and put to
death, since these expectations of receiving so valuable a consideration for
them have been excited than there usually had been; but it does not appear that
their accustomed cruelty to the warriors they take, is in the least abated;
their natural desire of vengeance must be gratified; they now only become more
assiduous in securing a greater number of young prisoners, whilst those who are
made captive in their defense are tormented and put to death as before

The missionaries finding that contrary to their wishes their zeal had only
served to increase the sale of the noxious juices, applied to the Governor of
Canada, in the year 1693, for a prohibition of this baneful trade. An order was
issued accordingly, but it could not put a total stop to it; the French
Couriers de Bois were hardy enough to carry it on clandestinely,
notwithstanding the penalty annexed to a breach of the prohibition was a
considerable fine and imprisonment.

Some who were detected in the prosecution of it withdrew into the Indian
countries, where they intermarried with the natives, and underwent a voluntary
banishment. These, however, being an abandoned and debauched set, their conduct
contributed very little either toward reforming the manners of their new
relations, or engaging them to entertain a favorable opinion of the religion
they professed. Thus did these indefatigable religious men see their designs in
some measure once more frustrated.

However, the emigration was productive of an effect which turned out to be
beneficial to their nation. By the connection of these refugees with the
Iroquois, Mississuages, Hurons, Miamies, Powtowottomies, Puants, Menomonies,
Algonkins, etc. and the constant representations these various nations received
from them of the power and grandeur of the French, to the aggrandizement of
whose monarch, notwithstanding their banishment, they still retained their
habitual inclination, the Indians became insensibly prejudiced in favor of
that people, and I am persuaded will take every opportunity of showing their
attachment to them.

And this, even in despite of the disgraceful estimation they must be held by
them, since they have been driven out of Canada; for the Indians consider every
conquered people as in a state of vassalage to their conquerors. After one
nation has finally subdued another, and a conditional submission is agreed on,
it is customary for the chiefs of the conquered, when they sit in council with
their subduers, to wear petticoats, as an acknowledgement that they are in a
state of subjection, and ought to be ranked among the women. Their partiality
to the French has however taken too deep root for time itself to eradicate it.

CHAPTER X. Of their Manner of making PEACE, etc.
THE wars that are carried on between the Indian nations are in general
hereditary, and continue from age to age with a few interruptions. If a peace
becomes necessary, the principal care of both parties is to avoid the
appearance of making the first advances.

When they treat with an enemy, relative to a suspension of hostilities, the
chief who is commissioned to undertake the negotiation, if it is not brought
about by the mediation of some neighboring band, abates nothing of his natural
haughtiness: even when the affairs of his country are in the worst situation,
he makes no concessions, but endeavors to persuade his adversaries that it is
their interest to put an end to the war.

Accidents sometimes contribute to bring about a peace between nations that
otherwise could not be prevailed on to listen to terms of accommodation. An
instance of this, which I heard of in almost every nation I passed through, I
shall relate.

About eighty years ago, the Iroquois and Chipeways, two powerful nations, were
at war with the Ottagaumies and Saukies, who were much inferior to their
adversaries both in numbers and strength. One winter near a thousand of the
former made an excursion from Lake Ontario, by way of Toronto, toward the
territories of their enemies. They coasted Lake Huron on its east and northern
borders, till they arrived at the island of St. Joseph, which is situated in
the Straights of St. Marie. There they crossed these Straights upon the ice
about fifteen miles below the falls, and continued their route still westward.
As the ground was covered with snow, to prevent a discovery of their numbers,
they marched in a single file, treading in each others footsteps.

Four Chipeway Indians, passing that way, observed this army, and readily
guessed from the direction of their march, and the precautions they took, both
the country to which they were hastening, and their designs.

Notwithstanding the nation to which they belonged was at war with the
Ottaga^mies, and in alliance with their invaders, yet from a principle which
cannot be accounted for, they took an instant resolution to apprize the former
of their danger. To this purpose they hastened away with their usual celerity,
and, taking a circuit to avoid discovery, arrived at the hunting grounds of the
Ottagaumies, before so large a body, moving in so cautious a manner, could do.
There they found a party of about four hundred warriors, some of which were
Saukies, whom they informed of the approach of their enemies.

The chiefs immediately collected their whole force, and held a council on the
steps that were to be taken for their defense. As they were encumbered with
their families, it was impossible that they could retreat in time; they
therefore determined to choose the most advantageous spot, and to give the
Iroquois the best reception in their power.

Not far from the place where they then happened to be, stood two small lakes,
between which ran a narrow neck of land about a mile in length, and only from
twenty to forty yards in breadth. Concluding that the Iroquois intended to pass
through this defile, the united bands divided their little party into two
bodies of two hundred each. One of these took post at the extremity of the pass
that lay nearest to their hunting grounds, which they immediately fortified
with a breast-work formed of palisades; whilst the other body took a compass
round one of the lakes, with a design to hem their enemies in when they had
entered the defile.

Their stratagem succeeded; for no sooner had the whole of the Iroquois entered
the pass, than, being provided with wood for the purpose, they formed a similar
breast-work on the other extremity, and thus enclosed their enemies.

The Iroquois soon perceived their situation, and immediately held a council on
the measures that were necessary to be pursued to extricate themselves.
Unluckily for them a thaw had just taken place, which had so far dissolved the
ice as to render it impassible, and yet there still remained sufficient to
prevent them from either passing over the lakes on rafts, or from swimming
across. In this dilemma it was agreed that they should endeavor to force one
of the breast-works; but they soon found them too well defended to effect their
purpose.

Notwithstanding this disappointment, with the usual composure and
unapprehensiveness of Indians, they amused themselves three or four days in
fishing. By this time the ice being quite dissolved, they made themselves
rafts, which they were enabled to do by some trees that fortunately grew on the
spot, and attempted to cross one of the lakes.

They accordingly set off before daybreak; but the Ottagaumies, who had been
watchful of their motions, perceiving their design, detached one hundred and
fifty men from each of their parties, to oppose their landing. These three
hundred marched so expeditiously to the other side of the lake, that they
reached it before their opponents had gained the shore, they being retarded by
their poles sticking in the mud.

As soon as the confederates arrived, they poured in a very heavy fire, both
from their bows and musquetry, on the Iroquois, which greatly disconcerted
them; till the latter finding their situation desperate, leaped into the water,
and fought their way through their enemies. This however they could not do
without losing more than half their men.

After the Iroquois had landed, they made good their retreat, but were obliged
to leave their enemies masters of the field, and in possession of all the furs
they had taken during their winter's hunt. Thus dearly did they pay for an
unprovoked excursion to such distance from the route they ought to have
pursued, and to which they were only impelled by a sudden desire of cutting off
some of their ancient enemies.

But had they known their strength they might have destroyed every man of the
party that opposed them; which even at the first onset was only inconsiderable,
and, when diminished by the action, totally unable to make any stand against
them.

The victorious bands rewarded the Chipeways, who had been the means of their
success, with a share of the spoils. They pressed them to take any quantity
they chose of the richest of the furs, and sent them under an escort of fifty
men, to their own country. The disinterested Chipeways, as the Indians in
general are seldom actuated by mercenary motives, for a considerable time
refused these presents, but were at length persuaded to accept of them.

The brave and well-concerted resistance here made by the Ottagaumies and
Saukies, aided by the mediation of the Chipeways, who laying aside on this
occasion the animosity they had so long born, those people approved of the
generous conduct of their four chiefs, were together the means of effecting a
reconciliation between these nations; and in process of time united them all in
the bands of amity.

And I believe that all the Indians inhabiting that extensive country, which
lies between Quebec, the banks of the Mississippi north of the Ouisconsin, and
the settlements belonging to the Hudson's Bay Company, are at present in a
state of profound peace. When their restless dispositions will not suffer them
to remain inactive, these northern Indians seldom commit hostilities on each
other, but make excursions to the southward, against the Cherokees, Choctahs,
Chicksaws or Illinois.

Sometimes the Indians grow tired of a war which they have carried on against
some neighboring nation for many years without much success, and in this case
they seek for mediators to begin a negotiation. These being obtained, the
treaty is thus conducted.

A number of their own chiefs, joined by those who have accepted the friendly
office, set out together for the country of their enemies; such a^ are chosen
for this purpose, are chiefs of the most extensive abilities, and of the
greatest integrity. They bear before them the Pipe of Peace, which I need not
inform my readers is of the same nature as a Flag of Truce among the Europeans,
and is treated with the greatest respect and veneration, even by the most
barbarous nations. I never heard of an instance wherein the bearers of this
sacred badge of friendship were ever treated disrespectfully, or its rights
violated. The Indians believe that the Great Spirit never suffers an infraction
of this kind to go unpunished.

The Pipe of Peace, which is termed by the French the Calumet, for what reason
I could never learn, is about four feet long. The bowl of it is made of red
marble, and the stem of it of a light wood, curiously painted with
hieroglyphics in various colors, and adorned with feathers of the most
beautiful birds; but it is not in my power to convey an idea of the various
tints and pleasing ornaments of this much esteemed Indian implement.

Every nation has a different method of decorating these pipes* and they can
tell at first sight to what band it belongs. It is used as an introduction to
all treaties, and great ceremony attends the use of it on these occasions.

The assistant or aid-du-camp of the great warrior, when the chiefs are
assembled and seated, fills it with tobacco mixed with the herbs
beforementioned, taking care at the same time that no part of it touches the
ground. When it is filled, he takes a coal that is thoroughly kindled, from a
fire which is generally kept burning in the midst of the assembly, and places
it on the the tobacco.

As soon as it is sufficiently lighted, he throws off the coal. He then turns
the stem of it toward the heavens, after this toward the earth, and now
holding it horizontally, moves himself round till he has completed a circle:
by the first action he is supposed to present it to the Great Spirit, whose aid
is thereby supplicated; by the second, to avert any malicious interposition of
the evil spirits; and by the third to gain the protection of the spirits
inhabiting the air, the earth, and the waters. Having thus secured the favor
of those invisible agents, in whose power they suppose it is either to forward
or obstruct the issue of their present deliberations, he presents it to the
hereditary chief, who having taken two or three whiffs, blows the smoke from
his mouth first toward heaven, and then around him upon the ground.

It is afterward put in the same manner into the mouths of the ambassadors or
strangers, who observe the same ceremony; then to the chief of the warriors,
and to all the other chiefs in turn, according to their gradation. During this
time the person who executes this honorable office holds the pipe slightly in
his hand, as if he feared to press the sacred instrument; nor does any one
presume to touch it but with his lips.

When the chiefs who are entrusted with ^he commission for making peace,
approach the town or camp to which they are going, they begin to sing and dance
the songs and dances appropriated to this occasion. By this time the adverse
party are apprized of their arrival, and divesting themselves of their wonted
enmity at the sight of the Pipe of Peace, invite them to the habitation of the
Great Chief, and furnish them with every convenience during the negotiation.

A council is then held; and when the speeches and debates are ended, if no
obstructions arise to put a stop to the treaty* the painted hatchet is buried
in the ground, as a memorial that all animosities between the contending
nations have ceased, and a peace taken place. Among the ruder bands, such as
have no communication with the Europeans, a war club, painted red, is buried,
instead of the hatchet.

A belt of wampum is also given on this occasion, which serves as a
ratification of the peace, and records to the latest posterity, by the
hieroglyphics into which the beads are formed, every stipulated article in the
treaty.

These belts are made of shells found on the coasts of New England and
Virginia, which are sawed out into beads of an oblong form, about a quarter of
an inch long, and round like other beads. Being strung on leather strings, and
several of them sewed neatly together with fine sinewy threads, they then
compose what is termed a belt of Wampum.

The shells are generally of two colors, some white and others violet; but the
latter are more highly esteemed than the former. They are held in as much
estimation by the Indians, as gold, silver, or precious stones are by the
Europeans.

The belts are composed of ten, twelve* o^ a greater number of strings,
according to the importance of the affair in agitation, or the dignity of the
person to whom it is presented. On more trifling occasions, strings of these
beads are presented by the chiefs to each other, and frequently worn by them
about their necks, as a valuable ornament,

CHAPTER XI. Of their GAMES.
AS I have before observed, the Indians are greatly addicted to gaming, and
will even stake, and lose with composure, all the valuables they are possessed
of. They amuse themselves at several sorts of games, but the principal and most
esteemed among them is that of the ball, which is not unlike the European game
of tennis.

The balls they use are rather larger than those made use of at tennis, and are
formed of a piece of deer-skin; which being moistened to render it suppl^, is
stuffed hard with the hair of the same creature, and sewed with its sinews. The
ball-sticks are about three feet long, at the end of which there is fixed a
kind of racket, resembling the palm of the hand, and fashioned of thongs cut
from a deer-skin. In these they catch the ball, and throw it to a great
distance, if they are not prevented by some of the opposite party, who fly to
intercept it.

This game is generally played by large companies, that sometimes consist of
more than three hundred; and it is not uncommon for different bands to play
against each other.

They begin by fixing two poles in the ground at about six hundred yards apart,
and one of these goals belong to each party of the combatants. The ball is
thrown up high in the center of the ground, and in a direct line between the
goals; toward which each party endeavors to strike it, and which-ever side
first causes it to reach their own goal, reckons toward the game.

They are so exceeding dextrous in this manly exercise, that the ball is
usually kept flying in different directions by the force of the rackets,
without touching the ground during the whole contention; for they are not
allowed to catch it with their hands. They run with amazing velocity in pursuit
of each other, and when one is on the point of hurling it to a great distance,
an antagonist overtakes him, and by a sudden stroke dashes down the ball.

The play with so much vehemence that they frequently wound each other, and
sometimes a bone is broken; but notwithstanding these accidents there never
appears to be any spite or wanton exertions of strength to effect them, nor do
any disputes ever happen between the parties.

There is another game also in use among them worthy of remark, and this is the
game of the Bowl or Platter. This game is played between two persons only. Each
person has six or eight little bones not unlike a peach-stone either in size or
shape, except that they are quadrangular; two of the sides of which are
colored black, and the others white. These they throw up into the air, from
whence they fall into a bowl or platter placed underneath, and made to spin
round.

According as these bones present the white or black side upwards they reckon
the game: he that happens to have the greatest number turn up of a similar
color, counts five points; and forty is the game.

The winning party keeps his place, and the loser yields his to another who is
appointed by one of the umpires; for a whole village is sometimes concerned in
the pa^ty, and at times one hand plays against another.

During this play the Indians appear to be greatly agitated, and at every
decisive throw set up a hideous shout. They make a thousand contortions,
addressing themselves at the same time to the bones, and loading with
imprecations the evil spirits that assist their successful antagonists.

At this game some will lose their apparel, all the movables of their cabins,
and sometimes even their liberty, notwithstanding there are no people in the
universe more jealous of the latter than the Indians are.

CHAPTER XII. Of their MARRIAGE CEREMONIES, etc.
THE Indians allow of polygamy, and persons of every rank indulge themselves in
this point. The chiefs in particular have a seraglio, which consists of an
uncertain number, usually from six to twelve or fourteen. The lower ranks are
permitted to take as many as there is a probability of their being able, with
the children they may bear, to maintain. It is not uncommon for an Indian to
marry two sisters; sometimes, if there happen to be more, the whole number; and
notwithstanding this (as it appears to civilized nations) unnatural union, they
all live in the greatest harmony.

The younger wives are submissive to the elder; and those who have no children,
do such menial offices for those who are fertile, as causes their situation to
differ but little from a state of servitude. However they perform every
injunction with the greatest cheerfulness, in hopes of gaining thereby the
affection of their husband, that they in their turns may have the happiness of
becoming mothers, and be entitled to the respect attendant on that state.

It is not uncommon for an Indian, although he takes to himself to many wives,
to live in a state of continence with many of them for several years. Such as
are not so fortunate as to gain the favor of their husband, by their
submissive and prudent behavior, and by that means to share in his embraces,
continue in their virgin state during the whole of their lives, except they
happen to be presented by him to some stranger chief, whose abode among them
will not admit of his entering into a more lasting connection. In this case
they submit to the injunction of their husband without murmuring, and are not
displeased at the temporary union. But if at any time it is known that they
take this liberty without first receiving his consent, they are punished in the
same manner as if they had been guilty of adultery.

This custom is more prevalent among the nations which lie in the interior
parts, than among those that are nearer the settlements, as the manners of the
latter are rendered more conformable in some points to those of the Europeans,
by the intercourse they hold with them.

The Indian nations differ but little from each other in their marriage
ceremonies, and less in the manner of their divorces. The tribes that inhabit
the borders of Canada, make use of the following custom.

When a young Indian has fixed his inclinations on one of the other sex, he
endeavors to gain her consent, and if he succeeds, it is never known that her
parents ever obstruct their union. When every preliminary is agreed on, and the
day appointed, the friends and acquaintance of both parties assemble at the
house or tent of the oldest relation of the bridegroom, where a feast is
prepared on the occasion.

The company who meet to assist at the festival are sometimes very numerous;
they dance, they sing, and enter into every other diversion usually made use of
on any of their public rejoicings.

When these are finished, all those who attended merely out of ceremony depart,
and the bridegroom and bride are left alone with three or four of the nearest
and oldest relations of either side; those of the bridegroom being men, those
of the bride, women.

Presently the bride, attended by these few friends, having withdrawn herself
for the purpose, appears at one of the doors of the house, and is led to the
bridegroom, who stands ready to receive her. Having now taken their station, on
a mat placed in the center of the room, they lay hold of the extremities of a
wand, about four feet long, by which they continue separated, whilst the old
men pronounce some short harangues suitable to the occasion.

The married couple after this make a puplic declaration of the love and regard
they entertain for each other, and still holding the rod between them, dance
and sing. When they have finished this part of the ceremony, they break the rod
into as many pieces as there are witnesses present, who each take a piece, and
preserve it with great care.

The bride is then reconducted out of the door at which she entered, where her
young companions wait to attend her to her father's house; there the bridegroom
is obliged to seek her, and the marriage is consummated. Very often the wife
remains at her father's house till she has a child, when she packs up her
apparel, which is all the fortune she is generally possessed of, and
accompanies her husband to his habitation.

When from any dislike a separation takes place, for they are seldom known to
quarrel, they generally give their friends a few days notice of their
intentions, and sometimes offer reasons to justify their conduct. The witnesses
who were present at the marriage, meet on the day requested, at the house of
the couple that are about to separate, and bringing with them the pieces of rod
which they had received at their nuptials, throw them into the fire, in the
presence of all the parties.

This is the whole of the ceremony required, and the separation is carried on
without any murmurings or ill will between the couple or their relations; and
after a few months they are at liberty to marry again.

When a marriage is thus dissolved, the children which have been produced from
it, are equally divided between them; and as children are esteemed a treasure
by the Indians, if the number happens to be odd, the woman is allowed to take
the better half.

Though this custom seems to encourage fickleness and frequent separations, yet
there are many of the Indians who have but one wife, and enjoy with her a state
of connubial happiness not to be exceeded in more refined societies. There are
also not a few instances of women preserving an inviolable attachment to their
husbands, except in the cases beforementioned, which are not considered as
either a violation of their chastity or fidelity.

Although I have said that the Indian nations differ very little from each
other in their marriage ceremonies, there are some exceptions. The Naudowessies
have a singular method of celebrating their marriages, which seems to bear no
resemblance to those made use of by any other nation I passed through. When one
of their young men has fixed on a young woman he approves of, he discovers his
passion to her parents, who give him an invitation to come and live with them
in their tent.

He accordingly accepts the offer, and by so doing engages to reside in it for
a whole year, in the character of a menial servant. During this time he hunts,
and brings all the game he kills to the family; by which means the father has
an opportunity of seeing whether he is able to provide for the support of his
daughter and the children that might be the consequence of their union. This
however is only done whilst they are young men, and for their fi^^t wife, and
not repeated like Jacob's servitudes.

When this period is expired, the marriage is solemnized after the custom of
the country, in the following manner: Three or four of the oldest male
relations of the bridegroom, and as many of the bride's, accompany the young
couple from their respective tents, to an open part in the center of the camp.

The chiefs and warriors being here assembled to receive them, a party of the
latter are drawn up in two ranks on each side of the bride and bridegroom
immediately on their arrival. Their principal chief then acquaints the whole
assembly with the design of their meeting, and tells them that the couple
before them, mentioning at the same time their names, are come to avow publicly
their intentions of living together as man and wife. He then asks the two young
people alternately, whether they desire that the union might take place. Having
declared with an audible voice that they do so, the warriors fix their arrows,
and discharge them over the heads of the married pair; this done, the chief
pronounces them man and wife.

The bridegroom then turns round, and bending his body, takes his wife on his
back, in which manner he carries her amidst the acclamations of the spectators
to his tent. This ceremony is succeeded by the most plentiful feast the new
married man can afford, and songs and dances, according to the usual custom,
conclude the festival.

Divorces happen so seldom among the Naudowessies, that I had not an
opportunity of learning how they are accomplished.

Adultery is esteemed by them a heinous crime, and punished with the greatest
rigor. The husband in these cases bites off the wife's nose, and a separation
instantly ensues. I saw an instance wherein this mode of punishment was
inflicted, whilst I remained among them. The children, when this happens, are
distributed according to the usual custom observed by other nations, that is,
they are equally divided.

Among the Indian as well as European nations, there are many that devote
themselves to pleasure, and notwithstanding the accounts given by some modern
writers of the frigidity of an Indian constitution, become the zealous votaries
of Venus. The young warriors that are thus disposed, seldom want opportunities
for gratifying their passion; and as the mode usually followed on these
occasions is rather singular, I shall describe it.

When one of these young debauchees imagines from the behavior of the person
he has chosen for his mistress, that he shall not meet with any great
obstruction to his suit from her, he pursues the following plan.

It has been already observed, that the Indians acknowledge no superiority, nor
have they any ideas of subordination, except in the necessary regulations of
their war or hunting parties; they consequently live nearly in a state of
equality, pursuant to the first principles of nature. The lover therefore is
not apprehensive of any check or countroul in the accomplishment of his
purposes, if he can find a convenient opportunity for completing them.

As the Indians are also under no apprehension of robbers, or secret enemies,
they leave the doors of their tents or huts unfastened during the night, as
well as in the day. Two or three hours after sunset, the slaves or old people
cover over the fire, that is generally burning in the midsts of their
apartment, with ashes, and retire to their repose.

Whilst darkness thus prevails, and all is quiet, one of these sons of
pleasure, wrapped up closely in his blanket, to prevent his being known, will
sometimes enter the apartment of his intended mistress. Having first lighted at
the smothered fire a small splinter of wood, which answers the purpose of a
match, he approaches the place where she reposes, and gently pulling away the
covering from the head, jogs her till she awakes. If she then rises up, and
blows out the light, he needs no further confirmation that his company is not
disagreeable; but if, after he has discovered himself, she hides her head, and
takes no notice of him, he might rest assured that any further solicitations
will prove vain, and that it is necessary immediately for him to retire.

During his stay he conceals the light as much as possible in the hollow of his
hands, and as the tents or rooms of the Indians are usually large and
capacious, he escapes without detection. It is said that the young women who
admit their lovers on these occasions, take great care, by an immediate
application to herbs, with the potent efficacy of which they are well
acquainted, to prevent the effects of these illicit amors from becoming
visible; for should the natural consequences ensue, they must forever remain
unmarried.

The children of the Indians are always distinguished by the name of the
mother; and if a woman marries several husbands, and has issue by each of them,
they are all called after her. The reason they give for this is, that as their
offspring are indebted to the father for their souls, the invisible part of
their essence, and to the mother for their corporeal and apparent part, it is
more rational that they should be distinguished by the name of the latter, from
whom they indubitably derive their being, than by that of the father, to which
a doubt might sometimes arise whether they are justly entitled.

There are some ceremonies made use of by the Indians at the imposition of the
name, and it is considered by them as a matter of great importance; but what
these are I could never learn, through the secrecy observed on the occasion. I
only know (...) it is usually given when the children have passed the state o^
^nfancy.

Nothing can exceed the tenderness shown by them to their offspring; and a
person cannot recommend himself to their favor by any method more certain,
than by paying some attention to the younger branches of their families. I can
impute, in some measure, to the presents I made to the children of the chiefs
of the Naudowessies, the hospitable reception I met with when among them.

There is some difficulty attends an explanation of the manner in which the
Indians distinguish themselves from each other. Besides the name of the animal
by which every nation and tribe is denominated, there are others that are
personal, and which the children receive from their mother.

The chiefs are also distinguished by a name that has either some reference to
their abilities, or to the hie^oglyphick of their families; and these are
acquired after they arrive at the age of manhood. Such as have signalized
themselves either in their war or hunting parties, or are possessed of some
eminent qualification, receive a name that serves to perpetuate the same of
these actions, or to make their abilities conspicuous.

Thus the great warrior of the Naudowessies was named Ottahtongoomlishcah, that
is, the Great Father of Snakes; ottah being in English father, tongoom great,
and lishcah a snake. Another chief was called Honahpawjatin, which means a
swift runner over the mountains. And when they adopted me a chief among them,
they named me Shebaygo, which signifies a writer, or a person that is curious
in making hieroglyphics, as they saw me often writing.

CHAPTER XIII. Of their RELIGION.
IT is very difficult to attain a perfect knowledge of the religious principles
of the Indians. Their ceremonies and doctrines have been so often ridiculed by
the Europeans, that they endeavor to conceal them; and if, after the greatest
intimacy, you desire any of them to explain to you their system of religion, to
prevent your ridicule* they intermix with it many of the tenets they have
received from the French missionaries, so that it is at last rendered an
unintelligible jargon, and not to be depended upon.

Such as I could discover among the Naudowessies (for they also were very
reserved in this point) I shall give my readers* without paying any attention
to the accounts of others. As (...) religion of that people from their
situation appears to be (...) unadultered with the superstitions of the church
of Rome, we shall be able to gain from their religious customs a more perfect
Idea of the original tenets and ceremonies of the Indians in general, than from
those of any nations that approach nearer to the settlements.

It is certain they acknowledge one Supreme Being, or Giver of Life, who
presides over all things. The Chipeways call this Being Manitou, or
Kitchi-Manitou; the Naudowessies, Wakon or Tongo-Wakon, that is, the Great
Spirit; and they look up to him as the source of good, from whom no evil can
proceed. They also believe in a bad spirit, to whom they ascribe great power,
and suppose that through his means all the evils which befall mankind are
inflicted. To him therefore do they pray in their distresses, begging that he
would either avert their troubles, or moderate them when they are no longer
avoidable.

They say that the Great Spirit, who is infinitely good, neither wishes or is
able to do any mischief to mankind; but on the contrary, that he showers down
on them all the bless^^^^ they deserve; whereas the evil spirit is continually
employed in contriving how he may punish the human race; and to do which he is
not only possessed of the will, but of the power.

They hold also that there are good spirits of a lesser degree, who have their
particular departments, in which they are constantly contributing to the
happiness of mortals. These they suppose to preside over all the extraordinary
productions of nature, such as those lakes, rivers, or mountains that are of an
uncommon magnitude; and likewise the beasts, birds, fishes, and even
vegetables, or stones that exceed the rest of their species in size or
singularity. To all of these they pay some kind of adoration. Thus when they
arrive on the borders of Lake Superior, on the banks of the Mississippi, or any
other great body of water, they present to the Spirit who resides there some
kind of offering, as the prince of the Winnebagoes did when he attended me to
the Falls of St. Anthony.

But at the same time I fancy that the ideas they annex to the word spirit, are
very different from the conceptions more enlightened nations entertain of it.
They appear to fashion to themselves corporeal representations of their gods,
and believe them to be of a human form, though of a nature more excellent than
man.

Of the same kind are their sentiments relative to a futurity. They doubt not
but they shall exist in some future state; they however fancy that their
employments there will be similar to those they are engaged in here, without
the labor and difficulty annexed to them in this period of their existence.

They consequently expect to be translated to a delightful country, where they
shall always have a clear unclouded sky, and enjoy a perpetual spring; where
the forests will abound with (...), and the lakes with fish, which might be
taken without r^^^iring a painful exertion of skill, or a laborious pursuit; in
short, that they shall live for ever in regions of plenty, and enjoy every
gratification they delight in here, in a greater degree.

To intellectual pleasures they are strangers; nor are these included in their
scheme of happiness. But they expect that even these animal pleasures will be
proportioned and distributed according to their merit; the skilful hunter, the
bold and successful warrior, will be entitled to a greater share than those who
through indolence or want of skill cannot boast of any superiority over the
common herd.

The priests of the Indians are at the same time their physicians, and their
conjurors; whilst they heal their wounds, or cure their diseases, they
interpret their dreams, give them protective charms, and satisfy that desire
which is so prevalent among them, of searching into futurity.

How well they execute the latter part of their professional engagements, and
the methods they make use of on some of these occasions, I have already shown
in the exertions of the priest of the Killistinoes, who was fortunate enough to
succeed in his extraordinary attempt near Lake Superior. They frequently are
successful likewise in administering the salubrious herbs they have acquired a
knowledge of; but that the ceremonies they make use of during the
administration of them contributes to their success, I shall not take upon me
to assert.

When any of the people are ill, the person who is invested with this triple
character of doctor, priest, and magician, sits by the patient day and night,
rattling in his ears a goad-shell filled with dry beans, called a Chichicoue,
and making a disagreeable noise that cannot be well described.

This uncouth harmony one would imagine should disturb the sick person, and
prevent the good effects of the doctor's prescription; but on the contrary they
believe that the method made use of contributes to his recovery, by diverting
from his malignant purposes the evil spirit who has inflicted the disorder; or
at least that it will take off his attention, so that he shall not increase the
malady. This they are credulous enough to imagine he is constantly on the watch
to do, and would carry his inveteracy to a fatal length if they did not thus
charm him.

I could not discover that they make use of any other religious ceremonies than
those I have described; indeed, on the appearance of the new moon they dance
and sing; but it is not evident that they pay that planet any adoration; they
only seem to rejoice at the return of a luminary that makes the night cheerful,
and which serves to light them on their way when they travel during the absence
of the sun.

Notwithstanding Mr. Adair has asserted that the nations among whom he resided,
observe with very little variation all the rites appointed by the Mosaic Law, I
own I could never discover among those tribes that lie but a few degrees to the
north-west, the least traces of the Jewish religion, except (...) admitted that
one particular female custom and their division into tribes, carry with them
proofs sufficient to establish this assertion.

The Jesuits and French missionaries have also pretended that the Indians had,
when they first traveled into America, some notions, though these were dark
and confused, of the christian institution; that they have been greatly
agitated at the sight of a cross, and given proofs, by the impressions made on
them, that they were not entirely unacquainted with the sacred mysteries of
Christianity. I need not say that these are too glaring absurdities to be
credited, and could only receive their existence from the zeal of those
fathers, who endeavored at once, to give the public a better opinion of the
success of their missions, and to add support to the cause they were engaged in.

The Indians appear to be in their religious principles, rude and uninstructed.
The doctrines they hold are few and simple, and such as have been generally
impressed on the human mind, by some means or other, in the most ignorant ages.
They however have not deviated, as many other uncivilized nations, and too many
civilized ones have done, into idolatrous modes of worship; they venerate
indeed, and make offerings to the wonderful parts of the creation, as I have
before observed; but whether these rites are performed on account of the
impression such extraordinary appearances make on them, or whether they
consider them as the peculiar charge, or the usual places of residence of the
invisible spirits they acknowledge, I cannot positively determine.

The human mind in its uncultivated state is apt to ascribe the extraordinary
occurrences of nature, such as earthquakes, thunder, or hurricanes, to the
interposition of unseen beings; the troubles and disasters also that are
annexed to a savage life, the apprehensions attendant on a precarious
subsistence and those numberless inconveniences which man in his improved
state has found means to remedy, are supposed to proceed from the interposition
of evil spirits; the savage consequently lives in continual apprehensions of
their unkind attacks, and to avert them has recourse to charms, to the
fantastic ceremonies of his priest, or the powerful influence of his Manitous.
Fear has of course a greater share in his devotions than gratitude, and he pays
more attention to deprecating the wrath of the evil than to securing the favor
of the good beings.

The Indians, however, entertain these absurdities in common with those of
every part of the globe who have not been illumined by that religion which only
can disperse the clouds of superstition and ignorance, and they are as free
from error as a people can be that has not been favored with its instructive
doctrines.

CHAPTER. XIV. Of their DISEASES, etc.
THE Indians in general are healthy, and subject but to few diseases, many of
those that afflict civilized nations, and are the immediate consequences of
luxury or sloth, being not known among them; however, the hardships and
fatigues which they endure in hunting or war, the inclemency of the seasons to
which they are continually exposed, but above all the extremes of hunger, and
that voraciousness their long excursions consequently subject them to, cannot
fail of impairing the constitution, and bringing on disorders.

Pains and weaknesses in the stomach and breast are sometimes the result of
their long fasting, and consumptions of the excessive fatigue and violent
exercises they expose themselves to from their infancy, before they have
strength sufficient to support them. But the disorder to which they are most
subject, is the pleurisy; for the removal of which, they apply their grand
remedy and preservative against the generality of their complaints, sweating.

The manner in which they construct their stoves for this purpose is as
follows: They fix several small poles in the ground, the tops of which they
twist together, so as to form a rotunda: this frame they cover with skins or
blankets; and they lay them on with so much nicety, that the air is kept from
entering through any crevice; a small space being only left, just sufficient to
creep in at, which is immediately after closed. In the middle of this confined
building they place red hot stones, on 'which they pour water till a steam
arises that produces a great degree of heat.

This causes an instantenous perspiration, which they increase as they please.
Having continued in it for some time, they immediately hasten to the nearest
stream, and plunge into the water; and, after bathing therein for about half a
minute, they put on their clothes, sit down and smoke with great composure,
thoroughly persuaded that the remedy will prove efficacious. They often make
use of this sudoriferous method to refresh themselves, or to prepare their
minds for the management of any business that requires uncommon deliberation
and sagacity.

They are likewise afflicted with the dropsy and paralytic complaints, which,
however, are but very seldom known among them. As a remedy for these as well as
for fevers they make use of lotions and decoctions, composed of herbs, which
the physicians know perfectly well how to compound and apply. But they never
trust to medicines alone; they always have (...) course likewise to some
superstitious ceremonies, without which their patients would not think the
physical preparations sufficiently powerful.

With equal judgment they make use of simples for the cure of wounds,
fractures, or bruises; and are able to extract by these, without incision,
splinters, iron, or any sort of matter by which the wound is caused. In cures
of this kind they are extremely dextrous, and complete them in much less time
than might be expected from their mode of proceeding.

With the skin of a snake, which those reptiles annually shed, thy will also
extract splinters. It is amazing to see the sudden efficacy of this
application, notwithstanding there does not appear to be the least moisture
remaining in it.

It has long been a subject of dispute, on what continent the venereal disease
first received its destructive power. This dreadful malady is supposed to have
originated in America, but the literary contest still remains undecided; to
give some elucidation to it I shall remark, that as I could not discover the
least traces among the Naudowessies, with whom I resided so long, and was also
informed that it was yet unknown among the more western nations, I think I may
venture to pronounce that it had not its origin in North America. Those nations
that have any communication with the Europeans, or the southern tribes, are
greatly afflicted with it; but they have all of them acquired a knowledge of
such certain and expeditious remedies, that the communication is not attended
with any dangerous consequences.

Soon after I set out on my travels, one of the traders whom I accompanied,
complained of a violent gonorrhoea, with all its alarming symptoms: this
increased to such a degree, that by the time we had reached the town of the
Winnebagoes, he was unable to travel. Having made his complaint known to one of
the chiefs of that tribe, he told him not to be uneasy, for he would engage
that by following his advice, he should be able in a few days to pursue his
journey, and in a little longer time be entirely free from his disorder.

The chief had no sooner said this than he prepared for him a decoction of the
bark of the roots of the prickly ash, a tree scarcely known in England, but
which grows in great plenty throughout North America; by the use of which, in a
few days he was greatly recovered, and having received directions how to
prepare it, in a fortnight after his departure from this place perceived that
he was radically cured.

If from excessive exercise, or the extremes of heat or cold, they, are
affected with pains in their limbs or joints, they scarify the parts affected.
Those nations who have no commerce with Europeans do this with a sharp flint;
and it is surprising to see how fine a point they have the dexterity to bring
them; a lancet can scarcely exceed in sharpness the instruments they make use
of this unmalleable substance.

They never can be convinced a person is ill, whilst he has an appetite; but
when he rejects all kind of nourishment, they consider the disease as
dangerous, and pay great attention to it; and during the continuance of the
disorder, the physician refuses his patient no sort of food that he is desirous
of.

Their doctors are not only supposed to be skilled in the physical treatment of
diseases; but the common people believe that by the ceremony of the Chichicoue
usually made use of, as before described, they are able to gain intelligence
from the spirits of the cause of the complaints with which they are afflicted,
and are thereby the better enabled to find remedies for them. They discover
something supernatural in all their diseases, and the physic administered must
invariably be aided by these superstitions.

Sometimes a sick person fancies that his disorder arises from witchcraft; in
this case the physician or juggler is consulted, who after the usual
preparations, gives his opinion on the state of the disease, and frequently
finds some means for his cure. But notwithstanding the Indian physicians always
annex these superstitious ceremonies to their prescriptions, it is very
certain* as I have already observed, that they exercise their art by principles
which are founded on the knowledge of simples, and on experience which they
acquire by an indefatigable attention to their operations.

The following story, which I received from a person of undoubted credit,
proves that the Indians are not only able to reason with great acuteness on the
causes and symptoms of many of the disorders which are amendant^on human
nature, but to apply with equal judgment proper remedies.

In Penobscot, a settlement in the province of Main, in the north-east parts of
New England, the wife of a soldier was taken in labor, and notwithstanding
every necessary assistance was given her, could not be delivered. In this
situation she remained for two or three days, the persons around her expecting
that the next pang would put an end to her existence.

An Indian woman, who accidentally passed by, heard the groans of the unhappy
sufferer, and enquired from whence they proceeded. Being made acquainted with
the desperate circumstances attending the case, she told the informant, that if
she might be permitted to see the person, she did not doubt but that she could
be of great service to her.

The surgeon that had attended, and the midwife who was then present, having
given up every hope of preserving their patient, the Indian woman was allowed
to make use of any methods she thought proper. She accordingly took a
handkerchief, and bound it tight over the nose and mouth of the woman: this
immediately brought on a suffocation; and from the struggles that consequently
ensued she was in a few seconds delivered. The moment this was achieved, and
time enough to prevent any fatal effect, the handkerchief was taken off. The
long suffering patient thus happily relieved from her pains, soon after
perfectly recovered, to the astonishment of all those who had been witness to
her desperate situation.

The reason given by the Indian for this hazardous method of proceeding was,
that desperate disorders require desperate remedies; that as she observed the
exertions of nature were not sufficiently forcible to effect the desired
consequence, she thought it necessary to augment their force, which could only
be dono by some mode that was violent in the extreme.

CHAPTER XV. Of the Manner in which they treat their DEAD.
AN Indian meets death when it approaches him in his hut, with the same
resolution he has often faced him in the field. His indifference relative to
this important article, which is the source of so many apprehensions to almost
every other nation, is truly admirable. When his fate is pronounced by the
physician, and it remains no longer uncertain, he harangues those about him
with the greatest composure.

If he is a chief and has a family, he makes a kind of funeral oration, which
he concludes by giving to his children such advice for the regulation of their
conduct as he thinks necessary. He then takes leave of his friends, and issues
out orders for the preparation of a feast, which is designed to regale those of
his tribe that come to pronounce his eulogium.

After the breath is departed, the body is dressed in the same attire it
usually wore whilst living, his face is painted, and he seated in an erect
posture, on a mat or skin, placed in the middle of the hut, with his weapons by
his side. His relations being seated round, each harangues in turn the
deceased; and if he has been a great warrior, recounts his heroic actions
nearly to the following purport, which in the Indian language is extremely
poetical and pleasing:

You still sit among us, Brother, your person retains its usual resemblance,
and continues similar to ours, without any visible deficiency, except that it
has lost the power of action. But whither is that breath flown, which a few
hours ago sent up smoke to the Great Spirit? Why are those lips silent, that
lately delivered to us expressive and pleasing language? why are those feet
motionless, that a short time ago were fleeter than the deer on yonder
mountains? why useless hang those arms that could climb the tallest tree, or
draw the toughest bow? Alas! every part of that frame which we lately beheld
with admiration and wonder, is now become as inanimate as it was three hundred
winters ago. We will not, however, bemoan thee as if thou wast for ever lost
(...) that thy name would be buried in oblivion; thy soul (...) lives in the
great Country of Spirits, with those of thy (...) that are gone before thee;
and though we are left (...) to perpetuate thy fame, we shall one day join
thee. Actuated by the respect we bore thee whilst living, we now come to tender
to thee the last act of kindness it is in our power to bestow: that thy body
might not lie neglected on the plain, and become a prey to the beasts of the
field, or the fowls of the air, we will take care to lay it with those of thy
predecessors who are gone before thee; hoping at the same time, that thy spirit
will feed with their spirits, and be ready to receive ours, when we also shall
arrive at the great Country of Souls.

In short speeches somewhat similar to this does every chief speak the praises
of his departed friend. When they have so done, if they happen to be at a great
distance from the place of interment, appropriated to their tribe, and the
person dies during the winter season, they wrap the body in skins, and lay it
on a high stage built for this purpose, or on the branches of a large tree,
till the spring arrives. They then, after the manner described in my journal,
carry it, together with all those belonging to the same nation, to the general
burial place, where it is interred with some other ceremonies that I could not
discover.

When the Naudowessies brought their dead for interment to the great cave, I
attempted to get an insight into the remaining burial rites; but whether it was
on account of the stench which arose from so many bodies, the weather being
then hot, or whether they chose to keep this part of their customs secret from
me, I could not discover; I found, however, that they considered my curiosity
as ill-timed, and therefore I withdrew.

After the interment, the band to which the person belongs, take care to fix
near the place such hieroglyphics as shall show to future ages his merit and
accomplishments. If any of these people die in the summer at a distance from
the burying-ground, and they find it impossible to remove the body before it
putrefies, they burn the flesh from the bones, and preserving the latter, bury
them in the manner described.

As the Indians believe that the souls of the deceased employ themselves in the
same manner in the country of spirits, as they did on earth, that they acquire
their food by hunting, and have there, also, enemies to contend with, they take
care that they do not enter those regions defenseless and unprovided: they
consequently bury with them their bows, their arrows, and all the other weapons
used either in hunting or war. As they doubt not but they will likewise have
occasion both for the necessaries of life, and those things they esteem as
ornaments, they usually deposit in their tombs such skins or stuffs as they
commonly made their garments of, domestic utensils, and paint for ornamenting
their persons.

The near relations of the deceased lament his loss with an appearance of great
sorrow and anguish; they weep and howl, and make use of many contortions, as
they sit in the hut or tent around the body, when the intervals between the
praises of the chiefs will permit.

One formality in mourning for the dead among the Naudowessies is very
different from any mode I observed in the other nations through which I passed.
The men, to show how great their sorrow is, pierce the flesh of their arms,
above the elbows, with arrows; the scars of which I could perceive on those of
every rank, in a greater or less degree; and the women cut and gash their legs
with sharp broken flints, till the blood flows very plentifully.

Whilst I remained among them, a couple whose tent was adjacent to mine, lost a
son of about four years of age. The parents were so much affected at the death
of their favorite child, that they pursued the usual testimonies of grief with
such uncommon rigor, as through the weight of sorrow and loss of blood, to
occasion the death of the father. The woman, who had hitherto been
inconsolable, no sooner saw her husband expire, than she dried up her tears,
and appeared cheerful and resigned.

As I knew not how to account for so extraordinary a transition, I took an
opportunity to ask her the reason of it; telling her at the same time, that I
should have imagined the loss of her husband would rather have occasioned an
increase of grief, than such a sudden diminution of it.

She informed me, that as the child was so young when it died, and unable to
support itself in the country of spirits, both she and her husband had been
apprehensive that its situation would be far from happy; but no sooner did she
behold its father depart for the same place, who not only loved the child with
the tenderest affection, but was a good hunter, and would be able to provide
plentifully for its support, than she ceased to mourn. She added, that she now
saw no reason to continue her tears, as the child on whom she doated, was happy
under the care and protection of a fond father, and she had only one wish that
remained ungratified, which was that of being herself with them.

Expressions so replete with unaffected tenderness, and sentiments that would
have done honor to a Roman matron, made an impression on my mind greatly in
favor of the people to whom she belonged, and tended not a little to
counteract the prejudices I had hitherto entertained, in common with every
other traveller, of Indian insensibility and want of parental tenderness.

Her subsequent conduct confirmed the favorable opinion I had just imbibed;
and convinced me, that, notwithstanding this apparent suspension of her grief,
some particles of that reluctance, to be separated from a beloved relation,
which is implanted either by nature or custom in every human heart, still
lurked in hers. I observed that she went almost every evening to the foot of
the tree, on a branch of which the bodies of her husband and child were laid,
and after cutting off a lock of her hair, and throwing it on the ground, in a
plaintive melancholy song bemoaned its fate. A recapitulation of the actions he
might have performed, had his life been spared, appeared to be her favorite
theme; and whilst she foretold the fame that would have attended an imitation
of his father's virtues, her grief seemed to be suspended: --

"If thou had continued with us, my dear Son," would she cry, how well would
the bow have become thy hand, and and how fatal would thy arrows have proved to
the enemies of our bands. Thou would often have drank their blood, and eaten
their flesh, and numerous slaves would have rewarded thy toils. With a nervous
arm would thou have seized the wounded buffaloe, or have combated the fury of
the enraged bear. Thou would have overtaken the flying elk, and have kept
pace on the mountain's brow with the fleetest deer. What feats might thou
not have performed, had thou staid among us till age had given thee strength,
and thy father had instructed thee in every Indian accomplishment! In terms
like these did this untutored savage bewail the loss of her son, and frequently
would she pass the greatest part of the night in the affectionate employ.

The Indians in general are very strict in the observance of their laws
relative to mourning for their dead. In some nations they cut off their hair,
blacken their faces, and sit in an erect posture, with their heads closely
covered, and depriving themselves of every pleasure. This severity is continued
for several months, and with some relaxations the appearance is sometimes kept
up for several years. I was told that when the Naudowessies recollected any
incidents of the lives of their deceased relations, even-after an interval of
ten years, they would howl so as to be heard at a great distance. They would
sometimes continue this proof of respect and affection for several hours; and
if it happened that the thought occurred, and the noise was begun toward the
evening, those of their tribe, who are at hand would join with them.

CHAPTER XVI. A concise CHARACTER of the INDIANS.
THE character of the Indians, like that of other uncivilized nations, is
composed of a mixture of ferocity and gentleness. They are at once guided by
passions and appetites, which they hold in common with the fiercest beasts that
inhabit their woods, and are possessed of virtues which do honor to human
nature.

In the following estimate I shall endeavor to forget of the one hand the
prejudices of Europeans, who usually annex to the word Indian epithets that are
disgraceful to human nature, and who view them in no other light than as
savages and cannibals; whilst with equal care I avoid any partiality toward
them, as some must naturally arise from the favorable reception I met with
during my stay among them.

At the same time I shall confine my remarks to the nations inhabiting only the
western regions, such as the Naudowessies, the Ottaguamies, the Chipeways, the
Winnebagoes, and the Saukies; for as throughout that diversity of climates, the
extensive continent of America is composed of, there are people of different
dispositions and various characters, it would be incompatible with my present
undertaking to treat of all these, and to give a general view of them as a
conjunctive body.

That the Indians are of a cruel, revengeful, inexorable disposition, that they
will watch whole days unmindful of the calls of nature, and make their way
through pathless, and almost unbounded woods, subsisting only on the scanty
produce of them, to pursue and revenge themselves of an enemy; that they hear
unmoved the piercing cries of such as unhappily fall into their hands, and
receive a diabolical pleasure from the tortures they inflict on their
prisoners, I readily grant; but let us look on the reverse of this terrifying
picture, and we shall find them temperate both in their diet and potations (it
must be remembered that I speak of those tribes who have little communication
with Europeans) that they with-stand, with unexampled patience, the attacks of
hunger, or the inclemency of the seasons, and esteem the gratification of their
appetites but as a secondary consideration.

We shall likewise see them social and humane to those whom they consider as
their friends and even to their adopted enemies; and ready to partake with them
of the last morsel, or to risk their lives in their defense.

In contradiction to the report of many other travelers, all of which have
been tinctured with prejudice, I can assert, that notwithstanding the apparent
indifference with which an Indian meets his wife and children after a long
absence, an indifference proceeding rather from custom than insensibility, he
is not unmindful of the claims either of connubial or parental tenderness; the
little story I have introduced in the preceding chapter, of the Naudowessie
woman lamenting her child, and the immature death of the father, will elucidate
this point, and enforce the assertion much better than the most studied
arguments I can make use of.

Accustomed from their youth to innumerable hardships, they soon become
superior to a sense of danger, or the dread of death; and their fortitude,
implanted by nature, and nurtured by example, by precept and accident, never
experiences a moment's allay.

Though slothful and inactive whilst their store of provision remains
unexhausted, and their foes are at a distance, they are indefatigable and
persevering in pursuit of their game, or in circumventing their enemies.

If they are artful and designing, and ready to take every advantage, if they
are cool and deliberate in their councils, and cautious in the extreme either
of discovering their sentiments, or of revealing a secret, they might at the
same time boast of possessing qualifications of a more animated nature, of the
sagacity of a hound, the penetrating sight of a lynx, the cunning of the fox,
the agility of a bounding roe, and the unconquerable fierceness of the tiger.

In their public characters, as forming part of a community, they possess an
attachment for that band to which they belong, unknown to the inhabitants of
any other country. They combine, as if the were actuated only by one soul,
against the enemies of their nation, and banish from their minds every
consideration opposed to this.

They consult without unnecessary opposition, or without giving way to the
excitements of envy or ambition, on the measures necessary to be pursued for
the destruction of those who have drawn on themselves their displeasure. No
selfish views ever influence their advice, or obstruct their consultations. Nor
is it in the power of bribes or threats to diminish the love they bear their
country.

The honor of their tribe, and the welfare of their nation, is the first and
most predominat emotion of their hearts; and from hence proceed in a great
measure all their virtues and their vices. Actuated by by this, they brave
every danger, endure the most exquisite torments, and expire triumphing in
their fortitude, not as a personal qualification, but as a national
characteristic.

From these also flow that insatiable revenge toward those with whom they are
at war, and all the consequent horrors that disgrace their name. Their
uncultivated mind, being incapable of judging of the propriety of an action, in
opposition to their passions, which are totally insensible to the controuls of
reason or humanity, they know not how to keep their fury within any bounds, and
consequently that courage and resolution, which would otherwise do them honor,
degenerates into a savage ferocity.

But this short dissertation must suffice; the limits of my work will not
permit me to treat the subject more copiously, or to pursue it with a logical
regularity. The observations already made by my readers on the preceding
pages, will, I trust, render it unnecessary; as by them they will be enabled to
form a tolerably just idea of the people I have been describing. Experience
teaches, that anecdotes, and relations of particular events, however trifling
they might appear, enable us to form a truer judgment of the manners and
customs of a people, and are much declaratory of their real state, than the
most studied and elaborate disquisition, without these aids.

CHAPTER XVII. Of their LANGUAGE, HIEROGLYPHICS, etc.
THE principal languages of the natives of North America may be divided into
four classes, as they consist of such as are made use of by the nations of the
Iroquois toward the eastern parts of it, the Chipeways or Algonkins to the
north-west, the Naudowessies to the west, and the Cherokees, Chickasaws, etc.
to the south. One or other of these four are used by all the Indians who
inhabit the parts that lie between the coast of Labradore north, the Florida
south, the Atlantic ocean east, and, as far as we can judge from the
discoveries hitherto made, the Pacific Ocean on the west.

But of all these, the Chipeway tongue appears to be the most prevailing; it
being held in such esteem, that the chiefs of every tribe, dwelling about the
great lakes, or to the westward of these on the banks of the Mississippi, with
those as far south as the Ohio, and as far north as Hudson's Bay, consisting of
more than thirty different tribes, speak this language alone in their councils,
notwithstanding each has a peculiar one of their own.

It will probably in time become universal among all the Indian nations, as
none of them attempt to make excursions to any great distance, or are
considered as qualified to carry on any negotiation with a distant band, unless
they have acquired the Chipeway tongue.

At present, besides the Chipeways, to whom it is natural, the Ottawaws, the
Saukies, the Ottagaumies, the Killistinoes, the Nipegons, the bands about Lake
Le Pleuve, and the remains of the Algonkins, or Gens de Terre, all converse in
it, with some little variation of dialect; but whether it be natural to these
nations, or acquired, I was not able to discover. I am however of opinion that
the barbarous and uncouth dialect of the Winnebagoes, the Menomonies, and many
other tribes, will become in time totally extinct, and this be adopted in its
stead.

The Chipeway tongue is not incumbered with any unnecessary tones or accents,
neither are there any words in it that are superfluous; it is also easy to
pronounce, and much more copious than any other Indian language.

As the Indians are unacquainted with the polite arts, or with the sciences,
and as they are also strangers to ceremony, or compliment, they neither have
nor need an infinity of words wherewith to embellish their discourse. Plain and
unpolished in their manners, they only make use of such as serve to denominate
the necessaries or conveniences of life, and to express their wants, which in a
state of nature can be but few.

I have annexed hereto a short vocabulary of the Chipeway language, and another
of that of the Naudowessies, but am not able to reduce them to the rules of
grammar.

The latter is spoken in a soft accent, without any guttural sounds, so that it
may be learnt with facility, and is not difficult either to be pronounced or
written. It is nearly as copious and expressive as the Chipeway tongue, and is
the most prevailing language of any on the western banks of the Mississippi;
being in use, according to their account, among all the nations that lie to the
north of the Messorie, and extend as far west as the shores of the Pacific
Ocean.

As the Indians are not acquainted with letters, it is very difficult to convey
with precision the exact sound of their words; I have however endeavored to
write them as near to the manner in which they expressed, as such an uncertain
mode will admit of.

Although the Indians cannot communicate their ideas by writing, yet they form
certain hieroglyphics, which, in some measure, serve to perpetuate any
extraordinary transaction, or uncommon event. Thus when they are on their
excursions, and either intend to proceed, or have been on any remarkable
enterprise, they peel the bark from the trees which lie in their way, to give
intelligence to those parties that happen to be at a distance, of the path they
must pursue to overtake them.

The following instance will convey a more perfect idea of the methods they
make use of on this occasion, than any expressions I can frame.

When I left the Mississippi, and proceeded up the Chipeway River, in my way to
Lake Superior, as related in my Journal, my guide, who was a chief of the
Chipeways that dwell on the Ottawaw Lake, near the heads of the river we had
just entered, fearing that some parties of the Naudowessies, with whom his
nation are perpetually at war, might accidentally fall in with us, and before
they were apprized of my being in company, do us some mischief, he took the
following steps:

He peeled the bark from a large tree, near the entrance of a river, and with
wood-coal, mixed with bear's grease, their usual substitute for ink, made in an
uncouth, but expressive manner, the figure of the town of the Ottagaumies. He
then formed to the left a man dressed in skins, by which he intended to
represent a Naudowessie, with a line drawn from his mouth to that of a deer,
the symbol of the Chipeways. After this he depictured still farther to the left
a canoe as proceeding up the river, in which he placed a man sitting with a hat
on; this figure was designed to represent an Englishman, or myself, and my
Frenchman was drawn with a handkerchief tied round his head, and rowing the
canoe; to these he added several other significant emblems, among which the
Pipe of Peace appeared painted on the prow of the canoe.

The meaning he intended to convey to the Naudowessies, and which I doubt not
appeared perfectly intelligible to them, was, that one of the Chipeway chiefs
had received a speech from some Naudowessie chiefs, at the town of the
Ottagaumies, desiring him to conduct the Englishman, who had lately been among
them, up the Chipeway river; and that they thereby required, that the Chipeway,
notwithstanding he was an avowed enemy, should not be molested by them on his
passage, as he had the care of a person whom they esteemed as one of their
nation.

Some authors have pretended that the Indians have armorial bearings, which
they blazon with great exactness, and which distinguish one nation from
another; but I never could observe any other arms among them than the symbols
already described.

A short VOCABULARY of the Chipeway Language.
N. B. This people do not make use either of the consonants F or V.
A
ABOVE Spimink Abandon Packiton Admirable Pilawah Afterward Mipidach All
Kokinum Always Kokali Amiss Napitch Arrive Takouchin Ax Agacwet Ashes Pingoe
Assist Mawinewah
B
Ball Alewin Bag, or tobacco-pouch Caspetawgan Barrel Owentowgan Beat Pakhite
Bear, Mackwah Bear, a young one Makon Beaver Amik Beaver's skin Apiminique Be,
or to be Tapaie Beard Mischiton Because Mewinch Believe Tilerimah Belly
Mishemout Black Markaute Blood Miskow Body Y^e Bottle Shisheg^ Brother Neconnis
Brandy or Rum Scuttawawbah Bread Paboushigan Breech Miscousab Breeches
Kipokitie Kousah Buck Wosketch
C
Canoe Cheman Call Teshenekaw Chief, a Okemaw Carry Petou Child or Children
Bobeloshin Coat Capotewian Cold, I am Kekalch Come on Moppa Come to Pemotcha
Comrade Neechee Concerned Tallemissi Corn Melomin Covering, or a Blanket
Wawbewion Country Endawlawkeen Courage Tagwawmissii Cup Olawgan
D
Dance Nemeh Dart Sheshikwee Die, to Nip Dish Mackoan Dog Alim Dead Neepoo
Devil or evil? Spirit Matcho-Manitou Dog, a little one Alemon Done, it is done
Shiah Do Toshiton Doubtless Ontclatoubah Dress the kettle Poutwah Drink
Minikwah Drunken Ouisquiba Duck Chickhip
E
Earth Aukwin Eat Owissine Each Papegik English Sagaunosh Enough Mimilic Equal,
or alike Tawbiscouch Esteem Nawpetelimaw Eyes Wiskinkhie
F
Fast Waliebic Fall Ponkisin Far off Watsaw Fat Pimmitee Friend Niconnis Father
Noosah Few, or little Maungis Fatigued Taukwissi Field sown Kittegaumic Fire
Scutta Fire, to strike Scutecke Find Nantounawa^ Fish Kickon Fork Nassawokwot
Formerly Pirwego Fort Wakaigon Forward Nopawink French Nechtegoosh Freeze, to
Kissin Freezes hard Kissin Magat Full Mouskinet Fuzee or Gun Paskessigan
G
God, or the Great Spirit Kitchi Manitou Go by water Pimmiscaw Girl Jeckwassin
Give Millaw Glass, a mirror Wawbemo Good Cawlatch Good for nothing Malatal
Govern Tibarimaw General, or Commander in Chief Kitchi Okimaw Simauganish
Grapes Shoamin Great Manatou Greedy Sawsawkissi Guts Olawbish
H
Hare Wawpoos Heart Michewah Hate Shingaurimaw Half Nawbal Hair, human Lissis
Hair of beasts Pewal Handsome Canoginne Have Tandaulaw Head Oustecouan Heaven
Speminkakwin Herb Mejask Here Aconda Hidden Kemouch Home Entayent Honor
Mackawalaw Hot Akesbotta How Tawne How many Tawnemilik Hunt Kewassa Hut, or
House Wig-Waum
I
Indians Ishinawbah Iron Pewawbick Island Minis Immediately Webatch Indian Corn
Mittawmin Entirely Nawpitch Impostor Mawlawtissie It might be so Tawneendo
K
Kettle Ackikons King, or Chief Okemaw Keep Ganwerimaw Knife M^^koman Knife
that is crooked Cootawgan Know Thickeremaw
L
Lake Kitchigawmink Laugh Pawpi Lazy Kittimi Lame Kikekate Leave Pockiton
Letter Mawsignaugon Life Nouchimowin Love Saukie Long since Shawshia Land
Carriage Cappatawgon Lose Packilaugue Lie down Weipemaw Little Waubesheen
M
Meat Weas Much Nibbilaw Man Allissinape March, to go Pimmoussie Marry Weewin
Medicine Maskikic Merchandise Alokochigon Moon Debicot Mortar to pound in
Poutawgon Male Nape Mistress Neremousin
N
Needle Shawbonkin Near Pewitch Nation Irinee Never Cawikkaw Night Debicot No
Kaw Nose Yoch Nothing Kakego Not yet Kawmischi Not at all Kagutch Naught good
for nothing Malatat
O
Old Kauweshine Otter Nikkik Other Coutack
P
Pipe Poagan Part, what part Tawnapee Play Packeigo Powder, gun, or dust Pingo
Peace, to make Pecacotiche Pray Tawlaimia Proper Sawsega Presently Webatch
Peninsula Minnissin
Q
Quick Kegotch
R
Regard Wawbemo Red Miscow Resolve Tibelindon Relation Towwemaw Respect
Tawbawmica Rain Kimmewan Robe Ockolaw River Sippim Run, to Pitchebot
S
Sad Talimissie Sail Pemiscaw Sack, or Bag Maskimot Sea, or large Lake
Agankitchigawmink Shoes Maukisson Ship, or large Canoe Kitchi Cheman Sorry
Niscottissie Spirit Manitou Spoon Mickw^^r Star Alank Steal Kemautin Stockings
Mittaus Strong Mashkauwah Sturgeon Lawmack Sun Kissis Sword Simaugan Surprising
Etwah, Etwah See Wawbemo Since Mapedoh Shirt Papawkwean Slave Wackan Sleep
Nippee Sit down Mintepin
T
Take Emaundah Teeth Tibbit That Mawbah There Watsaudebi This Maundah Truly
Kikit Together Mawmawwee Tobacco Semau Tongue Outon Tired Tawkonsie Too little
Osaummangit Too much Ossaune Thank you Megwatch Tomorrow Wawbunk Tomorrow the
day after Ouswawbunk
W
Warriors Semauganaush Water Nebbi War Nantaubaulaw Way Mickon Well then!
Tauneendah! What is that? Wawwewin? What now? Quagonie? Whence Taunippi Where
Tah White Waube Who is there? Quagonie Maubah? Wind Loutin Winter Pepoun Woman
Ickwee Wood Mittic Wolf Mawhingon
Y
Yesterday Petchilawgo Yet Minnewatch Young Wisconekissi Yellow Wazzo.
The Numerical Terms of the Chipeways.
One Pashik Two Ninch Three Nissou Four Neau Five Naran Six Ningoutwassou Seven
Ninchowassou Eight Nissowassou Nine S^^ngassou Ten Mittaussou Eleven Mittaussou
Pashik Twenty Ninchtawnaw Thirty Nissou Mittawnaw Forty Neau Mittawnaw Fifty
Naran Mittawnaw Sixty Ningoutwassou Mittawnaw Seventy Ninchowassou Mittawnaw
Eighty Nissowassou Mittawnaw Ninety Shongassou Mittawnaw Hundred Mittaussou
Mittawnaw Thousand Mittaussou Mittaussou Mittawnaw.
A Short VOCABULARY of the Naudowessie Language.
A
Axe Ashpaw
B
Beaver Chawbah Buffalo Tawtongo Bad Shejah Broach Muzahootoo Bear, a
Wahk^^shejah
C
Canoe Waahtoh Cold Mechuetah Child, a Male Wechoakseh Child, a Female
Whacheekseh Come here Accooyouiyore
D
Dead Negush Deer Tohinjoh Dog Shungush
E
Eat Echawmenaw Ears Nookah Eyes Eshtike Evil Shejah
F
Fire Paahtah Father Otah Frenchman Neehteegush Falls of Water Owah Menah
Friend Kitchiwah
G
Good Woshtah Give Accooyeh Go away Accoowah God, or the Great Spirit Wakon Gun
Muzah Wakon Great Tango Gold Muzaham
H
Hear Nookishon Horse Shuetongo Home, or domestic Shuah House Teebee Heaven
Woshta Tebee
I
Iron Muzah I, or me Meoh
K
King, or Chief Otah Kill Negushtaugaw
L
Little Jestin Long Tongoom Lake Tongo Mene^ Love E^wakmeak
M
Much Otah More Otena^ Moon Oweeh Mouth Eeh Medal Muzah Otah Mine Mewah Milk.
Etsawboh
N
No Heyah Near Jeestinaw
O
Oh! Hopiniyahie!
P
Pipe Shanuapaw Pipe of Peace Shanuapaw Wakon
R
Rain Owah Meneh Ring Muzamchupah Round Chupah
S
Smoke Shaweah Salt Water Menis Queah See, to Eshtaw Sleep Eshteemo Snake
Omlishcaw Sun Paahtah Spirit Wakon Spirituous Liquors Meneh Wakon Snow Sinnee
Surprising Hopiniayare Silver Muzaham
T
Tobacco Shawsassaw Talk Owehchin Tree Ochaw There Dache
W
Woman Winnokejah Wonderful Hopiniyare Water Meneh What Tawgo Who is there?
Tawgodache? Wicked Heyahatchta
Y
You Chee Young Hawpawnaw You are good Washtah Chee You are a Spirit Wakon Chee
You are my good Friend Washtah Kitchiwah Chee No Good Heyah Washtah.
The Numerical Terms of the Naudowessies.
One Wonchaw Two Noompaw Three Yawmonee Four Toboh Five Sawbuttee Six Shawco
Seven Shawcopee Eight Shahindohin Nine Nebochunganong Ten Wegochunganong Eleven
Wegochunganong Wonchaw Twenty Wegochunganong Noompaw Thirty Wegochunganong
Yawmonee Forty Wegochunganong Toboh Fifty Wegochunganong Sawbuttee Sixty
Wegochunganong Shawco Seventy Wegochunganong Shawcopee Eighty Wegochunganong
Shahindohin Ninety Wegochunganong Nebochunganong Hundred Opohng Thousand
Wegochudganong Opohng
To this short vocabulary of the Naudowessie language, I shall adjoin a
specimen of the manner in which they unite their words. I have chosen for this
purpose a short song, which they sing* with some kind of melody, though not
with any appearance of poetical measure, when they set out on their hunting
expeditions: and have given as near a translation as the difference of the
idioms will permit.

Meoh accoowah esht^w paatah negushtawgaw shejah menah. Tongo Wakon meoh
washta, paatah accoowah. Hopiniyahie oweeh accocyee meoh, woshta patah ^toh
tohinjoh meoh teebee.

I will rise before the sun, and ascend yonder hill, to see the new light chase
away the vapors, and disperse the clouds. Great Spirit give me success. And
when the sun is gone, lend me, oh moon, light sufficient to guide me with
safety back to my tent laden with deer!

CHAPTER XVIII. Of the BEASTS, BIRDS, FISHES, REPTILES, and INSECTS, which are
found in the interior Parts of North America.
OF these I shall, in the first place, give a catalogue, and afterward a
description of such only as are either peculiar to this country, or which
differ in some material point from those that are to be met with in other
realms.

OF THE BEASTS.
The Tiger, the Bear, Wolves, Foxes, Dogs, the Cat of the Mountain, the Wild
Cat, the Buffalo, the Deer, the Elk, the Moose, the Carrabou, the Carcajou, the
Skunk, the Porcupine, the Hedgehog, the Wood-chuck, the Raccoon, the Marten,
the Fisher, the Muskquaw, Squirrels, Hares, Rabbits, the Mole, the Weezel, the
Mouse, the Dormouse, the Beaver, the Otter, the Mink, and Bats.

The TIGER. The Tiger of America resembles in shape those of Africa and Asia,
but is considerably smaller. Nor does it appear to be so fierce and ravenous as
they are. The color of it is a darkish fallow, and it is entirely free from
spots. I saw one on an island in the Chipeway River, of which I had a very good
view, as it was at no great distance from me. It sat up on its hinder parts
like a dog; and did not seem either to be apprehensive of our approach, or to
discover any ravenous inclinations. It is however very seldom to be met with in
this part of the world.

The BEAR. Bears are very numerous on this continent, but more particularly so
in the northern parts of it, and contribute to furnish both food and beds for
almost every Indian nation. Those of America differ in many respects from those
either of Greenland or Russia, they being not only somewhat smaller, but
timorous and inoffensive, unless they are pinched by hunger, or smarting from a
wound. The sight of a man terrifies them; and a dog will put several to flight.
They are extremely fond of grapes, and will climb to the top of the highest
trees in quest of them. This kind of food renders their flesh excessively rich
and finely flavoured; and it is consequently preferred by the Indians and
traders to that of any other animal. The fat is very white, and besides being
sweet and wholesome is possessed of one valuable quality, which is, that it
never cloys. The inhabitants of these parts constantly anoint themselves with
it, and to its efficacy they in a great measure owe their agility. The season
for hunting the bear is during the winter; when they take up their abode in
hollow trees, or make themselves dens in the roots of those that are blown
down, the entrance of which they stop up with branches of fir that lie
scattered about. From these retreats it is said they stir not whilst the
weather continues severe, and as it is well known that they do not provide
themselves with food, they are supposed to be enabled by nature to subsist for
some months without, and during this time to continue of the same bulk.

The WOLF. The wolves of North America are much less than those which are met
with in other parts of the world. They have, however, in common with the rest
of their species, a wildness in their looks, and a fierceness in their eyes;
notwithstanding which, they are far from being so ravenous as the European
wolves, nor will they ever attack a man, except they have accidentally fed on
the flesh of those slain in battle. When they herd together, as they often do
in the winter, they make a hideous and terrible noise. In these parts there are
two kinds; one of which is of a fallow color, the other of a dun, inclining to
a black.

The FOX. There are two sorts of foxes in North America, which differ only in
their color, one being of a reddish brown, the other of a gray; those of the
latter kind that are found near the river Mississippi, are extremely beautiful,
their hair being of a fine silver gray.

DOGS. The dogs employed by the Indians in hunting appear to be all of the same
species; they carry their ears erect, and greatly resemble a wolf about the
head. They are exceedingly useful to them in their hunting excursions, and will
attack the fiercest of the game they are in pursuit of. They are also
remarkable for their fidelity to their masters; but being ill fed by them, are
very troublesome in their huts or tents.

The CAT of the Mountain. This creature is in shape like a cat, only much
larger. The hair or fur resembles also the skin of that domestic animal; the
color however differs, for the former is of a reddish or orange cast, but
grows lighter near the belly. The whole skin is beautified with black spots of
different figures, of which those on the back are long, and those on the lower
parts round. On the ears there are black stripes. This creature is nearly as
fierce as a leopard, but will seldom attack a man.

The BUFFALO. This beast, of which there are amazing numbers in these parts, is
larger than an ox, has short black horns, with a large beard under his chin,
and his head is so full of hair, that it falls over his eyes, and gives him a
frightful look. There is a bunch on his back which begins at the haunches, and
increasing gradually to the shoulders, reaches on to the neck. Both this
excrescence and its whole body are covered with long hair, or rather wool, of a
dun or mouse color, which is exceedingly valuable, especially that on the fore
part of the body. Its head is larger than a bull's, with a very short neck; the
breast is broad, and the body decreases toward the buttocks. These creatures
will run away at the sight of a man, and a whole herd will make off when they
perceive a single dog. The flesh of the buffalo is excellent food, its hide
extremely useful, and the hair very proper for the manufacture of various
articles.

The DEER. There is but one species of deer in North America, and these are
higher and of a slimmer make than those in Europe. Their shape is nearly the
same as the European, their color of a deep fallow, and their horns very large
and branching. This beast is the swiftest on the American plains, and they herd
together as they do in other countries.

The ELK greatly exceeds the deer in size, being in bulk equal to a horse. Its
body is shaped like that of a deer, only its tail is remarkably short, being
not more than three inches long. The color of its hair, which is gray, and not
unlike that of a camel, but of a more reddish cast, is nearly three inches in
length, and as coarse as that of a horse. The horns of this creature grow to a
prodigious size, extending so wide that two or three persons might sit between
them at the same time. They are not forked like those of a deer, but have all
their teeth or branches on the outer edge. Nor does the form of those of the
elk resemble a deer's, the former being flat, and eight or ten inches broad,
whereas the latter are round and considerably narrower. They shed their horns
every year in the month of February, and by August the new ones are nearly
arrived at their full growth. Notwithstanding their size, and the means of
defense nature has furnished them with, they are as timorous as a deer. Their
skin is very useful, and will dress as well as that of a buck. They feed on
grass in the summer, and on moss or buds in the winter.

The MOOSE is nearly about the size of the elk, and the horns of it are almost
as enormous as that amimal's; the stem of them however are not quite so wide,
and they branch on both sides like those of a deer. This creature also sheds
them every year. Though its hinder parts are very broad, its tail is not above
an inch long. It has feet and legs like a camel; its head is about two feet
long, its upper lip much larger than the under, and the nostrils of it are so
wide that a man might thrust his hand into them a considerable way. The hair of
the moose i^ light gray, mixed with a blackish red. It is very elastic, for
though it be beaten ever so long, it will retain its original shape. The flesh
is exceeding good food, easy of digestion, and very nourishing. The nose, or
upper lip, which is large and loose from the gums, is esteemed a great
delicacy, being of a firm consistence, between marrow and gristle, and when
properly dressed, affords a rich and luscious dish. Its hide is very proper for
leather, being thick and strong, yet soft and pliable. The pace of this
creature is always a trot, which is so expeditious, that it is exceeded in
swiftness but by few of its fellow inhabitants of these woods. It is generally
found in the forests, where it feeds on moss and buds. Though this creature is
of the deer kind, it never herds as those do. Most authors confound it with the
elk, deer, or carrabou, but it is a species totally different, as might be
discovered by attending to the description I have given of each.

The CARRABOU. This beast is not near so tall as the moose, however it is
something like it in shape, only rather more heavy, and inclining to the form
of the ass. The horns of it are not flat as those of the elk are, but round
like those of the deer; they also meet nearer together at the extremities, and
bend more over the face, than either those of the elk or moose. It partakes of
the swiftness of the deer, and is with difficulty overtaken by its pursuers.
The flesh of it likewise is equally as good, the tongue particularly is in high
esteem. The skin being smooth and free from veins, is as valuable as shamoy.

The CARCAJOU. This creature, which is of the cat kind, is a terrible enemy to
the preceding four species of beasts. He either comes upon them from some
concealment unperceived, or climbs up into a tree, and taking his station on
some of the branches, waits till one of them, driven by an extreme of heat or
cold, takes shelter under it; when he fastens upon his neck, and opening the
jugular vein, soon brings his prey to the ground. This he is enabled to do by
his long tail, with which he encircles the body of his adversary; and the only
means they have to shun their fate, is by flying immediately to the water; by
this method, as the carcajou has a great dislike to that element, he is
sometimes got rid of before he can effect his purpose.

The SKUNK. This is the most extraordinary animal that the American woods
produce. It is rather less than a pole-cat, and of the same species; it is
therefore often mistaken for that creature, but it is very different from it in
many points. Its hair is long and shining, variegated with large black and
white spots, the former mostly on the shoulders and rump; its tail is very
bushy, like that of the fox, part black, and part white, like its body; it
lives chiefly in the woods and hedges; but its extraordinary powers are only
shown when it is pursued. As soon as he finds himself in danger he ejects, to a
great distance from behind, a small stream of water, of so subtle a nature,
and at the same time of so powerful a smell, that the air is tainted with it
for half a mile in circumference; and his pursuers, whether men or dogs, being
almost suffocated with the stench, are obliged to give over the pursuit. On
this account he is called by the French, Enfant du Diable, the Child of the
Devil; or Beat Puante, the Stinking Beast. It is almost impossible to describe
the noisome effects of the liquid with which this creature is supplied by
nature for its defense. If a drop of it falls on your clothes, they are
rendered so disagreeable that it is impossible ever after to wear them; or if
any of it enters your eyelids, the pain becomes intolerable for a long time,
and perhaps at last you lose your sight. The smell of the skunk, though thus to
be dreaded, is not like that of a putrid carcass, but a strong foetid effluvia
of musk, which displeases rather from its penetrating power than from its
nauseousness. It is notwithstanding considered as conducive to clear the head,
and to raise the spirits. This water is supposed by naturalists to be its
urine; but I have diffected many of them that I have shot, and have found
within their bodies* near the urinal vessel, a small receptacle of water,
totally distinct from the bladder which contained the urine, and from which
alone I am satisfied the horrid stench proceeds. After having taken out with
great care the bag wherein this water is lodged, I have frequently fed on them,
and have found them very sweet and good; but one drop emitted taints not only
the carcass, but the whole house, and renders every kind of provisions, that
are in it, unfit for use. With great justice therefore do the French give it
such a diabolical name.

The PORCUPINE. The body of an American porcupine is in bulk about the size of
a small dog, but it is both shorter in length, and not so high from the ground.
It varies very much from those of other countries both in its shape and the
length of its quills. The former is like that of a fox, except the head, which
is not so sharp and long, but resembles more that of a rabbit. Its body is
covered with hair of a dark brown, about four inches long, great part of which
are the thickness of a straw, and are termed its quills. These are white, with
black points, hollow, and very strong, especially those that grow on the back.
The quills serve this creature for offensive and defensive weapons, which he
darts at his enemies, and if they pierce the flesh in the least degree, they
will sink quite into it, and are not to be extracted without incision. The
Indians use them for boring their ears and noses, to insert their pendants, and
also by way of ornament to their stockings, hair, etc. besides which they
greatly esteem the flesh.

The WOOD-CHUCK is a ground animal of the fur kind, about the size of a martin,
being nearly fifteen inches long; its body however is rounder, and his legs
shorter; the fore-paws of it are broad, and constructed for the purpose of
digging holes in the ground, where it burrows like a rabit; its fur is of a
gray color, on the reddish cast, and its flesh tolerable food.

The RACOON is somewhat less in size than a beaver, and its feet and legs are
like those of that creature, but short in proportion to its body, which
resembles that of a badger. The shape of its head is much like a fox's, only
the ears are shorter, more round and naked; and its hair is also similar to
that animal's, being thick, long, soft, and black at the ends. On its face
there is a broad stripe that runs across it, and includes the eyes, which are
large. Its muzzle is black, and at the end roundish like that of a dog; the
teeth are also similar to those of a dog in number and shape; the tail is long
and round, with annular stripes on it like those of a cat; the feet have five
long slender toes, armed with sharp claws, by which it is enabled to climb up
trees like a monkey, and to run to the very extremities of the boughs. It makes
use of its fore feet, in the manner of hands, and feeds itself with them. The
flesh of this creature is very good in the months of September and October,
when fruit and nuts, on which it likes to feed, are plenty.

The MARTIN is rather larger than a squirrel, and somewhat of the same make;
its legs and claws however are considerably shorter. Its ears are short, broad,
and roundish, and its eyes shine in the night like those of a cat. The whole
body is covered with fur of a brownish fallow color, and there are some in the
more northern parts which are black; the skins of the latter are of much
greater value than the others. The tail is covered with long hair, which makes
it appear thicker than it really is. Its flesh is sometimes eaten, but is not
in any great esteem.

The MUSQUASH, or MUSK-RAT, is so termed for the exquisite musk which it
affords. It appears to be a diminutive of the beaver, being endowed with all
the properties of that sagacious animal, and wants nothing but size and
strength, being not much bigger than a large rat of the Norway breed, to rival
the creature it so much resembles. Was it not for its tail, which is exactly
the same as that of an European rat, the structure of their bodies is so much
alike, especially the head, that it might be taken for a small beaver. Like
that creature it builds itself a cabin, but of a less perfect construction,
and takes up its abode near the side of some piece of water. In the spring they
leave their retreats, and in pairs subsist on leaves and roots till the summer
comes on, when they feed on strawberries, rasberries, and such other fruits as
they can reach. At the approach of winter they separate, when each takes up its
lodging apart by itself in some hollow of a tree, where they remain quite
unprovided with food, and there is the greatest reason to believe, subsist
without any till the return of spring.

SQUIRRELS. There are five sorts of squirrels in America; the red, the gray,
the black, the variegated, and the flying. The two former are exactly the same
as those of Europe; the black are somewhat larger, and differ from them only in
color; the variegated also resemble them in shape and figure, but are very
beautiful, being finely striped with white or gray* and sometimes with red and
black. The American flying squirrel is much less than the European, being not
above five inches long, and of a russet gray or ash color on the back, and
white on the under parts. It has black prominent eyes, like those of the mouse,
with a long flat broad tail. By a membrane on each side which reaches from its
fore to its hind legs, this creature is enabled to leap from one tree to
another, even if they stand a considerable distance apart; this loose skin,
which it is enabled to stretch out like a sail, and by which it is buoyed up,
is about two inches broad, and is covered with a fine hair or down. It feeds
upon the same provisions as the others, and is easily tamed.

The BEAVER. This creature has been so often treated of* and his uncommon
abilities so minutely described, that any further account of it will appear
unnecessary: however for the benefit of those of my readers who are not so well
acquainted with the form and properties of this sagacious and useful animal, I
shall give a concise description of it. The beaver is an amphibious quadruped,
which cannot live for any long time in the water, and it is said is even able
to exist entirely without it, provided it has the convenience of sometimes
bathing itself. The largest beavers are nearly four feet in length, and about
fourteen or fifteen inches in breadth over the haunches; they weigh about sixty
pounds. Its head is like that of the otter, but larger; its snout is pretty
long, the eyes small, the ears short, round, hairy on the outside, and smooth
within, and its teeth very long; the under teeth stand out of their mouths
about the breadth of three fingers, and the upper half a finger, all of which
are broad, crooked, strong and sharp; besides those teeth called the incisors,
which grow double, are set very deep in their jaws, and bend like the edge of
an axe, they have sixteen grinders, eight on each-side, four above and four
below, directly opposite to each other. With the former they are able to cut
down trees of a considerable size, with the latter to break the hardest
substances. Its legs are short, particularly the fore legs, which are only four
or five inches long, and not unlike those of a badger; the toes of the
fore-feet are separate, the nails placed obliquely, and are hollow like quills;
but the hind feet are quite different, and furnished with membranes between the
toes. By this means it can walk, though but slowly, and is able to swim with as
much ease as any other aquatic animal. The tail has somewhat in it that
resembles a fish, and seems to have no manner of relation to the rest of the
body, except the hind feet, all the other parts being similar to those of land
animals. The tail is covered with a skin furnished with scales, that are joined
together by a pellicle; these scales are about the thickness of parchment,
nearly a line and a half in length, and generally of a hexagonical figure,
having six corners; it is about eleven or twelve inches in length, and broader
in the middle, where it is four inches over, than either at the root or the
extremity. It is about two inches thick near the body, where it is almost
round, and grows gradually thinner and flatter to the end. The color of the
beaver is different according to the different climates in which it is found.
In the most northern parts they are generally quite black; in more temperate,
brown; their color becoming lighter and lighter as they approach toward the
south. The fur is of two sorts all over the body, except at the feet, where it
is very short; that which is the longest is generally in length about an inch,
but on the back it sometimes extends to two inches, gradually diminishing
toward the head and ^ail. This part of the fur is harsh, coarse, and shining,
and of little use; the other part consists of a very thick and fine down, so
soft that it feels almost like silk, about three quarters of an inch in length,
and is what is commonly manufactured. Castor, which is useful in medicine, is
produced from the body of this creature; it was formerly believed to be its
testicles, but later discoveries have shown that it is contained in four bags,
situated in the lower belly. Two of which, that are called the superior, from
their being more elevated than the others, are filled with a soft resinous,
adhesive matter, mixed with small fibers, greyish without, and yellow within,
of a strong, disagreeable, and penetrating scent, and very inflammable. This is
the true castoreum; it hardens in the air, and becomes brown, brittle, and
friable. The inferior bags contain an unctuous liquor like honey; the color of
which is a pale yellow, and its odor somewhat different from the other, being
rather weaker and more disagreeable; it however thickens as it grows older, and
at length becomes about the consistence of tallow. This has also its particular
use in medicine; but it is not so valuable as the true castoreum.

The ingenuity of these creatures in building their cabins, and in providing
for their subsistence, is truly wonderful. When they are about to choose
themselves a habitation, they assemble in companies sometimes of two or three
hundred, and after mature deliberation six on a place where plenty of
provisions, and all necessaries are to be found. Their houses are always
situated in the water, and when they can find neither lake nor pond adjacent,
they endeavor to supply the defect by stopping the current of some brook or
small river, by means of a causeway or dam. For this purpose they set about
felling of trees, and they take care to choose out those that grow above the
place where they intend to build, that they might swim down with the current.
Having fixed on those that are proper, three or four beavers placing themselves
round a large one, find means with their strong teeth to bring it down. They
also prudently contrive that it shall fall toward the water, that they may
have the less way to carry it. After they have by a continuance of the same
labor and industry, cut it into proper lengths, they roll these into the
water, and navigate them toward the place where they are to be employed.
Without entering more minutely into the measures they pursue in the
construction of their dams. I shall only remark, that having prepared a kind of
mortar with their feet, and laid it on with their tails, which they had before
made use of to transport it to the place where it is requisite, they construct
them with as much solidity and regularity as the most experienced workman could
do. The formation of their cabins is no less amazing. These are either built on
piles in the middle of the small lakes they have thus formed, on the bank of a
river, or at the extremity of some point of land that advances into a lake. The
figure of them is round or oval, and they are fashioned with an ingenuity equal
to their dams. Two thirds of the edifice stands above the water, and this part
is sufficiently capacious to contain eight or ten inhabitants. Each beaver has
his place assigned him, the floor of which he curiously strews with leaves, or
small branches of the pine tree, so as to render it clean and comfortable; and
their cabins are all situated so contiguous to each other, as to allow of an
easy communication. The winter never surprises these animals before their
business is completed; for by the latter end of September their houses are
finished, and their stock of provisions are generally laid in. These consist of
small pieces of wood whose texture is soft, such as the poplar, the aspin, or
willow, etc. which they lay up in piles, and dispose of in such manner as to
preserve their moisture. Was I to enumerate every instance of sagacity that is
to be discovered in these animals, they would fill a volume, and prove not only
entertaining but instructive.

The OTTER. This creature also is amphibious, and greatly resembles a beaver,
but is very different from it in many respects. Its body is nearly as long as a
beaver's, but considerably less in all its parts. The muzzle, eyes, and the
form of the head are nearly the same, but the teeth are very unlike, for the
otter want^ the large incisors or nippers that a beaver has; instead of these,
all his teeth, without any distinction, are shaped like those of a dog or wolf.
The hair also of the former is not half so long as that belonging to the
latter, nor is the color of it exactly the same, for the hair of an otter
under the neck, stomach, and belly, is more greyish than that of a beaver, and
in many other respects it likewise varies. This animal, which is met with in
most parts of the world, but in much greater numbers in North America, is very
mischievous, and when he is closely pursued, will not only attack dogs but men.

It generally feeds upon fish, especially in the summer, but in the winter is
contented with the bark of trees, or the produce of the fields. Its flesh both
tastes and smells of fish, and is not wholesome food, though it is sometimes
eaten through necessity.

The MINK is of the otter kind, and subsists in the same manner. In shape and
size it resembles a pole-cat, being equally long and slender. Its skin is
blacker than that of an otter, or almost any other creature; "as black as a
mink," being a proverbial expression in America; it is not however so valuable,
though this greatly depends on the season in which it is taken. Its tail is
round like that of a snake, but growing flattish toward the end, and is
entirely without hair. An agreeable musky scent exhales from its body; and it
is met with near the sources of rivers, on whose banks it chiefly lives.

OF THE BIRDS.
The Eagle, the Hawk, the Night Hawk, the Fish Hawk, the Whipperwill, the
Raven, the Crow, the Owl, Parrots, the Pelican, the Crane, the Stork, the
Cormorant, the Heron, the Swan, the Goose, Ducks, Teal, the Loon, the
Water-Hen, the Turkey, the Heath Cock* the Partridge, the Quail, Pigeons, the
Snipe, Larks, the Woodpecker, the Cuckoo, the Blue Jay, the Swallow, the Wakon
Bird, the Black Bird, the Red Bird, the Thrush, the Whetsaw, the Nightingale,
the King Bird, the Robin, the Wren, and the Humming Bird.

The EAGLE. There are only two sorts of eagles in these parts, the bald and the
gray, which are much the same in size, and similar to the shape of those of
other countries.

The NIGHT HAWK. This Bird is of the hawk species, its bill being crooked, its
wings formed for swiftness, and its shape nearly like that of the common hawk;
but in size it is considerably less, and in color rather darker. It is
scarcely ever seen but in the evening, when, at the approach of twilight, it
flies about, and darts itself in wanton gambols at the head of the belated
traveller. Before a thunder-shower these birds are seen at an amazing height in
the air assembled together in great numbers, as swallows are observed to do on
the same occasion.

The WHIPPERWILL, or, as it i^ ^ermed by the Indians, the Muckawiss. This
extraordinary (...) is somewhat like the last-mentioned in its shape and
color, only it has some whitish stripes across the wings, and like that is
seldom ever seen till after sunset. It also is never met with but during the
spring and summer months. As soon as the Indians are informed by its notes of
its return, they conclude that the frost is entirely gone, in which they are
seldom deceived; and on receiving this assurance of milder weather, begin to
sow their corn. It acquires its name by the noise it makes, which to the people
of the colonies sounds like the name they give it, Whipper-will; to an Indian
ear Muck-a-wiss. The words, it is true, are not alike, but in this manner they
strike the imagination of each; and the circumstance is a proof that the same
sounds, if they are not rendered certain by being reduced to the rules of
orthography, might convey different ideas to different people. As soon as night
comes on, these birds will place themselves on the fences, stumps, or stones
that lie near some house, and repeat their melancholy notes without any
variation till midnight. The Indians, and some of the inhabitants of the back
settlements, think if this bird perches upon any house, that it betokens some
mishap to the inhabitants of it.

The FISH HAWK greatly resembles the latter in its shape, and receives his name
from his food, which is generally fish; it skims over the lakes and rivers, and
sometimes seems to lie expanded on the water, as he hovers so close to it, and
having by some attractive power drawn the fish within its reach, darts suddenly
upon them. The charm it makes use of is supposed to be an oil contained in a
small bag in the body, and which nature has by some means or other supplied him
with the power of using for this purpose; it is however very certain that any
bait touched with a drop of the oil collected from this bird is an irresistible
lure for all sorts of fish, and insures the angler great success.

The OWL. The only sort of owls that is found on the banks of the Mississippi
is extremely beautiful in its plumage* being of a fine deep yellow or gold
color, pleasingly shaded and spotted.

The CRANE. There is a kind of crane in these parts, which is called by Father
Hennepin a pelican, that is about the size of the European crane, of a greyish
color, and with long legs; but this species differs from all others in its
bill, which is about twelve inches long, and one inch and half broad, of which
breadth it continues to the end, where it is blunted, and round like a paddle;
its tongue is of the same length.

DUCKS. Among a variety of wild ducks, the different species of which amount to
upwards of twenty, I shall confine my description to one sort, that is, the
wood duck, or, as the French term it, Canard branchus. This fowl receives its
name from its frequenting the woods, and perching on the branches of trees,
which no other kind of water fowl (a characteristic that this still preserves)
is known to do. It is nearly of a size with other ducks; its plumage is
beautifully variegated, and very brilliant. The flesh of it also, as it seeds
but little on fish, is finely flavoured, and much superior to any other sort.

The TEAL. I have already remarked in my Journal, that the teal found on the
Fox River, and the head branches of the Mississippi, are perhaps not to be
equalled for the fatness and delicacy of their flesh by any other in the world.
In color, shape, and size they are very little different from those found in
other countries.

The LOON is a water fowl, somewhat less than a teal, and is a species of the
dobchick. Its wings are short, and its legs and feet large in proportion to the
body; the color of it is a dark brown, nearly approaching to black; and as it
feeds only on fish, the flesh of it is very ill-flavoured. These birds are
exceedingly nimble and expert at diving, so that it is almost impossible for
one person to shoot them, as they will dexterously avoid the shot by diving
before they reach them; so that it requires three persons to kill one of them,
and this can only be done the moment it raises his head out of the water as it
returns to the surface after diving. It however only repays the trouble taken
to obtain it. by the excellent sport it affords.

The PARTRIDGE. There are three sorts of partridges here, the brown, the red,
and the black, the first of which are most esteemed. They are all much larger
than the European partridges, being nearly the size of a hen pheasant; their
head and eyes are also like that bird, and they have all long tails, which they
spread like a fan, but not erect; but contrary to the custom of those in other
countries, they will perch on the branches of the poplar and black birch, on
the buds of which they feed early in the morning and in the twilight of the
evening during the winter months, when they are easily shot.

The WOOD PIGEON, is nearly the same as ours, and there is such prodigious
quantities of them on the banks of the Mississippi, that they will sometimes
darken the sun for several minutes.

The WOODPECKER. This is a very beautiful bird; there is one sort whose
feathers are a mixture of various colors; and another that is brown all over
the body, except the head and neck, which are of a fine red. As this bird is
supposed to make a greater noise than ordinary at particular times, it is
conjectured his cries then denote rain.

The BLUE JAY. This bird is shaped nearly like the European jay, only that its
tail is longer. On the top of its head is a crest of blue feathers, which is
raised or let down at pleasure. The lower part of the neck behind, and the
back, are of a purplish color, and the upper sides of the wings and tail, as
well as the lower part of the back and rump, are of a fine blue; the
extremities of the wings are blackish, faintly tinctured with dark blue on the
edges, whilst the other parts of the wing are barred across with black in an
elegant m^^ner. Upon the whole this bird can scarcely be exceeded, in ^eauty by
any of the winged inhabitants of this or other clim^^^s. It has the same
jetting motion that jays generally have, and (...) cry is far more pleasing.

The WAKON BIRD, as it is termed by the In^^ans, appears to be of the same
species as the birds of paradise. The name they have given it is expressive of
its superior excellence, and the veneration they have for it; the wakon bird
being in their language the bird of the Great Spirit. It is nearly the size of
a swallow, of a brown color, shaded about the neck with a bright green; the
wings are of a darker brown than the body; its tail i^ composed of four or five
feathers* which are three times as long as its body, and which are beautifully
shaded with green and purple. It carries this fine length of plumage in the
same manner as a peacock does, but it is not known whether it ever raises it
into the erect position that bird sometimes does. I never saw any of these
birds in the colonies, but the Naudowessie Indians caught several of them when
I was in their country, and seemed to treat them as if they were of a superior
rank to any other of the feathered race.

The BLACK BIRD. There are three sorts of birds in North America that bear this
name; the first is the common, or as it is there termed, the crow blackbird,
which is quite black, and of the same size and shape of those in Europe, but it
has not that melody in its notes which they have. In the month of September
this sort fly in large flights, and do great mischief to the Indian corn, which
is at that time just ripe. The second sort is the red-wing, which is rather
smaller than the first species, but like that it is black all over its body,
except on the lower rim of the wings, where it is of a fine bright full
scarlet. It builds its nest, and chiefly resorts among the small bushes that
grow in meadows and low swampy places. It whistles a few notes, but is not
equal in its song to the European blackbird. The third sort is of the same size
as the latter, and is jet black like that, but all the upper part of the wing,
just below the back, is of a fine clear white; as if nature intended to
diversify the species, and to atone for the want of a melodious pipe by the
beauty of its plumage; for this also is deficient in its musical powers. The
beaks of every sort are of a full yellow, and the females of each of a rusty
black like the European.

The RED BIRD is about the size of a sparrow, but with a long tail, and is all
over of a bright vermilion color. I saw many of them about the Ottawaw Lakes,
but I could not learn that they sung. I also observed in some other parts, a
bird of much the same make, that was entirely of a fine yellow.

The WHETSAW is of the cuckoo kind, being like that, a solitary bird, and
scarcely ever seen. In the summer months it is heard in the groves, where it
makes a noise like the filing of a saw; from which it receives its name.

The KING BIRD is like a swallow, and seems to be of the same species as the
black martin or swift. It is called the King Bird because it is able to master
almost every bird that flies. I have often seen it bring down a hawk.

The HUMMING BIRD. This beautiful bird, which is the smallest of the feathered
inhabitants of the air, is about the third part the size of a wren, and is
shaped extremely like it. Its legs, which are about an inch long, appear like
two small needles, and its body is proportionable to them. But its plumage
exceeds description. On its head it has a small tuft of a jetty shining black;
the breast of it is red, the belly white, the back, wings, and tail of the
finest pale green; and small specks of gold are scattered with inexpressible
grace over the whole: besides this, an^ ^lmost imperceptible down softens the
colors, and produces the most pleasing shades. With its bill, which is of the
same diminutive size as the other parts of its body, it extracts from the
flowers a moisture which is its nourishment; over these it hovers like a be,
but never lights on them, moving at the same time its wings with such velocity
that the motion of them is imperceptible; notwithstanding which they make a
humming noise, from whence it receives its name.

Of the FISHES which are found in the waters of the Mississippi.
I have already given a description of those that are taken in the great lakes.

The Sturgeon, the Pout or Cat Fish, the Pike, the Carp, and the Chub.

The STURGEON. The fresh water sturgeon is shaped in no other respect like
those taken near the sea, except in the formation of its head and tail; which
are fashioned in the same manner, but the body is not so angulated, nor are
there so many horny scales about it as on the latter. Its length is generally
about two feet and a half or three feet long, but in circumference not
proportionable, being a slender fish. The flesh is exceedingly delicate and
finely flavoured; I caught some in the head waters of the river St. Cr^ix that
far exceeded trout. The manner of taking them is by watching them as they lie
under the banks in a clear stream, and darting at them with a fish-spear; for
they will not take a bait. There is also in the Mississippi, and there only,
another sort than the species I have described, which is similar to it in every
respect, except that the upper jaw extends fourteen or fifteen inches beyond
the under; this extensive jaw, which is of a griftly substance, is three inches
and a half broad, and continues of that breadth, somewhat in the shape of an
oar, to the end, which is flat. The flesh of this fish, however, is not to be
compared with the other sort, and is not so much esteemed even by the Indians.

The CAT FISH. This fish is about eighteen inches long; of a brownish color
and without scales. It has a large round head, from whence it receives its
name, on different parts of which grow three or four strong sharp horns about
two inches long. Its fins are also very bony and strong, and without great care
will pierce the hands of those who take them. It weighs commonly about five or
six pounds; the flesh of it is excessively fat and luscious, and greatly
resembles that of an eel in its flavor.

The CARP and CHUB are much the same as those in England, and nearly about the
same in size.

OF SERPENTS.
The Rattle Snake, the Long Black Snake, the Wall or House Adder, the Striped
or Garter Snake, the Water Snake, the Hissing Snake, the Green Snake, the
Thorn-tail Snake, the Speckled Snake, the Ring Snake, the Two-headed Snake.

The RATTLE SNAKE. There appears to be two species of this reptile; one of
which is commonly termed the Black, and the other the yellow; and of these the
latter is generally considered as the largest. At their full growth they are
upwards of five feet long, and the middle part of the body, at which it is of
the greatest bulk, measures about nine inches round. From that part it
gradually decreases both toward the head and the tail. The neck is
proportionally very small, and the head broad and depressed. These are of a
light brown color, the iris of the eye red, and all the upper part of the body
brown, mixed with a ruddy yellow, and chequered with many regular lines of a
deep black, gradually shading toward a gold color. In short the whole of this
dangerous reptile is very beautiful, and could it be viewed with less terror,
such a variegated arrangement of colors would be extremely pleasing. But these
are only to be seen in their highest perfection at the time this creature is
animated by resentment; then every tint rushes from its subcutaneous recess,
and gives the surface of the skin a deeper stain. The belly is of a palish
blue, which grows fuller as it approaches the sides, and is at length
intermixed with the color of the upper part. The rattle at its tail, from
which it receives its name, is composed of a firm, dry, callous, or horny
substance of a light brown, and consists of a number of cells which articulate
one within another, like joints; and which increase every year, and make known
the age of the creature. These articulations being very loose, the included
points strike against the inner surface of the concave parts or rings into
which they are admitted, and as the snake vibrates, or shakes its tail, makes a
rattling noise. This alarm it always gives when it is apprehensive of danger;
and in an instant after forms itself into a spiral wreath, in the center of
which appears the head erect, and breathing forth vengeance against either man
or beast that shall dare to come near it. In this attitude he awaits the
approach of his enemies, rattling his tail as he sees or hears them coming on.
By this timely intimation, which heaven seems to have provided as a means to
counteract the mischief this venomous reptile would otherwise be perpetrator
of, the unwary traveller is apprized of his danger, and has an opportunity of
avoiding it. It is however to be observed, that it never acts offensively; it
neither pursues or flies from any thing that approaches it, but lies in the
position described, rattling his tail as if reluctant to hurt. The teeth with
which this serpent effects his poisonous purposes are not those he makes use of
on ordinary occasions, they are only two in number, very small and sharp
pointed, and fixed in a sinewy substance that lies near the extremity of the
upper jaw, resembling the claws of a cat; at the root of each of these, which
might be extended, contracted, or entirely hidden, as need requires, are two
small bladders which nature has so constructed, that at the same instant an
incision is made by the teeth, a drop of a greenish poisonous liquid enters the
wound, and taints with its destructive quality the whole mass of blood. In a
moment the unfortunate victim of its wrath seels a chilly tr^mor run through
all his frame; a swelling immediately begins on the spot where the teeth had
entered, which spreads by degrees over the whole body, and produces on every
part of the skin the variegated hue of the snake. The bite of this reptile is
more or less venomous, according to the season of the year in which it is
given. In the dog days it often proves instantly mortal, and especially if the
wound is made among the sinews situated in the back part of the leg, above the
heel; but in the spring, in autumn, or during a cool day which might happen in
the summer, its bad effects are to be prevented by the immediate application of
proper remedies; and these Providence has bounteously supplied, by causing the
Rattle Snake Plantain, an approved antidote to the poison of this creature, to
grow in great profusion wherever they are to be met with. There are likewise
several other remedies besides this, for the venom of its bite. A decoction
made of the buds or bark of the white ash, taken internally, prevents its
pernicious effects. Salt is a newly discovered remedy, and if applied
immediately to the part, or the wound be washed with brine, a cure might be
assured. The fat of the reptile also rubbed on it is frequently found to be
very efficacious. But though the lives of the persons who have been bitten
might be preserved by these, and their health in some degree restored, yet they
annually experience a slight return of the dreadful symptoms about the time
they received the instillation. However remarkable it may appear it is certain,
that though the venom of this creature affects in a greater or less degree all
animated nature, the hog is an exception to the rule, as that animal will
readily destroy them without dreading their poisonous fangs, and fatten on
their flesh. It has been often observed, and I can confirm the observation,
that the Rattle Snake is charmed with any harmonious sounds, whether vocal or
instrumental; I have many times seen them, even when they have been enraged,
place themselves into a listening posture, and continue immoveably attentive
and susceptible of delight all the time the music has lasted. I should have
remarked, that when the Rattle Snake bites, it drops its under jaw, and holding
the upper jaw erect, throws itself in a curve line, with great force, and as
quick as lightning, on the object of its resentment. In a moment after, it
returns again to its defensive posture, having disengaged its teeth from the
wound with great celerity, by means of the position in which it had placed its
head when it made the attack. It never extends itself to a greater distance
than half its length will reach, and though it sometimes repeats the blow two
or three times, it as often returns, with a sudden rebound to its former state.
The Black Rattle Snake differs in no other respect from the yellow, than in
being rather smaller, and in the variegation of its colors, which are exactly
reversed: one is black where the other is yellow, and vice versa. They are
equally venomous. It is not known how these creatures engender; I have often
found the eggs of several other species of the snake, but notwithstanding no
one has taken more pains to acquire a perfect knowledge of every property of
these reptiles than myself, I never could discover the manner in which they
bring forth their young. I once killed a female that had seventy young ones in
its belly, but these were perfectly formed, and I saw them just before retire
to the mouth of their mother, as a place of security, on my approach. The gall
of this serpent, mixed with chalk, are formed into little balls, and exported
from America, for medicinal purposes. They are of the nature of Gascoign's
powders, and are an excellent remedy for complaints incident to children. The
flesh of the snake also dried, and made into broth, is much more nutritive than
that of vipers, and very efficacious against consumptions.

The LONG BLACK SNAKE. These are also of two sorts, both of which are exactly
similar in shape and size, only the belly of one is a light red, the other a
faint blue; all the upper parts of their bodies are black and scaly. They are
generally from six to eight feet in length, and carry their heads, as they
crawl along, about a foot and an half from the ground. They easily climb the
highest tree, in pursuit of birds and squirrels, which are their chief food;
and these, it is said, they charm by their looks, and render incapable of
escaping from them. Their appearance carries terror with it to those who are
unacquainted with their inability to hurt, but they are perfectly inoffensive
and free from venom.

The STRIPED or GARTER SNAKE is exactly the same as that species found in other
climates.

The WATER SNAKE is much like the Rattle Snake in shape and size, but is not
endowed with the same venomous powers, being quite harmless.

The HISSING SNAKE I have already particularly described, when I treated, in my
Journal, of Lake Erie.

The GREEN SNAKE is about a foot and an half long, and in color so near to
grass and herbs, that it cannot be discovered as it lies on the ground; happily
however it is free from venom, otherwise it would do an infinite deal of
mischief, as those who pass through the meadows, not being able to perceive it,
are deprived of the power of avoiding it.

The THORN-TAIL SNAKE. This reptile is found in many parts of America but it is
very seldom to be seen. It is of a middle size, and receives its name from a
thorn-like dart in its tail, with which it is said to inflict a mortal wound.

The SPECKLED SNAKE is an aqueous reptile about two feet and an half in length,
but without venom. Its skin, which is brown and white with some spots of yellow
in it, is used by the Americans as a cover for the handles of whips, and it
renders them very pleasing to the sight.

The RING SNAKE is about twelve inches long; the body of it is entirely black,
except a yellow ring which it has about its neck, and which appears like a
narrow piece of ribband tied around it. This odd reptile is frequently found in
the bark of trees, and among old logs.

The TWO-HEADED SNAKE. The only snake of this kind that was ever seen in
America, was found about the year 1762, near Lake Champlain, by Mr. Park, a
gentleman of New England, and made a present to Lord Amherst. It was about a
foot long, and in shape like the common snake, but it was furnished with two
heads exactly similar, which united at the neck. Whether this was a distinct
species of snakes, and was able to propagat^^ its likeness, or whether it was
an accidental formation, I know not.

The TORTOISE or LAND TURTLE. The shape of this creature is so well known that
it is unnecessary to describe it. There are seven or eight sorts of them in
America, some of which are beautifully variegated, even beyond description. The
shells of many have spots of red, green, and yellow in them, and the chequer
work is composed of small squares, curiously disposed. The most beautiful sort
of these creatures are the smallest, and the bite of them is said to be
venomous.

LIZARDS, etc.
Though there are numerous kinds of this class of the animal creation, in the
country I treat of, I shall only take notice of two of them; which are termed
the Swift and the slow Lizard.

The SWIFT LIZARD is about six inches long, and has four legs and a tail. Its
body, which is blue, is prettily striped with dark lines shaded with yellow;
but the end of the tail is totally blue. It is so remarkably agile, that in an
instant it is out of sight, nor can its movement be perceived by the quickest
eye: so that it might more justly be said to vanish, than to run away. This
species are supposed to poison those they bite, but are not dangerous, as they
never attack persons that approach them, choosing rather to get suddenly out of
their reach.

The SLOW LIZARD is of the same shape as the Swift, but its color is brown; it
is moreover of an opposite disposition, being altogether as slow in its
movements as the other is swift. It is remarkable that these lizards are
extremely brittle, and will break off near the tail as easily as an icicle.

Among the reptiles of North America, there is a species of the toad termed the
TREE TOAD, which is nearly of the same shape as the common sort, but smaller
and with longer claws. It is usually found on trees, sticking close to the
bark, or lying in the crevices of it; and so nearly does it resemble the color
of the tree to which it cleaves, that it is with difficulty distinguished from
it. These creatures are only heard during the twilight of the morning and
evening, or just before and after a shower of rain, when they make a croaking
noise somewhat shriller than that of a frog, which might be heard to a great
distance. They infest the woods in such numbers, that their responsive notes at
these times make the air resound. It is only a summer animal, and never to be
found during the winter.

INSECTS.
The interior parts of North America abound with nearly the same insects as are
met with in the same parallels of latitude; and the species of them are so
numerous and diversified that even a succinct description of the whole of them
would fill a volume; I shall therefore confine myself to a few, which I believe
are almost peculiar to this country; the Silk Worm, the Tobacco Worm, the Be,
the Lightning Bug, the Water Bug, and the Horned Bug.

The SILK WORM is nearly the same as those of France and Italy, but will not
produce the same quantity of silk.

The TOBACCO WORM is a catterpillar of the size and figure of a silk worm, it
is of a fine seagreen color, on its rump it has a sting or horn near a
quarter of an inch long.

The BEES, in America, principally lodge their honey in the earth to secure it
from the ravages of the bears, who are remarkably fond of it.

The LIGHTNING BUG or FIRE FLY is about the size of a be, but it is of the
beetle kind, having like that insect two pair of wings the upper of which are
of a firm texture, to defend it from danger. When it flies, and the wings are
expanded, there is under these a kind of coat, constructed also like wings,
which is luminous; and as the insect passes on, causes all the hinder part of
its body to appear like a bright fiery coal. Having placed one of them on your
hand, the under part only shines, and throws the light on the space beneath;
but as soon as it spreads its upper wings to fly away, the whole body which
lies behind them appears illuminated all around. The light it gives is not
constantly of the same magnitude, even when it flies; but seems to depend on
the expansion or contraction of the luminous coat or wings, and is very
different from that emitted in a dark night by dry wood or some kinds of fish,
it having much more the appearance of real fire. They seem to be sensible of
the power they are possessed of, and to know the most suitable time for
exerting it, as in a very dark night they are much more numerous than at any
other time. They are only seen during the summer months of June, July, and
August, and then at no other time but in the night. Whether from their color,
which is a dusky brown, they are not then discernible, or from their retiring
to holes and crevices, I know not, but they are never to be discovered in the
day. They chiefly are seen in low swampy land, and appear like innumerable
transient gleams of light. In dark nights when there is much lightning, without
rain, they seem as if they wished either to imitate or assist the flashes; for
during the intervals, they are uncommonly agile, and endeavor to throw out
every ray they can collect. Notwithstanding this effulgent appearance, these
insects are perfectly harmless; you may permit them to crawl upon your hand,
when five or six, if they freely exhibit their glow together, will enable you
to read almost the smallest print.

The WATER BUG is of a brown color, about the size of a pea, and in shape
nearly oval: it has many legs, by means of which it passes over the surface of
the water with such incredible swiftness, that it seems to slide or dart itself
along.

The HORNED BUG, or, as it is sometimes termed, the STAG BEETLE, is of a dusky
brown color nearly approaching to black, about an inch and an half long, and
half an inch broad. It has two large horns, which grow on each side of the
head, and meet horizontally, and with these it pinches very hard; they are
branched like those of a stag, from whence it receives its name. They fly about
in the evening, and prove very troublesome to those who are in the fields at
that time.

I must not omit that the LOCUST is a septennial insect, as they are only seen,
a small number of stragglers excepted, every seven years, when they infest
these parts, and the interior colonies in large swarms, and do a great deal of
mischief. The years when they thus arrive are denominated the locust years.

CHAPTER XIX. Of the TREES, SHRUBS, ROOTS, HERBS, FLOWERS, etc.
I SHALL here observe the same method that I have pursued in the preceding
chapter, and having given a list of the trees, etc. which are natives of the
interior parts of North America, particularize such only as differ from the
produce of other countries, or, being little known, have not been described.

OF TREES.
The Oak, the Pine Tree, the Maple, the Ash, the Hemlock, the Bass or White
Wood, the Cedar, the Elm, the Birch, the Fir, the Locust Tree, the Poplar, the
Wickopick or Suckwick, the Spruce, the Hornbeam, and the Button Wood Tree.

The OAK. There are several sorts of oaks in these parts; the black, the white,
the red, the yellow, the gray, the swamp oak, and the chestnut oak: the five
former vary but little in their external appearance, the shape of the leaves,
and the color of the bark being so much alike, that they are scarcely
distinguishable; but the body of the tree when sawed discovers the variation,
which chiefly consists in the color of the wood, they being all very hard and
proper for building. The swamp oak differs materially from the others both in
the shape of the leaf, which is smaller, and in the bark, which is smoother;
and likewise as it grows only in a moist gravelly soil. It is esteemed the
toughest of all woods, being so strong yet pliable, that it is often made use
of instead of whalebone, and is equally serviceable. The chestnut oak also is
greatly different from the others, particularly in the shape of the leaf, which
much resembles that of a chesnut-tree, and for this reason is so denominated.
It is neither so strong as the former species, or so tough as the latter, but
is of a nature proper to be split into rails for fences, in which state it will
endure a considerable time.

The PINE TREE. That species of the pine tree peculiar to this part of the
continent is the white, the quality of which I need not describe, as the timber
of it is so well known under the name of deals. It grows here in great plenty,
to an amazing height and size, and yields an excellent turpentine, though not
in such quantities as those in the northern parts of Europe.

The MAPLE. Of this tree there are two sorts, the hard and the soft, both of
which yield a luscious juice, from which the Indians, by boiling, make very
good sugar. The sap of the former is much richer and sweeter than the latter,
but the soft produces a greater quantity. The wood of the hard maple is very
beautifully veined and curled, and when wrought into cabinets, tables,
gunstocks, etc. is greatly valued. That of the soft sort differs in its
texture, wanting the variegated grain of the hard; it also grows more strait
and free from branches, and is more easily split. It likewise may be
distinguished from the hard, as this grows in meadows and low-lands, that on
the hills and up-lands. The leaves are shaped alike, but those of the soft
maple are much the largest, and of a deeper green.

The ASH. There are several sorts of this tree in these parts, but that to
which I shall confine my description, is the yellow ash, which is only found
near the head branches of the Mississippi. This tree grows to an amazing
height, and the body of it is so firm and sound, that the French traders who go
into that country from Louisiana, to purchase furs, make of them periaguays;
this they do by excavating them by fire, and when they are completed, convey
in them the produce of their trade to New Orleans, where they find a good
market both for their vessels and cargoes. The wood of this tree greatly
resembles that of the common ash; but it might be distinguished from any other
tree by its bark; the ross or outside bark being near eight inches thick, and
indented with furrows more than six inches deep, which make those that are
arrived to a great bulk appear uncommonly rough; and by this peculiarity they
may be readily known. The rind or inside bark is of the same thickness as that
of other trees, but its color is a fine bright yellow, insomuch that if it is
but slightly handled, it will leave a stain on the fingers, which cannot easily
be washed away; and if in the spring you peel off the bark, and touch the sap,
which then rises between that and the body of the tree, it will leave so deep a
tincture that it will require three or four days to wear it off. Many useful
qualities belonging to this tree I doubt not will be discovered in time,
besides it proving a valuable acquisition to the dyer.

The HEMLOCK TREE grows in every part of America, in a greater or less degree.
It is an ever green of a very large growth, and has leaves somewhat like that
of the yew; it is however quite useless, and only an encumbrance to the ground,
the wood being of a very coarse grain, and full of wind-shakes or cracks.

The BASS or WHITE WOOD is a tree of a middling size, and the whitest and
softest wood that grows; when quite dry it swims on the water like a cork; in
the settlements the turners make of it bowls, trenchers, and dishes, which wear
smooth, and will last a long time; but when applied to any other purpose it is
far from durable.

The WICKOPICK or SUCKWICK appears to be a species of the white wood, and is
distinguished from it by a peculiar quality in the bark, which when pounded and
moistened with a little water, instantly becomes a matter of the consistence
and nature of size. With this the Indians pay their canoes, and it greatly
exceeds pitch, or any other material usually appropriated to that purpose; for
besides its adhesive quality, it is of so oily a nature, that the water cannot
penetrate through it, and its repelling power abates not for a considerable
time.

The BUTTON WOOD is a tree of the largest size, and might be distinguished by
its bark, which is quite smooth and prettily mottled. The wood is very proper
for the use of cabinet-makers. It is covered with small hard burs, which spring
from the branches, that appear not unlike buttons, and from these, I believe,
it receives its name.

NUT TREES.
The Butter or Oil Nut, the Walnut, the Hazle Nut, the Beech Nut, the Pecan
Nut, the Chestnut, the Hickory.

The BUTTER or OIL NUT. As no mention has been made by any authors of this nut,
I shall be the more particular in my account of it. The tree grows in meadows
where the soil is rich and warm. The body of it seldom exceeds a yard in
circumference, is full of branches, the twigs of which are short and blunt, and
its leaves resemble those of the walnut. The nut has a shell like that fruit,
which when ripe is more furrowed, and more easily craked; it is also much
longer and larger than a walnut, and contains a greater quantity of kernel,
which is very oily, and of a rich agreeable flavor. I am persuaded that a much
purer oil than that of olives might be extracted from this nut. The inside bark
of this tree dies a good purple; and it is said, varies in its shade, being
either darker or lighter, according to the month in which it is gathered.

The BEECH NUT. Though this tree grows exactly like that of the same name in
Europe, yet it produces nuts equally as good as chestnuts; on which bears,
martins, squirrels, partridges, turkies, and many other beasts and birds feed.
The nut is contained, whilst growing, in an outside case, like that of a
chestnut, but not so prickly; and the coat of the inside shell is also smooth
like that; only its form is nearly triangular. Vast quantities of them lie
scattered about in the woods, and supply with food great numbers of the
creatures just mentioned. The leaves, which are white, continue on the trees
during the whole winter. A decoction made of them is a certain and expeditious
cure for wounds which arise from burning or scalding, as well as a restorative
for those members that are nipped by the frost.

The PECAN NUT is somewhat of the walnut kind, but rather smaller than a
walnut, being about the size of a middling acorn, and of an oval form; the
shell is easily cracked, and the kernel shaped like that of a walnut. This tree
grows chiefly near the Illinois river.

The HICKORY is also of the walnut kind, and bears a fruit nearly like that
tree. There are several sorts of them, which vary only in the color of the
wood. Being of a very tough nature, the wood is generally used for the handles
of axes, etc. It is also very good firewood, and as it burns an excellent
sugar distills from it.

FRUIT TREES.
I need not to observe that these are all the spontaneous productions of
nature, which have never received the advantages of ingrafting, transplanting,
or manuring.

The Vine, the Mulberry Tree, the Crab Apple Tree, the Plum Tree, the Cherry
Tree, and the Sweet Gum Tree.

The VINE is very common here, and of three kinds; the first sort hardly
deserves the name of a grape; the second much resembles the Burgundy grape, and
if exposed to the sun a good wine might be made from them. The third sort
resembles Zant currants, which are so frequently used in cakes, etc. in
England, and if proper care was taken of them, would be equal, if not superior,
to those of that country.

The MULBERRY TREE is of two kinds, red and white, and nearly of the same size
of those of France and Italy, and grow in such plenty, as to feed any quantity
of silk worms.

The CRAB APPLE TREE bears a fruit that is much larger and better flavoured
than those of Europe.

The PLUM TREE. There are two sorts of plums in this country, one a large sort
of a purple cast on one side, and red on the reverse, the second totally green,
and much smaller. Both these are of a good flavor, and are greatly esteemed by
the Indians, whose taste is not refined, but who are satisfied with the
productions of nature in their unimproved state.

The CHERRY TREE. There are three sorts of cherries in this country; the black,
the red, and the sand cherry; the two latter may with more propriety be ranked
among the shrubs, as the bush that bears the sand cherries almost creeps along
the ground, and the other rises not above eight or ten feet in height; however
I shall give an account of them all in this place. The black cherries are about
the size of a current, and hang in clusters like grapes; the trees which bear
them being very fruitful, they are generally loaded, but the fruit is not good
to eat, however they give an agreeable flavor to brandy, and turn it to the
color of claret. The red cherries grow in the greatest profusion, and hang in
bunches, like the black sort just described; so that the bushes which bear them
appear at a distance like solid bodies of red matter. Some people admire this
fruit, but they partake of the nature and taste of alum, leaving a disagreeable
roughness in the throat, and being very astringent. As I have already described
the sand cherries, which greatly exceed the two other sorts, both in flavor
and size, I shall give no further description of them. The wood of the black
cherry tree is very useful, and works well into cabinet ware.

The SWEET GUM TREE or LIQUID AMBER (Copalm) is not only extremely common, but
it affords a balm, the virtues of which are infinite. Its bark is black and
hard, and its wood so tender and souple, that when the tree is felled, you may
draw from the middle of it rods of five or six feet in length. It cannot be
employed in building or furniture, as it warps continually. Its leaf is
indented with five points, like a star. This balm is reckoned by the Indians to
be an excellent febrifuge, and it cures wounds in two or three days.

SHRUBS.
The Willow, Shin Wood, Shumack, Sassafras, the Prickly Ash, Moose Wood, Spoon
Wood, Large Elder, Dwarf Elder, Poisonous Elder, Juniper, Shrub Oak, Sweet
Fern, the Laurel, the Witch Hazle, the Myrtle Wax tree, Winter Green, the Fever
Bush, the Cranberry Bush, the Goosberry Bush, the Current Bush, the Whirtle
Berry, the Rasberry, the Black Berry, and the Choke Berry.

The WILLOW. There are several species of the willow, the most remarkable of
which is a small sort that grows on the banks of the Mississippi, and some
other places adjacent. The bark of this shrub supplies the beaver with its
winter food; and where the water has washed the soil from its roots, they
appear to consist of fibers interwoven together like thread, the color of
which is of an inexpressible fine scarlet; with this the Indians tinge many of
the ornamental parts of their dress.

SHIN WOOD. This extraordinary shrub grows in the forests, and rising like a
vine, runs near the ground for six or eight feet, and then takes root again; in
the same manner taking root, and springing up successively, one stalk covers a
large space; this proves very troublesome to the hasty traveller, by striking
against his shins, and entangling his legs; from which it has acquired its name.

The SASSAFRAS is a wood well known for its medicinal qualities. It might with
equal propriety be termed a tree as a shrub, as it sometimes grows thirty feet
high* but in general it does not reach higher than those of the shrub kind. The
leaves, which yield an agreeable fragrance, are large, and nearly separated
into three divisions. It bears a reddish brown berry, of the size and shape of
Pimento, and which is sometimes used in the colonies as a substitute for that
spice. The bark or roots of this tree is infinitely superior to the wood for
its use in medicine, and I am surprised it is so seldom to be met with, as its
efficacy is so much greater.

The PRICKLY ASH is a shrub that sometimes grows to the height of ten or
fifteen feet, and has a leaf exactly resembling that of an ash, but it receives
the epithet to its name from the abundance of short thorns with which every
branch is covered, and which renders it very troublesome to those who pass
through the spot where they grow thick. It also bears a scarlet berry, which,
when ripe, has a fiery taste, like pepper. The bark of this tree, particularly
the bark of the roots, is highly esteemed by the natives for its medicinal
qualities. I have already mentioned one instance of its efficacy, and there is
no doubt but that the decoction of it will expeditiously and radically remove
all impurities of the blood.

The MOOSE WOOD grows about four feet high, and is very full of branches; but
what renders it worth notice is its bark, which is of so strong and pliable a
texture, that being peeled off at any season, and twisted, makes equally as
good cordage as hemp.

The SPOON WOOD is a species of the laurel, and the wood when sawed resembles
box wood.

The ELDER, commonly rermed the poisonous elder, nearly resembles the other
sorts in its leaves and branches, but it grows much straiter, and is only found
in swamps and moist soils. This shrub is endowed with a very extraordinary
quality, that renders it poisonous to some constitutions, which it effects if
the person only approaches within a few yards of it, whilst others may even
chew the leaves or the rind without receiving the least detriment from them:
the poison however is not mortal, though it operates very violently on the
infected person, whose body and head swell to an amazing size, and are covered
with eruptions, that at their height resemble the confluent smallpox. As it
grows also in many of the provinces, the inhabitants cure its venom by drinking
saffron tea, and anointing the external parts with a mixture composed of cream
and marsh mallows.

The SHRUB OAK is exactly similar to the oak tree, both in its wood and leaves,
and like that it bears an acorn, but it never rises from the ground above four
or five feet, growing crooked and knotty. It is found chiefly on a dry gravelly
soil.

The WITCH HAZLE grows very bushy, about ten feet high, and is covered early in
May with numerous white blossoms. When this shrub is in bloom, the Indians
esteem it a further indication that the frost is entirely gone, and that they
might sow their corn. It has been said, that it is possessed of the power of
attracting gold or silver, and that twigs of it are made use of to discover
where the veins of these metals lie hid; but I am apprehensive that this is
only a fallacious story, and not to be depended on; however that supposition
has given it the name of Witch Hazle.

The MYRTLE WAX TREE is a shrub about four or five feet high, the leaves of
which are larger than those of the common myrtle, but they smell exactly alike.
It bears its fruit in bunches, like a nosegay, rising from the same place in
various stalks, about two inches long: at the end of each of these is a little
nut containing a kernel, which is wholly covered with a gluey substance, which
being boiled in water, swims on the surface of it, and becomes a kind of green
wax; this is more valuable than beeswax, being of a more brittle nature, but
mixed with it makes a good candle, which, as it burns, sends forth an agreeable
scent.

WINTER GREEN. This is an ever-green, of the species of the myrtle, and is
found on dry heaths; the flowers of it are white, and in the form of a rose,
but not larger than a silver penny; in the winter it is full of red berries,
about the size of a sloe, which are smooth and round; these are preserved
during the severe season by the snow, and are at that time in the highest
perfection. The Indians eat these berries, esteeming them very balsamic, and
invigorating to the stomach. The people inhabiting the interior colonies steep
both sprigs and berries in beer, and use it as a diet drink for cleansing the
blood from scorbutic disorders.

The FEVER BUSH grows about five or six feet high; its leaf is like that of a
lilach, and it bears a reddish berry of a spicy flavor. The stalks of it are
excessively brittle. A decoction of the buds or wood is an excellent febrifuge,
and from this valuable property it receives its name. It is an ancient Indian
remedy for all inflammatory complaints, and likewise much esteemed on the same
account, by the inhabitants of the interior parts of the colonies.

The CRANBERRY BUSH. Though the fruit of this bush greatly resembles in size
and appearance that of the common sort, which grows on a small vine, in
morasses and bogs, yet the bush runs to the height of ten or twelve feet; but
it is very rarely to be met with. As the meadow cranberry, being of a local
growth, and flourishing only in morasses, cannot be transplanted or cultivated,
the former, if removed at a proper season, would be a valuable acquisition to
the garden, and with proper nurture prove equally as good, if not better.

The CHOKE BERRY. The shrub thus termed by the natives grows about five or six
feet high, and bears a berry about the size of a sloe, of a jet black, which
contains several small seeds within the pulp. The juice of this fruit, though
not of a disagreeable flavor, is extremely tart, and leaves a roughness in the
mouth and throat when ^aten, that ha^ gained if the name of choke berry.

ROOTS and PLANTS.
Elecampagne, Spikenard, Angelica, Sarsaparilla, Ginsang, Ground Nuts, Wild
Potatoes, Liquorice, Snake Root, Gold Thread, Solomon's Seal, Devil's Bit,
Blood Root, Onions* Garlic, Wild Parsnips, Mandrakes, Hellebore White and
Black.

SPIKENARD, vulgarly called in the colonies Petty-Morrel. This plant appears to
be exactly the same as the Asiatick spikenard, so much valued by the ancients.
It grows near the sides of brooks, in rocky places, and its stem, which is
about the size of a goose quill, springs up like that of angelica, reaching
about a foot and an half from the ground. It bears bunches of berries in all
respects like those of the elder, only rather larger. These are of such a
balsamic nature, that when infused in spirits, they make a most palatable and
reviving cordial.

SARSAPARILLA. The root of this plant, which is the most estimable part of it,
is about the size of a goose quill, and runs in different directions, twined
and crooked to a great length in the ground; from the principal stem of it
spring many smaller fibers, all of which are though and flexible. From the root
immediately shoots a stalk about a foot and an half long, which at the top
branches into three stems; each of these has three leaves, much of the shape
and size of a walnut leaf; and from the fork of each of the three stems grows a
bunch of bluish white flowers, resembling those of the spikenard. The bark of
the roots, which alone should be used in medicine, is of a bitterish flavor,
but aromatic. It is deservedly esteemed for its medicinal virtues, being a
gentle sudorific, and very powerful in attenuating the blood when impeded by
gross humors.

GINSANG is a root that was once supposed to grow only in Korea, from whence it
was usually exported to Japan, and by that means found its way to Europe; but
it has been lately discovered to be also a native of North America, where it
grows to as great perfection, and is equally valuable. Its root is like a small
carot, but not so taper at the end; it it sometimes divided into two or more
branches, in all other respects it resembles sarsaparilla in its growth. The
taste of the root is bitterish. In the eastern parts of Asia it bears a great
price, being there considered as a panacea, and is the last refuge of the
inhabitants in all disorders. When chewed it certainly is a great strengthener
of the stomach.

GOLD THREAD. This is a plant of the small vine kind, which grows in swampy
places, and lies on the ground. The roots spread themselves just under the
surface of the morass, and are easily drawn up by handfuls. They resemble a
large entangled skain of thread, of a fine bright gold color; and I am
persuaded would yield a beautiful and permanent yellow dye. It is also greatly
esteemed both by the Indians and colonists as a remedy for any foreness in the
mouth, but the taste of it is exquisitely bitter.

SOLOMON's SEAL is a plant that grows on the sides of rivers, and in rich
meadow land. It rises in the whole to about three feet high, the stalks being
two feet, when the leaves begin to spread themselves and reach a foot further.
A part in every root has an impression upon it about the size of a sixpence,
which appears as if it was made by a seal, and from these it receives its name.
It is greatly valued on account of its being a fine purifier of the blood.

DEVIL's BIT is another wild plant, which grows in the fields, and receives its
name from a print that seems to be made by teeth in the roots. The Indians say
that this was once an universal remedy for every disorder that human nature is
incident to; but some of the evil spirits envying mankind in the possession of
so efficacious a medicine gave the root a bite, which deprived it of a great
part of its virtue.

BLOOD ROOT. A sort of plantain that springs out of the ground in six or seven
long rough leaves, the veins of which are red; the root of it is like a small
carrot, both in color and appearance; when broken, the inside of it is of a
deeper color than the outside, and distills several drops of juice that look
like blood. This is a strong emetic, but a very dangerous one.

HERBS.
Balm, Nettles, Cinque Foil, Eyebright, Sanicle, Plantain, Rattle Snake
Plantain, Poor Robin's Plantain, Toad Plantain, Maiden Hair, Wild Dock, Rock
Liverwort, Noble Liverwort, Bloodwort, Wild Beans, Ground Ivy, Water Cresses,
Yarrow, May Weed, Gargit, Skunk Cabbage or Poke, Wake Robin, Betony, Scabious,
Mullen, Wild Pease, Mouse Ear, Wild Indigo, Tobacco, and Cat Mint.

SANICLE has a root which is thick toward the upper part, and full of small
fibers below; the leaves of it are broad, round^sh, hard, smooth, and of a fine
shining green; a stalk rises from these to the height of a foot, which is quite
smooth and free from knots, and on the top of it are several small flowers of a
reddish white, shaped like a wild rose. A tea made of the root is vulnerary and
balsamic.

RATTLE SNAKE PLANTAIN. This useful herb is of the plantain kind, and its
leaves, which spread themselves on the ground, are about one inch and an half
wide, and five inches long; from the center of these arises a small stalk,
nearly six inches long, which bears a little white flower; the root is about
the size of a goose quill, and much bent and divided into several branches. The
leaves of this herb are more efficacious than any other part of it for the bite
of the reptile from which it receives its name; and being chewed and applied
immediately to the wound, and some of the juice swallowed, seldom fails of
averting every dangerous symptom. So convinced are the Indians of the power of
this infallible antidote, that for a trifling bribe of spirituous liquor, they
will at any time permit a rattle snake to drive his fangs into their flesh. It
is to be remarked that during those months in which the bite of these creatures
is most venomous, that this remedy for it is in its greatest perfection, and
most luxuriant in its growth.

POOR ROBIN's PLANTAIN is of the same species as the last, but more diminutive
in every respect; it receives its name from its size, and the poor land on
which it grows. It is a good medicinal herb, and often administered with
success in fevers and internal weaknesses.

TOAD PLANTAIN resembles the common plaintain, only it grows much ranker, and
is thus denominated because toads love to harbor under it.

ROCK LIVERWORT is a sort of Liverwort that grows on rocks, and is of the
nature of kelp or moss. It is esteemed as an excellent remedy against declines.

GARGIT or SKOKE is a large kind of weed, the leaves of which are about six
inches long, and two inches and an half broad; they resemble those of spinach
in their color and texture, but not in shape. The root is very large, from
which spring different stalks that run eight or ten feet high, and are full of
red berries; these hang in clusters in the month of September, and are
generally called pigeon berries, as those birds then feed on them. When the
leaves first spring from the ground, after being boiled, they are a nutritious
and wholesome vegetable, but when they are grown nearly to their full size,
they acquire a poisonous quality. The roots applied to the hands or feet of a
person afflicted with a fever, prove a very powerful absorbent.

SKUNK CABBAGE or POKE is an herb that grows in moist and swampy places. The
leaves of it are about a foot long, and six inches broad, nearly oval, but
rather pointed. The roots are composed of great numbers of fibers, a lotion of
which is made use of by the people in the colonies for the cure of the itch.
There issues a strong musky smell from this herb, something like the animal of
the same name before described, and on that account it is so termed.

WAKE ROBIN is an herb that grows in swampy lands; its root resembles a small
turnip, and if tasted will greatly inflame the tongue, and immediately convert
it from its natural shape into a round hard substance; in which state it will
continue for some time, and during this no other part of the mouth will be
affected. But when dried, it loses its astringent quality, and becomes
beneficial to mankind, for if grated into cold water, and taken internally, it
is very good for all complaints of the bowels.

WILD INDIGO is an herb of the same species as that from whence indigo is made
in the southern colonies. It grows in one stalk to the height of five or six
inches from the ground, when it divides into many branches, from which issue a
great number of small hard bluish leaves that spread to a great breadth, and
among these it bears a yellow flower; the juice of it has a very disagreeable
scent.

CAT MINT has a woody root, divided into several branches, and it sends forth a
stalk about three feet high; the leaves are like those of the nettle or betony,
and they have a strong smell of mint, with a biting acrid taste; the flowers
grow on the tops of the branches, and are of a faint purple or whitish color.
It is called cat mint, because it is said that cats have an antipathy to it,
and will not let it grow. It has nearly the virtues of common mint, For an
account of Tobacco, see a treatise I have published on the culture of that
plant.


FLOWERS.
Heart's Ease, Lilies red and yellow, Pond Lilies, Cowslips, May Flowers,
Jessamine, Honeysuckles, Rock Honeysuckles, Roses red and white, Wild
Hollyhock, Wild Pinks, Golden Rod.

I shall not enter into a minute description of the flowers above recited* but
only just observe, that they much resemble those of the same name which grow in
Europe, and are as beautiful in color, and as perfect in odor, as they can be
supposed to be in their wild uncultivated state.

FARINACEOUS and LEGUMINOUS ROOTS, etc. Maize or Indian Corn, Wild Rice, Beans,
the Squash, etc.
MAIZE or INDIAN CORN grows from six to ten feet high, on a stalk full of
joints, which is stiff and solid, and when green, abounding with a sweet juice.
The leaves are like those of the reed, about two feet in length, and three or
four inches broad. The flowers which are produced at some distance from the
fruit on the same plant, grow like the ears of oats, and are sometimes white,
yellow, or of a purple color. The seeds are as large as peace, and like them
quite naked and smooth, but of a roundish surface, rather compressed. One spike
generally consists of about six hundred grains, which are placed closely
together in rows to the number of eight or ten, and sometimes ^welve. This corn
is very wholesome, easy of digestion, and ^ields as good nourishment as any
other sort. After the Indi^ns have reduced it into meal by pounding it, they
make cakes of it, and bake them before the fire. I have already mentioned that
some nations eat it in cakes before it is ripe, in which state it is very
agreeable to the palate, and extremely nutritive.

WILD RICE. This grain, which grows in the greatest plenty throughout the
interior parts of North America, is the most valuable of all the spontaneous
productions of that country. Exclusive of its utility, as a supply of food for
those of the human species, who inhabit this part of the continent and obtained
without any other trouble than that of gathering it in, the sweetness and
nutritious quality of it attracts an infinite number of wild fowl of every
kind, which flock from distant climes, to enjoy this rare repast; and by it
become inexpressibly fat and delicious. In future periods it will be of great
service to the infant colonies, as it will afford them a present support, until
in the course of cultivation other supplies may be produced; whereas in those
realms which are not furnished with this bounteous gift of nature, even if the
climate is temperate and the soil good, the first settlers are often exposed to
great hardships from the want of an immediate resource for necessary food. This
useful grain grows in the water where it is about two feet deep* and where it
finds a rich muddy soil. The stalks of it, and the branches or ears that bear
the seed, resemble oats both in their appearance and manner of growing. The
stalks are full of joints, and rise more than eight feet above the water. The
natives gather the grain in the following manner: nearly about the time that it
begins to turn from its milky state and to ripen, they run their canoes into
the midst of it, and tying bunches of it together, just below the ears with
bark, leave it in this situation three or four weeks longer, till it is
perfectly ripe. About the latter end of September they return to the river,
when each family having its separate allotment, and being able to distinguish
their own property by the manner of fastening the sheaves, gather in the
portion that belongs to them. This they do by placing their canoes close to the
bunches of rice, in such position as to receive the grain when it falls, and
then beat it out, with pieces of wood formed for that purpose. Having done
this, they dry it with smoke, and afterward tread or rub off the outside husk;
when it is fit for use they put it into the skins of fawns, or young buffalos,
taken off nearly whole for this purpose, and sewed into a sort of sack, wherein
they preserve it till the return of their harvest. It has been the subject of
much speculation, why this spontaneous grain is not found in any other regions
of America, or in those countries situated in the same parallels of latitude,
where the waters are as apparently adapted for its growth as in the climates I
treat of. As for instance, none of the countries that lie to the south and east
of the great lakes, even from the provinces north of the Carolinas, to the
extremities of Labradore, produce any of this grain. It is true I found great
quantities of it in the watered lands near Detroit, between Lake Huron and Lake
Erie, but on enquiry I learned that it never arrived nearer to maturity than
just to blossom; after which it appeared blighted, and died away. This
convinces me that the north-west wind, as I have before hinted, is much more
powerful in these than in the interior parts; and that it is more inimical to
the fruits of the earth, after it has passed over the lakes, and become united
with the wind which joins it from the frozen regions of the north, than it is
farther to the westward.

BEANS. These are nearly of the same shape as the European beans, but are not
much larger than the smallest size of them. They are boiled by the Indians, and
eaten chiefly with bear's flesh.

The SQUASH. They have also several species of the MELON or PUMPKIN, which by
some are called squashes, and which serve many nations partly as a substitute
for bread. Of these there is the round, the crane-neck, the small flat, and the
large oblong squash. The smaller sorts being boiled, are eaten during the
summer as vegetables; and are all of a pleasing flavor. The crane-neck, which
greatly excels all the others, are usually hung up for a winter's store, and in
this manner might be preserved for several months.

APPENDIX.
THE countries that lie between the great lakes and River Mississippi, and from
thence southward to West Florida, although in the midst of a large continent,
and at a great distance from the se^* are so situated, that a communication
between them an^ ^ther realms might conveniently be opened; by which means
those empires or colonies that may hereafter be founded or planted therein,
will be rendered commercial ones. The great River Mississippi, which runs
through the whole of them, will enable their inhabitants to establish an
intercourse with foreign climes, equally as well as the Euphrates, the Nile,
the Danube, or the Wolga do those people which dwell on their banks, and who
have no other convenience for exporting the produce of their own country, or
for importing those of others, than boats and vessels of light burden:
notwithstanding which they have become powerful and opulent states.

The Mississippi, as I have before observed, runs from north to south, and
passes through the most fertile and temperate ^art of North America, excluding
only the extremities of it, which verge both on the torrid and frigid zones.
Thus favorably situated, when once its banks are covered with inhabitants,
they need not long be at a loss for means to establish an extensive and
profitable commerce. They will find the country toward the south almost
spontaneously producing silk, cotton, indigo, and tobacco; and the more
northern parts, wine, oil, beef, tallow, skins; buffalo-wool, and furs; with
lead, copper, iron, coals, lumber, corn, rice, and fruits, besides earth and
barks for dying.

These articles, with which it abounds even to profusion, may be transported to
the ocean through this river without greater difficulty than that which attends
the conveyance of merchandise down some of those I have just mentioned. It is
true that the Mississippi being the boundary between the English and Spanish
settlements, and the Spaniards in possession of the mouth of it, they may
obstruct the passage of it, and greatly dishearten those who make the first
attempts; yet when the advantages that will certainly arise to settlers are
known, multitudes of adventurers, allured by the prospect of such abundant
riches, will flock to it, and establish themselves, though at the expense of
rivers of blood.

But should the nation that happens to be in possession of New Orleans prove
unfriendly to the internal settlers, they may find a way into the Gulf of
Mexico, by the River Iberville, which empties itself from the Mississippi,
after passing through Lake Maurepas, into Lake Ponchartrain; which has a
communication with the sea within the borders of West-Florida. The River
Iberville branches off from the Mississippi about eighty miles above N^w
Orleans, and though it is at present choked up in some part^ it might at an
inconsiderable expense be made navigable, so as to answer all the purpose^
proposed.

Although the English have acquired since the last peace a more extensive
knowledge of the interior parts than were ever obtained before, even by the
French, yet many of their productions still remain unknown. And though I was
not deficient either in assiduity or attention during the short time I remained
in them, yet I must acknowledge that the intelligence I gained was not so
perfect as I could wish, and that it requires further researches to make the
world thoroughly acquainted with the real value of these long hidden realms.

The parts of the Mississippi of which no survey have hitherto been taken,
amount to upwards of eight hundred miles, following the course of the stream,
that is, from the Illinois to the Ouisconsin Rivers. Plans of such as reach
from the Mississippi to the Gulf of Mexico, have been delineated by several
hands, and I have the pleasure to find that an actual survey of the
intermediate parts of the Mississippi, between the Illinois River and the sea,
with the Ohio, Cherokee, and Ouabache Rivers, taken on the spot by a very
ingenious Gentleman Thomas Hutchins, Esquire Captain in his Majesty's 60th ^or
Royal American Regiment of Foot.
, is now published. I flatter myself that the observations therein contained,
which have been made by one whose knowledge of the parts therein described was
acquired by a personal investigation, aided by a solid judgment, will confirm
the remarks I have made, and promote the plan I am here recommending.

I shall also here give a concise description of each, beginning, according to
the rule of geographers, with that which lies most to the north.

It is however necessary to observe, that before these settlements can be
established, grants must be procured in the manner customary on such occasions,
and the lands be purchased of those who have acquired a right to them by a long
possession: but no greater difficulty will attend the completion of this point*
than the original founders of every colony on the continent met with to
obstruct their intentions; and the number of Indians who inhabit these tracts
being greatly inadequate to their extent* it is not to be doubted, but they
will readily give up for a reasonable consideration, territories that are of
little use to them* or remove for the accommodation of their new neighbors, to
lands at a greater distance from the Mississippi, the navigation of which is
not essential to the welfare of their communities.

No. I. The country within these lines, from its situation, is colder than an^
of the others; yet I am convinced that the air is much more temperate than in
those province that lie in the same degree of latitude to the east of it. The
soil is excellent, and there is a great deal of land that is free from woods in
the parts adjoining to the Mississippi; whilst on the contrary the
north-eastern borders of it are well wooded. Toward the heads of the River
Saint Croix, rice grows in great plenty, and there is abundance of copper.
Though the falls of Saint Anthony are situated at the south-east corner of this
division, yet that impediment will not totally obstruct the navigation, as the
River Saint Croix, which runs through a great part of the southern side of it,
enters the Mississippi just below the Falls, and flows with so gentle a
current, that it affords a convenient navigation for boats. This tract is about
one hundred miles from north-west to south-east, and one hundred and twenty
miles from north-east to south-west.

No. II. This tract, as I have already described it in my Journals, exceeds the
highest encomiums I can give it; notwithstanding which it is entirely
uninhabited, and the profusion of blessings that nature has showered on this
heavenly spot, return unenjoyed to the lap from whence they sprung. Lake Pepin,
as I have termed it after the French, lies within these bounds; but the lake to
which that name properly belongs is a little above the River St. Croix;
however, as all the traders call the lower lake by that name, I have so
denominated it, contrary to the information I received from the Indians. This
colony lying in unequal angles, the dimensions of it cannot be exactly given,
but it appears to be on an average about one hundred and ten miles long, and
eighty broad.

No. III. The greatest part of this division is situated on the River
O^isconsin, which is navigable for boats about one hundred and eighty miles,
till it reaches the carrying place that divides it from the Fox River. The land
which is contained within its limits, is in some parts mountainous, and in
^^hers consists of fertile meadows and fine pasturage. It is furnished also
with a great deal of good timber, and, as is generally the case on the banks of
the Mississippi and its branches, has much fine, open, clear land, proper for
cultivation. To these are added an inexhaustible fund of riches, in a number of
lead mines which lie at a little distance from the Ouisconsin toward the
south, and appear to be uncommonly full of ore. Although the Sau^ies and
Ottagaumies inhabit a part of this tract, the whole of the lands under their
cultivation does not exceed three hundred acres. It is in length from east to
west about one hundred and fifty miles, and about eighty from north to south.

No. IV. This colony consists of lands of various denominations, some of which
are very good, and others very bad. The best is situated on the borders of the
Green Bay and the Fox River, where there are innumerable acres covered with
fine grass, most part of which grows to an astonishing height. This river will
afford a good navigation for boats throughout the whole of its course, which is
about one hundred and eighty miles, except between the Winnebago Lake, and the
Green Bay; where there are several carrying-places in the space of thirty
miles. The Fox River is rendered remarkable by the abundance of rice that grows
on its shores, and the almost infinite numbers of wild fowl that frequent its
banks. The land which lies near it appears to be very fertile, and promises to
produce a sufficient supply of all the necessaries of life for any number of
inhabitants. A communication might be opened by those who shall settle here,
either through the Green Bay, Lake Michigan, Lake Huron, Lake Erie, and Lake
Ontario with Canada, or by way of the Ouisconsin into the Mississippi. This
division is about one hundred and sixty miles long from north to south, and one
hundred and forty broad.

No. V. This is an excellent tract of land, and, considering its interior
situation, has greater advantages than could be expected; for having the
Mississippi on its western borders, and the Illinois on its south-east, it has
as free a navigation as most of the others. The northern parts of it are
somewhat mountainous, but it contains a great deal of clear land, the soil of
which is excellent, with many fine fertile meadows, and not a few rich mines.
It is upwards of two hundred miles from north to south, and one hundred and
fifty from east to west.

No. VI. This colony being situated upon the heads of the Rivers Illinois and
Ouabache, the former of which empties itself immediately into the Mississippi,
and the latter into the same river by means of the Ohio, will readily find a
communication with the sea through these. Having also the River Miami^ passing
through it, which runs into Lake Erie, an intercourse might be established with
Canada also by way of the lakes, as before pointed out. It contains a great
deal of rich fertile land, and though more inland than any of the others, will
be as valuable an acquisition as the best of them. From north to south it is
about one hundred and sixty miles, from east to west one hundred and eighty.

No. VII. This division is not inferior to any of the foregoing. Its northern
borders lying adjacent to the Illinois river, and its western to the
Mississippi, the situation of it for establishing a commercial intercourse with
foreign nations is very commodious. It abounds with all the necessaries of
life, and is about one hundred and fifty miles from north to south, and sixty
miles from east to west; but the confines of it being more irregular than the
others, I cannot exactly ascertain the dimensions of it.

No. VIII. This colony having the River Ouabache running through the center of
it, and the Ohio for its southern boundary, will enjoy the advantages of a free
navigation. It extends about one hundred and forty miles from north to south,
and one hundred and thirty from east to west.

No. IX.X. and XI. being similar in situation, and furnished with nearly the
same conveniences as all the others, I shall only give their dimensions. No.
IX. is about eighty miles each way, but not exactly square. No. X. is nearly in
the same form, and about the same extent. No. XI. is much larger, being at
least one hundred and fifty miles from north to south, and one hundred and
forty from east to west, as nearly as from its irregularity it is possible to
calculate.

After the description of this delightful country I have already given, I need
not repeat that all the spots I have thus pointed out as proper for
colonization, abound not only with the necessaries of life, being well stored
with rice, deer, buffalos, bears, etc. but produce in equal abundance such as
may be termed luxuries, or at least those articles of commerce before recited,
which the inhabitants of it will have an opportunity of exchanging for the
needful productions of other countries.

The discovery of a north-west passage to India has been the subject of
innumerable disquisitions. Many efforts likewise have been made by way of
Hudson's Bay, to penetrate into the Pacific Ocean, though without success. I
shall not therefore trouble myself to enumerate the advantages that would
result from this much wished-for discovery, its utility being already too well
known to the commercial world to need any elucidation; I shall only confine
myself to the methods that appear most probable to ensure success to future
adventurers.

The many attempts that have hitherto been made for this purpose, but which
have all been rendered abortive, seem to have turned the spirit of making
useful researches into another channel, and this most interesting one has
almost been given up as impracticable; but, in my opinion, their failure rather
proceeds from their being begun at an improper place, than from their
impracticability.

All navigators that have hitherto gone in search of this passage, have first
entered Hudson's Bay; the consequence of which has been, that having spent the
season during which only those seas are navigable, in exploring many of the
numerous inlets lying therein, and this without discovering any opening,
terrified at the approach of winter, they have hastened back for fear of being
frozen up, and consequently of being obliged to continue till the return of
summer in those bleak and dreary realms. Even such as have perceived the coasts
to enfold themselves, and who have of course entertained hopes of succeeding,
have been deterred from prosecuting their voyage, lest the winter should set in
before they could reach a more temperate climate.

These apprehensions have discouraged the boldest adventurers from completing
the expeditions in which they have engaged, and frustrated every attempt. But
as it has been discovered by such as have sailed into the northern parts of the
Pacific Ocean, that there are many inlets which verge toward Hudson's Bay, it
is not to be doubted but that a passage might be made out from that quarter, if
it be sought for at a proper season. And should these expectations be
disappointed, the explorers would not be in the same hazardous situation with
those who set out from Hudson's Bay, for they will always be sure of a safe
retreat, through an open sea, to warmer regions, even after repeated
disappointments. And this confidence will enable them to proceed with greater
resolution, and probably be the means of effecting what too much circumspection
or timidity has prevented.

These reasons for altering the plan of enquiry after this convenient passage,
carry with them such conviction, that in the year 1774 Richard Whitworth, Esquire
member of parliament for Stafford, a gentleman of an extensive knowledge in
geography, of an active enterprising disposition, and whose benevolent mind is
ever ready to promote the happiness of individuals, or the welfare of the
public, from the representations made to him of the expediency of it by myself
and others, intended to travel across the continent of America, that he might
attempt to carry a scheme of this kind into execution.

He designed to have pursued nearly the same route that I did; and after having
built a fort at Lake Pepin, to have proceeded up the River St. Pierre, and from
thence up a branch of the River Messorie, till having discovered the source of
the Oregan or River of the West, on the other side the summit of the lands that
divide the waters which run into the Gulf of Mexico from those that fall into
the Pacific Ocean, he would have sailed down that river to the place where it
is said to empty itself near the Straights of Annian.

Having there established another settlement on some spot that appeared best
calculated for the support of his people, in the neighborhood of some of the
inlets which tend toward the north-east, he would from thence have begun his
researches. This gentleman was to have been attended in the expedition by
Colonel Rogers, myself, and others, and to have taken out with him a sufficient
number of artificers and mariners for building the forts and vessels necessary
on the occasion, and for navigating the latter; in all not less than fifty or
sixty men. The grants and other requsites for this purpose were even nearly
completed, when the present troubles in America began, which put a s^op to an
enterprise that promised to be of inconceivable adv^ntage to the British
dominions.

FINIS.

