A LOOKING-GLASS. FOR THE JEWS: WHEREIN They may clearly see that the MESSIAH
is come, by the PROPHETS in the OLD TESTAMENT (above SIXTEEN HUNDRED YEARS
since) and the manifest TESTIMONIES since.

AND ALSO, They may see their own BLINDNESS and IGNORANCE of their own
PROPHETS, and of the MESSIAH unto this DAY.

BY WHICH MY DESIRE IS, They may turn to HIM, that their Eyes may be opened,
that they may see HIM whom they have PIERCED.

WRITTEN BY GEORGE FOX, IN THE YEAR OF OUR LORD, 1674.

LONDON, PRINTED: PHILADELPHIA: REPRINTED BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, IN
MARKET-STREET, BETWEEN SECOND AND THIRD STREETS. 1784.

PREFACE.
Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee
Light.

Ephesians. v. 14.
THE following work was written by that valiant and glorious advocate for
truth, George Fox. the first founder of that sect of Christians who are called
Quakers. I have thought proper to republish it, as I am of opinion that it
contains many forcible, many irresistible arguments to a candid mind, in favor
of the Messiah having been come. I conceive that God is willing at this time
that the Jews should be particularly called to partake of the blessings of the
Gospel. We are soon to expect, I apprehend, that Christianity will prevail in
singular purity against the gates of hell, that the Jew, as well as the
Infidel, will soon bow, "at the name of Jesus," at which name we are taught,
that every knee should bow, Philippians, ii. 10.
and that thus the earth will be filled with the glory of the Almighty. I would
urge therefore the Jews, with peculiar earnestness, but with meekness and with
love, to give attention to the subsequent treatise. At the same time I would
urge those who call themselves Christians, to relax from that severity with
which they have treated the Jews. I would urge them to consider that the Jews
were once the darling people of the Almighty, that he bore them on Eagles'
wings, and that the sacred prophecies declare he will again bless them after an
appointed time of affliction. -- It is said in Isaiah, There shall be a root of
Jesse which shall stand for an ensign of the people: to it shall the Gentiles
seek, and his rest shall be glorious. And it shall come to pass in that day,
that the Lord shall set his hand again the second time, to recover the remnant
of his people which shall be left -- And he shall set up an ensign for the
nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the
dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth. xi. 10, 11, 12.
And again it is said in the same prophet of Israel, I will bring thy seed from
the east, and gather thee from the west. I will say to the north, Give up; and
to the south, keep not back: bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the
ends of the earth. xliii 5, 6.
And it is said in Amos, And I will bring again the captivity of my people
Israel, and they shall build the waste cities and inhabit them; and they shall
plant vineyards and drink the wine thereof: they shall also make gardens, and
eat the fruit of them. And I will plant them upon their land, and they shall no
more be pulled out of their land which I have given them, says the Lord thy
God. ix. 14, 15.


In regard to our conduct toward the Jews we should imitate St. Paul, who says
Unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews. 1 Cor. ix. 20.
He never insulted them in the manner that some, who call themselves
Christians, insult them. One would suppose, that the wanton abuse of them for
their religious principles would irritate their minds, would inflame them to a
desire of revenge, and have a tendency to confirm them in their unbelief. They
might from this entertain a disgust to the principles and the truth of the
gospel, from the folly and the wickedness of those who call themselves its
friends, St. Paul addresses them with the tenderness of a parent toward his
children. He says, My heart's desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they
might be saved. Romans x. 1.
Our Savior's mission was at first intended only for the Jews. I am not sent,
but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Mat. xv. 24.
-- He laments with an affectionate and pleasing sensibility the invincible
obduracy of the Jews. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the prophets, and
stonest them which are sent unto thee: how often would I have gathered thy
children together, as a hen does gather her brood under her wings, and ye would
not! Behold your house is left unto you desolate --. Luke xiii. 34.
He shed tears over Jerusalem when he reflected upon her coming destruction.
And when he was extended by the Jews upon the cross, with a patience that
triumphed over scorn and over torture, he mildly says, (O admirable meekness! O
godlike benevolence!) Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.
Luke xxiii. 34.
These who wish to be the true disciples of our Savior and of his apostle,
should endeavor to act as they did in regard to this as well as in regard to
other matters. If it should be observed that the prophets mention that the Jews
were to be, "scattered among all people," and were to become, a curse, and an
astonishment, and a hissing, and a reproach, I will answer, that it would
become the true disciples of Christ to aim rather to be the instruments of
God's mercy than of his wrath, and that these prophecies refer to the time of
the apostasy, from which dark and gloomy night, the glorious gospel of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ (for ever blessed be his name!) is going to emerge as
brilliant as the daystar.

It would reflect immortal honor, it would attract the blessings of Heaven
upon America, if the first impression were here to be made upon the Jews as a
nation. We should give them a free and uncircumscribed toleration. We have not
led them away captive. We do not, or we should not, wish them to sit down and
weep by the waters of America, and to hang their harps upon the willows that
grow therein.

It would become those states in America, which can prudently alter their
religious tests, to alter them in favor of the Jews. It would become the other
nations of the world to imitate in this instance the custom of those states of
America, which make no political distinction between a Jewish and a Christian
citizen. Our Savior said, My kingdom is not of this world. John xviii. 36.
Those who demand an acknowledgement that the New Testament was written by
divine inspiration, before an admission to the offices of a commonwealth, say,
that his kingdom is of this world. They speak a language different from his. In
this point they are not Christians.

I conceive it to be our duty as followers of Christ, to extend our toleration
to the Jews, without considering whether it would or would not tend to the
temporal advantage of the commonwealth in which we live. There cannot be a
doubt however, I should think, with a reasonable man, but that it would tend to
the present and immediate interests of a state. We are told by the apostle,
that the whole Jewish nation is to be converted to Christianity, that "all
Israel shall be saved. Romans xi. 26.
" I conceive that the drawing a political line of distinction between us and
them, has a tendency to prevent their conversion, that the unlimited toleration
of them has a tendency to bring them over to the gospel, and therefore that the
unlimited toleration of them is the cause of God.

I will beseech you again, O ye Jews, by the meekness and gentleness of Christ,
2 Cor. x. 1.
that ye would deliberate on the following treatise, which was not written to
insult but to inform, which sprang not from hatred but from love. I would
beseech you my friends (I hope that I shall soon call you my brethren) to
attend, and not to be, like the deaf adder that stops her ear; which will
not listen to the voice of charmers, charming ever so wisely. Ps. lviii. 5, 6.
At the same time I will observe to those, who from fear, from interest, or
from any unworthy motive, continue openly to profess Judaism, while they
secretly believe in Christianity, that God will not deal lightly with such as
reject his visitations. I would urge them to flee from the wrath which he has
denounced against such who are fearful in his cause. I would tell them that the
Savior of the world has declared that of him, who is ashamed of his words
among mankind, shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of
his Father, with the holy angels. Mark viii. 38.


CHARLES CRAWFORD.
PHILADELPHIA, 8th Month, 1784.
Lately published by this Author, THE CHRISTIAN, A POEM, etc. And OBSERVATIONS
upon NEGRO-SLAVERY.

A LOOKING-GLASS FOR THE JEWS.
DANIEL was a man greatly beloved of God. who interpreted Nebuchadnezzar's
dream: and Nebuchadnezzar's dream concerned himself, and the whole monarchy,
(the head of Gold) and concerned the Persian monarchy, (the breast of silver)
and concerned the Grecian monarchy, (the belly and thighs of brass) and
concerned the Roman monarchy, (the legs of iron, and the feet of iron and
clay): and the breaking of all these to pieces as the chasf of the summer
threshing-floor, and the wind carrying them away, that no place for them was
found. And it was the stone that smote the image of Gold, etc. and became a
great mountain, that filled the whole earth. And is not this stone the Messiah?
For Daniel says, whom ye do believe as a Prophet and beloved of God, In the
days of these kings shall the God of Heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never
be destroyed. Dan. ii. 44.
[Mark, in the days of these four monarchies] and the kingdom shall not be left
to other people, but it shall break into pieces and consume all these kingdoms,
and it shall stand for ever: the stone which was cut out of the mountain
without hands, it shall break into pieces the brass, and the clay and iron, the
silver and the gold monarchies. Now Nebuchadnezzar did say to Daniel, Of a
truth, his God was the God of truth, and the God of Gods, and the King of
Kings, etc. So now, consider, was not Nebuchadnezzar beyond you in your belief?
And did not the Messiah come in the days of these four monarchies, and set up
his kingdom above sixteen hundred years since? And are not those four
monarchies dashed in pieces by the stone which should come in their days? Was
not Daniel a true prophet, and Nebuchadnezzar's dream true upon the four
monarchies? And did not the God of truth reveal these secrets to him? So if you
do believe that Daniel was a true prophet, and Nebuchadnezzar's dream true, and
God did reveal the secrets of it to Daniel, and the gold, and silver, and
brass, and iron, and clay monarchies were broken to pieces by the stone which
should become a great mountain, and should fill the whole earth; then you must
believe that the Messiah is come, Dan. ii. 44. And did not Nebuchadnezzar, in
the vision of himself to be the tree which was hewn down, confess to the God of
Heaven, and extol him, and lifted up his eyes to Heaven, and blessed and
praised the Most High, and honored him that lived for ever; whose dominion is
an everlasting dominion, and his kingdom is from generation to generation? And
mark that, and see if ye see this kingdom that is everlasting, and dominion
from generation to generation: And see if you can see this in your generation:
And how can ye see this, unless you come to this stone, and this kingdom which
God set up in the days of these four monarchies, which should never have an
end? For you know, ye had a kingdom before those four monarchies, which had an
end.

And Daniel in his vision, chap. vii. 13. saw the kingdom of God, who saw one
like the Son of Man, and there was given him dominion and glory, and a kingdom,
that all people, nations and languages should serve him; his dominion is an
everlasting dominion, and shall not pass away; and his kingdom shall not be
destroyed: Now you know yours past away: And the saints should take this
kingdom, (that is, the sanctified ones.)

And Daniel heard one saint speak to another, How long shall be the vision
concerning the daily sacrifice, and the transgression of desolation, to give
both the sanctuary and the host to be trodden under foot? He said unto me. Unto
two thousand three hundred days, then shall the sanctuary be cleansed, Dan.
viii. 13, 14. Now, do you cast up this time, and number these days or years,
and see what time your selves be in, Dan. viii.

And in Dan. ix. while Gabriel the angel speaks to him, and tells Daniel that
he was greatly beloved, and to give him skill and understanding. etc. And says
to him, Seventy weeks were determined upon his people, and upon the holy city,
to finish the transgression, and to make an end of sin; [mark,] and to bring in
everlasting righteousness, and to seal up the vision and prophecy, and to
anoint the most holy; know therefore and understand, that from the going forth
of the commandment to restore and build Jerusalem unto the Messiah, the Prince,
shall be 7 weeks, and 62 weeks, etc. And after 62 weeks the Messiah shall be
cut off, but not for himself: and the people of the prince shall come and
destroy the city, and sanctuary, etc. And he shall confirm the covenant with
many for one week, and in the midst of the week he shall cause the sacrifice
and the oblation to cease, etc. Now consider this, ye Jews, and number ye this
time, the seventy weeks; and whether your Jerusalem was not built according to
that number; and whether the Messiah did not come; and was not he cut off after
the sixty-two weeks? according to this time was not he cut off? Did not you cut
him off but not for himself? And did not the people of the prince come and
destroy your city, and caused your offerings to cease? Now number you this
time: and whether one which was called the Messiah did not come, according to
these years, which you would not receive? And Isaiah calls him a Prince: but
when he came, he did confirm his new covenant with many, and when he had
offered up himself, he caused your offering to cease once for all.

And Dan. xii. From the time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, and
the abomination that makes desolate set up, shall be one thousand two hundred
and ninety days; blessed is he that waits, and comes to the thousand three
hundred and five and thirty days. Now number ye this time when it began, and
when it ended, and see that you may be partakers of this blessing: so I desire
that you would see and number the time to the Messiah, the Prince, after the
three score and two weeks; and whether ye did not cut off one in that time that
was called the Messiah, who was born of a virgin, called the Virgin Mary,
according to Isaiah the prophet, who says, Isaiah 7. The Lord himself shall
give you a sign; behold a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and shall call
his name Immanuel. Now number you the time in Dan. ix. unto Messiah the Prince,
and see whether or no a virgin had not a child, a son, whose name was called
Immanuel. And also the saying of Isaiah the prophet came upon you, Go tell this
people, hearing indeed, but understand not; and seeing indeed, but perceive
not: make the heart of this people sat, and make their ears heavy, and shut
their eyes; least they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their hearts, and be converted and be healed, Isa. vi. 9, 10.
And was not this your condition, when this virgin had a child, and when the
Messiah came to you, according to Daniel's number, which was the sign the Lord
gave you, a virgin should have a Son, and his name should be called Immanuel,
God with us; then you would not understand this with your hearts, nor see with
your eyes, nor hear with your ears; but were shut up unconverted and unhealed
to this day.

Then said I, O Lord, How long? Then said he, Till the city be wasted without
inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be utterly destroyed: the
Lord shall remove men far away, and there shall be a great forsaking in the
midst of the land, Isa. vi. 11, 12. (Do ye not see this come upon you?) But in
it shall be a tenth, and it shall return, and shall be eaten, as an elmtree, or
as an oak, whose substance is in them, when they cast their leaves; so the holy
seed shall be the substance thereof. So when you have cast off your show, your
outside leaves, you may see this tenth, and this holy seed, the substance of
your figures and shadows.

For to us a child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the government shall be
upon his shoulders, and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the
Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace; of the increase of his
government and peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of David and his
Kingdom, to ordain it, and stablish it with judgment and with justice, from
henceforth and for ever; the zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform this, Isa.
ix. 6, 7.

Now consider this prophecy of Isaiah; whether this child was not born of the
virgin, this son given, and came according to Daniel's number, and Isa. xi.
There shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch shall grow
out of his roots, and the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit of
wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, and the spirit of
knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord; and he shall make him of quick
understanding in the fear of the Lord; and he shall not judge after the sight
of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his ears; but with
righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of
the earth; and he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth; and
righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of
his reins, etc. And this root of Jesse shall stand as an ensign to the people
to it shall the Gentiles seek, and his rest shall be glorious. Now consider, ye
Jews; is not this the Messiah spoken of, according to Daniel's number, who was
of the seed of David? and now is he our people's ensign; and we, that ye call
Gentiles, have sought, and found; and his rest is glorious to us.

And consider in Isa. xxix. The Lord has poured upon you the spirit of deep
slumber, and has closed your eyes, your prophets and your rulers, your seers
has he covered. Was not this so, when the virgin had a child the Messiah, the
Immanuel, when that sign was brought forth among you, according to Daniel's
number? and was not the vision and the book, and the law and the prophets a
sealed book to you, which spoke of Christ to you, that when the Messiah came,
you did wonder, and stagger like drunken men, but not with wine nor strong
drink: and though you cannot rightly read the book of the law and the prophets,
it being sealed up; yet you then and now draw nigh to the Lord with your lips,
and your mouths do honor him, but have removed your hearts far from him:
therefore the Lord said, Behold, I will proceed to do a marvelous work among
this people, a marvelous work and a wonder; for the wisdom of the wise men
shall perish, and the understanding of your prudent men shall be hid And has
not this been seen among you, concerning the Messiah? that sign, that a virgin
should have a son; and therefore he calls you in Isa. xxx. Rebellious children;
who says, woe to you rebellious children, says the Lord that take counsel but
not of me; that cover with a covering, but not of my spirit, that they may add
sin to sin. For, had you been covered with the spirit, you would have seen the
sign that God gave you, the virgin having a son, the Immanuel, who came
according to Daniel's number: and therefore, says Isaiah, Says the Lord, write
it before them in a table, and note it in a book, that it may be for a time to
come, for ever and ever; for this is a rebellious people, lying children, that
will not hear the law of the Lord, Isa. xxx, 1, 8, 9. So here you may see what
they were in Isaiah's days, and the rest of the prophets; and you may see what
you were in Moses's days, and the rest of the judges; and what you were when
the Messiah came: for did you not say to the seers, see not; to the prophets,
prophesy not to us right things, speak to us smooth things, prophesy deceit? so
you may see how you were against the prophets, and how you were all along from
Moses to the Messiah.

And Isa. xxxii. Behold, a king shall reign in righteousness, etc. And is not
this spoken of the Messiah? A man shall be as a hiding place from the wind, and
a covert from the tempest, as rivers of water in a dry place, and as the shadow
of a great rock in a weary land. And the eyes of them that see, shall not be
dim; and the ears of them that hear shall hearken: and this is witnessed by
thousands, though you have ears and hear not, and eyes and see it not.

And Isa. xxxv. where it speaks largely of the Messiah who has made the
wilderness a solitary place. glad, and has confirmed the weak hands and feeble
knees, and made the fearful hearts strong, and opened the blind eyes and deaf
ears, and made the lame man to leap, the tongue of the dumb to sing, and the
wilderness and the desert water-streams, and her parched land to become a pool,
and thirsty land springs of water: we who own the Messiah, the Immanuel the son
of the virgin, the sign to you, whose hands are weak, and knees feeble, and
land parched thirsty, wanting the springs that be heavenly, and tongues are
dumb, concerning the Messiah being come, having not the tongue of the learned
to know the times and seasons to be in the Father's hand. And Isaiah tells you
of a way, that shall be called the way of holiness, which shall be for those,
the wayfaring-men, though fools, shall not therein; and the redeemed shall walk
in it, and the ransomed of the Lord. Now are not your eyes blinded to this way,
and your ears deaf from hearing it, this way of holiness, where the unclean
shall not walk over it? mark, is not this the way, the Messiah? and in Isaiah
xlii. where he says, Behold my servant whom I uphold, my elect in whom my soul
delights; I have put my spirit upon him; he shall bring forth judgment to the
Gentiles. And this the Gentiles witness, though your eyes are blind and cannot
see this elect, this servant, in whom God's soul delights, and has put his
spirit upon him, who has brought forth judgment to the Gentiles: a bruised
reed he shall not break, and the smoking flax shall he not quench; he shall
bring forth judgment to truth; he shall not fail nor he discouraged, 'till he
has set judgment in the earth, and the isles shall wait for his law, etc. And
many have received his law, though you Jews have had the law, and the prophets
have spoke of him that was to come, who is come; you have shut your eyes and
stopped your ears, and have not received his law, though you read in the law
and the prophets of him; but I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and
I will hold thine hand; I will keep thee; I will give thee for a covenant of
the people, for a light of the Gentiles: is not this the Messiah? is not this
the Immanuel that is born of the virgin? yes, the Gentiles received this light
and covenant, many thousands, and witnesses both the promise of God, and the
prophecies fulfilled. And further he says, The Lord says that he will open
the eyes of the blind, to bring the prisoners from the prison, and them that
sit in darkness out of the prisonhouse: I am the Lord, that is my name, and my
glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to graven images: behold,
says he, the former things are come to pass, and new things do I declare;
before they spring forth I tell you of them: sing unto the Lord a new song, and
his praise to the ends of the earth, etc. And you may see further; the isles
and the inhabitants thereof shall give glory to God, and declare his praise in
the isles.

So consider now, you whose eyes are blind, and are yet prisoners in prison,
and sit in darkness, and do not behold the new things that the prophet
declared, yea, declared them before they sprung forth; and you who know not
this new song, cannot sing it to the Lord; but who knows the Messiah, knows
this new song, knows new things: many islands can declare his praise, whom the
Messiah has brought out of darkness, the prisonhouse, and opened the blind
eyes, who the Lord has given for a covenant of the people, for a light to the
Gentiles, and to be his salvation to the ends of the earth; now ye know ye had
the old covenant before. And the Lord says further, I will bring the blind by a
way they know not; I will lead them into paths which they have not known; I
will make darkness light before them, and crooked things straight; these will I
do etc. Hear ye deaf, and look ye blind, that ye may see; seeing many things,
but thou observest not; opening thine ears, but hear not; is not this thy
condition? behold, thus says the Lord, which makes a way in the sea, and a
path in the mighty waters, etc. Remember ye not the former things, neither
consider the things of old, because I will make a new thing, and now it shall
spring forth, and ye shall not know it; the beasts, of the field shall honor
me, etc. Now consider how ye have not truly minded the old things, nor the new
thing.

And Isa. I. Does not he there speak of the Messiah, of the Son of Man who was
not rebellious: he that turned not away his back, but said, I gave my back to
the smiter, and my cheek to them that plucked off the hair, and hid not my face
from shame and spitting? And was not this the Immanuel, born of a virgin, who
came among you, according to the number of Daniel, the Messiah? did not you
spit upon him? did not you whip and scourge him? and did he turn his back from
you smiters, whose eyes was blinded; but the Lord had given him the tongue of
the learned, that he should know how to speak a word in season to him that is
weary, etc. He further says, The Lord God will help me, therefore shall I not
be confounded, therefore I have set my face as a flint: behold the Lord will
help me, who is he that will condemn me? lo, they all shall wax old as a
garment, and the moth shall eat them up.

And now ye that will not receive the Messiah, the Immanuel, born of the
virgin, according to Daniel's number, that little stone that has dashed to
pieces the four monarchies, and is become a great mountain, and filled the
whole earth; and will not this stone fall upon your heads, and grind you to
powder? and are not you waxed old like a garment? and have not the moths eaten
up many of you? And does not Isaiah say in the liid and liiid chapters, Behold
my servant shall deal prudently; he shall be exalted and be very high: as many
were astonished at thee; his visage was marred more than any man's, and his
form more than the sons of men.

And was not the Messiah served so with you Jews, when he came amongst you,
above 1600 years since, were not you astonished at him? was not his visage
marred? but says Isaiah, He shall sprinkle many nations: this we see, though
you whose eyes are blind cannot see; the Lord has made bare his holy arm in
the face of all the nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see the
salvation of our God: is not this the Immanuel, born of a virgin, according to
Isaiah's prophecy, and Daniel's number; though seeing you see not, and hearing
hear not; closing your eyes and stopping your ears? but Isaiah says, Isa.
liii. 1, 2 Who has believed our report? to whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed? he shall grew up before him, as a tender plant, and as a root out of
a dry ground; he has no form nor comeliness, and when we see him, there is no
beauty, that we should desire him.

And so is not this he that was born of a virgin, the Messiah; that when he
came among you, and to this day, you could never see any form or comeliness or
beauty, but spit upon him, and buffeted him, and put your crown of thorns on
him; yea, says Isaiah, He was despised and rejected of men: and did not you
despise him? did not you fulfill the prophets words? He was a man of sorrows,
and acquainted with grief, and we have hid our faces from him; he was despised,
and we esteemed him not. And did not you hide your faces from him, and despised
him when he came? did not you fulfill Isaiah's prophecy here concerning the
Immanuel, who was born of a virgin? and says Isaiah, But he was wounded for
our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, the chastizement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed; all we like sheep have
gone astray, and have turned every one to his own way, and the Lard has laid
on him the iniquities of us all. All you Jews every where have gone astray
after your own way, till you turned to the Immanuel, that was born of a virgin,
that was the Messiah, that came according to Daniel's number: He was oppressed,
he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth; he was brought as a lamb to the
slaughter; and as a sheep before the shearers is dumb, so he opened not his
mouth. And was it not you Jews that did oppress him, and afflict him, and
brought him as a lamb to your slaughter, as a sheep before her shearer is dumb;
were not you the people that did thus deal with the Messiah above 1600 years
since? he was taken from prison and judgment, and who shall declare his
generation? for he was cut off from the land of the living; for the
transgression of the people was he stricken.

Now consider this you Jews; was it not you that did take him from prison and
judgment? and were not your forefathers and Pilate his judges, who was cut off
for the transgression, and was stricken for the people? and you will never come
out of your transgression, but through him, the Messiah the Immanuel, born of
the virgin. He made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death,
because he had done no violence, neither was deceit found in his mouth: it
pleased the Lord to bruise him, and to put him to grief, when thou shall make
his soul an offering for sin; he shall see his seed; he shall prolong his days;
the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand.

Now here you may see you Jews, here was an offering for sin, who made his soul
an offering for sin, and ended your offerings for sin; this is beyond all your
offerings, and this is the offering that pleased the Lord; this was he that was
born of the virgin; this was the Messiah that Daniel numbers the years of the
time when he should come, and who came in your forefathers days, above 1600
years since, and made his soul an offering for sin; and he did see his seed in
the days of his disciples and apostles, and now; and the pleasure of the Lord
did prosper in his hand, and does. Isaiah says, He shall see the travail of
his soul, and be satisfied; by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify
many, for he shall bear their iniquity.

Now you that do not believe in him, though he was an offering for your sin,
how can you be justified; or how can you believe in Moses or any of the
prophets that testified of him, that do not believe in him? and therefore says
the Lord, I will divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the
spoil with with the strong, because he has poured out his soul unto death; he
was numbered with the transgressors; he bare the sins of many, and made
intercession for the transgressors. Now you that do not believe that he bare
your sins, though he was numbered with the transgressors; and you that do not
believe that it is he that you crucified, who is the son of the virgin, that
must make intercession for you, you neither believe in the prophets, nor in the
Messiah, nor ever can come to God, but by him that makes intercession for you,
and bears your sins.

Does not Isaiah complain in chap. lii. how his name was blasphemed every day?
And did not you blaspheme against his Son when he came? but my people shall
know my name in that day, that I am he that speaks; behold it is I. Now here
was a day to come, and happy were those of you that did behold the day when it
came; yea, the day of the Messiah, and does behold it now. And how beautiful
upon the mountains are the feet of him that publishes peace, that brings
glad tidings of good, that publishes salvation, that says to Sion, thy God
reigns.

In Isa. lv. Ho every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters; come he that
has no money, come, buy and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk without money
and without price, etc Incline your ears, and come to me; hear, and your souls
shall live, and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, the sure mercies
of David: behold I have given him, a witness to the people, a leader and
commander to the people: behold thou shall call a nation thou know not;
nations that know not thee, shall run to thee, because of the Lord thy God.

Now mark, ye Jews; this everlasting covenant which God would make; you had the
first covenant that spoke of this witness which God gives, and this leader, and
this commander to the people, that should call a nation, and nations should run
unto him; is not this the Messiah and Immanuel, that was born of a virgin,
according to Isaiah and Daniel's prophecy; whom you hid your faces from, were
ashamed of, and spit upon. And in Isaiah lxii. The Gentiles shall see thy
righteousess, and all kings thy glory, and thou shall be called by a new name,
which the mouth of the Lord shall name.

And is not this brightness and salvation, and this righteousness, and glory,
that the Gentiles and all kings shall see, and this new name which the Lord
shall name; is not this the Messiah, the Prince? and thou shall be a crown of
glory in the hand of the Lord, a royal diadem in the hand of thy God. And in
the ixvth chapter Isaiah says, The Lord says, I was sought of them that asked
not for me, I was found of them that sought me not. And were not these the
Gentiles, which the Messiah was promised to, who have received him; many have
received him? So the Lord says; Behold me, behold me, to a nation that was not
called by my name: but concerning you Jews he says, I have spread out my hands
all the day to a rebellious people, which walked in a way that was not good,
after their own thoughts, a people that provoked me to anger continually to my
face, etc.

So you may read your rebellion, how you provoked him, from Moses throughout
all the prophets, till you come to the Messiah, whom you spit at: and see how
other nations have received the Messiah, and run after him; and so when you
call, the Lord shall not answer, because that you reject his Son. and does not
Jeremy say, As a cage was full of birds, so were your houses full of deceit;
and therefore repent and turn. And in Jeremy xxxi. Behold the days come, says
the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with
the house of Judah; not according to the covenant that I made with their
fathers, in the day that I took them by the hand, to bring them out of the land
of Egypt, which my covenant they broke, though I was a husband to them, says
the Lord. Here you (may see you forsook your husband) that broke the covenant.
But here is a new covenant, which is not according to the old: and now this new
covenant you have not received, and will not receive: for as he said, I will
give him for a covenant, that is the Messiah, he that was born of a virgin. But
this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days.

Now here are the days of the old covenant; here are the days of new, says the
Lord, I will put my laws in their hearts, and write them in your inward parts:
and I will be their God, and they shall be my people; and they shall not teach
every man their neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord,
for they shall all know me, from the least of them, to the greatest of them
says the Lord.

And it is said in Isa. live. All thy children shall be taught of the Lord, and
great shall be the peace of thy children; in righteousness shall thou be
established, etc. So consider, you will never own the new covenant, till you
own the Messiah is come. In the xxxiid of Jeremy, I will make an everlasting
covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them, to do them good; but I
will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me: so now
this is the new covenant which you must all receive, if you come to be God's
people, and he your God; and to have the one heart and the one way, it must be
in this everlasting covenant.

And you that crucify the Messiah, did not God raise him up the third day, that
he might live in his sight? so if ever you live to God, it is through him; for
in Hosea vi. After two days he will revive us; in the third day he will raise
us up, and we shall live in his sight. And was not this a prophecy of the work
of the Messiah, whom you crucified? For the Lord desired mercy of you and not
sacrifice, and the knowledge of God rather than burnt offerings but you like
men, have transgressed the covenant, and dealt treacherously against me, says
the Lord. Micah says in the ivth chapter, that in the last days the mountain
of the Lord's house shall be established on the top of the mountains, and shall
be exalted above the hills, and people shall flow unto it, and many nations
shall come and say, come and let us go up to the mountain of the house of the
Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and
we will walk in his paths, etc. Now ye Jews, consider this; is not this the new
covenant, where many nations now come to be taught of God? and God does teach
them his ways to walk in; and he shall judge among the people and judge many
strong nations, etc. and is not this in the days of the Messiah, which many
witness.

And Micah v. But thou Bethlehem Ephratath, though thou be little among the
thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall come forth to me, that is to be a
ruler in Israel, whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting;
and he shall stand and feed in the strength of the Lord, in the majesty of the
name of the Lord his God; for now he shall be great to the ends of the earth,
etc. And now ye Jews, was it not here prophesied that the Messiah should come
out of Bethlehem of Judah, to be a ruler; and this is the son that the virgin
bare, the Immanuel: and when she, Mary the virgin, had brought forth, who was
advised by the angel what to call her son, to wit, Jesus, all Jerusalem was on
an uproar; look back you Jews: and did not Herod your king, who was troubled
also, gather all the chief priests and scribes of the people, and demanded of
them where the Messiah should be born? and they said to him, in Bethlehem
Judah; so says the prophet, Mic. 5. for thou Bethlehem in the land of Judah,
though thou be the least among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall
come forth to me, that is to be a ruler in Israel, whose goings forth have been
from of old, from everlasting: and he shall stand and feed in the strength of
the Lord, in the majesty of the name of the Lord his God; for now he shall be
great to the ends of the earth, etc. and now ye Jews, was it not here written,
that the Messiah should come out of Bethlehem of Judah, to be a ruler? and this
is the son that the virgin bare, the Immanuel.

And did not Herod in his envy seek the destruction of this Messiah? and
therefore not killing him, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by
Jeremiah the prophet, Chapter 31. when he had killed the children from such an age:
thus says the Lord, a voice was heard in Ramah, lamentation and bitter
weeping; Rachel weeping for her children, and would not be comforted, because
they were not. And the Messiah was carried down into Egypt, when Herod sought
his life, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken of him; out of Egypt have
I called my son, Hos. 11. so here you may see it is clear, how the Messiah was
born in Bethlehem; now number you, according to the prophecy: a virgin had a
child, and called his name Immanuel; whether was he not born in Bethlehem,
according to Daniel's number, and the prophets prophecy of him?

And in Psalm. 2. Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing;
the kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together
against the Lord, and against his anointed. Is not this the Messiah? and was
not this fulfilled amongst you when he came? and to this day do not ye rage
against him? but further he says in the same psalm, thou art my son, this day
have I begotten thee, therefore kiss this son, east he be angry, and ye perish
from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little, blessed are all they that
trust in him, in this son. And again he says, in Psalm 16. I have set the Lord
always before me, because he is at my right hand, and I shall not be moved; and
therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoiceth: my flesh also shall rest in
hope, for thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer thy
holy one to see corruption.

Now is not this the Messiah, the Immanuel, born of the virgin, that sign that
God gave to you, who wrought signs and miracles among you, though you despised
him, and wondered at, and crucified, and buried, who rose the third day, and
did not see corruption; but God raised him up, who is at his right hand: and
did not your priests give the soldiers large money, that watched his sepulcher
where he was laid, to say, that the disciples stole him away by night? and did
not you crucify him between two thieves? and was not he named among
transgressors? read Isaiah before: and when ye crucified him, did not ye Jews
say, he trusted in the Lord, that he would deliver him, seeing he loves him,
Ps. 22. and in Wisd. 2. did not you fulfill the sayings there: he makes his
boast that God is his father, let us see if his words be true, let us prove
what will happen in the end of him; for if the just man be the son of God, he
will help him and deliver him from the hands of his enemy; let us condemn him
with a shameful death. And this you did, when ye crucified the Messiah: as it
is said in Psalm 31. into thy hand I commit my spirit, etc. And in Psalm 34. he
keeps all his bones, not one of them is broken: so this was fulfilled upon
the Messiah, not a bone of him was broken; though ye broke the thieves legs,
yet had not power to break his bones: therefore it is said in Psalm. 40.
sacrifice and offerings thou did not desire; mine ears have thou opened;
burnt-offerings and sin offerings have thou not required: [mark ye Jews,] then
said I, lo, I come, in the volume of thy book it is written of me, I delight to
do thy will, O my God; yea, thy law is within my heart. Is not this the
Messiah, the Immanuel, whom ye crucified? in the volume of the law and prophets
it was written of him; you must never expect to see any other. And so in Isaiah
36. I have trodden the wine press alone.

So if you Jews did mind the 6th of Hosea, the Lord desired mercy and not
sacrifice, the knowledge of God more than burnt-offerings. And when this sign
was brought forth among you, that this virgin had a child, Immanuel; then did
the Lord confirm his covenant with an oath, which he made with Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, concerning the Messiah, Psalm. 105. and Psalm. 110. the Lord said to
my Lord, sit thou on my right hand, 'till I make thine enemies thy footstool,
etc. the Lord has sworn and will not repent; thou art a priest for ever after
the order of Melchizedeck: and is not this the Messiah, the Immanuel, which
came among you, according to Daniel's number? and in Psalm 118. the stone which
the builders refused is become the head stone of the corner; this is the Lord's
doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes.

And is not this the Immanuel, which was born of a virgin, the Messiah, which
came to you according to Daniel's prophecy above 1600 years ago, whom you Jews,
that were the pretended builders of people up to Heaven, refused and rejected
this cornerstone? and therefore were not your cities, your houses and religion
all thrown down by the storm of Titus, and you blown over all nations? And in
Psalm. 132. for thy servant David's sake, turn not away the face of thine
anointed: the Lord has sworn in truth to David, he will not turn from it, of
the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne, there will I make the horn of
David to bud; I have ordained a light for mine anointed.

Now you Jews, does not this speak of the Messiah? and was not he to come of
the seed of David and Abraham, as God had promised and sworn? and see in
Daniel, if he did not come according to the Angel Gabriel's (...). And in
Isaiah viii. he shall be for a sanctuary, for a stone of stumbling, for a rock
of offense to both the houses of Israel, for a gin, for a share to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem; and many among them shall stumble and full, and he
broken, and be snared, and taken; bind up the testimony, seal the law among my
disciples. Is not this spoken of the Messiah? and were not you the people that
stumbled and fell? was not he a rock of offense for both the houses of Israel?
he was no sanctuary to you that stuck in your outward sanctuary. And did not
many thousands among you Jews wait for the Messiah, and received him at that
time when he came? and many of his disciples which believed on him, and
received him, among whom the law and testimony was bound up and sealed among
them; and you stumbled at him, this stone: is not this the stone that Daniel
interpreted in Nebuchadnezzar's dream, that should dash to pieces the four
Monarchies, and become a great mountain, and fill the whole earth, which should
set up a kingdom that should never have an end; and your kingdoms had an end,
and is ended. Was not he a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedeck? but
your priests died and had an end; and though you crucified him, yet he is
risen, and is at the right hand of God, and is a priest for ever, who ever
lives to save to the utmost, and makes intercession, who is not after the
order of Aaron, but after the order of Melchizedeck.

And it is said of the Redeemer, Isa. 59. he shall put on righteousness as a
breast plate, and an helmet of salvation upon his head; and he shall put on the
garment of vengeance for clothing, and he was clad with zeal as a cloak; and
the redeemer shall come to Zion, and to them that turn from transgression in
Jacob, says the Lord. As for me, this is my covenant, says the Lord, my
spirit that is upon thee, and my words that I have put in thy mouth, shall not
depart out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed's seed,
says the Lord, from henceforth and for ever. So many did witness this
fulfilled when the Messiah came, according to the prophets, to you Jews: many
received him; but you Jews, that turned not from your trasgressions (but lived
in your blindness) stumbled, and darkness covered you, gross darkness!

But in Isa. lx. the Gentiles shall come to his light. This prophecy many of
the Gentiles witness, that are come to his light: for it is said, a little one
shall become a thousand, a small one a strong nation; I the Lord will hasten it
in his time Is not this the branch of the Lord's own planting? and many are
witnesses of it, though you cannot see it this day, and see his kingdom. The
gates are open day and night, that men may bring to thee the force of the
Gentiles, and that their kings may be brought, though you blind Jews cannot see
it: and they shall call thee the city of the Lord, the zeal of the holy one of
Israel, he who is the joy of many generations. Thou shall suck the milk of the
Gentiles; signifying that the Gentiles have a breast.

And in Isa. lxi. The spirit of the Lord is upon me, he has anointed me to
preach good tidings to the meek; he has sent me to bind up the broken heart,
to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that
are bound, etc. and was not this fulfilled when he came according to Daniel's
prophecy? and did not he open the book among your people, and told you, it was
fulfilled, in one of your synagogues at Nazareth, when one of you delivered him
the book of Isaiah? then you did wonder at him, at the gracious words for a
time; but you were quickly changed, and thrust him out of your city, to throw
him down the brow of your hill.

Isaiah lxvi. where he says, Heaven is my throne, earth is my footstool;
where is the house that ye will build to me? where is the place of my rest?

And you that look so much at your outward temple, did not the Messiah tell
you, that it should be thrown down, and not one stone left upon another in that
generation? And was it not done by Titus? and have you built it since?

And does not the Lord say, All these things have my hands made, and all these
things have been, says the Lord; but to this man will I look, even to him that
is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my word. And in Jeremiah
xxxi. This is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, after
those days, says the Lord. I will put my law in their inward parts, and write
them in their hearts, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people:
they shall teach no move every man his neighbor and every man his brother,
saying, know the Lord; for they shall all know me, from the greatest to the
least of them, says the Lord; for I will forgive their iniquities, and their
sins I will remember no more. And now mark, this is a covenant after these
days: you had the old covenant before, where ye were teaching one another his
brother, etc. and where ye were writing the laws, the laws written in tables of
stone; but here the Lord is the writer, in the new covenant, to write them in
your hearts: so, as you receive this covenant, and come into this covenant,
your sins and iniquities will be forgiven, and be remembered no more. So God
says, I will give him for a covenant, meaning his Messiah, he that is born of
a virgin, that you crucified: if you receive not him, do you think your sins
and iniquities will not be remembered?

And how can you or dare you take the title to be called God's people? for,
they shall be my people, and I will be their God, that come into this covenant
which God gives, which is the new covenant, for you had the old before.

Read Jer xxxi. And I will give them one heart. Ezekiel. xi. And I will put a new
spirit within them; I will take away the stony heart out of their flesh, and I
will give them a heart of flesh. Now they that believed in the Messiah, are
witnesses of this; yea, those Jews that believed in him above one thousand six
hundred years since, witnessed this new spirit, this one heart, this heart of
flesh, and this new covenant; but you that did not, and do not believe, witness
the stony heart and old spirit, poring about the old covenant, and stumbling at
the new, and are breakers of the old too, and despisers of the new covenant,
and of God's oath concerning it.

And again, The Lord says in Ezekiel. xviii. Cast away from you all your
transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed, and make you a new heart and a
new spirit: For why will ye die, ye house of Israel? for I have no pleasure in
the death of him that dies, says the Lord, wherefore return, and live ye. Now
here you Jews may see, that without turning from transgression you do not live,
neither have you a new heart, nor a new spirit, and not turning you die. And
the Lord says, he has no pleasure in it, and in your death, Ezekiel. xxx^^^. I
will set up one shepherd, says the Lord, and he shall feed them, and he shall
be your shepherd: I the Lord will be your God, and my servant David a prince;
and I will make with them a covenant of peace.

And is not this one shepherd, that the Lord will set up, the Immanuel born of
the virgin, which came according to the prophecy of Isaiah, and according to
Daniel's number? and when he was come, did not he say, That he was the true
shepherd, that laid down his life for his sheep? And is not he the covenant of
peace spoken of by Ezekiel? did not he come of the seed of David? and did not,
and do not you yet reject this shepherd, this feeder, and his covenant of
peace, and this seed of David? And therefore what evil seed are ye run into?

And Ezekiel in the xxxvith Chapter, Says the Lord, I will sprinkle clean
water upon you, and ye shall be clean, etc. And I will give you a new heart,
and a new spirit I will put within you, and take away your stony heart, etc.
And I will open your graves, and I will bring you out of your graves, and put
my spirit in you. Moreover, I will make a covenant of peace with you, which
shall be an everlasting covenant, and I will set my sanctuary in the-midst of
them for evermore; my tabernacle also shall be with them, and I will be their
God, and they shall be my people, and David shall be their prince for ever.

This you must know was the Messiah, the seed of David, for David was dead long
before: but you must be come out of your graves of sin and wickedness, and your
own traditions, and come out of the old covenant, and come into the new; if ye
know this seed of David, the Messiah, you must come out of the seed of
transgression and rebellion, blindness and darkness, and see your selves in the
graves, and your bones scattered, before you be gathered to this one shepherd,
that God sets over his people in the new covenant. Read the xxxvith and
xxxviith of Ezekiel.

Micah iv. In the last days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of the
house of the Lord shall be established upon the tops of the mountains, and it
shall be exalted above the hills; and many nations shall come, and say, Come,
let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and
he will teach us of his ways, and we shall walk in his paths; and the kingdom
shall come to the daughter of Jerusalem. Now you that did not receive the
Messiah have not lost these last days of God's teaching, and neglecting these
last days of God's teaching, which many are come to, and can say, He does teach
them of his ways, and they walk in his paths.

And this kingdom that should come to the daughter of Jerusalem, many in the
time when the Messiah came did both receive him as king, and were heirs of his
kingdom; and so there are many at this day: but you that rejected the Messiah,
rejected both king and kingdom, and, God's teaching on his mountain, Mic. iv.
And so the saying of Habbakkuk i. 5. is come upon you, Behold ye among the
heathen, and hearken and wonder; for I work a work in your days which ye will
not believe, though it be told you; for ye would not believe Jeremy the
prophet, nor the other prophets, nor the son, the Messiah, the Immanuel, born
of the virgin; though they that did believe in him, the just shall live by his
faith. So you may see in Habbakkuk ii. 4. For the vision was for an appointed
time, and in the end it did speak, the vision or the sign, as you may read in
Daniel, and Isaiah.

And Zach. xii. 10. where the Lord says, I will pour upon the house of David,
and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplication,
and they shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for
him, as one mourns for his son, his only son; and they shall be in bitterness
for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn. And now mark, ye
Jews, what him is it that ye have pierced? is it not the Immanuel, born of a
virgin, the Messiah, which came according to Daniel's number of years? they
that did believe in him did mourn bitterly, and were pricked in their hearts;
so you may look back above one thousand six hundred years since; they came to
be the learners of him: and you that stand still in your blindness and hardness
of heart, and have not mourned, and do not believe in him that you have
pierced, you cannot witness the spirit of grace and supplication upon you yet,
as they had that did look upon him that they had pierced. Mal. iii. And behold,
says the Lord, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before
me: And the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his temple, etc. But who
shall abide the day of his coming? for he shall sit as a Refiner's fire, etc.
Mal. iv. 5. Behold I will send you Elias the prophet before the coming of the
great and terrible day of the Lord: And he shall turn the hearts of the fathers
to the children, and the hearts of the children to the fathers; lest I come and
smite the earth with a curse. And when this Elias did come, did not ye do to
him what ye listed? and so, did not he come before the Messiah and prepare the
way before him? for ye did believe that John Baptist was a prophet, some of
you; and some said, that he was a devil: for did not Isaiah prophesy of him in
the xlth chapter and the 3d verse? The voice of one crying in the wilderness,
Prepare the way of the Lord, make his paths straight; every valley shall be
filled, and every mountain and hill shall be brought low, and the crooked shall
be made straight, and the rough ways smooth, and all flesh shall see the
salvation of God. Now was not this John the son of Zachariah, that Isaiah
prophesied of? did not John here fulfill Isaiah's prophecy, the forerunner of
Christ? So if you will neither believe the prophet Isaiah, nor John the
prophet, nor the Messiah, the Immanuel, born of a virgin, which came according
to the number of the angel to Daniel, but your crooked paths are not made
straight, nor your rough spirit and mind is not made smooth, and your mountain
of sin is not brought low; and therefore how were ye like to see the salvation
of God when he came; but you hid your faces from him, and so fulfilled Isaiah's
prophecy. But when God had given you a temple, when the Messiah came, he found
in the temple such as sold oxen, sheep and doves, and money changers sitting
there, which should have been a house of prayer: and so was not here the Psalm
fulfilled, Ps. lxix. 9. The zeal of my Father's house has eaten me up.

Zach. ix. 9. Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion, shout O daughter of
Jerusalem: Behold, thy King comes to thee; he is just, and having salvation;
lowly, and riding upon an ass, upon a colt, the foal of an Ass. Now consider,
did not he come so into your Jerusalem, this Immanuel, this Messiah? and did
not many of your daughters rejoice, and cried Hosanna? but your priests that
were blind, and the rest of the Scribes and Pharisees and Jews railed at him,
and blasphemed against him. But He is He that speaks peace to the Heathen, and
his dominion is from sea to sea, and from the river to the ends of the earth.
And as for thee also in the blood of thy covenant, I have sent forth thy
prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water, Zach. ix. 10, 11.

And in Zach. xi. 12, 13. And I said to them, If ye think good, give me my
price; if not, forbear: so ye weighed to my price thirty pieces of silver; and
the Lord said to me, Cast it to the potter, a goodly price that I was prized at
by them; so I cast them to the potter in the house of the Lord. And did not
your high priest give Judas thirty pieces of silver to betray the Messiah? so
was not this prophecy fulfilled upon you, as David says in Psalm. xli. 9. Yea,
my own familiar friend, that did eat of my bread, has lifted up his heel
against me: Was not this fulfilled in your Judas?

Also David says in Psalm. lxix. 21, 22, 23. They gave me gall for my meat, in
my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink: let their table become a snare before
them, and their posterity a ruin: let their eyes be darkened, that they see
not; make their joints continually shake; let their habitation be desolate, and
let none dwell in their tents. Now consider when the Messiah was come, and when
ye crucified him, did not ye give him vinegar and gall to drink: and was not
your table become a snare and a trap to you, and your eyes blinded, and your
habitations desolate, which ye had at Jerusalem in David's time? so how can you
say, that was not the Messiah in all these prophecies you have so fulfilled
upon the Messiah? And in Psaim cix. 8. etc. Let his days be few; let another
take his office: This was spoken of Judas, to whom your chief priests gave the
thirty pieces of silver, that he might betray the Messiah into your hands: Let
another take his office; so another Disciple of Jesus, the Messiah, the Lord,
was put in his room: So this was fulfilled, Psalm xxii. 16 17. For dogs have
compassed me; the assembly of the wicked have enclosed me; they pierced my
hands and my feet; they parted my garments among them, and cast lots upon my
vesture. And now ye Jews, did not ye often assemble together to crucify him?
And when you did crucify him, did not you pierce his hands and feet? And did
not you part his garments among you, the Messiah, when they crucified him? And
did not your soldiers cast lots upon his vesture? And does not Moses say in the
xviiith of Deuteronomy, The Lord thy God will raise up a prophet in the midst
of thee, of thy brethren, like to me, to him shall ye hearken. And further he
says, I will raise them up a prophet of their brethren like to thee, and I
will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak to them all that I shall
command him; and it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall not hearken to my
words that he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him. Now this
prophet, like to Moses, was the Messiah, which was the sign born of a virgin;
according to the prophecy of Isaiah: And Daniel numbered the years to the
Messiah, and and the time that he should be cut off, should make his soul a
sacrifice, according to the prophet: And there rose not a prophet since in
Israel, like to Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face, as it is said in Deuteronomy.
xxxiv. So this prophet that God has raised up, like Moses, whom the people
should hear in all things, was not Joshua, but the Messiah, whom you would not,
nor did not hear; and so not hearing him, you hear not the prophets. And God
said to Abraham, in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed,
Genesis xii. And Genesis xviii. All the nations of the earth shall be blessed in
Abraham's seed; and I know he will command his children and his household after
him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord to do justice and judgment. And in
Genesis xxii. The Lord said to Abraham, by my self have I sworn, because thou have
done this thing, and have not withheld thine only Son; that in blessing I will
bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thee as the stars of Heaven, and
in thy seed shall all nations of the earth be blessed. And so was not Abraham's
offering up his only son Isaac a type of the Messiah's making his soul an
offering, the Messiah's making his soul a sacrifice for the sins of men, who
according to the flesh was of the seed of Abraham, who was the son of God, a
sign and wonder to you to this day, that a virgin should have a child? And did
not Jacob say on his deathbed, Genesis xliv. 8, 10. when he called his sons
together, he said to Judah, when he prophesied to them all; Judah, thou art he
whom thy brethren shall praise; thy hand shall be on the neck of thine enemies;
thy father's children shall bow down before thee; the scepter shall not depart
from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet 'til Shiloh come, and unto
him shall the gathering be of the people? And now consider; did not the scepter
continue in Judah 'till Shiloh the Messiah came? but is not the scepter
departed from Judah above 1600 years since, after you had crucified the
Messiah? and are not your walls and city of Jerusalem broken down, trodden
under foot, and you scattered over all nations? And so is not your scepter
gone? so consider these things, how long is it since you lost your scepter: It
should not depart 'till Shiloh came; and he came, and is come, and you would
not hearken to him, being a stiff-necked people.

Is it not clear that the Messiah came of the seed of David and of Abraham,
according to the prophets, who was born of a virgin, though you were
rebellious, as you may see from Moses through the prophets to the Messiah;
though some of you in all ages did believe, yet for the generality of you, what
a stiff-necked people you were, that your eyes were blinded, your table was
made a snare, and you stuck in the old covenant, and opposed the new: And were
not your backs often therefore bowed down; yea, and under all the governments
of the world now: And so Isaiah's prophecy is come upon you, saying, Go tell
this people, Isa. vi. 9, 10. hearing ye hear not, seeing ye see not, and do not
perceive; for the heart of this people waxed gross, and their ears are dull of
hearing; and their eyes have they closed, least they should see with their
eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and should be
converted, and should heal them. This is a sad condition; you would not receive
the Immanuel born of a virgin; and therefore was not the salvation sent to the
Gentiles, that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy through the
Messiah? For this cause I will confess thee among the Gentiles, and sing to thy
name, Psalm. xviii. 49. And again he says, rejoice ye Gentiles with his people.
Now those Jews that were the believers in the Messiah, the Gentiles can rejoice
withal. And Psalm. cxvii. Praise the Lord ye Gentiles, and laud him all ye
people. And again Isaiah says, there shall be a root of Jesse, and he shall
rise to reign over the Gentiles, in him the Gentiles shall trust. Now this is
the Messiah that was born of a virgin, whom ye crucified, who is risen, in whom
the Gentiles rejoice and trust, who is their salvation; read Isa. xi. 10. And
so it was said before to you; like to me (says Moses) will God raise up a
prophet of your brethren, him shall ye hear in all things, whatsoever he shall
say to you; and that soul that will not hear this prophet shall be destroyed
from among the people. So was not the Messiah of the seed of David and of
Abraham; and when God had raised up, and brought him forth, you would not hear
him, neither before ye crucified him, nor now when he is risen, who came
according to Daniel's prophecy: and so in this you neither hear God, nor Moses,
nor the prophets, nor the angel, nor the son the Messiah; and so in this you
neither keep the law, nor the prophets, nor the old covenant, nor the new,
though you often spoke fair with your mouths, but your hearts were far off.

Is not that come to pass which the Messiah spoke to you, that you should be
led away captive, and many should fall by the edge of the sword, and Jerusalem
should be compassed with armies, and you should be led captive into all
nations, and Jerusalem shall be trodden down (read in Daniel the 9th,) and was
not Jerusalem built and standing 'till Messiah, the prince? and when he came,
was not he cut off? and after did not Titus the prince of the people come to
destroy your city and sanctuary; therefore was not this the true Messiah, the
Immanuel, born of a virgin, and the prophet that you should hear in all things;
and they that did hear him, and do hear him, do witness the prophecy of Joel to
be fulfilled; the Lord is pouring out of his spirit upon all flesh, his sons,
his daughters, his old men, his young men, servants, handmaids: these are the
days of the Messiah; for he says, In those days I will pour out my spirit: so
by the spirit of God they can praise God, sons, daughters old men, young men,
servants; handmaids through the Messiah, the Immanuel, who was born of a
virgin, whom you crucified, and is risen, and is at the right hand of God, who
is our prophet, and shepherd, and covenant of peace, through him we can praise
God, Halleluiah for ever and ever, Amen.

And you that despise him, despise your salvation, and lie under the judgment
of the prophets and the son, as you may see in the Scriptures; and therefore it
is time for you to repent, and turn to him.

A POSTSCRIPT.
NOT a bone of the Paschal-Lamb shall be broken, Numb. ix. 12. And was not this
a type of the Paschal-Lamb, the Messiah, of whom you had not power to break a
bone, although you brake the bones of the two thieves that were crucified on
each side of him.

And in Deuteronomy. viii. there you may see how the Lord in the wilderness humbled
your fathers to reprove them, and to know what was in their hearts, whether
they would keep his commandments or no; therefore he humbled them, and made
them to hunger, and fed them with Manna, which they knew not, neither did their
fathers know it, that he might teach them, that man lives not by bread only,
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord does a man live;
yet how soon did your forefathers forget the Lord, and lusted after Egypt's
fleshpots, as you may read in the book, of Moses how your forefathers murmured
against the Lord, and turned against him, and his prophets, and his son, the
Messiah; against whom you stand in rebellion to this day.

Psalm. viii. And was not this fulfilled when the Messiah rid into Jerusalem
upon the foal of an Ass? Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings have thou or
dained strength.

And did not the Messiah say these words when you put him to death? Psalm. xxxi.
Into thy hand I commend my spirit: and thou have brought my soul out of the
grave, thou have revived me from them that go down into the pit, sing praises
unto the Lord ye his saints. So the saints can sing praises unto the Lord, that
know the resurrection of the Messiah, whose grave you watched; yet he rose, and
all your watchmen were struck: but your priests taught them to lie, and to
say, his disciples stole him away: In which lie, and graves of sin and unbelief
you lie, that do not believe the Messiah is come, and is risen, Psalm. xxx. 3.

And was not this the doctrine of the Messiah to your forefathers, That the
meek men should possess the earth, and have their delight in the multitude of
peace; but the wicked practices against the just, and gnashes his teeth
against him. And was not this the practice of your forefathers against the
Messiah? Psalm. xxxvii. 12.

And in Psalm. lxxviii. I will open my mouth in parables: I will declare high
sentences of old. And did not the Messiah fulfill these sayings, and declare the
high sentences of old, and speak in parables when he came?

And in Psalm. lxxxii. where it is said, I have said ye are Gods, and ye all are
children of the Most High. And did not your fore fathers persecute and put to
death the Messiah for saying, he was the son of God?

And in Psalm. xci. He shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in
all thy ways; they shall bear thee in their hands, that thou hurt not thy foot
against a stone. And was not the Messiah tried and tempted by satan and you in
your days, wherein that scripture was fulfilled upon him, when satan tempted
him, and perverted those words?

And in Psalm. cx. where it is said, The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my
right hand, until I make thy enemies thy footstool. Is not this the Messiah,
and the Immanuel, born of a virgin, spoken of Isaiah, which came and said to
your forefathers above sixteen hundred years since, If David in spirit called
the Messiah Lord, how was he his son? which neither your forefathers nor you
ever answered?

Also, the Lord swear, and will not repent; thou art a priest for ever, after
the order of Melchizedeck. Now was not this the Messiah, who came not after the
order of Aaron, which had a beginning of days, and end of life; but he, the
Messiah, is a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedeck, is without
beginning of days, or end of life.

And is not the prophecy of Isaiah v. fulfilled upon you, where he says, the
vineyard is laid waste, and you which were keepers of it, who stoned the
servants, and had killed the son, the heir; and now are you and your vineyard
laid waste? and did not the Messiah when he came, show you the fulfilling of
the prophecy in this? and so is not your sun and moon darkened, and your stars
fallen, as you may read in the prophets? and the marvelous work the Lord has
done upon you, and a wonder? for the wisdom of your wisemen is perished; for
the Lord has covered you with the spirit of slumber, and has shut up your
eyes; and the vision is become unto you as the words of a sealed book, so that
you can neither read the book of the prophets, nor of the law, that speak of
the Messiah, being out of the spirit: though you come near unto the Lord with
your mouths, and honor him with your lips, but have removed your hearts far
from him; and your fear toward him is taught by the precepts of men: and this
did Isaiah foresee and prophesy of; and this did the Messiah see, and find
amongst you when he came.

And in Isa. live. It is said, all thy children shall be taught of the Lord. And
did not the Messiah when he came show the fulfilling of this prophecy, so that
many thousands are witnesses of God's teaching, and his establishing of them in
peace?

And was not the saying of Jeremiah the prophet fulfilled, Jer. vii. Is this
house, which is called by my name, become a den of robbers in your eyes? behold
I see it says the Lord. And was not this fulfilled in the days of the Messiah,
above sixteen hundred years since? and did not the Lord say, Therefore I will
cast you out of my sight, as I have cast out your brethren before you?

And in Hosea. vi. did not the Lord say. He desired mercy, and not sacrifice;
and the knowledge of God more than burnt-offerings: but ye like men have
transgressed the covenant, and therefore have ye trespassed against me; and as
thieves wait for a man, so does the company of priests murder in the way by
consent; for they work mischief. Now was not this fulfilled in the days of the
Messiah? were not the priests the most mischievous against him? did they not
gather together in troops to work mischief against him, and to put him to
death? and had you had mercy, and the knowledge of God, you would have received
the Messiah when he came, the son born of a virgin?

And again, in 2 Esdras Chap. i. verse. 30. The Lord gathered you as a hen
gathers her chickens under her wings: but now what shall I do for you? I will
cast you out of my sight. And would not the Messiah have gathered you when he
came, and you would not? so that your house is become a desolation, and you
cast forth.

And in the sayings of the wisdom of Solomon, Chap. ii. He checks us for
offending against the law; he makes his boast to have the knowledge of God; he
calls himself the son of God: he is made to reprove our thoughts: It grieves us
also to look upon him; for his life is not like other men's, his ways are of
another fashion: let us examine him with rebukes and torments, that we may know
his meekness, and prove his patience; let us condemn him to a shameful death.
And did not you Jews fulfill all this? and are not these sayings verified by
you concerning the Messiah?

And you sons of Adam, who are called Jews, what do you think of the saying in
Esdras? Chap. vii. the bride shall appear, and he shall come forth and he seen,
that now is under the earth: for my son JESUS shall appear, with those that be
with him, and they that remain shall rejoice within four hundred years; and
after these same years shall my son CHRIST die. So do ye think he spoke truth?
and what Jesus was this, the anointed, that was prophesyed of should die after
the four hundred years?

G.F.

BOOKS to be sold by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK.
THE Original, and Present State of Man, briefly considered; wherein is shown,
the nature of his fall, and the necessity, means, and manner of his
restoration, through the sacrifice of Christ, and the sensible operation of that
divine principle held forth to the world by the people called Quakers.

Some account of the life, and gospel labors of William Reckett, late of
Lincolnshire in Great Britain: also, memoirs of the life, religious
experiences, and gospel labors of James Gough, late of Dublin, deceased.

An account of the life of that ancient servant of Jesus Christ, John
Richardson, giving a relation of many of his exercises in his youth, and his
services in the work of the ministry, in England, Ireland, America, etc.

The Christian, a poem, in four books. To which is prefixed a preface in prose,
in defense of Christianity; with an address to the people of America. To which
is added, miscellaneous poems By Charles Crawford.

Buchan's family physician: or, a treatise on the prevention and cure of
diseases by regimen and simple medicine, a late edition, with an appendix
containing the method of preparing and compounding such Medicines as are
recommended in the Book, with addition of several others of a similar nature;
remarks on the doses, uses, and manner of applying the different preparations.

Capt. Carver's three years travels, through the interior parts of
North America, for more than five thousand miles, containing an account of the
great lakes, and all the lakes, islands, and rivers, cataracts, mountains,
minerals, soil and vegetable productions of the north-west regions of that vast
continent; with a description of the birds, beasts, reptile, insects, and
fishes, peculiar to the country. Together with a concise history of the genius,
manners and customs of the Indians inhabiting the lands that lie adjacent to
the heads, and to the westward of the great river Mississippi; and an appendix
describing the uncultivated parts of America, that are most proper for forming
settlements.

Sacred history: or, the historical part of the holy scriptures of the old and
new testaments; digested into due method, with respect to order of time and
place, with observations tending to illustrate some passages therein. By Thomas
Ellwood, 3 vols.

A journal of the life, travels, sufferings, Christian experiences, and labor
of love in the work of the ministry of George Fox.

Select works of William Penn, in 5 vols. Octavo.

An essay on the treatment and conversion of African slaves. By James Ramsey,
M.A. Vicar of Teston, in Kent.

Fruits of retirement: or, miscellaneous poems, moral and divine. By Mary
Mollineux.

Grounds of a holy life. By Hugh Turford.

Some principles and precepts of the Christian religion, by way of question and
answer. By Samuel Fuller.

Memoirs of the life of John Roberts, alias Hayward.

Primitive Christianity revived, in the faith and practice of the people called
Quakers. Written in testimony to the present dispensation of God through them
to the world. By William Penn. To which is added, select pieces on religious
subjects. By Isaac Penington.

Select poems, containing epistles, etc. occasionally written on various
subjects. To which is now added, the history of Elijah and Elisha. By John Fry.

The advantages and disadvantages of the marriage-state, as entered into with
religious or irreligious persons.

An epistle to friends, concerning the present and succeeding times. By Stephen
Crisp.

Seven discourses and three prayers, and an epistle to his brethren in
religious profession in the island of Tortola. By Samuel Fothergill.

STATIONARY.
Imperial, super-royal, royal, medium, demi, and foolscap writing-paper;
medium, demi, and foolscap day-books, journals, and ledgers; counting house
files; Irish and common wafers; Dutch and English sealing-wax; Dutch and
English quills, from 3 s to 18 sper hundred; ivory folders; ink-powder and
ink-cake; pewter and japaned ink-stands; a variety of leather and paper
ink-holders for the pocket; asses skin memorandum books; copperplate copies;
black sand; neat slates; slate pencils; sliding and common black lead pencils,
of a good quality; blank bonds; arbitration do. powers of attorney; bills of
lading; apprentice and servant's indentures; conveyances for land warrants;
blank declarations for attorneys at law, etc. etc. etc.


