A NARRATIVE OF THE CAPTIVITY AND SUFFERINGS OF BENJAMIN GILBERT AND HIS FAMILY;

WHO WERE SURPRISED BY THE INDIANS, AND TAKEN FROM THEIR FARMS, ON THE
FRONTIERS OF PENNSYLVANIA, IN THE SPRING, 1780.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, IN MARKET-STREET, BETWEEN
SECOND AND THIRD-STREETS.

MDCC LXXXIV.

1784

PREFACE.
AS the Captivity of Benjamin Gilbert's Family has been a Subject of much
Inquiry, and many of their Friends were anxious to have a particular Account of
their Sufferings; the following Narrative is presented to them and the Public,
reciting the Transactions as circumstantially as could be furnished from
Memory, after comparing Accounts with each other on their Return from Canada.

That their Lives were preserved through the many threatening Scenes they
passed, whilst in the Hands of the Indians, is to be ascribed, with Gratitude
and Thankfulness, to the great Ruler of the Universe, who can say unto the Sea,
"Thus far shall thou go, and no further. And though Benjamin Gilbert, the
Elder, was permitted to sink under the Weight of his Fatigue and Afflictions,
he lived to be restored to Liberty, and breathed his last in the Arms of his
affectionate Wife.

To be cast into the Power of Savages, who, from Infancy, are taught a Hardness
of Heart, which deprives them of the common Feelings of Humanity, is enough to
intimidate the firmest Mind: But when we hear of helpless Women and Children
torn from their Homes, and dragged into the Wilderness, we shudder at the
Thought, and are bound to acknowledge our infinite Obligations to the Almighty,
that we are so much more enlightened than these unhappy Wretches of the Desert;
to most of whom, the Glad-Tidings of the Gospel remains yet to be proclaimed:
"Glory to God in the Highest; on Earth Peace and good Will to Men.

A NARRATIVE OF THE CAPTIVITY OF BENJAMIN GILBERT AND HIS FAMILY.
BENJAMIN GILBERT, Son of Joseph Gilbert, was born at Byberry, about 15 Miles
from the City of Philadelphia, in the Year 1711, and received his Education
among the People called Quakers.

He resided at or near the Place of his Nativity for several Years; during
which Time of Residence he married, and after the Decease of his first Wife, he
accomplished a second Marriage with Elizabeth Peart, Widow of Bryan Peart, and
continued in this Neighborhood until the Year 1775, when he removed with his
Family to a Farm situate on Mahoning Creek, in Penn Township, Northampton
County, being the Frontiers of Pennsylvania, not far from where Fort Allen was
erected. The Improvements he carried on here were according to the usual Manner
of new Settlements, Convenience being principally attended to; his House and
Barn being of Logs, to this he had added a Saw-Mill and a commodious Stone
Grist-Mill, which, as it commanded the Country for a considerable Distance,
conduced in some Measure to render his Situation comfortable.

This short Account may not be improper, in order to interest our Feelings in
the Relation of the many Scenes of Affliction the Family were reduced to, when
snatched from the pleasing enjoyment of the Necessaries and Conveniences of
Life. The most flattering of our Prospects are often marked with
Disappointment, expressively instructing us that we are all Strangers and
Sojourners here, as were our Forefathers.

This Family was alarmed on the 25th Day of the 4th Month, 1780, about
Sunrise, by a Party of eleven Indians, whose Appearance struck them with
Terror; to attempt and Escape was Death, and a Portion of Distress not easy to
be supported, the certain Attendant on the most patient and submissive Conduct.
The Indians who made this Incursion, were of different Tribes or Nations, who
had abandoned their Country on the Approach of General Sullivan's Army, and
fled within Command of the British Forts in Canada, promiscuously settling
within their Neighborhood, and, according to Indian Custom of carrying on War,
frequently invading the Frontier Settlements, taking Captive the weak and
defenseless.

The Names of these Indians, with their respective Tribes, are as follow: 1.
Rowland Mo^teur, 1st Captain. 2. John Monteur, second in Command, who was also
styled Captain: These two were Mohawks descended of a French Woman. 3. Samuel
Harris, a Cayuga Indian. 4. John Huston, and his Son Cayugas. 5. John Huston,
Jun. Cayugas. 6. John Fox, of the Delaware Nation. The other 5 were Senecas.


At this Place they made Captives of the following Persons:

1. Benjamin Gilbert, aged about 69 Years. 2. Elizabeth, his Wife, 55 3. Joseph
Gilbert, his Son, 41 4. Jesse Gilbert, another Son, 19 5. Sarah Gilbert, Wife
to Jesse, 19 6. Rebecca Gilbert, a Daughter, 16 7. Abner Gilbert, a Son. 14 8.
Elizabeth Gilbert, a Daughter, 12 9. Thomas Peart, Son to Benjamin Gilbert's
Wife, 23 10. Benjamin Gilbert, a Son of John Gilbert of Philadelphia, 11 11.
Andrew Harrigar, of German Descent, hired by Benjamin Gilbert, 26 12. Abigail
Dodson, (Daughter of Samuel Dodson, who lived on a Farm near one Mile distant
from the Mill) who came that Morning with Grist, 14

They then proceeded to Benjamin Peart's Dwelling, about Half a Mile further,
and brought himself and Family, viz.

13. Benjamin Peart, Son to Benjamin Gilbert's Wife, 27 14. Elizabeth Peart,
his Wife, 20 15. Their Child, about nine Months old.

The Prisoners were bound with Cords which the Indians brought with them, and
in this melancholy Condition left under a Guard for the Space of Half an Hour,
during which Time the rest of the Captors employed themselves in plundering the
House, and packing up such Goods as they chose to carry off, until they had got
together a sufficient Loading for three Horses which they took, besides
compelling the distressed Prisoners to carry Part of their Plunder. When they
had finished plundering, they began their Retreat, two of their Number being
detached to fire the Buildings, which they did without any Exception of those
belonging to the unhappy Sufferers; thereby aggravating their Distresses, as
they could observe the Flames, and the falling in of the Roofs, from an
adjoining Eminence called Summer Hill. They cast a mournful Look toward their
Dwellings, but were not permitted to stop, until they had reached the further
Side of the Hill, where the Party sat down to make a short Repast; but Grief
prevented the Prisoners from sharing with them.

The Indians speedily put forwards from this Place; as they apprehended they
were not so far removed from the Settlements as to be secure from Pursuit. Not
much further was a large Hill called Mochunk, which they fixed upon for a Place
of Rendezvous: Here they halted near an Hour, and prepared Shoes or Sandals,
which they call Mockasons, for some of the Children: Considering themselves in
some Degree relieved from Danger, their Fears abated so that they could enjoy
their Meal at Leisure, which they ate very heartily. At their Removal from this
Hill, they told the Prisoners that Col. Butler was no great Distance from them,
in the Woods, and that they were going to him.

Near the Foot of the Hill flows a Stream of Water called Mochunk Creek, which
was crossed, and the second Mountain passed; the steep and difficult Ascent of
which appeared very great to the much enfeebled and affrighted Captives: They
were permitted to rest themselves for some Minutes, and then pressed onwards to
the Broad Mountain, at the Foot of which runs Nescaconnah Creek.

Doubly distressed by a Recollection of past Happiness, and a Dread of the
Miseries they had now to undergo, they began the Ascent of this Mountain with
great Anguish both of Mind and Body. Benjamin Gilbert's Wife, dispirited with
the increasing Difficulties, did not expect she was able to pass this Mountain
of Foot; but being threatened with Death by the Indians if she did not perform
it, with many a heavy Step she at length succeeded. The Broad Mountain is said
to be 7 Miles over in this Place, and about 10 Miles distant from Benjamin
Gilbert's Settlement. Here they halted an Hour, and then struck into the
Neskapeck Path; the Unevenness and Ruggedness of which, rendered it exceedingly
toilsome, and obliged them to love forwards slowly. Quackac Creek runs across
the Neskapeck Path, which leads over Pismire Hill. At this last Place they
stopped to refresh themselves, and then pursued their March along the same
Path, through Moravian Pine Swamp, to Mahoniah Mountain, where they lodged, being
the first Night of their Captivity.

It may furnish Information to some, to mention the Method the Indians
generally use to secure their Prisoners: They cut down a Sapling as large as a
Man's Thigh, and therein cut Notches, in which they fix their Legs, and over
this they place a Pole, crossing the Pole on each Side with Stakes drove in the
Ground, and in the Crotches of the Stakes they place other Poles or Riders,
effectually consining the Prisoners on their Backs; besides which, they put a
Strap round their Necks, which they fasten to a Tree: In this Manner the Night
passed. Their Beds were Hemlock Branches strewed on the Ground, and Blankets
for a Covering, which was an Indulgence scarcely to have been expected from
Savages: It may reasonably be expected, that in this melancholy Situation,
Sleep was a Stranger to their Eyelids.

Benjamin Peart having fainted in the Evening, occasioned by the Sufferings he
endured, was threatened to be tomhawked by Rowland Monteur.

26 th. Early this Morning they continued their Route, near the Waters of
Teropin Ponds. The Indians thought it most eligible to separate the Prisoners
in Companies of two by two, each Company under the Command of a particular
Indian, spreading them to a considerable Distance, in order to render a Pursuit
as impracticable as possible. The old People, overcome with Fatigue, could not
make as much Expedition as their severe Taskmasters thought proper, but failed
in their Journey, and were therefore threatened with Death, by the Indian under
whose Direction they were placed: Thus circumstanced, they resigned themselves
to their unhappy Lot, with as much Fortitude as possible. Toward Evening the
Parties again met and encamped, having killed a Deer, they kindled a Fire, each
one roasting Pieces of the Flesh upon sharpened Switches. The Confinement of
the Captives was the same with the first Night, but, as they were by this Time
more resigned to the Event, they were not altogether deprived of Sleep.

27 th. After Breakfast a Council was held concerning the Division of the
Prisoners, which being settled, they delivered each other those Prisoners who
fell within their several Allotments, giving them Directions to attend to the
particular Indians whose Property they became. In this Day's Journey they
passed near Fort Wyoming, on the Eastern Branch of Susquehanna, about forty
Miles from their late Habitation. The Indians, naturally timid, were alarmed as
they approached this Garrison, and observed great Caution, not suffering any
Noise, but stepped on the Stones that lay in the Path, lest any Footsteps
should lead to a Discovery. Not far from thence is a considerable Stream of
Water, emptying itself into Susquehanna, which they crossed with great
Difficulty, it being deep and rapid, and continued here this Night. Benjamin
Gilbert being bound fast with Cords, underwent great Sufferings.

28 th. This Morning the Prisoners were all painted according to the Custom
among the Indians, some of them with red and black, some all red, and some with
black only: Those whom they smut with black, without any other Color, are not
considered of any Value, and are by this Mark generally devoted to Death:
Although this cruel Purpose may not be executed immediately, they are seldom
preserved to reach the Indian Hamlets alive. In the Evening they came to
Susquehanna, having had a painful and wearisome Journey through a very stony
and hilly Path. Here the Indians sought diligently for a private Lodging-place,
that they might be as secure as possible from any Scouting-parties of the white
People. It is unnecessary to make further Mention of their Manner of Lodging,
as it still remained the same.

29 th. They went in Search of the Horses which had strayed from them in the
Night, and after some Time found them. They then kept the Course of the River,
walking along its Side with Difficulty. In the Afternoon they came to a Place
where the Indians had directed four Negroes to wait their Return, having lest
them some Corn for a Subsistence; These Negroes had escaped from Confinement,
and were on their Way to Niagara, when first discovered by the Indians; being
challenged by them, answered "They were for the King," upon which they
immediately received them into Protection.

30 th. The Negroes who were added to the Company the Day before, began cruelly
to domineer and tyrannize over the Prisoners, frequently whipping them for
their Sport, and treating them with more Severity than even the Indians
themselves; having had their Hearts hardened by the Meanness of their
Condition, and long Subjection to Slavery. In this Day's Journey they passed
the Remains of the Indian Town, Wyaloosing. The Lands round these Ruins have a
remarkable Appearance of Fertility. In the Evening they made a Lodgement by the
Side of a large Creek.

5 th. Month 1 st After crossing a considerable Hill in the Morning, they came
to a Place where two Indians lay dead. A Party of Indians had taken some white
People, whom they were carrying off Prisoners, they rose upon the Indians in
the Night, killed four of them, and then effected their Escape. The Women were
sent forwards, and the Men-Prisoners commanded to draw near and view the two
dead Bodies, which remained; (the other two being removed) they staid to
observe them a considerable Time, and were then ordered to a Place where a Tree
was blown down. Death appeared to be their Doom; but after remaining in a State
of sad Suspense for some Time, they were ordered to dig a Grave; to effect
which, they cut a Sapling with their Tomhawks, and sharpened on End, with which
wooden Instrument one of them broke the Ground, and the others cast the Earth
out with their Hands, the Negroes being permitted to beat them severely whilst
they were thus employed. After interring the Bodies, they went forwards to the
rest, and overtook them as they were preparing for their Lodging. They were not
yet released from their Sapling Confinement.

2 d. Having some of their Provisions with them, they made an early Meal, and
traveled the whole Day. They crossed the East Branch of Susquehanna toward
Evening, in Canoes, at the Place where General Sullivian's Army had passed it
in their Expedition. Their Encampment was on the Western Side of this Branch of
the River; but two Indians who did not cross it, sent for Benjamin Gilbert,
jun* and Jesse Gilbert's Wife, and as no probable Cause could be assigned why
it was so, the Design was considered as a very dark one, and was a grievous
Affliction to the others.

3 d. The Morning however dispelled their Fears, when they had the Satisfaction
of seeing them again, and understood they had not received any Treatment harder
than their usual Fare. The Horses swam the Susquehanna, by the Side of the
Canoe. This Day the Indians in their March found a Scalp, and took it along
with them, as also some old Corn, of which they made a Supper. They frequently
killed Deer, and by that Means supplied the Company with Meat, being almost the
only Provision they ate, as the Flour they took with them was expended.

4 th. The Path they traveled this Morning was but little trodden, which made
it difficult for those who were not acquainted with the Woods to keep in it.
They crossed a Creek, made up a large Fire to warm themselves by, and then
separated into two Companies, the one taking the Westward Path, with whom were
Thomas Peart, Joseph Gilbert, Benjamin Gilbert jun. and Jesse Gilbert's Wife
Sarah; the others went more to the North, over rich level Land. When Evening
came, Enquiry was made concerning the four Captives who were taken in the
Westward Path, and they were told, that "These were killed and scalped, and you
may expect the same Fate to Night. Andrew Harrigar endured many Hardships in
the Woods, and at Length re^^^ned to the Settlements, and gave the first
authentic Intelligence of Benjamin Gillbert and his Family, to their Friends.
Andrew Harrigar was so terrified at the Threat, that he resolved upon leaving
them, and as soon as it was dark, took a Kettle with Pretense of bringing some
Water, and made his Escape under Favor of the Night: He was sought after by
the Indians as soon as they observed him to be missing.

5 th. In the Morning the Indians returned; their Search for Andrew Harrigar
being happily for him unsuccessful: The Prisoners who remained, were therefore
treated with great Severity on Account of his Escape, and were often accused of
being privy to his Defign. Capt. Rowland Monteur, carried his Resentment so
far, that he threw Jesse Gilbert down, and lifted his Tomhawk to strike him,
which the Mother prevented, by putting her Head on his Forehead, beseeching him
to spare her Son: This so enraged him, that he turned round, kicked her over,
and tied them both by their Necks to a Tree, where they remained until his Fury
was a little abated; he then loosed them, and not long after bid them pack up
and go forwards. They passed through a large Pine Swamp, and about Noon reached
one of the Kittareen Towns, which was desolated. Not far from this Town, on the
Summit of a Mountain, there issues a large Spring, forming a very considerable
Fall, and runs very rapidly in an irregular winding Stream down the Mountain's
Sides. They left this Place, and took up their Lodging in a deserted Wigwam
covered with Bark, which had formerly been Part of the Town of the Shipquagas.

6 th, 7 th, 8 th, They continued these three Days in the Neighborhood of
these Villages, which had been deserted upon General Sullivan's Approach. Here
they lived well, having in Addition to their usual Bill of Fare, plenty of
Turnips and Potatoes, which had remained in the Ground, unnoticed by the Army.
This Place was the Hunting-Ground of the Shipquagas, and whenever their
Industry prompted them to go out hunting, they had no Difficulty to procure as
many Deer as they desired.

Roast and boiled Meat, with Vegetables, afforded them plentiful Meals: they
also caught a wild Turkey, and some Fish, called Suckers. Their Manner of
catching Fish, was, to sharpen a Stick, and watch along the Rivers until a Fish
came near them, when they suddenly pierced him with the Stick, and brought him
out of the Water.

Here were a Number of Colts, some of them were taken, and the Prisoners
ordered to manage them, which was not easily done.

9 th, When they renewed their March, they placed the Mother upon a Horse that
seemed dangerous to ride, but she was preserved from any Injury. In this Day's
Journey they came to Meadow Ground, where they staid the Night, the Men being
confined as before related, and the Negroes lay near them for a Guard.

10 th. A wet Swamp, that was very troublesome, lay in their Road; after which
they had to pass a rugged Mountain, where there was no Path. The Underbrush
made it hard Labor for the Women to travel; but no Excuse would avail with
their severe Masters, and they were compelled to keep up with the Indians,
however great the Fatigue: When they had passed it, they tarried awhile for the
Negroes who had lagged behind, having suffic^ent Employ to attend to the Colts
that carried the Plunder. When all the Company met together, they agreed to
rendezvous in an adjoining Swamp.

11 th. A long Reach of Savannas and low Ground, rendered this Day's Route very
fatiguing and painful, especially to the Women: Elizabeth Peart's Husband not
being allowed to relieve her by carrying the Child, her Spirits and Strength
were so exhausted that she was ready to faint; the Indian under whose Care she
was, observing her Distress, gave her a violent Blow. When we compare the
Temper and Customs of these People, with those of our own Color, how much
Cause have we to be thankful for the Superiority we derive from the Blessings
of Civilization.

It might truly be said, Days of bitter Sorrow, and wearisome Nights were
appointed the unhappy Captives.

12 th. Their Provisions began to grow scant, having past the hunting Grounds:
The Want of proper Food to support them, which might render them more capable
of enduring their daily Fatigue, was a heavy Trial, and was much increased by
their Confinement at Night. Elizabeth Gilbert was reduced so low, that she
traveled in great Pain all this Day, riding on Horseback in the Morning, but
toward Evening she was ordered to alight, and walk up a Hill they had to
ascend; the Pain she suffered, together with Want of Food, so overcame her,
that she was seized with a Chill: The Indians administered some Flour and Water
boiled, which afforded her some Relief.

13 th. Last Night's Medicine being repeated, they continued their March, and
after a long Walk, were so effectually worn down, that they halted. The Pilot,
John Huston, the Elder, took Ab^er Gilbert with him, (as they could make more
Expedition than the Rest) to procure a Supply of Provisions to relieve their
Necessity.

14 th. The Mother had suffered so much, that two of her Children were obliged
to lead her. Before Noon they came to Canadosago, where they met with Benjamin
Gilbert, jun. and Jesse Gilbert's Wife Sarah, two of the four who had been
separated from them ten Days past, and taken along the Western Path: This
Meeting afforded them great Satisfaction; the Doubt and Uncertainty of their
Lives being spared, often distressing their affectionate Relations.

John Huston, jun the Indian under whose Care Benjamin Gilbert was placed,
designing to dispatch him, painted him black; this exceedingly terrified the
Family, but no Entreaties of theirs being likely to prevail, they resigned
their Cause to him whose Power can control all Events. Wearied with their
Weakness and traveling, they made a Stop to recover themselves, when the Pilot
returning, assured them they should soon receive some Provisions. The Negroes
were reduced so low with Hunger, that their Behavior was different from what
it had been, conducting with more Moderation. At their Quarters in the Evening,
two white Men came to them, one of which was a Volunteer amongst the British,
the other had been taken Prisoner some Time before; these two Men brought some
Hom^^^^, and Sugar made from the sweet Maple, the (...) being boiled to a
Consistency, and is but a lit^^^ inferior to the Sugar imported from the
Islands: Of this Provision, and an Hedgehog which they found, they made a more
comfortable Supper than they had enjoyed for many Days.

15 th. In the Morning the Volunteer having received Information of the rough
Treatment the Prisoners met with from the Negroes, relieved them, by taking the
four Blacks under his Care. It was not without much Difficulty they crossed a
large Creek which was in their Way, being obliged to swim the Horses over it.
Benjamin Gilbert began to fail; the Indian, whose Property he was, highly
irritated at his Want of Strength, put a Rope about his Neck, leading him along
with it; Fatigue at last so overcame him, that he fell on the Ground, when the
Indian pulled the Rope so hard, that he almost choked him: His Wife seeing
this, resolutely interceded for him, although the Indians bid her go forwards,
as the others had gone on before them; this she refused to comply with, unless
her Husband might be permitted to accompany her; they replied. "That they were
determined to Kill the old Man, having before this set him apart as a Victim:
But at Length her Entreatirs prevailed, and their Hearts were turned from their
cruel Purpose. Had not an overruling Providence preserved him from their Fury,
he would inevitably have perished, as the Indians seldom show Mercy to those
whom they devote to Death, which, as has been before observed, was the Case
with Benjamin Gilbert, whom they had (...) with black Paint from this Motive.
When their Anger was a little moderates, they set forwards to overtake the Rest
of the Company: Their Relations, who had been Eye-witness^^ of the former Part
of this Scene of Cruelty, and expected they would both have been murdered,
re^^^^^d greatly at their Return, considering their Safety as a Providential
De^^verance.

16 th. Necessity induced two of the Indians to set off on Horseback, into the
Seneca Country* in Search of Provisions. The Prisoners, in the mean Time, were
ordered to dig up a Root, something resembling Potatoes, which the Indians call
Whoppanies. They tarried at this Place, until toward the Evening of the
succeeding Day, and made a Soup of wild Onions and Turnip Tops; this they eat
without Bread or Salt, it could not therefore afford sufficient Sustenance*
either for young or old; their Food being so very light, their Strength daily
wasted.

17 th. They left this Place, and crossed the Genesee River, (which empties its
Waters into Lake Ontario) on a Raft of Logs, bound together by Hickory Withes;
this appeared to be a dangerous Method of ferrying them over such a River, to
those who had been unaccustomed to such Conveyances. They fixed their Station
near the Genesee Banks, and procured more of the wild Potatoe Roots before
mentioned, for the Supper.

18 th. One of the Indians left the Company, taking with him the finest Horse
they had, and in some Hours after, returned with a large Piece of Meat,
ordering the Captives to boil it; this Command they cheerfully performed,
anxiously watching the Kettle, fresh Meat being a Rarity which they had not eat
for a long Time: The Indians, when it was sufficiently boiled, distributed to
each one a Piece, eating sparingly themselves. The Prisoners made their Repast
without Bread or Salt, and eat with a good Relish, what they supposed to be
fresh Beef, but afterward understood it was Horse-Hesh.

A shrill Halloo which they heard, gave the Prisoners some Uneasiness; one of
the Indians immediately rode to examine the Cause, and sound it was Capt.
Rowland Monteur, and his Bother John's Wise, with some other Indians, who were
seeking them with Provision. The Remainder of the Company soon reached them,
and they divided some Bread, which they had brought, into small Pieces,
according to the Number of the Company.

Here is a large Extent of rich farming Land, remarkable for is Levelness and
beautiful Meadows. The Country is so flat, that there are no Falls in the
Rivers, and the Waters run slow and deep; and whenever Showers decsend, they
continue a long Time muddied.

The Captain and his Company had brought with them Cakes of Hommony and Indian
Corn; of this they made a good Meal. He appeared pleased to see the Prisoners,
having been absent from them several Days, and ordered them all round to shake
hands with him. From him they received Information respecting Joseph Gilbert
and Thomas Peart, who were separated from the others on the ^^th Instant, that
they had arrived at the Indian Settlements, some Time, in Safety.

The Company staid the Night at this Place. One of the Indians refused to
suffer any of them to come near his Fire, or converse with the Prisoner, who in
the Distribution had sallen to him.

19 th. Pounding Hommony was this Day's Employment, the Weather being warm,
made it a hard Task; they boiled and prepared it for Supper, the Indians
setting down to eat first, and when they had concluded their Meal, they wiped
the Spoon on the Soal of their Mockasons, and then gave it to the Captives:
Hunger alone could prevail on any one to eat after such Filth and Nastiness.

20 th. Elizabeth Gilbert, the Mother, being obliged to ride alone, missed the
Path, for which the Indians repeatedly struck her. Their Route still continued
through rich Meadow. After wandering for a Time out of the direct Path, they
came to an Indian Town, and obtained the necessary Information to pursue their
Journey: the Indians ran out of their Huts to see the Prifoners* and to partake
of the Plunder, but no Part of it suited them. Being directed to travel the
Path back again, for a short Distance, they did so, and then struck into
another, and went on until Night, by which Time they were very hungry, not
having eat since Morning; the Kettle was again set on the Fire, for Hommony,
this being their only Food.

21 st. The Report of a Morning-Gun from Niagara* which they heard, contributed
to raise their Hopes* they rejoiced at being so near. An Indian was dispatched
on Horseback, to procure Provisions from the Fort.

Elizabeth Gilbert cold not walk as fast as the Rest, she was therefore sent
forwards on Foot, but was soon overtaken, and left behind, the Rest being
obliged by the Indians to go on without regarding her. She would have been
greatly perplexed, when she came to a Division-path, had not her Husband lain a
Branch across the Path which would have led her Wrong: An affecting Instance of
both Ingenuity and Tenderness. She met several Indians, who passed by without
speaking to her.

An Indian belonging to the Company, who was on the Horse Elizabeth Gilbert had
rode, over-took her, and, as he went on slowly, conversing with her,
endeavored to alarm her, by saying that she would be left behind, and perish
in the Woods; yet, notwithstanding this, his Heart was so softened before he
had gone any great Distance from her, that he alighted from the Horse and left
him, that she might be able to reach the Rest of the Company. The more
seriously she considered this, the more it appeared to her, to be a convincing
Instance of the overruling Protection of him, who can "turn the Heart of Man,
as the Husbandman turns the Watercourse in his Field."

22 d. As the Indians approached nearer their Habitations, they frequently
repeated their Halloos, and after some Time, they received an Answer in the
same Manner, which alarmed the Company much; but they soon discovered it to
proceed from a Party of Whites and Indians, who were on some Expedition, though
their Pretense was, that they were for New York. Not long after parting with
these, the Captain's Wife came to them; she was Daughter to Siangorochti, King
of the Senecas, but her Mother being a Cayuga, she was ranked among that
Nation, the Children generally reckoning their Descent from the Mother's Side.
This Princess was attended by the Captain's Brother John, one other Indian, and
a white Prisoner who had been taken at Wyoming, by Rowland Monteur; she was
dressed altogether in the Indian Manner, shining with Gold Lace and Silver
Baubles: They brought with them from the Fort a Supply of Provision. The
Captain being at a Distance behind, when his Wise came, the Company waited for
him. After the customary Salutations, he addressed himself to his Wife, telling
her that Rebecca was her Daughter, and that she must not be induced, by any
Consideration, to part with her; whereupon she took a Silver Ring off her
Finger, and put it upon Rebecca, by which she was adopted as her Daughter.

They feasted upon the Provisions that were brought, for they had been for
several Days before pinched with Hunger, what Sustenance they could procure not
being sufficient to support Nature.

23 d. Their Spirits were in some Degree revived, by the Enjoyment of Plenty,
added to the pleasing Hope of some favorable Event procuring their
Releasement, as they were not far distant from Niagara.

The Indians proceeded on their Journey, and continued whooping in the most
frightful Manner. In this Day's Route, they met another Company of Indians, who
compelled Benjamin Gilbert, the Elder, to sit on the Ground, and put several
Questions to him, to which he gave them the best Answers he could; they then
took his Hat from him and went off.

Going through a small Town near Niagara, an Indian Woman came out of one of
the Huts, and struck each of the Captives a Blow. Not long after their
Departure from this Place, Jesse, Rebecca, and their Mother, were detained
until the others had got out of their Sight, when the Mother was ordered to
push on; and as she had to go by herself, she was much perplexed what Course to
take, as there was no Path by which she could be directed: In this Dilemma, she
concluded to keep as straight forward as possible, and after some Space of
Time, she had the Satisfaction of overtaking the others. The Pilot then made a
short Stay, that those who were behind might come up, and the Captain handed
some Rum round, giving each a Dram, except the two old Folks, whom they did not
consider worthy of this Notice. Here the Captain, who had the chief Direction,
painted Abner, Jesse, Rebecca, and Elizabeth Gilbert, jun* and presented each
with a Belt of wampum, as a Token of their being received into Favor although
they took from them all their Hat^ and Bonnets, except Rebecca's.

The Prisoners were released from the heavy Loads they had heretofore been
compelled to carry, and was it not for the Treatment they expected on their
approaching the Indian Towns, and the Hardship of a Separation, their Situation
would have been tolerable; but the Horror of their Minds, arising from the
dreadful Yells of the Indians, as they approached the Hamlets, is easier
conceived than described, for they were no Strangers to the customary Cruelty
exercised upon Captives on entering their Towns: The Indians, Men Women, and
Children collect together, bringing Clubs and Stones, in order to beat them,
which they usually do with great Severity, by Way of Revenge for their
Relations who have been slain; this is performed immediately upon their
entering the Village where the Warriors reside: This Treatment cannot be
avoided, and the Blows, however cruel, must be borne without Complaint, and the
Prisoners are sorely beaten, until their Enemies are wearied with the cruel
Sport. Their Sufferings were in this Case very great, they received several
Wounds, and two of the Women who were on Horseback, were much bruised by
falling from their Horses, which were frightened by the Indians. Elizabeth, the
Mother, took Shelter by the Side of one them, but upon his observing that she
met with some Favor upon his Account, he sent her away; she then received
several violent Blows, so that she was almost disabled. The Blood trickled from
their Heads, in a Stream, their Hair being cropped close, and the Clothes they
had on, in Rags, made their Situation truly piteous: Whilst they were
inflicting this Revenge upon the Captives, the King came, and put a Stop to any
further Cruelty, by telling them "It was sufficient," which they immediately
attended to.

Benjamin Gilbert, and Elizabeth his Wife, Jesse Gilbert, and his Wife, were
ordered to Captain Rowland Monteur's House, the Women belonging to it, were
kind to them, and gave them something to eat: Sarah Gilbert, Jesse's Wife, was
taken from them by three Women, in Order to be placed in the Family she was to
be adopted by.

Two Officers from Niagara Fort, Captains Dace, and Powel, came to see the
Prisoners, and prevent (as they were informed) any Abuse that might be given
them: Benjamin Gilbert informed these Officers, that he was apprehensive they
were in great Danger of being murdered, upon which they promised him they would
send a Boat, the next Day, to bring them to Niagara.

24 th. Notwithstanding the kind Intention of the Officers, they did not derive
the expected Advantage from it, for the Indians insisted on their going to the
Fort on Foot, although the Bruises they had received the Day before, from the
many severe Blows given them, rendered their Journey on Foot very distressing;
but Capt. Monteur obstinately persisting, they dare not long remonstrate, or
refuse.

When they left the Indian Town, several issued from their Huts after them,
with Sticks in their Hands, yelling and screeching in a most dismal Manner; but
through the Interposition of four Indian Women, who had come with the Captives,
to prevent any (...) Abuse they might receive, they were preserved: One of them
walking between Benjamin Gilbert and his Wife, led them, and desired Jesse to
keep as near them as he could, the other three wa^^ed behind, and prevailed
with the young Indians to desist. They had not pursued their Route long, before
they saw Capt. John Powel, who came from his Boat, and persuaded (though with
some Difficu^ty) the Indians to get into it, with the Captives, which relieved
them from the Apprehensions of further Danger. After reaching the Fort, Capt.
Powel introduced them to Col. Guy Johnson and Col. Butler, who asked the
Prisoners many Questions, in the Presence of the Indians. They presented the
Captain with a Belt of Wampum, which is a constant Practice amongst them, when
they intend a Ratification of the Peace. Before their Connection with Europeans,
these Belts were made of Shells, found on the Coasts of New England and
Virginia, which were sawed out into Beads of an Oblong Shape, about a Quarter
of an Inch long, which when strung together on leathern Strings, and these
Strings fastened with find threads made of Sinews, compose what is called, a
Belt of Wampum: But since the Whites have gained Footing among them, they make
Use of the common Glass Beads for this Purpose.

The Indians, according to their usual Custom and Ceremony, at three separate
Times, ordered the Prisoners to shake Hands with Col. Johnston.

25 th. Benjamin Gilbert, Elizabeth his Wife, and Jesse Gilbert, were
surrendered to Col, Johnson: This Deliverance from such Scenes of Distress, as
they had become acquainted with, gave them a more free Opportunity of close
Reflection than heretofore.

The many sorrowful Days and Nights they had passed, the painful Anxiety
attendant on their frequent Separation from each other, and the Uncertainty of
the Fate of the Rest of their Family, overwhelmed them with Grief.

26 th. Expression is too weak to describe their Distress, on leaving their
Children with these hard Masters; they were not unacquainted with many of the
Difficulties, to which they would necessarily be exposed in a Residence amongst
Indians, and the Loss which the Young People would sustain, for Want of a
civilized and Christian Education.

27 th. In this desponding Situ^^tion, the Kindness of Sympathy was awakened in
one of the Indian Women, who even forgot her Prejudices, and wiped away the
Tears which trickled down Elizabeth Gilbert's Cheeks.

The particular Attention of Col. Johnson's Houskeeper to them, from a
Commiseration of their Distress, claims their Remembrance: Benjamin, his Wife,
and Jesse Gilbert, were invited to her House, where she not only gave the old
Folks her best Room, but administered to their Necessities, and endeavored to
sooth their Sorrows.

Jesse Gilbert was favored to get Employ, which, as it was some Alleviation of
his Misfortunes, may be considered as a providential Kindness.

28 th. A few Days after they came to the Fort, they had Information that
Benjamin Peart was by the River Side, with the Indians; upon hearing this
Reports, his Mother went to see him, but every Attempt for his Release was in
Vain, the Indians would by no Means give him up. From this Place they intended
to march with their Prisoner, to the Genesee River, about an Hundred Miles
Distance. As the affectionate Mother's Solicitations proved fruitless, her Son
not only felt the afflicting Loss of his Wife and Child, from whom he had been
torn some Time before, but a Renewal of his Grief, on this short Sight of his
Parent: She procured him a Hat, and also some Salt, which was an acceptable
Burden for the Journey.

Benjamin Gilbert, conversing with the Indian Captain who made them Captives,
observed that he might say what none of the other Indians could, "That he had
brought in the oldest Man, and the youngest Child; his Reply to this was
expressive; "It was not I, but the great God who brought you through, for we
were determined to kill you, but were prevented.

The British Officers being acquainted that Jesse Gilbert's Wife was among the
Indians, with great Tenderness agreed to seek her out, and after a diligent
Enquiry, found that she was among the Delawares, they went to them, and
endeavored to agree upon Terms for her Releasement; the Indians brought her to
the Fort the next Day, but would not give her up to her Relations.

29 th. As the Cabbins of the Indians were but two Miles from the Fort, they
went thither, and Jesse and the Officers used ever Argument in their Power to
prevail upon them, representing how hard it was to part these two young People;
at Length they consented to bring her in next Day, with their whole Tribe, for
a final Release.

30 th. They accordingly came, but started so many Objections, that she was
obliged to return with them.

31 st. Early next Morning, Capt. Robeson generously undertook to procure her
Liberty, which, after much Attention and Solicitude, he, together with
Liutenant Hillyard, happily accomplished. They made the Indians several small
Presents, and gave them thirty Pounds as a Ransom.

When Sarah Gilbert had obtained her Liberty, she altered her Dress more in
Character for her Sex, then she had been able to do whilst amongst the Indians,
and went to her Husband and Parents at Col. Johnson's, where she was joyfully
received.

Col. Johnson's Ho^skeeper continued her kind Attentions to them, during their
Stay here, and procured Clothing for them from the King's Stores.

6 th Month 1 st. About this Time, the Senecas, among whom Elizabeth Peart was
Captive, brought her with them to the Fort; as soon as the Mother heard of it,
she went to her, and had some Conversation with her, but could not learn where
she was to be sent to; she then enquired of the Interpreter, and pressed on his
Friendship, to learn what was to become of her Daughter; this Request he
compiled with, and informed her that she was to be given away to another Family
of the Senecas, and adopted among them, in the Place of a deceased Relation.
Capt Powel interested himself in her ^ase likewise, and offered to purchase her
of them, but the Indians refused to give her up; and as the Mother and Daughter
expected they should see each other no more, their Parting was very affecting.

The Indian Woman who had adopted Rebecca as her Daughter, came also to the
Fort, and Elizabeth Gilbert made Use of this Opportunity to enquire concerning
her Daughter, the Interpreter informed her, there was no Probability of
obtaining the Enlargement of her Child, as the Indians would not part with her:
All she could do, was, to recommend her to their Notice, as very weakly, and of
Consequence not able to endure much Fatigue.

2 d. and 3 d. Not many Days after their Arrival at Niagara, a Vessel came up
Lake Ontario to the Fort, with Orders for the Prisoners to go Montreal. In this
Vessel came one Capt. Brant, an Indian Chief, high in Rank amongst them.
Elizabeth Gilbert immediately applied herself to solicit and interest him on
Behalf of her Children who yet remained in Captivity; he readily promised her
to use his Endeavors to procure their Liberty. A short Time before they sailed
for Montreal, they received Accounts of Abner and Elizabeth Gilbert the
younger, but it was also understood that their Possessors were not disposed to
give them up. As the Prospect of obtaining the Release of their Children was ^o
very discouraging, it was no Alleviation to their Distress, to be removed to
Montreal, where, in all Probability, they would seldom be able to gain any
Information respecting them; on which Account, they were very solicitous to
stay at Niagara, but the Col. said they could not remain there, unless the Son
would enter into the King's Service; this could not be consented to, therefore
they chose to submit to every Calamity which might be permitted to be^al them,
and con^^^ in the great Controller of Events.

Here they became acquainted with one Jesse Pawling, from Pennsylvania, who was
an Officer among the British, and behaved with Kindness and Respect to the
Prisoners, which induced them to request his Attention also to that Part of the
Family remaining in Captivity; it appeared to them of some Consequence to gain
an additional Friend. The Col. also gave his Promise to exert himself on their
Behalf.

After continuing ten Days at Col. Johnson's, they took Boat in the Forenoon of
the 2 d, being the sixth Day of the Week, and crossed the River Niagara, in
Order to go on Board the Vessel (which lay in Lake Ontario) for Montreal. The
Officers procured Necessaries for their Voyage in great Plenty, and they were
also furnished with Orders to draw (...) at certain Places, as they might have
Occasion: These Civilities may appear to many, to be too trivial to be
mentioned in this Narrative, but those who have been in equal Distress, will
not be insensible of their Value.

4 th, The Vessel sailed down the Lake, on the sixth Day of the Week, and on
First Day following, being the fourth Day of the Sixth Month, 1780, came to
Carlton Island, where there were such a Number of small Boats, which brought
Provisions, that it had the Appearance of a Fleet. Benjamin Gilbert, and Jesse,
went on Shore to obtain Leave from the commanding Officer, to go to Montreal in
the small Boats, as the Vessel they came in could proceed no further: They met
with a kind Reception and their Request was granted.

5 th. On Second-day following, they left Carlton Island, which lies at the
Mouth of Lake Ontario, and took their Passage in open Boats down the River St.
Laurence, and passed a Number of small Islands. There is a rapid Descent in the
Waters of this River, which appears dangerous to those unacquainted with these
Kind of Falls. The French Men who rowed the Boats, kept them near the Shore,
and passed without much Difficulty between the Rocks.

6 th, 7 th, and 8 th. Benjamin Gilbert had been much indisposed before they
left the Fort, and his Disorder was increased by a Rain which fell on their
Passage, as they were without any Covering. They passed Oswagatchy, an English
Garrison, by the Side of the River, but they were not permitted to stop here;
they proceeded down the St. Laurence, and the Rain continuing, went on Shore on
an Island in Order to secure themselves from the Weather: Here they made a
Shelter for Benjamin Gilbert, and when the Rain ceased, a Place was prepared
for him in the Boat, that he might lie down with more Ease. His bodily Weakness
made such rapid Progress, that it rendered all the Care and Attention of his
Wife necessary, and likewise called forth all her Fortitude; she supported him
in her Arms, affording every possible Relief to mitigate his extreme Pains: And
although in this distressed Condition, he, notwithstanding, gave a satisfactory
Evidence of the Virtue and Power of a patient and holy Resignation, which can
disarm the King of Terrors, and receive him as a welcome Messenger: Thus
prepared, he passed from this State of Probation, the eighth Day of the Sixth
Month, 1780, in the Evening, leaving his Wife and two Children, who were with
him, in all the Anxiety of deep Distress, although they had no Doubt but that
their Loss was his everlasting Gain. Being without a Light in the Boat, the
Darkness of the Night added not a little to their melancholy Situation. As
there were not any others with Elizabeth Gilbert but her Children, and the four
French Men who managed the Boat, and her Apprehensions alarmed her, lest they
should throw the Corpse overboad, as the appeared to be an unfeeling Company,
she therefore applied to some British Officers who were in a Boat behind them,
who dispelled her Fears, and received her under their Protection.

9 th. In the Morning they passed the Garrison of Coeur de Lac, and waited for
some considerable Time, a small Distance below it. Squire Campbell, who had the
Charge of the Prisoners, when he heard of Benjamin Gilbert's Decease, sent
Jesse to the Commandant of this Garrison to get a Coffin, in which they put the
Corpse, and very hastily interred him under an Oak not far from the Fort. The
Boat-men would not allow his Widow to pay the last Tribute to his Memory, but
regardless of her Affliction, refused to wait; her Distress on this Occasion
was great indeed, but being sensible that it was her Duty to submit to the
Dispensations of an overruling Providence, which are all ordered in Wisdom,
she endeavored to support herself under her Afflictions, and proceeded with
the Boa^men.

Near this Place they passed by a Grist-mill, which is maintained by a Stone
Wing extended into the River St. Laurence, the Stream being very rapid,
acquires a Force sufficient to turn the Wheel, without the further Expense of a
Dam.

The Current carried their Boat forwards with amazing Rapidity, and the Falls
became so dangerous that the Boats could proceed no further; they therefore
landed in the Evening, and went to the commanding Officer of Fort Lasheen to
request a Lodging, but the Houses in the Garrison were so crowded, that it was
with Difficulty they obtained a small Room belonging to the Boat-builders to
retire to, and here they stowed themselves with ten others.

10 th. The Garrison of Lasheen is on the Isle of Jesu, on which the Town of
Montreal stands, about the Distance of nine miles; hither our Travelers had to
go by Land, and as they were entirely unacquainted with the Road, they took the
Advantage of an empty Cart (which was going to the Town) for the Women to ride
in.

The Land in this Neighborhood is very stony* and the Soil thin; the Cattle
small, and ill favored.

When they arrived at Montreal, they were introduced to Brigadier General
M'Clean, who after examining them, sent them to one Duquesne, an Officer
amongst the Loyalists, who being from Home, they were desired to wait in the
Yard until he came; this Want of Politeness, gave them no favorable
Impressions of the Master of the House; when he returned, he read their Pass,
and gave Jesse an Order for three Days Provisions.

Daniel M' Ulphin received them into his House; by him they were treated with
great Kindness, and the Women continued at his House and worked five Weeks for
him.

Jesse Gilbert met with Employ at Thomas Busby's, where he lived very agreeably
for the Space of nine Months.

Elizabeth Gilbert had the Satisfaction of an easy Employ at Adam Scott's,
Merchant, having the Superintendence of his Kitchen, but about six Weeks after
she engaged in his Service, Jesse's Wife Sarah, was taken sick at Thomas
Busby's, which made it necessary for her Mother to disengage herself from the
Place where she was so agreeably situated, in Order to nurse her -- These three
were favored to be considered as the King's Prisoners, having Rations allowed
them; this Assistance was very comfortable, but Elizabeth's Name being erased
out of the List at a Time when they needed an additional Supply, they were much
straightned: Upon an Application to one Col. Campbell, he, together with
Esquire Campbell, took down a short Account of her Sufferings and Situation,
and after preparing a concise Narrative, they applied to the Brigadier General,
to forward it to General Haldimand at Quebec, desiring his Attention to the
Sufferers, who speedily issued his Orders, that the Releasement of the Family
should be procured, with particular injunctions for every Garrison to furnish
them with Necessaries as they came down.

As soon as Sarah Gilbert recovered from her Indisposition, her Mother returned
to Adam Scott's Family.

Thomas Gomersom hearing of their Situation, came to see them; he was educated
a Quaker, and had been a Merchant of New York, and traveled with Robert Walker
in his religious Visits; but upon the Commencement of the War, had deviated
from his former Principles, and had lost all the Appearance of a Friend,
wearing a Sword: He behaved with Respect to the Prisoners, and made Elizabeth a
Present.

The particular Attention of Col. Closs, and the Care he showed by writing to
Niagara, on Behalf of the Captives, as he was entirely a Stranger to her, is
remembered with Gratitude.

As there was an Opportunity of hearing from Niagara, it gave them great
Pleasure to be informed that Elizabeth Gilbert was amongst the white People,
she having obtained her Release from the Indians, prior to the others.

Sarah Gilbert, Wife of Jesse, becoming a Mother, Elizabeth left the Service
she was engaged in, Jesse having taken a House, that she might give her
Daughter every necessary Attendance; and in Order to make their Situation as
comfortable as possible, they took a Child to nurse, which added a little to
their Income. After this, Elizabeth Gilbert hired herself to iron a Day for
Adam Scott; whilst she was at her Work, a little Girl belonging to the House,
acquainted her that there were some who wanted to see her, and upon entering
into the Room, she found found sx of her Children; the Joy and Surprise she
felt on this Occasion, were beyond what we shall attempt to describe. A
Messenger was sent to inform Jesse and his Wife, that Joseph Gilbert, Benjamin
Peart, Elizabeth his Wife, and young Child, Abner and Elizabeth Gilbert, the
younger, were with their Mother. It must afford very pleasing Reflections to
any affectionate Disposition, to dwell awhile on this Scene, that after a
Captivity of upwards of fourteen Months, so happy a Meeting should take Place.

Thomas Peart, who had obtained his Liberty, and tarried at Niagara, that he
might be of Service to the two yet remaining in Captivity, viz. Benjamin
Gilbert, jun. and Rebecca Gilbert.

Abigail Dodson, the Daughter of a neighboring Farmer, who was taken with
them, having inadvertently informed the Indians she was not of the Gilbert
Family, all Attempts for her Liberty were fruitless.

We shall now proceed to relate how Joseph Gilbert, the eldest Son of the
deceased, fared amongst the Indians: He, with Thomas Peart, Benjamin Gilbert,
jun. and Jesse Gilbert's Wife Sarah, were taken along the Westward Path, as
before related; after some short Continuance in this Path, Thomas Peart and
Joseph Gilbert were taken from the other two, and by a different Rout through
many difficulties, they were brought to Caracadera, where they received the
Insults of the Women and Children, whose Husbands or Parents had fallen in
their hostile Excursions.

Joseph Gilbert was separated from his Companion, and removed to an Indian
Villa, called Nundow, about seven Miles from Caracadera; his Residence was, for
several Weeks, in the King's Family, whose Hamlet was superior to the other
small Huts. The King himself brought him some Hommony, and treated him with
great Civility, intending his Adoption into the Family, in the Place of one of
his Sons, who was slain when General Sullivan drove them from their
Habitations. As Nundow was not to be the Place of his Abode, his Quarters were
soon changed, and he was taken back to Caracadera; but his Weakness of Body was
so great, that he was two Days accomplishing this Journey, which was only seven
Miles, and not able to procure any other Food than Roots and Herbs, the Indian
Economy leaving them without any Provisions to subsist on. Here they adopted
him into the Family of one of the King's Sons, informing him, that if he would
marry amongst them, he should enjoy the Privileges which they enjoyed; but this
Proposal he was not disposed to comply with, and as he was not over anxious to
conceal his Dislike to them, the Sufferings he underwent were not alleviated.
The Manner of his Life differing so much from what he had before been
accustomed to, having to eat the wild Roots and Herbs before mentioned, and as
he had been lame from a Child, and subject to frequent Indispositions, it was
requisite for him to pay more Attention to his weak Habit of Body, than his
Captors were willing he should. When the Master of the Family was at Home, the
Respect he showed to Joseph, and his Kindness to him, rendered his Situation
more tolerable than in his Absence. Frequnently suffering with Hunger, the
Privilege of a plenteous Table, appeared to him as an inestimable Blessing,
which claimed the warmest Devotion of Gratitude: In such a distressed
Situation, the Hours rolled over with a Tediousness almost insupportable, as he
had no agreeable Employ to relieve his Mind from the Reflections of his
sorrowful Captivity: This Manner of Life continued about three Months, and when
they could not longer procure a Supply by their hunting, Necessity compelled
them to go to Niagara Fort for Provision. The greater Number of the Indians
belonging to Caracadera attended on this Journey, in Order to obtain a Supply
of Provisions; their Want of Economy being so great, as to have consumed so
early as the eighth Month, all they had raised the last Year, and the present
Crops unfit to gather: Their profuse Manner of using their scant Pittance of
Provision, generally introducing a Famine, after a short Time of Feasting. They
compute the Distance from Caracadera, to Niagara Fort, to be of 130 Miles; on
this Journey they were upwards of five Days, taking some Venison in their
Route, and feasting with great Greediness, as they had been a long Time without
Meat.

When they reached the Fort, they procured Clothing from the King's Stores for
Joseph Gilbert, such as the Indians usually wear themselves, a Match-coat,
Leggings, etc. His Indisposition confined him at Col. Johnson's for several
Days, during which Time, the British Officers endeavored to agree with the
Indians for his Releasement, but they would not consent. The asslicting Account
of the Death of his Father, which was here communicated to him, spre^d an
additional Gloom on his Mind. After continuing at the Fort about four Weeks,
the Indians ordered him back with them; this was a sore Stroke, to leave a
Degree of Ease and Plenty, and resume the Hardships of an Indian Life: With
this uncomfortable Prospect before him, added to his Lameness, the Journey was
toilsome and painful. They were five Days in their Return, and when they
arrived, their Corn was ^ipe for Use; this, with the Advantage of hunting, as
the Game was in its greatest Perfection, furnished a present comfortable
Subsistence.

Joseph had Permission to visit his fellow Captive, Thomas Peart, who was at a
small Town of the Indians, about seven Miles Distance, called ^undow, to whom
he communicated the sorrowful Intelligence of their Mother's widowed Situation.

At the first Approach of Spring, Joseph Gilbert and his adopted Brother
employed themselves in procuring Rails, and reparing the Fence about the Lot of
Ground they intended to plant with Corn; as this Part of preserving the Grain
was allotted to them, the planting and Culture was assigned to the Women, their
Husbandry being altogether performed by the Hoe.

The Indian Manner of Life was by no Means agreeable to Joseph Gilbert; their
Irregularity in their Meals was hard for him to bear; when they had provisions
in Plenty, they observed no Plan of domestic Economy, but indulged their
voracious Appetites, which soon consumed their Stock, and a Famine succeeded.

In the early Part of the sixth Month, 1781, their Corn was spent, and they
were obliged to have Recourse again to the wild Herbage and Roots, and were so
reduced for Want of Provision, that the Indians having found the Carcass of a
dead Horse, they took the Meat and roasted it.

An Officer from the Fort came down to enquire into the Situation of the
Indians, upon observing the low Condition Joseph was in, not being likely to
continue long without ^ome Relief, which the Officer privately afforded, he
being permitted to frequent his House, he advised him by Flight, to endeavor
an escape from the Indians, informing him that he had no other Expedient for
his Release; this confirmed him in a Resolution he had for some time been
contemplating, but his Lameness and weak Habit, for Want of proper Sustenance,
rendered it impracticable to make such an Attempt at that Time, and it would
require much Care and Attention to his own Health and Strength, to gather
sufficient for such an Undertaking; he therefore made Use of the Liberty
allowed him to visit the Officer, and partake of his Kindness and Assistance,
that he might be prepared for the Journey.

Embracing a favorable Opportunity, when the Men were generally from Home,
some in their War Expeditions, and some out hunting, he left them one Night
whilst the Family slept, and made the best of his Way toward Niagara Fort,
following the Path, as he had once before gone along it. Having a small Piece
of Bread which he took from the Hut, he made a hasty Repast, traveling Day and
Night, in Order to escape from the further Distresses of Captivity. As he
neither took any Sleep, or other Food by the Way than the Piece of Bread
mentioned, for the two Days and Nights he pursued his Journey, he was much
fatigued when he reached the Fort, and he experienced the Effects for several
Days. Upon his applying to Col. Johnson, he was hospitably entertained, and the
next Day saw three of the Indians whom he had left at the Town when he set off.

After a few Days Stay here, as most of the Family were discharged from
Captivity, and waiting for a Passage to Montreal, a Vessel was fitted to take
them on Board, in Order to proceed down the Lake.

We come next to Benjamin Peart, who remained the first Night after his
arriving at the Indian Huts, with his Wife and Child, but was separated from
them the next Day, and taken about a Mile and an Half, and presented to one of
the Families of the Seneca Nation, and afterward introduced to one of their
Chiefs, who made a long Harrangue which Penjamin did not understand. The
Indians then gave him to a Squaw, in Order to be received as her adopted Child,
who ordered him to a private Hut, where the Women wept over him in Remembrance
of the Relation in whose Stead he was received: After this, he went with his
Mother (by Adoption) to Niagara River, about two Miles below the great Falls,
and staid here several Days, then went to the Fort on their Way to the Genesee
River, where he had the Pleasure of conversing with his Mother, and receiving
Information concerning his Wife and Child; but even this Satisfaction was short
lived, for he neither could obtain Permission to visit his Wife, nor was he
allowed to converse freely with his Mother, as the Indians hurried him on board
their Bark Canoes, where having placed their Provisions, they proceeded with
Expedition down the Lake to the Mouth of the Genesee River; the computed
Distance from the small Village to the Mouth of the River, being one Hundred
Miles, and from thence up the Genesee to the Place of their Destination, thirty
Miles; in their Passage up the River they were about five Days, and as the
Falls in this River near its Entrance into Lake Ontario, has made a Carrying
place of about two Miles, they dragged their Canoe this Distance to the Place
of Boating above the Falls. There were nine Indians of the Party with them.
They frequently caught Fish by the Way.

It no Doubt was a sore Affliction to Benjamin, to be so far removed from his
Wife and Child whilst amongst the Indians: Patience and Resignation alone could
endure it.

When the Party arrived at the Place of their designed Settlement, they soon
erected a small Hut or Wigwam, and the Ground being rich and level, they began
with their Plantation of Indian Corn. Two white Men who had been taken
Prisoners, the one from Susquehanna, the other from Minisinks, both in
Penns^lvania, lived near his new Settlement, and were allowed by the Indians to
use the Horses and plant for themselves: These Men lightened the Toil of
Benjamin Peart's Servitude, as he was frequently in their Company, and he had
the Liberty of doing something for himself, though without much Success.

His new Habitation, as it was not very healthy, introduced fresh Difficulties,
for he had not continued here long, before he was afflicted with Sickness,
which preyed upon him near three Months, the Indians repeatedly endeavoring to
relieve him by their Knowledge in Simples, but their Endeavors proved
ineffectual; the Approach of the Winter Season afforded the Relief sought for.
Their Provision was not very tempting to a weakly Constitution, having nothing
else than Hommony, and but short Allowance even of that, insomuch that when his
Appetite increased, he could not procure Food sufficient to recruit ^is
Strength. The Company of his Brother Thomas Peart who visited him, was a great
Comfort, and as the Town he lived at was but the Distance of eighteen Miles,
they had frequent Opportunities of condoling with each other in their Distress.

The Indian Men being absent on one of their War Excursions, and the Women
employed in gathering the Corn, left Benjamin Peart much Leisure to reflect in
Solitude.

Toward the Beginning of the Winter Season the Men returned, and built
themselves a Log House for a Granary, and then removed about twenty Miles from
their Settlement into the hunting Country, and procured a great Variety of
Game, which they usually eat with^r^ Bread or Salt. As he had been with the
Indians for several Months, their Language became more familiar to him.

Hunting and feasting after their Manner being their only Employ, they soon
cleared the Place where they settled of the Game, which made a second Removal
necessary, and they are so accustomed to this wandering Life, that it becomes
their Choice.

They fixed up a Log Hut in this second Hunting place, and continued until the
second Month, when they returned to their first Settlement, though their Stay was
but a few Days, and then back again to their Log Hut.

A heavy Rain falling melted some of the Snow which had covered the Ground
about two Feet deep.

The whole Family concluded upon a Journey to Niagara Fort by Land, which was
completed in seven Days. At the Fort he had the Satisfaction of conversing
with his Brother Thomas Peart and the same Day his wife also came from Buffaloe
Creek, with the Senecas to the Fort^; this happy Meeting, after an Absence of
ten Months, drew Tears of Joy from them. He made an Inquiry after his Child, as
he had neither heard from it or the Mother since their Separation. The Indians
not approving of their conversing much together, as they imagined they would
remember their former Situation, and become less contented with their present
Manner of Life, they separated them again the same Day, and took Benjamin's
Wife about four Miles Distance; but the Party with whom he came, permitted him
to stay here several Nights, and when the Indians had completed their Purpose
of Traffic they returned, taking him some Miles back with them to one of their
Towns; but upon his telling them he was desirous of returning to the Fort to
procure something he had before forgot, in Order for his Journey, he was
permitted. As he staid the Night, his adopted Brother the Indian came for him,
but upon his complaining that he was so lame as to prevent his traveling with
them, they suffered him to remain behind.

He continued at the Fort about two Months before the Indians came back again,
and as he labored for the white People, he had an Opportunity of procuring
salt Provision from the King's Stores, which had been for a long Time a Dainty
to him.

When one of the Indians (a second adopted Brother) came for him, Benjamin went
with him to Capt. Powel, who with earnest Solicitations and some Presents
prevailed upon the Indian to suffer him to stay until he returned from his War
Expedition; but this was the last he ever made, as he lost his Life on the
Frontiers of New York.

After this another Captain (a third adopted Brother) came to the Fort, and
when Benjamin Peart saw him, he applied to Adjutant General Wilkinson to
intercede for his Release, who accordingly waited upon Col. Johnson and other
Officers, to prevail with them to exert themselves on his Behalf; they
concluded to hold a Council with the Indians for this Purpose, who after some
Deliberation surrendered him up to Col. Johnson, for which he gave them a
valuable Compensation.

Benjamin Peart after his Release was employed in Col Johnson's Service, and
continued with him for several Months. His Child had been released for some
Time, and his Wife by earnest Entreaty and Plea of Sickness, had prevailed with
the Indians to permit her Stay at the Fort, which proved a great Consolation
and Comfort after so long a Separation.

About the Middle of the eighth Month, there was Preparation made for their
Proceeding to Montreal, as by this Time there were six of the Prisoners ready
to go in a Ship which lay in Lake Ontario, whose Names were Joseph Gilbert,
Benjamin Peart, his Wife and Child, Abner Gilbert, and Elizabeth Gilbert the
younger: These went on Board the Vessel to Charlton Island, which is as far as
the large Vessels they use in the Lake can proceed; the Remainder of the Way
(on Account of the frequent Shoals) they are obliged to go in smaller Boats.

The commanding Officer at Niagara procured a suitable Supply of Provision, and
furnished them with Orders to draw more at the several Garrisons, as Occasion
required.

In two Days they arrived at the upper End of Charlton Island, and went to the
Commander in Chief to show their Pass, and obtain what they were in Need of.
Afterward they continued on to the Garrison of Oswagotchy by the Side of the
River St. Laurence, in an open Boat rowed by four Frenchmen, this Class of
People being chiefly employed in laborious Services.

The Stream was so rapid and full of Rocks, that the Prisoners were too much
alarmed to remain in the Boat, and concluded to go on Shore until they passed
the Danger; but the Frenchmen, who had been accustomed to these wild and
violent Rapids, (the longest of which is known by the Name of the long Sou)
kept on Board: This surprising Scene continued for the Distance of six Miles,
and they viewed it with a Degree of Horror, their Heads becoming almost giddy
with the Prospect. When the Boats had shot the Falls, they again went on Board
and continued down the River to Cour de Lac. No great Distance below this they
anchored, and landed at the Place where their Father was interred, shedding
many Tears of filial Affection to his Memory. They afterward applied to the
commanding Officer of the Garrison for Provisions and other Necessaries; they
then bid Adieu to this solemn Spot of Sorrow, and proceeded to Lasheen, which
they reached the twenty-fourth Day of the eighth Month, having been eight Days
on their Voyage.

After refreshing themselves at this Garrison, they set forward on Foot for
Montreal, which they reached the same Day. They went to the Brigadier General
and showed him their Passport, and as soon as at Liberty waited on their Mother
at Adam Scott's, as has been already related.

The Situation of Elizabeth Peart Wife of Benjamin, and her Child is next to be
related;

After she and the Child were parted from her Husband, Abigail Dodson and the
Child were taken several Miles in the Night to a little Hut, where they staid
till Morning, and the day following were taken within 8 Miles of Niagara, where
she was adopted into one of the Families of Senecas; the Ceremony of Adoption
to her was tedious and distressing; they obliged her to sit down with a young
Man an Indian, and the eldest Chi^stain of the Family repeating a Jargon of
Words to her unintelligible, but which she considered as some form amongst them
of Marriage, and this Apprehension introduced the most violent agitations, as
she was determined, at all events, to oppose any step of this Nature; but after
the old Indian concluded his Speech she was relieved from the dreadful
Embarrassment she had been under, as she was led away by another Indian.

Abigail Dodson was given the same day to one of the Families of the Cayuga
Nation, so that Elizabeth Peart saw her no more.

The Man who led Elizabeth from the Company took her into the Family for whom
they adopted her, and introduced her to her Parents, Brothers and Sisters in
the Indian style, who received her very kindly, and made a grievous Lamentation
very kindly, and made a grievous Lamentation over her according to Custom.
After she had been with them two Days, the whole Family left their Habitation
and went about two Miles to Fort Slusher, where they stand several Days: This
Fort is about one Mile above Niagara Falls.

As she was much indisposed, the Indians were detained several Days for her;
but as they cared little for her, she was obliged to lie on the damp Ground,
which prevented her speedy Recovery. As soon as her Disorder abated of its
Violence, they set off in a Bark Canoe which they had provided, intending for
Buffaloe Creek; and as they went slowly, they had an Opportunity of taking some
Fish.

When they arrived at the Place of their intended Settlement, they went on
Shore and built an House.

A few Days after they came to this new Settlement, they returned with
Elizabeth to Fort Slusher, when she was told her Child must be taken away from
her; this was truly afflicting, but all Remonstrances were in vain.

From Fort Slusher she traveled on Foot, carrying her Child to Niagara, it
being eighteen Miles, and in sultry Weather, rendered it a painful Addition to
the Thoughts of parting with her tender offspring. The Intent of their Journey
was to obtain Provisions, and their Stay at the Fort was of several Days
Continuance. Capt. Powel afforded her an Asylum in his House.

The Indians took the Child from her, and went with it across the River to
adopt it into the Family they had assigned for it, notwithstanding Capt. Powel,
at his Wife's Request, interceded that it might not be removed from its Mother;
but as it was so young, they returned it to the Mother after its Adoption,
until it should be convenient to send it to the Family under whose Protection
it was to be placed.

Obtaining the Provision and other Necessaries they came to Niagara to trade
for, they returned to Fort Slusher on Foot, from whence they embarked in their
Canoes. It being near the Time of planting, they used much Expedition in this
Journey.

The Labor and Drudgery in a Family falling to the Share of the Women,
Elizabeth had to assist the Squaw in preparing the Ground and planting Corn.

Their Provision being scant they suffered much, and as their Dependence for a
sufficient Supply until the gathering their Crop, was on what they should
receive from the Fort, they were under the Necessity of making a second Journey
thither.

They were two Days on the Road at this Time. A small Distance before they came
to the Fort, they took her Child from her, and sent it to its destined Family,
and it was several Months before she had an Opportunity of seeing it again.
After being taken from her Husband, to lose her darling Infant, was a severe
Stroke: She lamented her Condition and wept sorely, for which one of the
Indians inhumanly struck her. Her Indian Father seemed a little moved to behold
her so distressed; and in Order to console her, assured her they would bring it
back again, but she saw it not until the Spring following.

After they had disposed of their Peltries, they returned to their Habitation
by the same Route which they had come.

With a Heart oppressed with Sorrow, Elizabeth trod back her Steps, mourning
for her lost Infant, for this Idea presented itself continually to her Mind;
but as she experienced how fruitless, nay how dangerous, Solicitations in
Behalf of her Child were, she dried up her Tears and pined in Secret.

Soon after they reached their own Habitation, Elizabeth Peart was again
afflicted with Sickness. At the first they showed some Attention to her
Complaints; but as she did not speedily recover so as to be able to work, they
discontinued every Attention, and built a small Hut by the Side of the
Corn-field, placing her in it to mind the Corn. In this lonely Condition she
saw a white Man, who had been made Prisoner among the Indians: He informed her
that her Child was released and with the white People; this Information revived
her drooping Spirits, and a short Time after she recovered of her
Indisposition, but her Employment still continued of attending the Corn until
it was ripe for gathering, which she assisted in. When the Harvest was over,
they permitted her to return and live with them.

A Time of Plenty commenced, and they lived as if they had Sufficient to last
the Year through, faring plentiously every Day.

A drunken Indian came to the Cabin one Day, and the old Indian Woman
complaining to him of Elizabeth, his Behavior exceedingly terrified her; he
stormed like a Fury, and at Length struck her a violent Blow which laid her on
the Ground; he then began to pull her about and abuse her much, when another of
the Women in^^^posed, and rescued her from further Suffering: Such is the
shocking Effect of Spirituous Liquor on these People it totally deprives them
both of Sense and Humanity.

A ^edious Winter prevented them from leaving their Habitation, and deprived
her of the Pleasure of hearing often from her Friends, who were very much
scattered; but a Prisoner, who had lately seen her Husband, informed her of his
being much indisposed at the Genesee River, which was upwards of one Hundred
Miles Distance: receiving this Intelligence, she stood in Need of much
Consolation, but had no Source of Comfort, except in her own Bosom.

Near the Return of Spring their Provision failing, they were compelled to go
off to the Fort for a fresh Supply, having but a small Portion of Corn which
they allowanced out once each Day.

Through Snow and severe Frost they went for Niagara, suffering much from the
excessive Cold. And when they came within a few Miles of the Fort, which they
were four Days accomplishing, they struck up a small Wigwam for some of the
Family with the Prisoners to live in, until the Return of the Warriors from the
Fort.

As soon as Capt. Powell's Wife heard that the young Child's Mother had come
with the Indians, she desired to see her, claiming some Relationship in the
Indian Way, as she had also been a Prisoner amongst them. They granted her
Request, and Elizabeth was accordingly introduced, and informed that her
Husband was returned to the Fort, and there was some Expectations of his
Release. The same Day Benjamin Peart came to see his Wife, but could not be
permitted to continue with her, as the Indians insisted on her going back with
them to their Cabin, which, as has been related, was some Miles distant.

Elizabeth Peart was not allowed for some Days to go from the Cabin, but a
white Family who had bought her Child from the Indians to whom it had been
presented, offered the Party with whom Elizabeth was confined a Bottle of Ru^
if they would bring her across the River to her Child, which they did and
delighted the Fond Mother with this happy Meeting, as she had not seen it for
the Space of eight Months.

She was permitted to stay with the Family where her Child was for two Days,
when she returned with the Indians to their Cabin. After some time she
obtained a further Permission to go to the Fort, where she had some Needle work
from the white People, which afforded her a Plea for often Visiting it. At
length Capt. Powell's Wise prevailed with them to suffer her to continue a few
Days at her House, and work for her Family, which was (...). At the Expiration
of the time, upon the coming of the Indians for her to return with them, she
pleaded Indisposition, and by this means they were repeatedly dissuaded from
taking her with them.

As the time of Planting drew nigh, she made use of a little Address to retard
her Departure; having a small Swelling on her N^ck she applied a Poultice,
which led the Indians into a Belief it was improper to remove her, and they
consented to come again for her in two Weeks.

Her Child was given up to her soon after her Arrival at the Fort, where she
lodged at Capt. Powell's, and her Husband come frequently to visit her, which
was a great happiness, as her Trials in their Separation had been many.

At the Time appointed some of the Indians came again, but she still pled
Indisposition, and had consined herself to her Bed. One of the Women
interrogated her very closely, but did not insist upon her going Back. Thus
several Months elapsed, she contriving Delays as often as they came

When the Vessel which was to take the other five, among whom were her Husband
and Child, was ready to sail, the Officers at Niagara concluded she might also
go with them, as they saw no reasonable Objection, and they doubted not but it
was in their Power to satisfy those Indians who considered her as their
Property.

Abner Gilbert, another of the Captives, when the Company had reached the
Indian town within three miles of Niagara Fort, was, with Elizabeth Gilbert the
Younger, separated from the rest, about the latter part of the fifth Month
1780, and were both adopted into John Huston's Family, who was of the Cayuga
Nation. After a Stay of three Days at or near the Settlement of these Indians,
they removed to a Place near the Great Falls, which is about eighteen Miles
distant from the Fort, and loitered here three Days more; they then crossed the
River and settled near its Banks, clearing a Piece of Land and prepared it by
the Hoe for Planting. Until they could gather their Corn their Dependence was
entirely upon the Fort.

After the space of three Weeks they packed up their Movables, which they
generally carry with them in their Rambles, and went down the River to get
Provisions at Butlersbury, a small Village built by Col Butler and is on the
opposite Side of the River to Niagara Fort. They staid one Night at the
Village, observing great Caution that none of the White People should converse
with the Prisoners. Next Day, after transacting their Business, they returned
to their Settlement, and continued there but about one Week, when it was
concluded they must go again for Butlersbury; after they had left their
Habitation a small distance the Head of the Family met with his Brother, and as
they are very ceremonious in such Interviews, the Place of Meeting was their
Rendezvous for the Day and Night. In the morning the Family, with the Brother
before mentioned, proceeded for Butlersbury, and reached it before Night. They
went to the House of an Englishman, one John Seecord, who was styled Brother to
the Chief of the Family, having lived with him some time before.

After some Deliberation it was agreed that Elizabeth Gilbert should continue
in this Family till sent for; this was an agreeable Change to her.

Abner returned with them to the Settlement; his Employ being to fence and
secure the Cornpatch; sometimes he had plenty of Provisions but was often in
want.

The Mistress of the Family one Day intending for Butlersbury, ordered Abner to
prepare to go with her; but she had not gone far before she sent him back.
Notwithstanding he had long been inured to frequent Disappointments, he was
much mortified at returning, as he expected to have seen his Sister. When the
Woman came Home she gave him no Information about her, and all Inquiries on his
Part would have been fruitless.

The Place they had settled at served for a Dwelling until Fall, and as it was
not very far Distant from the Fort, by often applying for Provision, they were
not so much distressed between the failing of their old Crop and the gathering
of the new one, as those who lived at a greater Distance.

In the Fall John Huston, the Head of the Family, went out hunting, and in his
Return caught Cold from his careless Manner of lying in the Wet, and thereby
lost the Use of his Limbs for a long Time. On being informed of his Situation,
the Family moved to the Place where he was; they fixed a Shelter over him (as
he was unable to move himself) and continued here about a Month; but as it was
remote from any Settlement, and they had to go often to the Fort for the
Necessaries of Life, the concluded to return to their own Habitation. Abner,
one Indian Man, and some of the Women carried the Cripple in a Blanket about
two Miles; this was so hard a Task, they agreed to put up a small House and
wait for his Recovery: But not long after they had an Opportunity of conveying
him on Horse* back to the Landing, about nine Miles above the Fort. As this was
their Plantation and the Time of gathering their Crops, they took in their
Corn, which, as has been before observed, is the Business of the Women. Then
they changed their Quarters, carrying they lame Indian as before in a Blanket,
down to the River Side, when they went on board Canoes, and crossed the River in
order to get to their Hunting-Ground, where they usually spend the Winter.

Abner Gilbert ^ived a dronish Indian Life, idle and poor, having no other
Employ than the gathering of Hickory-Nuts; and although young, his Situation
was very irksome.

As soon as the Family came to the Hunting-Ground, they patched up a slight Hut
for their Residence, and employed themselves in hunting. They took Abner along
with them in one of their Tours, but they were then unsuccessful, taking
nothing but Rac^oons and Porcupines.

The Crop of Indian Corn proving too scant a Pittance ^or the Winter; Abner, on
this Account, had some agreeable Employ, which was to visit the ^ort, and
procure a Supply of Provisions, which continued to be his Employment for the
Remainder of the Season.

In the Spring John Huston, the Indian who had been lame the whole Winter,
recovered, and unhappily had it in his Power to obtain a Supply of Rum, which
he frequently drank to Excess; and always when thus debauched was extravagantly
morose, quarreling with the Women who were in the Family, and at L^ngth l^^t
them. Soon after his Departure the Family moved about forty Miles, near Buffalo
Creek, which empties its Waters into Lake Erie. At this Place Abner heard of
his Sister Rebecca Gilbert, who still remained in Captivity not far from his
new Habitation. This was their Summer Residence, they therefore undertook to
clear a Piece of Land, in which they put Corn, Pumpkins and Squashes.

Abner, having no useful Employ, amused himself with catching Fish in the Lake,
and furnished the Family with frequent Messes of various Kinds, which they eat
without Bread or Salt; for the Distance of this Settlement from the Fort
prevented them from obtaining Provisions so frequently as necessary. Capt. John
Powell and Thomas Peart (the latter had by this time obtained his Release from
the Indians) and several others came among the Indian Settlements with
Provision and Hoes for them. The Account of their coming soon spread amongst
the Indians. The Chiefs of every Tribe came, bringing with them as many little
Sticks as there were Persons in their Tribe, to express the Number, in Order to
obtain a just Proportion of the Provision to be distributed. They are said to
be unacquainted with any other Power of explaining Numbers than by this simple
hieroglyphic Mode.

It was upwards of a Year since Abner had been parted from his Relations, and
as he had not seen his Brother Thomas Peart in that Space of Time, this
un-expected Meeting gave him great Joy, but it was of short Duration, as they
were forced to leave him behind. During the Corn Season he was employed in
tending it, and not being of an impatient Disposition he bore his Captivity
without repining.

In the seventh Month, 1781, the Family went to Butlersbury, when Col. Butler
treated with the Woman who was the Head of this Family for the Release of
Abner, which she at Length consented to, on receiving some Presents, but said
he must first return with her, and she would deliver him up in twenty Days.
Upon their Return, she gave Abner the agreeable Information that he was to be
given up. This added a Spur to his Industry, and made his Labor light.

Some Days before the Time agreed on, they proceeded for Butlersbury, and went
to John Secord's where his Sister Elizabeth Gilbert had been from the Time
mentioned in the former Part of this Narrative.

Abner was discharged by the Indians soon after his Arrival at the English
Village, and John Secord permitted him to live in his Family with his Sister.
With this Family they continued two Weeks, and as they were under the Care of
the English Officers, they were permitted to draw Clothing and Provisions from
the King's Stores.

Afterward Benjamin Peart and his Brother Thomas, who were both released, came
over for their Brother and Sister at John Secord's, and went with them to Capt.
Powell's in Order to be nearer to the Vessel they were to go in to Montreal.

The next of the Family who comes within Notice is Elizabeth Gilbert the
Sister. From the Time of her being first introduced by the Indian into the
Family of John Secord, who was one in whom he placed great Confidence. She was
under the Necessity of having new Clothes, as those she had brought from Home
were much worn. Her Situation in the Family where she was placed was
comfortable. After a few Days Residence with them she discovered where the
young Child was, that had some Time before been taken from its Mother Elizabeth
Peart, as before mentioned; and herself, together with John Secord's Wife with
whom she lived, and Capt. Fry's Wife went to see it, in Order to purchase it
from the Indian Woman who had it under her Care; but they could not then
prevail with her, though some Time after Capt. Fry's Wife purchased it for
thirteen Dollars. Whilst among the Indians it had been for a long Time
indisposed, and in a lingering distressing Situation; but under its present
kind Protectress, who treated the Child as her own, it soon recruited.

Elizabeth Gilbert, jun. lived very agreeably in John Secord's Family rather
more than a Year, and became so fondly attached to her Benefactors, that she
usually Styled the Mistress of the House her Mamma. During her Residence here,
her Brother Abner and Thomas Peart came several Times to visit her.

The afflicting Loss of her Father, to whom she was affectionately endeared,
and the Separation from her Mother, whom she had no Expectation of seeing
again, was a severe Trial, although moderated by the kind Attentions shown her
by the Family in which she lived.

John Secord having some Business at Niagara, took Betsy with him, where she
had the Satisfaction of seeing six of her Relations who had been Captives, but
were most of them released: This happy Meeting made the Trip to the Fort a very
agreeable one. She staid with them all Night, and then returned.

Not long after this Visit, Col. Butler and John Secord sent for the Indian who
claimed Elizabeth as his Property, and when he arrived they made Overtures to
purchase her, but he declared he would not sell his own Flesh and Blood; for
thus they style those whom they have adopted. They then had Recourse to
Presents, which overcoming his Scruples, they obtained her Discharge; after
which she remained two Weeks at Butlersbury, and then went to her Mother at
Montreal.

Having given a brief Relation of the happy Release and Meeting of such of the
Captives as had returned from among the Indians, excepting Thomas Peart, whose
Narrative is deferred, as he was exerting his endeavors for the Benefit of his
Sister and Cousin who still remained behind.

It may not be improper to return to the Mother, who with several of her
Children were at Montreal. The Nurse-Child which they had taken, as related in
the former Part of this Account, dying, was a considerable Loss to them, as
they could not, even by their utmost Industry, gain as much any other Way.

In the Fall of the Year 1781, Col. Johnson, Capt. Powell, and some other
Officers came to Montreal upon Business, and were so kind in their Remembrance
of the Family, as to inquire after them, and to make them some Presents,
congratulating the Mother on the happy Releasement of so many of her Children.
They encouraged her with the Information of their Agreement with the Indians,
for the Releasement of her Daughter Rebecca, expecting that she was by that
Time at Niagara; but in this Opinion they were mistaken, as the Indian Family
who adopted her, valued her too high to be easily prevailed with, and it was a
long Time after this before she was given up.

Elizabeth Gilbert and her Daughters took in Clothes to wash for their Support,
and being industrious and careful, it afforded them a tolerable Subsistence.

Jesse Gilbert obtained Employ in his Trade as a Cooper, which yielded a
welcome Addition to their Stock.

Elizabeth Gilbert suffered no Opportunity to pass her, of inquiring about her
Friends and Relations in Pennsylvania, and had the Satisfaction of being
informed by one who came from the Southward, that Friends of Philadelphia had
been very assiduous in their Endeavors to gain Information where their Family
was, and had sent to the different Meetings, desiring them to inform themselves
of the Situation of the captivated Family, and, if in their Power, afford them
such Relief as they might need.

It gave her great Pleasure to hear of this kind sympathizing Remembrance of
their Friends, and it would have been essentially serviceable to them, could
they have reduced it to a Certainty.

^eborah Jones, a Daughter of Abraham Wing, a Friend, sent for Elizabeth
Gilbert in order to attend her as a Nurse; but her Death, which was soon after,
frustrated the Prospect she had of an agreeable Place, as this Woman was better
grounded in Friends Principles than most she had met with; which Circumstance
united them in the Ties of a close Friendship: And as Elizabeth Gilbert had
received many Civilities and Favors from her, her Death was doubly afflicting
to their Family.

A Person who came from Crown-Point, informed her that Benjamin Gilbert, a Son
of the deceased by his first Wife, had come thither in order to be of what
Service he could to the Family, and had desired him to make Inquiry where they
were, and in what Situation, and send him the earliest Information possible.

A second agreeable Intelligence she received from Niagara, by a young Woman
who came from thence, who informed her that her Daughter Rebecca was given up
to the English, by the Indians. This Information must have been very pleasing,
as their Expectations of her Release were but faint; the Indian, with whom she
lived, considering her as her own Child.

It was not long after this, that Thomas Peart, Rebecca Gilbert, and their
Cousin Benjamin Gilbert came to Montreal to the rest of the Family. This
Meeting, after such Scenes of Sorrow as they had experienced, was more
completely happy than can be expressed.

Reflection, if indulged, will steadily point out a protecting Arm of Power to
have ruled the varied Storms which often threatened the Family with Destruction
on their Passage through the Wilderness, under the Control of the fiercest
Enemies, and preserved and restored them to each other, although separated
among different Tribes and Nations: This so great a Favor, cannot be
considered by them but with the warmest Emotions of Gratitude to the great
Author.

Rebecca Gilbert and Benjamin Gilbert, jun. were separated from their Friends
and Connexions at a Place called the Five Mile Meadows, which was said to be
that Distance from Niagara. The Seneca King's Daughter, to whom they were
allotted in the Distribution of the Captives, took them to a small Hut where
her Father Siangorochti, his Queen, and the Rest of the Family were, eleven in
Number. Upon the Reception of the Prisoners into the Family, there was much
Sorrow and Weeping, as is customary upon such Occasions, and the higher in
Favor the adopted Prisoners are to be placed, the greater Lamentation is made
over them.

After three Days the Family removed to a Place called the Landing, on the
Banks of Niagara River: Here they continued two Days more, and then two of the
Women went with the Captives to Niagara, to procure Clothing from the King's
Stores for them, and permitted them to ride on Horseback to Fort Slusher,
which is about eighteen Miles distant from Niagara Fort. On this Journey they
had a Sight of the Great Falls of Niagara.

During a Stay of six Days at Fort Slusher, the British Officers and others
used their utmost Endeavors to purchase them of the Indians; but the Indian
King said he would not part with them for one thousand Dollars.

The Indians who claimed Elizabeth Peart, came to the Fort with her at this
Time, and although she was very weakly and indisposed, it was an agreeable
Opportunity to them both of conversing with each other, but they were not
allowed to be frequently together, lest they should increase each others
Discontent.

Rebecca being dressed in the Indian Manner, appeared very different from what
she had been accustomed to: Short Clothes, Leggings, and a gold laced Hat.

From Niagara Fort they went about eighteen Miles above the Falls to Fort Erie,
a Garrison of the English, and then continued their Journey about four Miles
further, up Buffalo Creek, and pitched their Tent. At this Place they met with
Rebecca's Father and Mother by Adoption, who had gone before on Horseback.
They caught some Fish and made Soup of them, but Rebecca could eat none of it,
as it was dressed without Salt, and with all the Carelessness of Indians.

This Spot was intended for their Plantation, they therefore began to clear the
Land for the Crop of Indian Corn. While the Women were thus employed, the Men
built a Log House for their Residence, and then went out hunting.

Notwithstanding the Family they lived with, was of the first Rank among the
Indians, and the Head of it styled King, they were under the Necessity of
laboring as well as those of lower Rank, although they often had Advantages of
procuring more Provisions than the Rest. This Family raised this Summer about
one Hundred Skipple of Indian Corn (a Skipple is about three Pecks) equal to
seventy-five Bushels.

As Rebecca was not able to pursue a Course of equal Labor with the other
Women, she was favored by them by often being sent into their Hut to prepare
something to ea^, and as she dressed their Provisions after the English Method,
and had erected an Oven by the Assistance of the other Women, in which they
baked their Bread, their Family fared more agreeably than the others.

Benjamin Gilbert, jun. was considered as the King's Successor, and entirely
freed from Restraint, so that he even began to be delighted with his Manner of
Life; and had it not been for the frequent Counsel of his Fellow-Captive, he
would not have been anxious for a Change.

In the Waters of the Lakes there are various Kinds of Fish, which the Indians
take sometimes with Spears; but whenever they can obtain Hooks and Lines they
prefer them.

A Fish called Ozoondah, resembling a Shad in Shape, but rather thicker and
le^s bony, with which Lake Erie abounded, were often dressed for their Table,
and were of an agreeable Taste, weighing from three to four Pounds.

They drew Provisions this Summer from the Forts, which frequently induced the
Indians to repair thither. The King, his Daughter, Granddaughter, and Rebecca
went together upon one of these Visits to Fort Erie, where the British Officers
entertained them with a rich Feast, and so great a Profusion of Wine, that the
Indian King was very drunk; and as he had to manage the Canoe in their Return,
they were repeatedly in Danger of being overset amongst the Rocks in the Lake.

Rebecca and Benjamin met with much better Fare than the other Captives, as the
Family they lived with were but seldom in great Want of Necessaries, which was
the only Advantage they enjoyed beyond the Rest of their Tribe.

Benjamin Gilbert, as a Badge of his Dignity, wore a Silver Medal pendant from
his Neck.

The King, Queen, and another of the Family, together with Rebecca and her
Cousin Benjamin set off for Niagara, going as far as Fort Slusher by Water,
from whence they proceeded on Foot carrying their Loads on their Backs. Their
Business at the Fort was to obtain Provisions, which occasioned them frequently
to visit it, as before related.

Rebecca indulged herself with the pleasing Epectation of obtaining her
Release, or at least Permission to remain behind among the Whites; but in both
these Expectations she was disagreeably disappointed having to return again
with her Captors; all Efforts for her Release being in Vain. Col. Johnson's
Housekeeper, whose repeated Acts of Kindness to this captived Family have been
noticed, made her some acceptable Presents.

As they had procured some Rum to carry Home with them, the Chief was
frequently intoxicated, and always in such unhappy Fits behaved remarkably
Foolish.

On their Return, Thomas Peart, who was at Fort Niagara, procured for Rebecca
an Horse to carry her as far as Fort Slusher, where they took Boat and got Home
after a Stay of nine Days.

Soon after their Return, Rebecca and her Cousin were seized with the Chill and
Fever, which held them for near three Months. During their Indisposition the
Indians were very kind to them; and as their Strength of Constitution alone,
could not check the Progress of the Disorder, the Indians procured some Herbs,
with which the Patients were unacquainted, and made a plentiful Decoction; with
these they washed them, and it seemed to afford them some Relief: The Indians
accounted it a sovereign Remedy.

The Decease of her Father, of which Rebecca received an Account, continued her
in a drooping Way a considerable Time longer than she would otherwise have been.

As soon as she recovered her Health, some of the Family again went to Niagara,
and Rebecca was permitted to be of the Company. They staid at the Fort about
two Weeks, and Col. Johnson exerted himself in order to obtain her Release,
holding a Treaty with the Indians for this Purpose; but his Mediation proved
fruitless: She had therefore to return with many an heavy Step. When they came
to Lake Erie, where their Canoe was, they proceeded by Water. While in their
Boat a Number of Indians in another Canoe came toward them, and informed them
of the Death of her Indian Father, who had made an Expedition to the Frontiers
of Pennsylvania, and was there wounded by the Militia, and afterward died of
his Wounds; on which Occasion she was under the Necessity of making a Feint of
Sorrow, and weeping aloud with the rest.

When they arrived at their Settlement, it was the Time of gathering their Crop
of Corn, Potatoes, Pumkins, and preserving their Store of Hickory Nuts.

About the Beginning of the Winter some British Officers came amongst them, and
staid with them until Spring, using every Endeavor for the Discharge of the
two Captives, but still unattended with Success.

Some Time after this, another British Officer, attended by Thomas Peart, came
with Provision and Hoes for the Indians. It afforded them great Happiness to
enjoy the Satisfaction of each others Conversation, after so long an Absence.

Rebecca and her Cousin had the additional Pleasure of seeing her Brother
Abner, who came with the Family amongst whom he lived, to settle near this
Place; and as they had not seen each other for almost twelve Months, it proved
very agreeable.

Thomas Peart endeavored to animate his Sister, by encourageing her with the
Hopes of speedily obtaining her Liberty: But her Hopes were often disappointed.

An Officer amongst the British, one Capt. Latteridge, came and staid some Time
with them, and interested himself on Behalf of the Prisoners, and appeared in a
fair Way of obtaining their Enlargement; but being ordered to join his
Regiment, he was prevented from further Attention until his Return from Duty;
and afterward was commanded by Col. Johnson to go with him to Montreal, on
Business of Importance, which effectually barred his undertaking any Thing
further that Winter.

It afforded her many pleasing Reflections when she heard that six of her
Relatives were freed from their Difficulties, and Thomas Peart visiting her
again, contributed, in some Measure, to reaniamate her with fresh Hopes of
obtaining her own Freedom. They fixed upon a Scheme of carrying her off
privately; but when they gave Time for a full Reflection, it was evidently
attended with too great Danger, as it would undoubtedly have much enraged the
Indians, and perhaps the Lives of every one concerned would have been forfeited
by such Indiscretion.

During the Course of this Winter she suffered many Hardships and severe
Disappointments, and being without a Friend to unbosom her Sorrows to, they
appeared to increase by Concealment; but making a Virtue of Necessity, she
summoned up a Firmness of Resolution, and was supported under her
Discouragement beyond her own Expectations.

The Youth and Inexperience of her Cousin did not allow of a sufficient
Confidence in him, but she had often to interest herself in an Attention to,
and Oversight of, his Conduct; and it was in some Measure owing to this Care,
that he retained his Desires to return amongst his Friends.

Col. Butler sent a String of Wampum to the Indian Chief, who immediately
called a Number of the other Indians together upon this Occasion, when they
concluded to go down to Niagara, where they understood the Design of the Treaty
was for the Freedom of the Remainder of the Prisoners; for especial Orders were
issued by General Haldimand, at Quebec, that their Liberty should be obtained.
At this Council Fire it was agreed they would surrender up the Prisoners.

When they returned they informed Rebecca that Col. Butler had a Desire to see
her, which was the only Information she could gain: This being a frequent
Custom amongst them to offer a very slight Surmise of their Intentions.

After this the whole Family moved about six Miles up Lake Erie, where they
staid about two Months to gather their annual Store of Maple Sugar, of which
they made a considerable Quantity.

As soon as the Season for this Business was over, they returned to their old
Settlement, where they had not continued long, before an Indian came with an
Account that an astonishing Number of young Pigeons might be procured at a
certain Place, by falling Trees that were filled with Nests of young, and the
Distance was computed to be about fifty Miles: This Information delighted the
several Tribes; they speedily joined together, young and old, from different
Parts, and with great Assiduity pursued their Expedition, and took Abundance of
the young ones, which they dried in the Sun and with Smoke, and filled several
Bags which they had taken with them for this Purpose, Benjamin Gilbert was
permitted to accompany them in this Excursion, which must have been a curious
one for whole Tribes to be engaged in. On this Rarity they lived with
Extravagance for some Time, faring sumptuously every Day.

As the Time approached, when, according to Appointment, they were to return to
Niagara and deliver up the Prisoners, they gave Rebecca the agreeable
Information, in order to allow her some Time to make Preparation. She made them
Bread for their Journey with great Cheerfulness.

The Indians, to the Number of thirty, attended on this Occasion with the two
Captives. They went as far as Fort Slusher in a Bark Canoe. It was several Days
before they reached Niagara Fort, as they went slowly on Foot. After attending
at Col. Butler's, and confering upon this Occasion, in Consideration of some
valuable Presents made them, they released the two last of the Captives Rebecca
Gilbert, and Benjamin Gilbert, jun.

As speedily as they were enabled, their Indian Dress was exchanged for the
more customary and agreeable one of the Europeans; and on the third of the
sixth Month, 1782, two Days after their happy Release, sailed for Montreal.

The Narrative of the Treatment of Thomas Peart, another of the Family, still
remains to be given:

He was taken along the Westward Path with the Prisoners before mentioned, viz.
Joseph, Sarah, and Benjamin Gilbert jun.

Thomas was compelled to carry a heavy Load of the Plunder which the Indians
had seized at their Farm. When separated from the rest, they were assured they
should meet together again in four Days.

The first Day's Travel was in an exceeding disagreeable Path, across several
deep Brooks, through which Thomas had to carry Sarah and Benjamin Gilbert, jun.
This Task was a very hard one, as he had been much reduced for Want of
sufficient Nourishment.

The first Night they lodged by the Banks of Cayuga Creek, the Captives being
tied as usual. The next Morning they took a Venison, and this, with some
decayed Corn which they gathered from the deserted Fields, served them for
Sustenance. This Day's Journey was by the Side of Cayuga Creek, until they came
to a steep Hill, which they ascended with Difficulty.

When Night came on, they sought a Wigwam which had been deserted precipitately
upon General Sullivan's March against the Inhabitants of these Parts.

The Land in this Neighborhood is excellent for Cultivation, affording very
good Pasture.

Thomas Peart assured the Indians, that he, with the other Captives, would not
leave them, and therefore requested the Favor to be freed from their
Confinement at Night; but one of them checked his Request, by saying he could
not sleep if the Captives were suffered to be untied.

Their Meat being all exhausted, Thomas and three Indians went near three Miles
to gather more decayed Corn; and this, moldy as it was, they were obliged to
eat, it being their only Food, excepting a few Winter Turnips which they met
with. They went forwards a considerable Distance by the Side of Cayuga Creek,
and then with much Difficulty crossed it; immediately afterward they ascended
an uncommon miry Hill, covered with Springs. Going over this Mountain they
missed the Path, and were obliged to wade very heavily through the Water and
Mire.

In the Close of the ^ay they came to a sine Meadow, where they agreed to
continue that Night, having no other Provisions than the Moldy Indian Corn
they accidentally met with in the Indian Plantations, which had been cut down
and left on the Ground by General Sullivan's Army.

Next Morning they set forwards, walking leisurely on, so that the Company who
went by the other Path might overtake them, and frequently stopped for them.

When Night approached, they came to a large Creek where some Indians were, who
had begun to prepare the Ground for planting Corn. At this Place they staid two
Nights, and being too indolent to procure Game by hunting, their Diet was still
very poor, and their Strength much exhausted, so that they became impatient of
waiting for the others, which was their Intention when they first stopped.

After traveling till near Noon, they made a short Stay, stripped the Bark off
a Tree, and then painted, in their Indian Manner, themselves and the Prisoners
on the Body of the Tree; this done, they set up a Stick with a Split at the
Top, in which they placed a small Bush of Leaves, and leaned the Stick so that
the Shadow of the Leaves should fall to the Point of the Stick where it was
fixed in the Ground; by which Means the others would be directed in the Time of
Day when they left the Place.

Here they separated the Prisoners again, those to whom Thomas Peart and Joseph
Gilbert were allotted went westward out of the Path, but Sarah Gilbert and
Benjamin Gilbert jun. with one Indian, continued in the Path. This was very
distressing to Sarah to be torn from her Relations and deprived of all the
Comforts and even Necessaries of Life. These two, with the Indian who had the
Care of them, after they had parted with the other two and traveled forward a
few Miles, came to some Indians by the Side of a Creek, who gave them something
to eat. The next Day the Indian who was their Pilot exerted himself to obtain
some Provisions, but his Endeavors proved fruitless, they therefore suffered
greatly. At Night the Indian asked Sarah if she had ever eaten Horseflesh, or
Dog's; she replied, she had not; he then further surprised her by asking
whether she had ever eat Man's Flesh; upon her expressing her Abhorrence, he
replied that he should be under the Necessity of killing the Boy, for he could
not procure any Deer. This Threat, although perhaps not intended to be executed,
terrified her exceedingly. He hunted with great Diligence, leaving the Captives
by themselves, and appeared to shudder himself, at what he had theartned,
willing to try every ^^ource; but notwithstanding his Exertions, her Fears
prevailed in a very great Degree. They went forwards slowly, being very weak,
and in addition to their Distress there fell a very heavy Rain, and they were
obliged to continue in it as they were without Shelter. In this reduced
Situation they at Length came to one of the Huts at Canodo^ago, where they
dressed the Remains of their Moldy Corn, and the Day after were joined by the
Part of the Company whom they had left ten Days before.

As the few Days solitary Sufferings of Sarah Gilbert had been before
unrelated, the foregoing Digression, from the Narrative of Thomas Peart's, may
not be thought improper.

To return to the two who were separated from the Path, and had to go forwards
across Mountains and Valleys, Swamps and Creeks.

In the Morning they eat the Remainder of their Corn. The Indians then cut off
their Hair, excepting a small rund Touft on the Crown of the Head; and, after
painting them in the Indian Manner, in Order to make them appear more terrible,
they took from them their Hats. Being thus obliged to travel bare Headed in the
Sun, they were seized with violent Head achs; and this added to a Want of
Provisions, was truly distressing.

When they approached the Indian Settlements, the Indians began their customary
Whooping, to announce their Arrival with Prisoners, issuing their dismal Yells
according to the Number brought in.

After some short Time an Indian came to them: With him they held a Discourse
concerning the Prisoners, and painted them afresh, part black, and part red, as
a distinguishing Mark. When this Ceremony was concluded, the Indian who met
them returned, and the others continued their Route.

As they were not far from the Indian Towns, they soon saw great Numbers of the
Indians collecting together, though the Prisoners were ignorant of the Motives.

When they came up to this disagreeable Company, the Indian who first met them,
took the String that was about Thomas Peart's Neck with which he had been tied
at Night, and held him whilst a Squaw stripped off his Vest.

Joseph Gilbert was ordered to run first, but being lame and indisposed, could
only walk. The Clubs and Tomhaws slew so thick, that he was sorely bruised, and
one of the Tomhawks struck him on the Head and brought him to the Ground, when
a Lad of about fifteen Years old run after him, and, as he lay, would
undoubtedly have ended him, as ^e had li^^^d the Tomhawk ^or that Purpose, but
the King's Son sent Orders not to kill him.

After him, Thomas Peart was set off; he seeing the horrid Situation of his
Brother, was so terrified, that he did not recollect the Indian still kept hold
of the String which was round his Neck; but, springing forwards with great
Force and Swiftness, he pulled the Indian over, who, in Return, when he
recovered his Feet, beat him severely with a Club. The Lad who was standing
with a Tomhawk near Joseph Gilbert, as he passed by him, threw his Tomhawk with
great Dexterity, and would certainly have struck him, if he had not sprung
forwards and avoided the Weapon. When he had got opposite to one of their Huts,
they pointed for him to take Shelter there, where Joseph Gilbert came to him as
soon as he recovered. In the Room were a Number of Women who appeared very
sorrowful, and wept aloud; this, though customary amongst them, still added to
the Terror of the Captives, as they imagined it to be no other than a Prelude
to inevitable Destruction.

Their Hair cropped close, their Bodies bruised, and the Blood gushing from
Joseph Gilbert's Wound, rendered them a horrid Spectacle to each other.

After the Lamentations ceased, one of them asked Thomas Peart, if he was
hungry; he replied, he was: They then told him, "You cat by and by. They
immediately procured some Victuals, and set it before them, but Joseph
Gilbert's Wounds had taken away his Appetite.

An Officer, who was of the French Families of Canada, came to them, and
brought a Negro with him to interpret. After questioning them, he concluded to
write to Col. Johnson, at Niagara, relative to the Prisoners.

The Indians advised them to be contented with their present Situation, and
marry amongst them, giving every Assurance that they should be treated with the
utmost Respect: But these Conditions were inadmissable.

After this, Joseph Gilbert was taken from his Brother, as related in the
Narrative of his Sufferings.

Thomas Peart continued at the Village that Night, and the next Day was given
to the Care of a young Indian, who went with him about two Miles, where several
Indians were collected, dressed in horrid Masks, in Order, as he supposed, to
make Sport of his Fears, if he discovered any: He therefore guarded against
being surprised, and when they observed him not to be intimidated, they
permitted him to return again. Not long after his arriving at the Village,
Capt. Rowland Monteur came in, who gave Thomat Peart some Account how the
others of his Family had suffered, and told him that he had almost killed his
Mother and Jesse, on Account of Andrew Harrigar's making his Escape. He had
come in before the others, in Order to procure some Provisions for the Company,
who were in great Need of it.

When the Captain returned, Thomas Peart accompanied him Part of the Way, and
the Capt. advised him to be cheerful and contented, and work faithful for the
Friend, for so he styled the Indian under whose Care Thomas Peart was placed,
promising him that if he complied, he should shortly go to Niagara.

They employed him in chopping for several Days, having previous to this taken
the String from his Neck, which they had carefully secured him with every Night.

The Plantation on which they intended to six for a Summer Residence, and to
plant their Crop of Corn, was several Miles down the Genesee or Little River.
Prior to their removing with the Family, some of the Men went thither and built
a Bark Hut, which was expeditiously performed, as they executed it in about tow
Days, when they returned to their old Habitation.

Thomas Peart was the next Day given to the chief Indian, who endeavored to
quiet his Apprehensions, assuring him he should meet with kind Treatment.

The Indian Manner of Life is remarkably dirty and lousy; and although they
themselves disregard their Filth, yet it was extremely mortifying to the
Prisoners to be deprived of the Advantages of Cleanliness: And this was by no
Means among the Number of smaller Difficulties.

As Thomas Peart had been accustomed to Industry, and when first among the
Indians was constantly exerting himself, either in their active Diversions or
useful Labor, they were much delighted with him. When they had conclued upon
sending him to the Family he was to reside with, they daubed him afresh with
their red Paint. He was then taken about seven Miles, where he was adopted into
the Family, and styled "Ochnusa," or Uncle. When the Ceremony of Adoption was
performed, a Number of the Relatives were summoned together, and the Head of
them took Thomas Peart into the Midst of the Assembly, and made a long
Harrangue in the Indian Language. After this he was taken into the House, where
the Women wept aloud for Joy, that the Place of a deceased Relation was again
supplied.

The old Man, whose Place Thomas Peart was to sill, had never been considered
by his Family as possessed of any Merit; and strange as it may appear, the
Person adopted, always holds in their Estimation the Merits or Demerits of the
deceased and the most careful Conduct can never overcome this Prejudice.

As soon as the Ceremony of Adoption at this Place was finished, he was taken
by the Family to Nundow, a Town on the Genesee River. The Head of this Family
was a Chief or King of the Senecas. But before Thomas was fully received into
the Family, there was a second Lamentation.

Their Provisions, notwithstanding it was a Season of great Plenty, was often
Deers Guts, dried with the Dung, and all boiled together, which they consider
strong and wholesome Food. They never throw away any Part of the Game they take.

Thomas Peart's Dress was entirely in the Indian Style, painted and ornamented
like one of themselves, though in a meaner Mannner, as they did not hold him
high in Esteem after his Adoption.

Greatly discontented, he often retired into the Woods, and reflected upon his
unhappy Situation, without Hopes of returning to his Relations, or ever being
rescued from Captivity.

He continued in this solitary Seclusion about five Weeks, when their Corn was
mostly consumed; and as their Dependence for a fresh Supply was on Niagara
Fort, they concluded to go thither, but at first would not consent that Thomas
should accompany them; but he was so urgent, they at length consented, and the
next Day they had an Indian Dance preparatory to their Expedition.

In the Route Thomas Peart got a Deer, which was an acceptable Acquisition, as
they had been for some Days without any Meat, and their Corn was likewise
expended.

When they came within two Miles of the Fort they halted, and staid there until
Morning.

A white Prisoner, who came from the Fort, gave Thomas Peart a particular
Relation of his fellow Captives: This was the first Account he had of them
since their Separation at the Indian Towns. As soon as he came to the Fort, he
applied to some of the Officers, requesting their exertions to procure Thomas's
Liberty, if possible; but he was disappointed, as nothing could be then done to
serve him.

He eat some salt Provisions, which, as he had tasted but little Salt since his
Captivity, (although pleasing to his Palate) affected his Stomach, it being
difficult for him to digest.

As he was to return with the Indians in about a Week, it was very distressing,
being much disgusted with the Fare he met amongst them.

They returned by Way of Fort Slusher, and then along Lake Erie, up Buffalo
Creek, taking some Fish as they went. They passed by the Place where Elizabeth
Peart and Rebecca Gilbert were, but he had not an Opportunity of seeing them.

The Stores they took Home with them, consisted of Rum, Salt, and Ammunition.

Lake Erie is about three hundred Miles long from East to West, and about forty
in Breadth: It receives its Supply of Waters from Lakes Superior, Michigan and
Huron, by a North-west Passage, called the Streights of Detroit. A very long
narrow Piece of Land lies on its North Side, which projects remarkably into the
Lake, and has been noticed by most Travelers, and is known by the Name of Long
Point. There are several Islands in it, which, with the Banks of the Lake, were
more infested with different Kinds of Snakes, particularly the Rattle-Snake,
than other Places.

The Navigation of this Lake is allowed to be more dangerous than the others,
on Account of the high Lands projecting into it; so that when sudden Storms
arise, Boats are frequently lost, as there are but few Places to land, and
seldom a Possibility of finding a Shelter near the craggy Precipices.

The Waters of Erie pass through a North-east Communication into the River
Niagara, which, by a No^^herly Course of near thirty-six Miles, falls into Lake
Ontario.

At the Discharge of this River into Lake Ontario* on the East Side, stands
Fort Niagara; and at the Entrance from Lake Erie lies Erie Fort; between these
two Forts are those extraordinary Falls which claim the Attention of the
curious, and are amongst the most remarkable Works of Nature.

This stup^ndous Cataract is supplied by the Waters of the several Lakes, and
their distant Springs; which, after traversing many hundred Miles, rush
astonishingly down a most horrid Precipice, and which, (...) a small Island, is
separated into two large Columns, and each near one hundred and forty Feet
perpendicular, and in a strong, rapid, inconceivable Foam and Roar, extends
near nine Miles further; having in this Distance a Descent nearly equal to the
first.

The Straight of Niagara is esteemed dangerous for a Mile or upwards above the
Falls. The Water of the Falls raises a very heavy Mist, somewhat resembling a
Continuation of the River, and this Deception, together with the Rapidity of
the Current, frequently hurries the Ducks and Geese down this dreadful
Precipice.

This vast Body of Water, after passing through the Straight of Niagara, is
received by Lake Ontario, or Cataraqui, which is nearly of an oval Form. Its
greatest Length is from North-east to South-west, and is generally allowed to
be six hundred Miles in Circumference. And although the least of the five great
Lakes of Canada is much the safest for Shipping, as the Channel is less
obstructed by Rocks or Islands, than the other Lakes. The South Side is the
most commodious for Batteaux and Canoes, having a moderately shelving Bank and
Shore on that Side: The other is more rocky.

Many of the Rivers which fall into it, are barred in their Entrances by broken
Hills, but the Valleys are uncommonly fertile.

On the South the most considerable Rivers which fall into this Lake, are, the
great and little Seneca. The Falls of these Rivers, render them not navigable
near the Lake; but after the Carrying-places are passed, they run slow and deep.

In Order to keep up the Communication between the different Parts of Canada,
there is a Portage from the Landing below Niagara Falls, to the Landing above,
up three sharp Hills, along which, the Road for about eight or nine Miles, has
been made as ^asy for Carts as it possibly could; (thence to Lake Erie is about
eighteen Miles) but the Stream is so swift here, that it is almost impossible
to stem it for a Mile or two in a Ship with the stiffest Gale; though Batteaux
and Canoes Pass along without much Danger, as the Current is less rapid near
the Shore. On the North-east it empties itself into the River Cataraqui.

From this short digressive Account of the Lakes, we may return to the
Situation of the Prisoner, and the Indian Family:

When they had consumed their last Year's Stock of ^orn, they lived very low,
and were reduced to great Necessity, digging what wild esculent Roots they
could find; this was so different from what he had been accustomed to, that he
could not bear it with that Cheerfulness with which the Indians met such
Difficulties. His painful Reflections, and the Want of Necessaries, reduced him
exceeding low.

Whilst in this Distress, he happily obtained the Use of a Testament from a
white Woman, who had been taken Captive, and afterward married amongst them:
With this solacing Companion, he frequently retired into the Woods, and
employed himself in reading and meditating upon the Instruction couched in it.

The Indians directed a white Girl to inform him, that they intended a Hunt of
twenty Days, and were desirous he should attend them; to this he agreed, and
the whole Family accompanied the Hunters. They passed by the Town where Joseph
Gilbert was, who informed his Brother that he was going to Niagara: Thomas
Peart replied he had already been there, and then informed him how the others
of their Relations were dispersed.

On their Way up the Genesee River, where they intended to hunt, they took a
Deer.

The fourth Day, as Thomas Peart was beating for Game, he lost his Company; but
at Length came to some Indians who directed him. When he came to the Family,
much fatigued, and told them he had been lost, they were very much delighted at
the perplexing Situation he had been in.

The next Day they moved further, hunting as they went, and in the Evening
fixed their Quar^^^s, where they staid two Nights.

Thomas Peart, not endeavoring to please them, they took Umbrage at his
Neglect: This, added to a Fit of the Ague, induced them to leave him in the
Woods, he being so weak he could not keep up with them, and was obliged to
follow by their Tracks in the Leaves.

Their Provisions soon began to waste, and it was not long before it was
entirely consumed; and as they took no Game, they were under the Necessity of
eating wild Cherries.

The Prospect appeared very gloomy to our Captive, to be thus distressed with
Hunger, and to be from Home near one hundred Miles with the whole Family: But
this Situation, though so alarming to him, did not appear to reach their Stoic
Insensibility. In this Extremity one of the Indians killed a fine Elk, which
was a long wished-for and delightful Supply; but as the Weather was very warm,
and they had no Salt, it soon became putrid, and filled with Maggots, which
they, notwithstanding, eat without Reserve.

After they had been out upwards of thirty Days, the Indians changed their
Course, toward their own Habitation, making but little Progress forwards, as
they kept hunting as they went. And as Thomas had long been uneasy, and
desirous to return, not expecting to have been absent more than twenty Days,
they gave him some Directions and a small Share of Provisions; he then left
them after an unsuccessful Hunt of forty Days: And, although weak and unfit for
the Journey, he set off in the Morning, and kept as near a North-west Course as
he could, going as fast as his Strength would permit over large Creeks, Swamps
and rugged Hills; and when Night came on* made up a small Fire, and being
exceedingly fatigued, said himself down on the Ground, and slept very soundly:
In the Morning he continued his Journey.

When he considered the great Distance through the Woods to the Indian Towns,
and the Difficulty of procuring Game to subsist on, it dejected him greatly.
His Spirits were so depressed, that when his Fire was extinguished in the
Night, he even heard the wild Beasts walking and howling around him, without
regarding them, as with all his Exertions and Assiduity, he had but small Hope
of ever reaching the Towns, but providentially he succeeded.

On the Journey he eat a Land Tortoise, some Roots and wild Cherries.

When he reached the Town, the Indians were pleased with his Return, and
inquired the Reason of his coming alone, and where he had left the Family he
went with; which he fully informed them of.

This being the Time for feasting on their new Crop of Corn, and they having
plenty of Pumpkins and Squashes, gave an agreeable Prospect of a short Season
of Health, and frequent, though simple, Feasts.

About ten Days after this, the Family returned; they soon inquired if Thomas
Peart had reached Home, and upon being informed that he had, replied that it
was not expected he ever could.

The Indians concluding to make a War Excursion, asked Thomas to with them; but
he determinately refused them, and was therefore left at Home with the Family;
and not long after had Permission to visit his Brother Benjamin Peart, who was
then about fifteen or eighteen Miles distant, down the Genesee River.

Benjamin Peart was at that Time very much indisposed: Thomas, therefore, staid
with him several Days, and, when he recovered a little Strength, left him, and
returned to his old Habitation.

He was thoroughly acquainted with the Customs, Manners and Dispositions of the
Indians, and observing that they treated him just as they had done the old
worthless Indian, in whose Place he was adopted, he having been considered a
Perquisite of the Squaws; he therefore concluded he would only fill his
Predecessor's Station, and used no Endeavors to please them, as his Business
was to cut Wood for the Family; notwithstanding he might easily have procured a
sufficient Store, yet he was not so disposed, but often refused, and even left
it for the Squaws sometimes to do themselves, not doubting if he was diligent
and careful, they would be less willing to give him his Liberty.

Joseph Gilbert came to see him, and, as has been mentioned, informed him of
the Decease of their Father.

Some Time in the Fall, the King (whose Brother Thomas was called) died, and he
was directed to hew Boards and make a Cossin for him; when it was completed,
they smeared it with red Paint. The Women, whose Attention to this is always
insisted on amongst the Indians, kept the Corpse for several Days, when they
prepared a Grave, and interred him; it being considered amongst this Tribe,
disgraceful for a Man to take any Notice of this solemn and interesting Scene.
A Number of Squaws collected upon this Occasion, and there was great Mourning,
which they continued for several Days at stated Times. As the Place of
Interment, as well as that appointed for weeping, was near the Hut Thomas Peart
resided at, he had an Opportunity of indulging his Curiosity, through the
Openings of the Logs, without giving Offense.

Soon after this, one of the Women who was called Thomas's Sister, desired him
to accompany her about fifty Miles toward Niagara. Some others of the Family
went with them, and in their Way they took a Deer and other Game.

They were from Home on this Journey about six Days; during the Time, there
fell a very heavy Snow, which made their Journey toilsome. The Women were sent
homeward before the rest, to prepare something against they came.

When they had loitered at Home a few Days, they set about gathering their
Winter Store of Hickory-nuts: From some of them they extracted an Oil* which
they eat with Bread or Meat, at their Pleasure.

Frequently before they set off on their Hunting Parties, they make an Indian
Frolic; when, commonly, all the Company become extravagantly intoxicated: And
when they intend to go off this Winter, they first give the preparatory
Entertainment.

After they were gone, Thomas Peart and the Mistress of the Family disagreeing,
she insisted upon his joining to the Hunters, and living on the Game, that she
might save more Corn. He plead the Coldness of the Season, and his Want of
Clothing, but it would not avail; he was therefore turned out, and upon
finding the Hunters, he built them Hut, where they staid for some Weeks, taking
the Game, and eating wild Meat without Corn, as the Supply they had raised was
short.

When they were weary with their Employ, they moved to their old Hut, and lived
in their idle Manner for a long Time. They then again returned to their Hut,
and staid about ten Days, and took several Deer.

A few Days after their Return from hunting, they acquainted Thomas that they
should set off for Niagara; which was truly grateful to him. There were fifteen
of them on this Visit. The old Woman gave Thomas Peart a strict Charge to
return.

Although the Prospect of seeing or hearing from his Relations was delightful,
yet the Journey was excessively painful; the Snow covering the Ground to a
considerable Depth, the Cold increased, and they had to wade through several
deep Creeks, the Water often freezing to their Legs; and Thomas Peart, as well
as the Rest, were uncloathed, excepting a Blanket and Pair of Leggings.

In five Days they came to Fort Slusher, and at the Treats they there received,
were most of them drunk for the Day.

Next Morning they went to Niagara, where he immediately made Application to
the British Officers to solicit his Release. Capt. Powell informed Col.
Johnson, who requested it of the Indians; they required some Time to deliberate
upon the Subject, not willing to disoblige the Col. and at Length concluded to
comply with his Request; telling him, that however hard it might be to part
with their own Flesh, yet, to please him, they consented to it, hoping he would
make them some Present.

Col. Johnson then directed him to his own House, and desired him to clean
himself, and sent Clothes for him to dress with. Here he had Plenty of salt
Provisions, and every Necessary of Life: This, with the happy regaining of his
Liberty, gave a new Spring to his Spirits, and, for a few Days, he scarcely
knew how to enjoy sufficiently, this almost unlooked-for Change.

When recruited, he went to work for Col. Johnson, and a few Weeks after had
the Satisfaction of his Brother Benjamin Peart's Company; who, though not
released, yet was permitted to stay at the Fort, and worked with his Brother
until Spring; when Capt. Powell, Lieutenant Johnson, and Thomas Peart went up
Buffalo Creek, with two Boats loaded with Provisions, and a Proportion of
planting Corn, together with Hoes, to be distributed among the Indians.

In this Expedition Thomas had the Satisfaction of seeing and conversing with
his Sister Rebecca, which was the first of their Meeting together, after a
Separation of a Year.

At the Distribution of the Corn and Hoes, the Indians met and made a general
Feast; after which, they dispersed; and the Officers, when they had completed
their Business, returned to Niagara, after an Absence of eight or nine Days.

Thomas Peart was settled at Col. Johnson's, to work for him at two Shillings
and six Pence per Day, till the eighth Month, when six of the Captives were
sent to Montreal, and Thomas also had Permission to go, but he chose rather to
stay, to afford his Assistance to his Sister Rebecca Gilbert, and his Cousin
Benjamin Gilbert, jun. who yet remained in Captivity; exerting himself as
strenuously as possible on their Behalf.

In the Fall, he went up again to Buffalo Creek, where he saw his Sister and
Cousin a second Time, and assured his Sister that the Col. intended to insist
on her being relased: This encouraged her to hope.

The Indians are too indolent to employ sufficient Pains to preserve their
Grain in the Winter; therefore, those who plant near the Fort, generally send
the greater Part to the English to preserve for them, and take it back as they
want it: Therefore, what this Neighborhood had more than for a short Supply,
they carried with them in their Boats to the Fort.

In the Winter, Thomas Peart undertook to chop Wood for the British Officers,
and built himself a Hut about two Miles from the Fort, in which he lodged at
Night. A drunken Indian came to his Cabin one Evening with his Knife in his
Hand, with an Intention of Mischief; but, being debilitated with Liquor, Thomas
Peart easily wrested his Knife from him.

A Wolf came one Night up to the Door of his Cabin, which he discovered next
Morning, by the Tracks in the Snow; and, a few Nights after, paid a second
Visit, when he fired at him, and, by the Blood on the Snow, supposed he had
mortally wounded him.

Next Spring, Thomas went with the Officers again up Buffalo Creek, when he
afresh animated his Sister, by informing her that General Haldimand had given
Orders to the Officers, to procure their Liberty.

As they returned by Fort Erie, their Boats were in Danger from the Ice in the
Lake and River. It continues in these Parts until late in the Spring; sometimes
as late as the fifth Month; and, as soon as melted, the Vegetation is
astonishingly quick.

About two Weeks after they returned, Thomas Peart went back again with some
Officers, who were going to the Indians.

After a Tour of fifteen Days, he came again to the Fort, where he staid for
several Weeks, and received several Letters from his Relations, at Montreal, by
some Officers who were on their Way to Cataraguors, on Lake Erie, about eighty
Miles from Niagara; who, in their Way, saw Rebecca and Benjamin Gilbert, jun.
with a Number of Indians, going for Niagara. Thomas Peart made as quick
Dispatch as possible, to meet them, delighted with the Prospect of their
obtaining their Liberty.

They took a Porcupine, which is somewhat larger than a Rackoon, and covered
remarkably with Quills of Bone, about eight or nine Inches long, which they can
discharge with such Force, as to penetrate through a Man's Hand at a
considerable Distance.

A few Days after he returned from this Expedition, the Captives were delivered
up: These two had been with the Indians upwards of two Years.

In a short Time after their Release, Thomas Peart procured Permission for them
and himself to proceed to Montreal, and was furnished with a Pass, containing
an Order to obtain what Provisions they might be in Want of in their Passage.

The second Day of the sixth Month, 1782, they went on Board the Ship Limner*
and proceeded toward Montreal. When they came against the Place where their
Father was interred, those whom they were with, gave Thomas and Rebecca Notice,
though they did not land, but pursued their Voyage; and, after being seven Days
on the Water* they reached Fort Lasheen, where they staid that Night, and the
next Day went to Montreal to their Relations: Soon after which, a Letter was
received from the before mentioned Benjamin Gilbert, then at Castleton,
acquainting them of his being so far on his Way to Montreal, in Order to give
them Assistance in getting Home, and requesting that Permission might be
obtained for his Coming in; which, Elizabeth immediately applied to the
Officers for: Who, with great Cheerfulness, wrote in her Behalf to General
Haldimand, at Quebec, who readily granted her Request, together with other
Favors to Elizabeth, worthy of her grateful Remembrance; by which Means,
Benjamin's Arrival at Montreal was soon effected, where he had the Pleasure
once more of seeing and conversing with his Relations and nearest Connexions,
to their great Joy and Satisfaction, after an Absence of near three Years;
during which Time, they had but little if any certain Account of each other.

After some Time spent in inquiring after their Relatives and Friends, and
conversing on the once unthought of and strange Scenes of Life they had passed
through since their Separation, it became necessary to prepare for their
Journey homewards, which was accordingly done, and in about five Weeks from the
Time of Benjamin's Arrival, they took Leave of the Friends and Acquaintances
they had made during their Residence there; whose hospitable and kind
Treatment, merits their grateful and sincere Acknowledgements, and most ardent
Desires for their Welfare in every Scene. And on the twenty-second Day of the
eighth Month, 1782, attended by a great Number of the Inhabitants, they
embarked in Boats prepared for them, and took their Departure. Having crossed
the River, and Carriages being provided, they proceeded on their Journey
without much Delay, until they came to St. John's, where they went on Board a
Sloop; but the Winds being unfavourable, rendered their Passage in the Lake
somewahat tedious.

They did not arrive at Crown-Point, until about two Weeks after their
Departure from Montreal. They continued here several Days, and from thence went
in open Boats to East-Bay in about two Days, where they landed and staid all
Night, and were next Day delivered up to the Officers of Vermont. Here some of
the Company staid two Nights, on Account of Benjamin Peart's Child being very
ill; by which Time it so recovered, that they proceeded on to Castleton, where
those that went before had halted, and near that Place stayed all Night, and in
the Morning Elizabeth the Mother having engaged to do an Errand for a Friend,
was under a Necessity of riding about thirty-five Miles, which occasioned her
to be absent two Nights from the Family, who were at Capt. Willard's; at which
Place Benjamin provided Horses and Wagons for the Remainder of the Journey,
together with some Provisions. Here they were very civilly treated, and
generously enertained free of Expense.

The Family then proceeded on, and met their Mother at the House of Capt.
Lonson, where they staid that Night, and until Noon next Day, and were also
kindly treated by him.

Continuing their Journey, they met with John Bracanage (who, together with
Capt. Lanson, were Passengers with them to East-Bay) he gave them an Invitation
to his House, which they accepted, and arrived there about Noon next Day, and
continued with him two Nights, and were respectfully entertained.

Having prepared for prosecuting their Journey, the proceeded on for the
North-River, where they met with Lot Trip and William Knowles, who kindly
conducted the Women to the House of David Sands, where they lodged that Night.
The rest of the Family came to them in the Morning, and several of them
attended Friends Meeting, not having had the like Opportunity for several Years
before.

In the Afternoon they pursued their Journey, the before mentioned Lot Trip and
William Knowles accompanying them, and being in a Wagon, kindly took Elizabeth
and her younger Daughter Passengers with them, which proved a considerable
Relief.

In a few Days they came into Pennsylvania, where they met with some of their
Relations and former Acquaintances and Friends, who were unitedly rejoiced at
the happy Event of once more seeing and conversing with them.

The next Day, being the twenty-eighth Day of the ninth Month, 1782, they
arrived at Byberry, the Place of their Nativity, and the Residence of their
nearest Connexions and Friends, where Elizabeth and her Children were once more
favored with the agreeable Opportunity of seeing and conversing with her
ancient Mother, together with their other nearest Relatives and Friends, to
their mutual Joy and Satisfaction; under which happy Circumstance we now leave
them.

THOUGHTS Alluding to, and in Part occasioned by the CAPTIVITY and SUFFERINGS
of BENJAMIN GILBERT and his FAMILY.
AS from the forest issues the fell boar,
So human ravagers, in deserts bred,
On the defenseless, peaceful hamlet pour
Wild waste o'e all, and sudden ruin spread!
Here undisguis'd, War's brutal spirit see,
Its venomed nature to the root laid bare,
In which (trickt up in webs of policy)
Professing Christians vindicate their share.
Pompous profession, vaunting in a name,
Floats lightly on an oftentatious show,
Nor dips sincere, in resignation^s stream,
To bring memorials from the depths below.
Sophisticated dogmas of the schools,
The flatulent, unwholesome food of strife,
With zeal pedantic, for tradition's rules,
Still crucify the principle of lise.
The woes of this probationary state,
Through life so mingled and diversisied,
Derive their chief malignity and weight,
From murmuring discontent and captious pride.
Transient is human Life, all flesh as grass,
The goodliness of man but as a slower.
Fine gold must through the fervid furnace pass*
Through death we immortality explore:
Through judgment must deliverance be known,
From vile affections, and their wrathful sting;
True peace pertains to righteousness alone,
That flows, through says, from li^e's eternal spring!
Should man (to glory called, and endless bliss)
Bewai^ his momentary adverse doom?
Or in deep thankful resignation kiss
The rod that prompts him on his journey home?
Unsearchable the providence of God,
By boasted wisdom of the son of dust;
Lo! virtue feels oppression's iron rod,
And impious spirits triumph o,er the just?
Shall hence a self-conceited reptile dare
Th'omniscient Ruler's equity arraign?
Say here thy wrath is fit* thy bounty there,
Good to promote, and evil to restrain?
Believing souls unfeignedly can say,
Not mine, but thy all-perfect will be done;
If best this bitter cup should pass away,
Or be endured, to thee, not me, is known.
Deep tribulation in the humbly wise,
Through patience to divine experience leads;
The ground where hope securely edifies,
Purged of the silth whence conscious shame proceeds.
Affliction is Bethesda's cleansing pool,
Deep searching each distemper of the mind;
The poor way-sarer, though esteemed a fool,
Baptizing here, immortal health may find.
Though for the present grim adversity
Not joyous is, but grievous to sustain;
Humbling the Shepherd's call -- "Come learn of me"
In lowly meckness to endure thy pain;
Yet shall it work a glorious recompense;
Nor can the heart of Man conceive in full,
The good by infinite Be^esicence,
Stored for the patient unrepining Soul.
Some feeble ones sustain the galling yoke,
With firmness no serocious tempers know;
Calm resignation mitigates the stroke
Of ills, tremendous to the distant view!
If disappointment blast thy sanguine hope,
Indulged in sublunary p^ospects ^air,
Conclude they guardian angel made thee stop,
To check thy blind, thy dangerous career.
The captive family in savage bonds,
Trace through each rugged way and trackless wild;
Through famine, toils unknown, and hostile wounds,
The tender Mother with her infant child;
Then with thy lighter griefs their sorrows weigh,
Nor let thy own demerits be forgot;
Impartial Inference deduce, and say
Whence thy exemption from their heavy lot:
Is it thy wisdom shields thee in the hour,
When mighty dangers over thy head impend?
Can thine, or other mortal arm of power,
From famine, pestilence, or storm defend?
Confess it is mercy covers thee from harm,
A care benign, unmerited by thee;
And if the grateful sense thy bosom warm,
Small price is paid for such felicity.
If the hard Indian's wild ferocity,
Against their race thy indignation move,
Think on the example due to them from thee,
Professing Christian equity and love:
So shall their cruel, their abhorred deeds,
Instruction to the humble mind convey,
Remind us whence all violence proceeds,
And strengthen to pursue the peaceful way.
Vengeance with vengeance holds perpetual war;
Love only can over enmity prevail;
Sulphur and pitch, absurdly who prepare,
To quench devouring sire, are sure to fail,
Hear ye vindictive! be no longer proud,
The high decree is past, gone forth the word;
No vain illusion -- it is the voice of God!
"Who use the sword must perish by the sword;"
Perish from that divine ennobling sense
Of heavenly good, which evil overcomes;
That light, whose energetic influence,
With piercing ray dispels bewildering glooms.
From whence come mortal jarrings! come they not
From lust, from pride, from selfish arrogance?
In which, from peace and freedom far remote,
The blind goad on the blind, a slavish dance.
What! cries the zealot, shall not Christian says
Over heathen insidelity prevail?
-- Yes -- but the means is not thy will, thy wrath;
Means which confederate with death and hell.
Did ever tyger-hearted Spanish Chief,
By those dire massacres in story told,
Vanquish Peruvia's stubborn unbelief,
Or add one convert to the Christian fold?
Vindictive man will still retalliate,
Evil for evil, and still rack his brains,
For arguments the cause to vindicate;
Nor knows what spirit in his bosom reigns.
Messiah is the love of God to man!
Revealed on earth, not to destroy, but save*
By wisdom's peaceful influence to maintain.
Dominion over death, hell and the grave.
But why for Christian purity contend?
Who has, alas! believed the glad report?
How many boast the name, the name defend*
Yet make the virtual life their scoff and sport*
Deal forth their censures with unsparing zeal,
Against savage violence and cruel wrong;
Nor dream the real essential infidel
Holds over their spirits his dominion strong.
What Turkish rover, or what heathen foe,
Shows more contempt of gospel equity,
Than those, to sultry climes remote who go,
TO enslave their fellow men, by nature free?
The yelling warrior, with relentless hand,
Leaves parent childless, fatherless the son;
Their griefs our tender sympathy demand;
But what have distant Afric's children done?
Will still the pick-thank, temporizing priest,
Give this oppression pharisaic aid?
Will civilized believers still persist
To vindicate the abominable trade?
The extensive, deep, unrighteous to unfold,
West-India's dark, inhuman laws explore;
What gross iniquity we there behold,
In solemn acts of legislative power?
Britons who loud for liberty contend,
Affect to guard their nation from the stain;
Yet sordidly in Mammon's temple bend,
And largely share in the ungodly gain.
What ardent execrations do we hear,
Against barbarous Mohoc's, bloody Shawanese?
From father's arms their hopeful sons who tear;
From mother's breasts love's tender pledges seize.
O Christian! think with what redoub'led force,
Against which fallacious artifice is vain,
On thee recurs thy aggravated curse,
Heavens righteous Judge pronouncing -- " Thou art the " Man."
Think for what end the Mediator came,
On earth an ignominious death to die;
Thy soul from wrath's dominion to redeem,
(...) himself a people purify.
FINIS.

