CURSORY REMARKS ON MEN and MEASURES IN GEORGIA.

PRINTED IN THE YEAR MDCCLXXXIV.

CURSORY REMARKS ON Men and Measures in Georgia.
Fuit ista quondam in hac republica virtus, ut viri fortes acrioribus
suppliciis civem perniciosum quam acerbissimum hostem coercerent.

Cic. in Catil.
IT is impossible for any honest man to contemplate the present situation of
public affairs in this state without being sincerely affected at the scene.
The baneful influence of an interested and designing faction enters so deeply
into many of our measures that insensibility itself must soon be awakened with
the consequences. Hardly warm in the seat we already feel ourselves goaded with
many of the vices and infirmities of the oldest governments. To what
infatuation or fatality this has fallen to be our lot it has become the duty,
as it is evidently the interest, of every good citizen to inquire. In such a
research philosophy and the deepest political skill, acting by scientifick
rules at a distance, would confess themselves at a loss; for as (according to
Blackstone) democracies contain more the principles of public virtue and
goodness of intention than other forms of government, we ought, by the rules of
theory, in our infant state at least, to be freest from the evils now
complained of; and this makes it obvious it is not in the nature of the system,
(that having confessedly the preference to all others) but in the venality and
corruption of some individuals among us, that the distemper lies.

For some years past it has been the unfortunate doom of Georgia, more perhaps
than any other state, to be split into factions. After having undergone a
variety of mutations, these differences have at length terminated in two
parties, whose preponderance will just depend upon the prevalence of right or
wrong. On the one hand we behold a most powerful combination of individuals
zealously embarked in the scheme of advancing their private fortunes on the
ruins of every thing that is dear and valuable to the community. On the other
we observe a more virtuous, though a less active set of citizens, opposing such
views, and counteracting knavery and vociferation with reason and argument. It
is an old remark, that the wicked are infinitely more keen in the pursuit of
bad actions than the good in opposing them. The former class having plunged
themselves into an abyss of debt, now conceive, on the very principles of
Catiline, that nothing less than an internal revolution can extricate them. To
this diabolical end are all their measures indubitably directed, the most
injurious falsehoods are disseminated, and whatever seems best calculated to
create distrust and jealousy against those whose fortunes offer a security for
confidence, and whose private characters command respect and esteem, is most
industriously propagated. To be a man of either reputed honesty or
unembarrassed circumstances is at once to be at enmity with this confederacy of
citizens. Governed themselves by no considerations but those of lucre, they,
with an effrontery peculiar to the wicked, concluded all other men acted on the
same principles; they were bold enough to suppose that a similarity of interest
would at all times inspire a similarity of sentiment: But how egregiously have
they been deceived, when they now find that every man of honor, virtue, or
property, has withdrawn from them, and they stand the sole champion of their
own disgraceful undertaking.

It has been for a long time artfully insinuated that the disputes in this
state lay between the purchasers of confiscated property and those who did not
purchase: But in truth the contest lies between those who have purchased
without any intention or means of paying and others of the same complexion, and
those who may or may not have purchased, but who nevertheless mean the thing
that is just and right toward the public. It is notorious that some very
considerable purchasers are always to be found voting and acting on the side
that evidently consult common good without any view to their private emolument.
It is equally notorious that such gentlemen have in general paid up their bonds
as far as the law allowed in certificates, and that they are able and willing
to pay the remainder when it shall become due. Some of them indeed may contend
for the reasonableness and justice of being allowed to pay the whole in
certificates, by way of discount, if they can procure liquidated demands
against the public for that purpose: And I confess there are strong reasons in
favor of such a mode being adopted now, which could not be allowed to operate
at the time the law passed, making a distinction between certificates and
specie. At that period the Legislature had not a precise knowledge of the
demands against the public, and therefore could not judge whether the means in
hand were adequate to the end of a full payment, or whether it would be
necessary to make a sort of composition and pay by installments: But when it
came to be ascertained that the amount sales of our confiscated property, with
the aids already provided, would be sufficient to sink all the debts of the
state, and leave a very considerable balance behind, every reason for a
discrimination ceased to exist. But, even were such a discrimination to
continue, it could not affect the honest and solvent purchaser; for, as the
fund is discovered by comparison to be better than was apprehended, in the same
proportion must the certificates or draughts upon it appreciate. Besides it is
well known that any man holding a certificate, ever and above what he was
allowed to pay upon his bond, might, with very little trouble and at no cost,
make the same in every respect equal to specie, by throwing it into a
particular fund of the state. In regard to officers demands, there never was,
and indeed never can be, any objection against considering them as specie;
whenever they come to be properly liquidated and certified, they will answer as
well, by the resolves of Congress, in payments from this state to the
Continent, as gold or silver: It is true the time limited by act of Assembly
for bringing them in has elapsed, but I think there is hardly a doubt a longer
indulgence will be granted when the Legislature meet.

Having drawn a line of distinction between the purchasers of confiscated
property, I shall only observe, that, in a general way, the men who make most
noise and pother against the law, because it does not allow them to pay the
whole of their bonds in certificates, are those who have not paid the half they
might have done in that way, although the time allowed for such purpose has run
out. Men of so scandalous a conduct are little better than pests to society;
their motions ought to be narrowly watched, for it is demonstrable that,
whatever may be the ostensible plea or pretense, ambition, avarice, and dark
design, lurk at the bottom, and give a certain suspicious cast to all their
proceedings.

The two principal heroes of this confederacy are said to be men remarkably
well associated -- the one in the full and indisputed possession of that kind
of subtle midnight cunning which formed a Missisippi scheme, or a South Sea
bubble, more the result of a bad heart, and a plodding temper, than the
characteristick of genius -- is never so guarded as when he pretends most to
vaunt himself upon his candor; -- the other, versed in all the little tricks
of life, having passed through the different gradations from the lowest
mechanic to the highest law officer, finds it as easy to explain away a
forgery as to assassinate a character. The former of these feels no qualms of
conscience in attesting, and thereby procuring to be audited, an account
against the public for a considerable crop which he neither planted or reaped,
and was only in possession of during the time Count d'Estaing lay before the
lines of Savannah: The latter with amazing facility can extract a legacy from
the dead which the living never thought of, and, by the magic of law language,
in order to elude an act of Assembly highly favored by him in every other
respect, clearly evince, that, "if A. bequeaths a legacy to B. his next heir
and nearest of kin, if B. afterward takes possession of the property, and
becomes attainted and banished, that in that case B. being dead in law, shall
be considered as having never lived, and the legacy being lapsed shall fall to
the next of kin, who has married a friend to the Revolution;" and of which last
circumstance who is so fit a judge as the expounder of the laws? Under so just
and equitable a law case as this, it is no secret that fifty-three very
valuable slaves have passed from the funds of the state to the plantation and
pocket of the C -- J --. Whether at a future day, when this business comes to
be inquired into, the 13th section of the Confiscation Act, which declares such
embezzlements and conversions to be felony, may not have some operation, is not
for me to determine.

This redoubtable duumvirate lately, under the signature of Brutus, (two in
one, like man and wife) made a most angry attack upon the conduct of the
present Administration. They had read, or been told, this was the usual mode of
introduction with the young orators of Rome; but the several grounds upon which
they raised their battery having failed them, the only product of their labors
has been an addition to the infamy of their characters. In respect to those
against whom the envenomed shafts were pointed, they, as became the dignity of
their stations, and the fortitude of mind inseparably attached to an upright
demeanor, treated their adversaries with silent contempt; they had wisely
implanted in their breasts, and now called in to their aid, the maxim of Lord
Bacon, that "to suffer scandal is a tax which every person of rank pays to the
public, and the man who has no virtue in himself ever envies virtue in others."

We are now upon the eve of a new election of officers; it is therefore a more
than ordinary duty, for every man who has a vote to give, to make himself well
acquainted with characters. The principle of jealousy being the soul of
liberty, when properly understood and liberally applied, is just and right;
but, if we permit this laudable jealousy to become synonimous with mean
suspicion, we shall do ourselves a material injury. Can we expect any man of
honor or spirit will serve us, when he is certain, that, to accept an office
in the state is to begin his journey on the high road of censure and abuse? The
perpetual clamours and impeachments in Athens, against the best citizens of the
commonwealth, at length produced a general backwardness among good men to
engage in public affairs, and left the way open for the ambitious and the
designing. And we read, in the History of Syracuse, that, when the Petalism was
erected there, in imitation of the Ostracism at Athens, (and perhaps not unlike
the Toryism of Brutus and his junto in Georgia) it was so notoriously levelled
against all who had fortune or merit to recommend them, that whoever possessed
either withdrew from the city, and would have no concern in the administration
of government; so that the people themselves were forced to abrogate it for
fear of bringing all things into confusion.

In every free state the evil to be avoided is tyranny. That all government
originates with the people is an axiom as uncontrovertible as necessary to
liberty, but that the people themselves at large ought not to administer that
government, further than by a delegation of power to their representatives and
officers, is also an essential point in the charter of freedom. The dominatio
plebis, or the dominion of the mob, is the worst of all governments. In holy
writ we find the raging of the sea and the madness of the people are classed
together, and it is God alone who can say to either, hitherto shall thou pass
and no further. Most of the convulsions of government in Greece and Rome began
with the tyranny of the people, but they generally concluded in that of a
single person. The lesson I wish to inculcate from this is, that, although the
mass of the people is the body wherein naturally and originally resides that
absolute and unlimited power, which in every government is necessarily supposed
to be somewhere, yet the only use a wise people will make of such power is, at
certain stated periods, to elect or appoint fit persons for their rulers; after
such appointment, to invest them with a confidence equal to the trust they are
charged with; to protect them against the tongue of slander, and the arts of
designing men, when they do right; and to punish them, in a regular and
constitutional way, if they do wrong. When this comes uniformly to be our rule
and maxim, we shall be a happy and a flourishing people; till then we may lay
our account to be the dupes of every factious demagogue who wants a step ladder
to climb into consequence, or feels a lust of being richer than his neighbor.

The great article of arranging our finances has been but little attended to in
this state; it is chiefly, though not altogether, owing to this, that our
political, as well as commercial importance, are so far behind hand in
comparison with some other states. There cannot exist a doubt but that we
possess a country which, for fertility of foil, convenience of water carriage,
and every agrarian or other advantage whatever, yields to none on the
continent: But yet, to all these bounties of nature it is necessary that we add
the refinements of art, and, by a due cultivation of the moral, learn
rationally to enjoy the physical blessings of life. We may assure ourselves,
that money is not more the sinews of war than the pillars of peace, and if we
suffer ourselves to be seduced into an idea that any modern government can
maintain its dignity and safety, or discharge its ordinary functions, without
taxes, we shall find ourselves woefully deceived, and ere long discover our
mistake and our punishment together. We have a large sum as our quota of the
several requisitions and debts to pay to Congress. This money must be raised,
and an act of Assembly, passed on the 29th July, 1783, has declared it shall be
raised, and paid out of the confiscated property. But what prospect is there of
this, whilst, on the one hand, it is part of a system with some not to pay
without being sued, and, on the other, we have for our C -- J -- a man who is
himself among the deepest in the public books? This single consideration
furnishes the best answer that could be given to the sixth presentment of the
Grand Jury of Chatham county, and is partly the cause and partly the effect of
the evils complained of in the seventh. Our Constitution, and all the laws
passed since the Revolution, in respect to the Judiciary Department, have had
for their object a cheap and a speedy course of justice; but how clearly is law
convicted of being a mere dead letter, when we see a bill of costs, for two or
three trifling motions and arguments about an administration, taxed at 22 l. 17
s. 6 d. sterling, and are told that suits, especially where the poor public is
plaintiff, seldom come to an issue under two years after their commencement. I
have heard of an eminent lawyer who boasted he would defy any Parliament to
make a law that he could not drive a coach and six through. It is very possible
our Lord Coke may not be able to gild the pill so well as that lawyer; but I
will venture to answer for him, that, if he cannot leap the fence, he will
break it down in pursuit of his prey. Can any words be stronger or plainer than
these: "All the costs attending any action in the Superior Court shall not
exceed the sum of three pounds, and that no cause be allowed to depend in the
Superior Court longer than two terms?" 48th section of the Constitution. By the
4th clause of the Superior Court Law, passed on the 1st March, 1778, the three
pounds are thus apportioned: To the Chief Justice, L. 0 15 0 To the Attorney, 1
0 0 To the Clerk of the Court, 0 15 0 To the Sheriff, 0 10 0 L. 3 0 0

Let us contrast this with the bill before mentioned: To the Chief Justice, L.
7 5 0 instead of L. 0 15 Overch. L. 6 10 0 To the Attorney, 6 16 0 Ditto 1 0
Ditto 5 16 0 To the Clerk of the Court, 2 13 5 Ditto 0 15 Ditto 1 18 5 To the
Sheriff, 2 0 0 Ditto 0 10 Ditto 1 10 0 18 14 5 3 0 15 14 5 To the Chief
Justice, etc. 4 3 1 instead of 0 0 Overch. 4 3 1 L. 22 17 6 L. 3 0 L. 19 17 6

Here we see there is not only an error in the aggregate sum, but also that the
proportion of its parts is entirely inverted; for whereas the Constitution and
the law intended that the Attorney should be allowed most, as having the
greatest share of trouble, and that the Chief Justice and the Clerk should be
upon a footing, in this bill we find the Chief Justice has taken the lead, and
taxed nearly as much for himself as for the other two put together. It was
thought a very great point in England gained by the people, when, after the
Revolution, the Judges were made partly independent of the Crown; the
completion of that independence has been almost the only popular thing afforded
to Britain in the reign of George the Third. Would to God our Judges were more
independent of their interest than they are, and that the laws would act in
unison with the petition taught by our Savior, Lead us not into temptation.

It may possibly be objected, that a hearing in regard to an administration is
not in nature of a suit, and therefore does not come within the words of the
Constitution; if so, I shall answer, 1stly, That it is evident this hearing was
considered, in the eye of the law, infinitely loss, both in point of expense
and consequence, than a regular suit, for the last clause but two of the
Superior Court Act allows either party to appeal therefrom to a jury, in manner
pointed out by the 40th section of the Constitution; and the whole costs upon
this second trial, with all the formality of process, and so forth, were not to
exceed 3 l. but, 2dly, there is no necessity to confine ourselves to one bill
of costs, when there is so great a choice; there are fifty ready to be
produced, wherein the costs, on a trial by process and jury, in the usual way,
are taxed at upwards of twenty pounds. I need not instance them, because they
are known to every body, and felt by a great many. My reason for selecting this
case of the administration was, because it had been taken up by a Grand Jury,
and also because there are other circumstances of aggravation in it besides the
exorbitancy of the fees. I am well informed, that, after the hearing was had,
the C -- J -- arbitrarily struck out the name of one of the defendants, and
inserted in its room the name of the Attorney who had appeared in the cause, a
gentleman who had never laid claim to any part of the subject in dispute, and
who had left the state on public business at the time this happened. I am also
well informed, that only one of the defendants was taken into custody on the
attachment of contempt, and he illegally detained by order of the C -- J --
until he had paid the fees of all. I shall, after a few remarks, leave it to
the lawyers (as perhaps they may have an opportunity at some future day) to
determine how far an attachment of contempt was a legal process in this case;
if it was, then there is nothing but the crime of extortion, with the
oppressive conduct before mentioned, to be imputed to the C -- J --; if it was
not, then either a gross ignorance or palpable violation of the law must make
an additional charge against him. It would be a great misfortune to a country
if a Judge should consider himself as a planet in opposition to the
Constitution, insomuch as that strictly to be influenced by the latter should
be deemed a contempt to him: However, waving all apprehensions of this sort, I
venture to pronounce, that a writ of contempt, in the case alluded to, was just
as regular as it would be for the costs upon a verdict or nonsuit in any other
case. I know very well that Attorneys, or other officers of the Court, and even
parties themselves, are sometimes liable to these kinds of writs for
disobedience to a rule or order made in the progress of a cause, or by
non-payment of costs awarded by the Court upon a motion or the like; but these
are always upon matters arising in the course of a suit, and not at all
attached to or connected with its issue, which determines who shall pay the
costs, and gives a remedy for them. Besides, these writs are always awarded in
Court, for a contempt to Court, and not at Chambers, where the power of Judges
is much circumscribed in comparison to their curial situation. I must here take
occasion to mention, that I observe most of the modern rules are dated from
Chambers. Surely a Judge must be strangely ignorant of law who supposes an
order made in his own house in vacation time can carry the same weight and
authority that a rule made in open Court, with all the solemnity of a by-law,
does: But, as an eminent writer justly observes, it is a singular happiness to
mankind that Providence seldom bestows great talents on wicked men; the
ignorance of the head is oftentimes a useful clog upon the depravity of the
heart.

Let us however act the fair part, and hear the J -- e in vindication of
himself. I caused full fees to be paid, in order to prevent delays and trifling
in future. The term full we are, I presume, to understand in contra distinction
to legal; for it would be charging his H -- r with an absurdity to take them
both in one sense. There are evidently two things implied: 1st, a difference
between what the party did pay as a tax for his trifling and delay, and what he
might only have paid if he had not offended the J -- e; and, 2dly, a discretion
in the J -- e to make that difference. Now, it is extremely clear that the
Constitution having determined the party should pay 3 l. as the legal fees for
trying his cause, the discretion of the J -- e rose upon that, and determined
he should pay 19 l. 17 s. 6 d. more, as the full fees for trifling with his H
-- r's precious time. It was surely merciful to stop where he did, for, as the
Gauls told the Romans, Vae victis! in the hands of such judicial omnipotence.
In fact this excuse is little better than that of a highway man, who should
pretend he robbed a traveller of his purse of gold, in order to teach him more
wit than to have carried it about him.

The vindication published in the newspaper also asserts, that the bill in
question was taxed agreeably to act of Assembly. If by it be meant the act
passed in February last, for the regulation of officers fees, I assert that
several of the charges are not warranted by that law; but, even were they, a
Judge ought to know (and upon any other occasion this gentleman would have told
us) a law directly in the teeth and against the express words of the
Constitution is void. We seem, however, to live under a most pliable
Constitution; like Lord Peter's wine-mutton-brown-loaf in Swift's Tale of a
Tub, it is one thing, it is another thing, it is any thing or nothing, as suits
convenience, or promotes interest. One day we are informed, that, let a
judgment be obtained when it will in the course of the year, yet, that, by the
47th section of the Constitution, no execution can issue to levy for the money
till the first Monday in March following; the next day we find this rule
relaxed, and a judgment obtained, and an estate sold in the course of a summer.
Again, we read in the second article of the Constitution, "And the
Representatives so elected shall meet the first Tuesday in January following,
at Savannah, or any other place or places where the House of Assembly for the
time being shall direct;" but are told in a Chief Justice's Charge, that, by
these words, we are not to understand that the first meeting after the election
of a new House is to be in Savannah, but in Augusta, and for this reason, that
the preceding House intended to meet at the latter place in July last. It would
have been but candid to mention also, that such of the Members (18 in number)
as did meet in Augusta in July presented a paper (now to be seen of record in
the Journals of Assembly) to the Executive Authority, recommending that the
House should be called to meet thereafter at such time and place as the
Governor and Council should deem proper; and that, in consequence thereof, on
the pressure of public business, the House were called, by proclamation, to
meet in Savannah, on the first Wednesday in October; but that summons, like the
adjournment, also failing of its end, left Savannah, and not Augusta, as the
last place mentioned in the Journals of the State for the intended meeting of
the Legislature. I must make a small digression from the inconsistencies of the
C -- f, whilst I take a nearer view of this so much talked of question, viz.
the proper place for the next meeting of the Assembly; but I promise to return
to the subject again as soon as possible: To me it is of all things the most
unaccountable, how any man, who has read the Constitution, and taken an oath to
support it, can assent to the construction which the C -- J -- contends for.
Without doubt there is the same reason why the Executive Authority should have
the power of altering the place, as of shortening the period, of adjournment;
and the 20th section of the Constitution seems clearly to imply so: The
Governor and Council are to shorten the time of adjournment upon any emergency:
Surely they may alter the place upon any unforeseen casualty, such, for
instance, as the town falling into the hands of an enemy; the plague, or even
the smallpox, breaking out in it, or the like. But if these arguments have any
weight, when applied to the House who actually made the adjournment, how much
more forcible are they when applied to a new House, who cannot be said to be in
being until they meet, qualify, and take their seats in Savannah? It is
ridiculous to suppose a former House of Assembly can bind a succeeding one, by
a mere order, calculated for, and confined altogether to itself; indeed such an
opinion is not only contrary to the 3d section of the Constitution, which
declares every Assembly shall politically perish on the day preceding the new
election; and to the 7th, which declares each House shall settle its own rules
of proceeding; but is also flatly contradicted by the practice of every new
House in drawing up rules for itself before the Members go upon business. Now,
surely, if these rules do not survive the body which made them, the resolve of
adjournment, which is no more than a rule of the House, cannot in the nature of
things; besides, it is not unworthy of remark, that the Legislature, when they
adjourned on 26th February last, did not then, or at any time previous thereto
in the course of that session, (as they had sometimes before done) resolve that
the next meeting of Assembly (whenever that might happen) should be in Augusta,
but concluded with these words, "The House then adjourned, to meet at Augusta
the first Monday in July next."

The Assembly may be considered as executing the will of the Convention; but
why the House of 1784 should also have the power of making a will before their
death, and appointing the House of 1785 the mere executors thereof, is what I
cannot comprehend. It was evidently the intention of the framers of our
Constitution, that, although, in the course of the year, the Legislature might
shift about from place to place, to suit the convenience of all parts of the
state, yet that, at the beginning of every new House, they should take their
departure and set out from one fixed meridian to wit, that of Savannah: And
this was certainly acting in conformity to the sentiments of the ablest
writers, who hold that all free states require that their government should be
brought back to its true and original principles every now and then; upon which
very foundation our annual elections, and the other periodical changes provided
for, are grounded: But I have dwelt too long upon so plain a case, and will now
return to my strictures upon some other parts of the C -- 's conduct.

To form the character of a great Judge there ought to be a happy commixture of
the amiable with the admirable qualities. Although the attainment of the first
class in either of these descriptions may be beyond the reach of ordinary men,
yet one would think caution and pride, the usual companions of little souls,
would guard against such glaring inconsistencies as the following: "Many cogent
reasons concurred to induce me to suggest to the Grand Juries in the counties
through which I have already rode the expediency of revising our Constitution:
As I speak to men of intelligence it is sufficient only to mention it -- if
with harmony and temper you can go into the consideration of a subject so truly
important to us all, I hesitate not to recommend it to you." C -- J -- 's
Charge to the Grand Jury of Richmond county, March 1784. "The Constitution of
our country contains the principles of liberty, which by attention may be
improved into a basis on which the happiness of the community may rest with
security -- the time however for any kind of alteration is not yet arrived."
Same C -- J -- 's Charge to the Grand Jury of Wilkes county, November 1784. He
also, in his Charge in Liberty county in March last, after giving reasons why
there was no time to be lost before the Constitution should be revised and
altered, goes on to tell the Grand Jury, as a spur to their industry, that
"people in the counties lying on Savannah river are promoting petitions for
that end, and I submit the example to your discretion and judgment." Whether
the people on Savannah river were promoting petitions I know not, but, even
were it otherwise, it shows the enthusiasm of the Judge in the business
proposed, and is at least as praiseworthy as the speech of one of our
Governors, who, in the year 1779, told the Assembly, by way of comfort, "that
he had received authentic accounts that Sweden and Denmark had become
additional pillars, by acknowledging the Independence of America."

It has never been my wish, and, however provoked, never shall be my endeavor,
to develope the conduct of any man in office, further than I think the good of
society requires; with this profession, then, I hope I shall not be charged
with a desire to gratify private spleen, or minister to the passions or
prejudices of party, if I make a candid scrutiny into some late decisions in
Court. I shall begin with the case of a Mr. Fox, a native and citizen of
Georgia, who stood charged with murder.

On the arraignment of this person, it seems, he offered for his plea, "that he
was not bound by any law of this state previous to the Definitive Treaty of
Peace." The Court, without farther ceremony, on motion of the prisoner's
Council, admitted him to bail. This defense, which was more properly in nature
of a special plea in bar, than to the jurisdiction of the Court, could not be
used as an argument for indulgence to the prisoner. Surely every evidence to
show his plea to be good, which he could ever obtain, was now to be had; and
if, instead of resting on the 6th Article of the Treaty, and setting up a plea
of pardon, he chose to risque his life upon this issue, whether there was any
law of the land against murder binding upon him prior to the Definitive Treaty
of Peace, there was every reason for the Judges to settle the point without
loss of time, lest so fatal a doctrine, subversive of the first principles of
freedom, which will not suppose the law to be in the hands of any master,
should impose itself upon others. The nice reasoning upon the allegiance due to
the sovereignty de facto, and that de jure, and the distinctions admitted, or
not admitted, between the two, did not at all enter into this business. The
simple point would have been, whether an usurpation virtually and ipso facto
suspends the operation of all laws, as well those against offenses mala in se
as those only mala prohibita: And I think, without recurring to the laws or
adjudications in the reign of Henry VII. when the disputes between the Houses
of York and Lancaster came to be terminated, or to those of Charles II. after
the Restoration, the very article itself in the Treaty of Peace is, by the
strongest implication imaginable, a deadly wound to such a plea as this; for,
surely, if no crime had been committed, no pardon would have been necessary.
Thus circumstanced, the prisoner's defense resolved itself into a confession of
the fact, but a denial of its criminality so far as respected him. Some
centuries ago, in a Roman Catholic country, when men carried dispensations in
their pockets, such a plea might have been sanctioned by authority; but, at
this period of time, and before so haughty a tribunal as ours, it is a little
astonishing that it could even be attended to; nay, more, that it should
actually produce its intended effect, and, by a base sacrifice of law and
common sense, consult the mere safety and convenience of a supposed offender
against the community. I wish to avoid saying any thing that can in the most
distant point of view go to the merits of this unfortunate man's case -- let
God and the Country be his judges -- My observations are all meant to be
confined to the conduct of the Court upon his business, and that I am free to
pronounce highly censurable. Under the Habeas Corpus Act, (the principles
whereof are incorporated into, and, by the 60th section, made a part of our
Constitution) had the prisoner demanded his trial in the first week of the
term, or on the first day of the sessions, and had the Attorney General omitted
to get the witnesses for the state when he might have done so, I grant that, in
such cases, even murderers have sometimes, by the Superior Courts, (to whom we
confided great powers, and from whom is expected great prudence) been admitted
to bail: But I believe this is the first instance wherein a man, against whom
was found a bill of indictment for murder, has ever been ordered out upon bail
where the prosecutors pressed for trial, where the party himself had put his
fate upon an issue that could neither require or admit witnesses, and where
such indulgence was not pretended to be craved on the foot of any supposed
hardship inflicted by the other party. If it be said, it was on account of the
perplexed state the Court was thrown into, when this new and unexpected plea
made its appearance, that the cause was adjourned over, I reply, that is
impossible, for, if the Judges had ever read (and I will not suppose the
contrary) the cases of Townly, M'Donald, Storey, and a number of others, in
Foster's Crown Law, they would have found the subject so copiously and clearly
handled, that, to be perfectly stupid; and to be at a loss in the business,
would be the same thing.

Did any man in the world believe this lenity arose from a spirit of
forbearance and mercy, or that there was the least particle of the milk of
human nature in the composition of its author, Christian charity would induce
forgiveness, and we should perhaps be won over to lose sight of the fault in a
tenderness for the motive; but, when it is beyond contradiction, that the
gentle usage this prisoner met with sprung entirely from the part his
connexions, and their connexions again, have acted, and continue to act, on the
little scale of politics, it is too much for any man of spirit, sense, or
justice, to tolerate it in a free country.

There is one other transaction of the last Court which I must take the liberty
of saying a few words upon: I shall, I expect, be anticipated, in being
supposed to allude to the case between an Indian and a Jew; God forbid I should
feel, or be suspected of recommending, the most distant enmity on a religious
score against either of these people; I mean to regulate my observations by the
rules of policy, as the affair respects the public, and by the eternal laws of
justice and truth, as it concerns the parties themselves. It seems a half-breed
man, descended of a white father (who is also supposed to be of the race of
Jacob) and a free Indian mother, had brought a suit against a full-blooded Jew;
the Jew, ever upon the watch, took an exception against the right of the
plaintiff to sue. There was really something so peculiarly droll, in a contest
about privilege between two men of this description in a Christian country,
that, when I first heard of it, I could not help repeating a very vulgar saying
of the pot to the kettle; however, the matter being referred to the Court, two
against one decided in favor of the Israelite, and the poor Creekite was
ordered to imparl until he could prove red was white. This naturally led me to
inquire what were the rights of a free Indian, and what were those of a Jew, in
this state. As it appeared to be at least a diverting speculation, I devoted
some time to the inquiry, and, if the reader feels the same curiosity I did, he
will not grudge a few minutes extraordinary in perusing their respective
claims. And now to the point: By the common law of the land the Indian seems to
me to enjoy every privilege which the Jew does; and by the local Constitutions,
or acts of Assembly, he certainly enjoys several which the Jew does not. To
elucidate the former part of this position, it will be necessary to show in
what light these people respectively stood, and to consider whether there was
any discrimination between them in England at the time our country was
colonized from that kingdom, for I conceive that to be the common law of this
land (indeed our Legislature has declared so) which was the law of England at
the time our charter is dated, to wit, on the 9th day of June, 1732. When a
free people (say the writers on this head) migrate to a new soil, with intent
to settle the same, they carry with them as their birthright all the laws of
their mother country then in force, at least so much thereof as may be
applicable to their own situation and the condition of an infant colony. This
being acknowledged as a postulatum, let us now see what that law was.

Judge Blackstone, in his Commentaries, (vol 1, page 425.) speaking of the
protection granted in England even to Negroes who run away from their masters
in America, thus expresses himself: "The law of England acts upon general and
extensive principles -- it gives liberty rightly understood, that is,
protection to a Jew, a Turk, or a Heathen, as well as to those who profess the
true religion of Christ." So that we see the Jew stands upon a level with the
African slave who deserts the employment of his master. Now, surely, we will
not suppose a free Indian to be in a situation worse than a man of this
description, but rather in a better; and by so much as his situation is better
than that of the Negro, in the same ratio does he, from the words of Mr.
Blackstone, rise above the Jew. The only difficulty with me is, whether we
ought not to consider the Indians within our state, and who are the aborigines
of the soil, rather in the light of citizens than aliens. There is no moral
obstacle to such a determination in respect to these people, as there is to the
Jews, who are not at present considered as citizens in any part of the world
but by the special favor and operation of some particular law. And this
carries me to the second part of my position, viz. a view of the local
Constitutions or acts of Assembly in favor of the Indians: These will be found
to countenance very much the idea of citizenship which I have before advanced.
An act, passed 25th March, 1765, in the first clause, expressly secures every
right and privilege to the Indians in amity with us, which they ever enjoyed.
In the 13th and 14th sections of the same law it is clearly implied, that, in
the opinion of the then Legislature, these people were at all times, and upon
all occasions, to be esteemed as being precisely upon the same footing with
Mulattoes or Meztizoes (or Jews or Turks) actually naturalized by a special act
of Assembly. And it is well known that Indians, and the descendants of Indian
women, have, in a variety of instances, both under the present and former
government, had grants of lands to them and their heirs, which is of itself
conclusive evidence they were acknowledged to be citizens. But, even should we
admit they were not citizens, they certainly are entitled to the rights of free
aliens: What those rights are no man who has read Wood's Institutes, or turned
over Jacob's Law Dictionary, can be ignorant of; but I shall make no comments,
nor detain the reader further than whilst I transcribe one or two passages out
of one or two very common books: "An alien may bring an action concerning
personal property, and may make a will and dispose of his personal estate: This
is to be understood of alien friends only, or such whose countries are in peace
with ours." 1 Black. 372. Here we see, if the Indians are merely in peace it is
sufficient; but they are more, they are actually in alliance with us, and
therefore a judicial opinion incapacitating them from the right of suit is
neither law or justice. "All personal actions he (an alien) may sue as on a
bond, so likewise for words, for the common law, according to the laws of
nations, protects trade and traffic; and not to have the benefit of the law in
such cases is to deny trade." Yelv. 198. Moore, 431. "An alien enemy commorant
(or tarrying) in England by the King's license, and under his protection, may
maintain actions of debt upon bond, although he came not with safe conduct."
Lord Raymond, 282. Here we see, if the Indians were actually at war with us,
yet, by the common law of England, (which we have adopted as the law of our
land) if we permit any one of them to tarry among us, he is not disabled from
bringing suit even against a Christian citizen. But I shall now quit my Creek
friend, and proceed to consider the case of the Jews, a people whose increase
in any country is at once a compliment and a reflection upon it; a compliment
upon its natural advantages, but an implied censure upon its moral system or
administration of government. An ancient writer observes, the Jews always
insinuate themselves most into favor among those nations who remain in
darkness and in the shadows of death. I shall not waste my own time, or
trespass on the reader's patience, in demonstrating whether these people ought
most to be tolerated in a republic or in a monarchy. In truth the Jews
nowadays enter very little into politics further than to favor that system
which is most promotive of their pecuniary interest, the principle of lucre
being the life and soul of all their actions. If indeed they have any choice as
to governments, it must be in favor of a monarchy, for there are no people so
wedded to their old institutions as the Jews, and we all know that, from the
earliest accounts, they have been accustomed to an arbitrary, though not always
to an hereditary government. At first the fathers of families, and the eldest
sons after them, exercised unlimited power, both civil and ecclesiastical, as
kings and priests, over the rest; they had authority to bless, curse, cast out,
disinherit, or punish with death, as they thought proper, in their own houses.
In Moses's time the civil jurisdiction came to be severed from the
ecclesiastical, but with no abatement of power or rigor in either; for whilst
Moses, and after him Joshua, were absolute leaders, Aaron and his posterity
were high priests, more arbitrary than subsequent popes. After these came
judges, who, when once elected into office, were as despotic as dictators; and
the sanhedrim, who filled up the chasm between judge and judge, had also very
great powers conferred on them. The whole concluded in a monarchy, beginning
with Saul, and continuing until the Captivity. They were after that event for a
long time bandied about under the Persian monarchs, and the ten captains of
Alexander the Great. At length the scepter was entirely removed from the House
of Judah, and came to be vested in King Herod, who was of a branch no ways
descended from the holy stock. At what particular time they came into England
is not ascertained; however they certainly were there in the time of William
the Conqueror, for we find in history that that monarch, for a large sum of
money, granted the Jews the privilege of living in a certain part of England as
his mere vassals, their persons and goods to be considered as his alone, and
they were to dispose of neither without his license. They continued in such
situation, with the addition of some few privileges, never as citizens, but,
according to Molloy, (vol. 2d, pages 293 and 294,) "as most absolute bond
slaves and exquisite villains, obliged to wear a badge and table on their
outmost garment, as well females as males, to distinguish them from Christians,
and not privileged to sue but by special license of the king," until their
insolence, oppressions, and usury, notwithstanding all these restraints, had
risen to such a height as to become a grievance to the nation. Then it was
that Edward I. in the 18th year of his reign, at the earnest solicitation of
his Commons, published an edict in Parliament for the total and absolute
banishment of all Jews from every part of his dominions, and if, after a
limited time, any of them were found within the same, they were to be hanged.
The accounts of these times tell us, they had proceeded so far in their
superstitious wickedness, that it became a custom among them, on a Good Friday,
to steal a Christian child, and privately to crucify him in derision of his
religion. From that time the Jews stood banished the dominions of England until
the great civil war in the reign of Charles I. During the confusions of that
period, they, by some means or other, with the help of long purses, found an
opportunity of reintroducing themselves; they remained, however, extremely
limited in their privileges, up to the time out charter was granted; nay, it
was not until the commencement of the present century that they were admitted
to the common privilege of benefit of clergy in any case whatever. (See
Foster's Crown Law, 306.)

Thus I have traveled with the Jews through a wilderness of history, from the
time of their patriarchs down to the settlement of Georgia; if I have been
particular or lengthy, the reader will excuse it, when he reflects it was
necessary to show in what light the Jews stood in England when our first
settlers emigrated from that country, in order to ascertain the privileges they
are now entitled to in Georgia; for I do not know that a single law has ever
been passed by our own Legislature in their favor, either before or since the
Revolution. As to the 56th article of our Constitution, it says no more for
them than it does for the Bramins of China, or the Mussulmen of Turkey, they
shall have the free exercise of their religion, provided it be not repugnant to
the peace and safety of the state. Whether this proviso, applied to the Jews,
does not abrogate the preceding words, I refer to the opinion of others; at
all events, there is nothing in it that promises them any more than a more
religious privilege; not a word in the whole clause, by the most forced
construction, can be made to signify a grant of any civil right whatever. I am
aware these people have hitherto laid great stress on the statutes of 13th and
20th Geo. II. and 2d Geo. III. which make two years service in a military
capacity, or seven years constant residence in America, work a naturalization
in any Jew; but a moment's reflection will convince us these statutes are
rather against the Jews than for them, as matters now stand; they evidently
imply and prove, that, by the common or other laws of force, previous to the
13th Geo. II. there was some moral obstacle in the way of a Jew's acquiring the
rights of citizenship in America which could only be removed by the authority
of Parliament. Now, this being admitted, the only question will be, whether
these statutes are of force in Georgia or not. This is a question that turns
upon the same hinge that the Stamp Act, the Tea Act, and all the other acts
which we declared unconstitutional, did; the criterion was not the expediency
of these laws, but the right in the makers to bind us by them. The people of
Georgia ceased to be represented in the British Parliament in the 5th year of
the reign of George II. when they migrated to this new soil; the first of these
Jew Acts was passed eight years afterward; then surely, upon the very
principles of our Revolution, it cannot be considered as of force here without
having been adopted by our own Legislature; that never having been done, the
conclusion in the breast of every Revolutionist inevitably is, that the Jews in
Georgia at present stand upon the same footing they did in England in the year
1732; what that footing was I have already shown to be that of aliens, who
never can become citizens but by the aid of the Legislature. Indeed every man
knows that at this day no Jew becomes a citizen in England but by virtue of a
special act of Parliament for naturalizing him. There is scarcely a session but
several of these laws pass, which are said to cost, one way or other, near 500
l. each. The terms of naturalization even then amount to this, that the Jew
shall renounce his errors and turn Christian, which he is obliged to evidence
by taking the sacrament, as required by stat. 7th James I. There was, in the
16th year of George II. an attempt made, and an act actually passed, for
dispensing with the test of the sacrament in respect to Jews before they were
naturalized, but the clamours of the people rose so high that the Parliament
were compelled, after a very few months trial, to repeal this law, and leave
the Jews where they were before.

After having said so much against the Jews, it may probably be suspected I am
not only an enemy, but that I wish to stir up a spirit of intolerance against
that dispersed and unhappy people. Let me tell the reader, I am as far removed
from being a votary of friend to persecution as any man upon earth. Had the
Jews in this state but conducted themselves with common modesty and decorum, I
should have been the last person to point out their disabilities; on the
contrary, I should have been happy to give my voice for sectling every just and
reasonable privilege upon them, or even to have gone farther, and permitted
them to enjoy by curtesy some which it would be impossible to concede of right
in any Christian country. But, when we see these people eternally obtruding
themselves as volunteers upon every public occasion, one day assuming the lead
at an election, the next taking upon them to direct the police of the town, and
the third daring to pass as jurors upon the life and death of a free man, what
are we to expect but to have Christianity enacted into a capital heresy, the
synagogue become the established church, and the mildness of the New Testament
compelled to give place to the rigor and severity of the Old? The most distant
apprehension of which evils is sufficient to rouse any man into action who
values either his civil or religious liberty.

It may possibly be said that no people can be blamed for pushing their
pretensions as far as they are permitted, that it is in the nature of man to
thirst after privilege and pre-eminence as much as it is after money, and that
therefore it is not to the Jews, but to our Christian officers, we ought to
impute the blame. All this I will in some measure grant, but, at the same time,
desire leave to remind these people they stand exceedingly in their own light,
when they venture so far under the auspices of any one man, especially an
officer whose office, and in all probability whose consequence, will expire
with the year.

The Jews are a race of men well acquainted with the scorns and persecution of
all the rest of the world: Surely, then, it was a most forward, not to say
unguarded action, in one of these, whose religious situation makes him the most
vulnerable man on earth, to endeavor to disfranchise an Indian of a privilege
which he himself held by the slender tenure of good will; indeed, if we believe
Mr. Adair, in his History of the Indians, we might go farther, and call it a
most injudaic action, for that writer strongly insists the Creek Indians and
the Jews are very nearly allied; he hazards a conjecture that the former are
really and truly one of the Tribes of Jacob, who came, by some means or other,
to be lost in the wilds of America.

I cannot take my leave of the Jews without saying a word more as a tribute to
justice, and I do no more than this, when I acknowledge there is one whole
family (and perhaps to these might be added two or three other individuals)
whose long residence, upright demeanor, and inoffensive conduct, in this
state, have always claimed, and now procure for them, the countenance and
esteem of every honest Christian; the only badge I ever wish to see any of this
house, or their connexions, (especially the females, who are by far the largest
part) wear, is what they have always carried, "the approbation of the good." It
is really remarkable that, in the bitterest moods against this singular people,
there should always occur a remnant to be saved.

Were I disposed, as I really am not, to canvass every act of the Judiciary
that appeared liable to reprehension, I could fill volumes instead of a single
pamphlet; but I confess myself already tired with a subject which exhibits
nothing but memorials on the dark side of human nature. As far as lies with the
Head of this Department, it is obvious to all that the end of one ridiculous
situation is only the beginning of another. Had this gentleman any feeling, he
must be convinced his conduct is not approved of by the country: the very
common compliment of thanks for his charge is withhold in all the ^^st
presentiments that I have seen; and no wonder, when the main scope of such
charges was to stir up parties and dissensions throughout the land; instead of
being a preserver of the peace, as his oath and duty require of him, it is
evidently his object to disturb the repose, and thereby impede the welfare of
the community. The Grand Jury of Chatham county gave but an inkling of the
light in which they viewed him; and why an opportunity was not afforded to the
people of Effingham to convey their sense, in the form of presentiments, is a
matter that the Representatives of that county will no doubt demand an
explanation of.

It was my intention to have said something on the famous adjudication
respecting our trade; but as that point has been already discussed by others,
and as I have exceeded the limits I had prescribed for myself. I shall leave so
unfounded a thesis to perish by its own absurdity and impolicy. The idea of a
Treaty of Commerce being necessary to entitle a foreigner to sue for a debt is
too puerile to deserve a serious refutation. If this were law, we could have no
trade with Germany, Spain, Portugal, Italy, Russia, and half the other powers
of Europe, together with all those of Asia and Africa.

Were it an article of our political creed that the freedom of a people
depended on the emptiness of their Treasury, there could not be more
backwardness than there is in the payment of public debts. In February last,
an act passed, laying an impost upon shipping, and a duty on goods imported.
This would prove some aid to our Treasury, were the moneys collected, but
unfortunately a clause, granting four months indulgence to all who should
desire it, was annexed to the law, and the consequence has been, that, when the
duties came once to be bonded, the parties either considered the debt as paid,
or procured drafts upon the Treasury sufficient to balance the account by the
time it became due. In either case no cash is brought into the Treasury: And
here I must observe, that I consider these circulating Treasury notes as big
with evil consequences; at best they are mere expedients, generated by the spur
of the occasion, and all expedients in government imply a defect in the
organization or conduct of the machine. Every draft is an anticipation of so
much of our funds; and, if we go on without knowing or determining precisely
how far we may afford to anticipate, the consequence may be, that the
expenditures of one year will mortgage the revenue of ten.

The general account of our fiscal concerns for the present year, not yet being
laid before the public, I am unable to say any thing about them. I should
however imagine that our expenses, with the utmost frugality, and although we
have had but one session of Assembly, cannot full short of 6000 l. In this sum
I do not include one sixpence of what we owe on the federal score. It would
astonish nine tenths of the people to hear, if my information is just, what a
bagatelle has been as yet brought into the Treasury to oppose to this sum. The
last year had no such difficulties to struggle with as the present, for
although the taxes were trifling, yet the amercements and cash sales were very
considerable. I have been told, that, in the year 1783, the amercements
collected amounted to 4186 l. 5 s. 6 d. and that the cash sales of confiscated
property are credited at 5250 l. 10 d. These resources being entirely exhausted
before the commencement of the current year, the Duty Bill was intended to
supply their place; but how far short it has fallen of general expectation I
leave to the candid decision of every honest member of the community.

I shall not at present make any particular remarks on the fund arising from
our confiscated property. The amount sales were indeed prodigious, but what
will be the neat balance after payment of the debts of these proscribed persons
I can form no probable guess. I have heard that, when the Assembly last sat,
the bonds in the Treasury on that account amounted to 288,253 l. 19 s. 8 d. how
many more have been brought in since I know not.

There are, I believe, many and great demands still remaining against these
estates; what channel they will next be thrown into for liquidation and
settlement I am unapprized of; in my judgment there can be none so proper, or
conducive to public good, as that of the Auditor. Could the gentleman who has
nearly gone through the Herculean task of auditing and arranging the other
(...) of the state be prevailed upon to undertake this, I am persuaded it would
diffuse general pleasure. To the honor of this Officer let me bear testimony,
as far as I have had an opportunity of observing, that, even under the
disadvantage of an infirm state of health, the effects of his zeal, fidelity,
and abilities, have been conspicuous: Whilst on the one hand, he has done ample
justice, under the article of savings, to his country, on the other, he has had
the singular fortune to render satisfaction to the individuals concerned. For
him it was reserved to bring forth order from confusion, and to reduce a chaos
of claims into a system of accounts.

Having now waded through the drudgery of a retrospective examination, I shall
take my leave of the public, without any apology for the plain garb in which
my observations appear. Written as they were in haste, and on a subject rather
dry, it was impossible I could be studious of the ornaments of style; if they
carry the beauties of truth and justice, it is all I cover, or desire any
credit for. In respect to any who may suppose themselves levelled at, I can
only say, that I have endeavored to avoid personalities as far as the man
could be separated from the actor. I have always strove to keep in view
Sergeant Glynn's principle, in his defense of Woodfall, for publishing Junius's
Letters, that, "though to speak ill of individuals is deserving of
reprehension, yet all public acts ought to lie open to public examination,
and it is a service done to the state to canvass them freely."

A CITIZEN.


