AN ENQUIRY INTO PUBLIC ABUSES, ARISING FOR WANT OF A DUE EXECUTION OF LAWS,
PROVIDED FOR THE SUPPRESSION OF VICE, IN THE STATE OF NEW JERSEY: CALCULATED TO
DRAW THE ATTENTION OF THE EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY, AND PEOPLE AT LARGE, TO THE
NECESSITY OF AN UNITED EXERTION, THAT MAY PRODUCE A REFORMATION.

Cry aloud, spare not, show my People their Transgressions, and the House of
Jacob their Sins.

ISAIAH lviii. 1. PHILADELPHIA: Printed and sold by HALL and SELLERS; also sold
by ISAAC COLLINS, Printer in Trenton; THOMAS REDMAN, in Haddonfield; and JOHN
REDMAN, in Salem. M,DCC,LXXXIV.

AN ENQUIRY, etc.
WHEN I reflect on the reciprocal benefits of civil society, I consider myself
as one of a ship's company, who are embarked together, and have to struggle
with the difficulties and dangers of a boisterous element, where individual
safety is absorbed in that of the whole, and each one, by contributing to the
security of the whole, is serving himself; and though all cannot have the command
of the helm, yet, being so nearly interested, every one has a right to keep a
look-out, and, if he apprehends danger, give the alarm, which to neglect might
be a criminal omission; and should his fears appear not equally important to
others, his motive being good, ought to secure him from censure. This may
apologize for my solicitude for the common safety, when I behold the supineness
and inattention of those appointed to the watch.

Physicians, in judging of the health of a human body, examine symptoms, some
they deem mortal, others dangerous, etc. If we take the same method to judge of
the vigor and health of government, I know of no symptom more justly alarming,
than a general slight and disregard to good and wholesome laws. That this is
too much the case at present in New Jersey admits of no dispute. Laws
calculated to guard the manners and morals of the people; to check vice, and
encourage and promote industry and frugality, the strongest sinews of
independence, and truest riches of a state or nation; when such laws are
treated as objects of trivial moment, and not worthy the serious notice of the
Executive authority, it certainly denotes a great depravity of manners. To show
that this is really our present situation is the intention of the ensuing
pages, wherein I shall make extracts from some of our laws, with remarks
thereon, for the inspection of such of my fellow-citizens who may not so fully
have considered the power which every honest man has of lending a hand to
suppress vice. In doing of this, if any thing I say should appear harsh or
severe, I may declare once for all, that I desire to give no just offense to
any, my motive is upright and disinterested, at which virtue and worth can
never be offended; and as for those of a contrary cast, their obloquy is
praise. I scorn to gain a friend by servile ways,
Nor wish to lose a foe, my virtues raise.
POPE.
I am enough acquainted with the world, to know that honest truths too often
offend ears accustomed to adulation; neither is physic grateful to the
disordered stomach; but this was never thought a sufficient reason for
suppressing the one, or neglecting to administer the other, for the real
advancement of health and happiness.

There are two laws in this state for the regulating of taverns, etc. The first
was passed in 1738, the other in 1768. The preamble to one says, The vices so
much practiced in them were to the great scandal of religion, the dishonor of
GOD, and impoverishing of the commonwealth. That to the other gives the reason
for passing it, i. e. More effectually to prevent taverns from being perverted
to places of gaming, tippling, drunkenness, revelling, extortion, and other
vices. Here we discover the sense the Legislature had of the conduct common in
taverns when these laws were passed, and the necessity they saw of providing a
remedy. In doing of this, they give the Justices in their sessions as full and
ample a power as words can well express -- Licenses must be renewed every year,
and are in the discretion of the Justices either to grant or refuse, with this
restriction, that they shall not grant a license to any person but what comes
to them well recommended, as being of good repute for honesty and temperance.
Nevertheless it is a constant complaint throughout the state, that hardly any
one ever applies, however bad their character, but they obtain a license. It
may be said, they come recommended, and that is the guide to the Court. Will
that excuse for sinning against knowledge? But the truth is, hardly any good
law was ever so trifled with, or tortured, to evade the true intent and meaning
of it, as this. It requires a recommendation, signed by at least six
freeholders of the neighborhood where the tavern is to be kept; instead of
this, tavernkeepers will sign each others recommendation, be each others
security, etc. and such who cannot get a reputable neighbor to sign, will pick
up any they can, and sometimes from the remotest parts of the county. Thus is
the security the law provides against persons of bad fame rendered a mere farce
and mockery, and this in open Court, in the face of the county, thereby
teaching the common people to evade and trifle with the solemnity of laws,
instead of endeavoring on all occasions to inculcate a reverence for, and
religious obedience to them. To enable my readers to judge for themselves, here
follows extracts from those laws, whereby they may compare the present mode of
executing them with their true intent and meaning, and then seriously reflect
where such a perversion of law must lead.

New Jersey Laws, ALLINSON's Edition,
Page 102. No person or persons within this province shall sell by retail any
rum, brandy, wine, or spirits of any kind, under the quantity of one quart, nor
cider, strong beer, metheglin, or other strong or mixed liquors, directly or
indirectly, under five gallons, except thereunto licensed as herein directed,
under the penalty of forty shillings for the first, and five pounds for the
second and every other offense, to be recovered, etc.

Page 103. -- 302. No license shall be granted by any Justices of the Peace
within this Province, to any person whatsoever, for retailing of strong
liquors, save only in open Sessions, held in the county where such tavern is to
be kept; and to such person or persons only as shall come to them well
recommended, by at least six freeholders of the neighborhood where the tavern
is to be kept, certifying that the person recommended is of good repute for
honesty and temperance, and known to the person recommending to be provided
with at least two good spare feather beds, more than is necessary for the
family's use, and is well accommodated with house room, stabling and pasture;
and if any person signing such recommendation shall be convicted of having
imposed on the Court, either by signing to an undeserved character, or by
describing a situation not true, or in any other manner, every person so
imposing, and being thereof legally convicted, shall be fined by the Court in
the sum of three pounds, for the use of the poor, etc.

Page 103. And every tavernkeeper shall enter into recognizance, with two
sufficient freehold sureties, in the penalty of twenty pounds, with a
condition, That he shall not himself game, nor suffer any person to game in his
house for money, or the value of money, but shall in all things as a public
housekeeper use and maintain good order and rule, etc. And any Justices that
shall, contrary to the true intent and meaning of this act, grant any license
or licenses to any person whatsoever, they and each of them shall for each and
every offense forfeit the sum of ten pounds, etc.

Page 104. The Clerk of each respective Court shall make out lists of the names
of the persons so licensed, and transmit one to every constable within the
county; and said constables are hereby strictly commanded to make diligent
search and enquiry in the township for which he or they are appointed, for such
persons as shall presume to sell liquors contrary to this act, and prosecute
the offenders; and upon conviction, by the testimony of one witness, said
Constable shall be entitled to one half the forfeiture aforesaid, the other
half to the use of the poor. And said Constables are further commanded and
strictly enjoined, each of them, at least four times in every year, to visit
each of the taverns; and upon the discovery of any enormities, irregularities
or evil practices, within their respective districts, shall true report thereof
make to the Justices at their sessions, who are hereby commanded to take notice
thereof, and punish the offenders accordingly. And the Justices are hereby
required to acquaint the Constables with their duty herein, and command them to
perform the same. And all such licenses shall be granted for one year, and no
longer.

Page 105. If any tavernkeeper shall harbor any apprentice, white servant, or
slave, or sell them any strong liquor, knowing, or having reason to believe
them to be such, shall, for the first offense, forfeit twenty shillings; for
the second, forty shillings; and for every other offense, five pounds, etc.

Page 302. The Justices, at every of their spring and fall sessions, shall fix
the prices of liquors, meat and entertainment for man, and of provender,
stabling and pasturage for horses. And every person so licensed shall obtain
and affix up in the most public room in his or her house, in ten days after
said sessions, a list of the rates aforesaid, under the penalty of twenty
shillings for every day he or she shall omit the same; and if any tavernkeeper
shall demand or receive more for any article specified in said rates than they
allow, and being legally convicted thereof, he or she shall forfeit five pounds
for each and every offense, and be incapable of receiving another license for
three years.

Page 105. And whereas it has been too often observed, to the great grief and
concern of all sober and well disposed persons, that many of the inhabitants of
this province, of mean and low fortunes, do make it their constant practice to
frequent taverns, and there spend much of their time and substance in gaming,
tippling, and often drinking to excess, to the great damage, affliction and
distress of their poor families, and destruction of themselves: Therefore be it
enacted by the authority aforesaid, That, after this act shall take place, if
any tavernkeeper shall suffer any person or persons to spend his or their time
in an idle manner at his or their house, or supply them with more strong liquor
than is absolutely necessary for his or her refreshment, upon proof made by a
Constable or freeholder at the sessions held for the county, the tavernkeeper
so convicted shall be fined by the Court for the first offense twenty
shillings, the second forty shillings, and every other offense five pounds, etc.

Page 106. If any tavernkeeper shall trust any person above ten shillings for
liquor or victuals (travelers and lodgers excepted) he or she shall for ever
be debarred from suing for or recovering such debt, any bill, bond, or other
security given for the same, notwithstanding.

Page 104. No Undersheriff or Goal-keeper shall have a license granted to sell
liquor; and if he or they shall sell any strong liquor, simple or mixed, or
suffer any to be sold in the goal under his or their care, for his or their
benefit, he or they shall forfeit twenty shillings for every such offense, etc.

Page 302. No license to keep a tavern shall be granted to any shopkeeper,
neither shall a tavern and a shop for selling goods and wares of any kind be at
any time kept in one house; and if any shopkeeper shall give or sell strong
liquors, so as to encourage drunkenness, revelling and frolicking in his or her
house, he or she shall forfeit five pounds for each and every such offense.

Page 4. No tavernkeeper shall suffer any person or persons to drink and tipple
in his house on the Lord's Day, under the penalty of six shillings for each and
every such offense, to be recovered upon the testimony of one witness, etc.

Page 304. Every Constable shall take the following oath or affirmation, viz.
I, A. B. will well and truly execute the office of Constable for the year next
ensuing, and in particular, I will faithfully use my endeavor to do my duty,
as it is enjoined by an act for regulating taverns, etc. without any connivance
at or favor to those who shall offend against it: Which oath or affirmation a
Justice shall read to him, and the Constable repeat.

Page 303. If any person or persons making any vendue (except civil officers at
public houses) shall give or sell, or suffer to be given or sold, in order to
be drank on the day or days of such vendue, any rum, cider, or other spirituous
liquors, he, she or they, so offending, shall forfeit the sum of six pounds, to
be recovered by action of debt, on the testimony of one credible witness, to be
applied, etc. And if any such liquor shall be given or sold in manner
aforesaid, it shall be deemed to be given or sold by the maker or makers of
such vendue (unless he, she or they can prove the contrary) who shall suffer
the penalty aforesaid.

In making the foregoing extracts, I have not copied whole sections, but so
much only as appeared sufficient to give my reader a true idea of what the law
is, whereby he may know when it is transgressed; and what his duty, as a lover
of rectitude, requires. He may read them at large in Allinson's edition, as
aforesaid.

The law says -- No license shall be granted to any person but such who come
well recommended, by at least six freeholders of the neighborhood, as being in
good repute for honesty and temperance, and well accommodated, etc. That if any
Justices shall grant a license to any person contrary to the true intent and
meaning of that act, each of them shall forfeit ten pounds for every such
offense.

Are all tavernkeepers in good repute for temperance, or rather are not many of
them well known to the Justices who grant them licenses to be very intemperate,
and such who are likely to encourage it in others? But they come recommended;
the Court cannot be supposed to know all who apply. Be it so. But many of them
are well known to the Court, as also the scandalous orders they have heretofore
kept, and that they are not accommodated as the law requires, and often situate
in private corners, or where there is not any just pretense of necessity to
answer the end of that institution, which is in fact establishing
tippling-houses by authority, to debauch the morals of the people, there being
at the writing of this five taverns on the road from Coopers Ferries to Salem,
in the distance of five miles and an half. Did the Justices make it their
business to examine into the situation of proposed taverns, whether necessary,
if the signers were of the neighborhood, and of good repute, and not tipplers
in taverns, they might easily discover if the person recommended was within the
description of the law, and if not (which I believe is oftener the case than
otherwise) careful to fine those who dare offend the law by so imposing upon
them, they would show themselves real friends to their country, and worthy the
dignity of their stations. The good effects of such a conduct would soon
appear; and will any one pretend to say their duty and office qualification
does not enjoin this care in a matter wherein the good of the commonwealth is
so highly interested? For, unless some method can be fallen upon to check the
licentious conduct so much practiced in these houses, parents may indeed sit
down and sorrow, and instead of being careful to save something for their
children, may conclude the greatest kindness will be, not to afford them the
means of debauching themselves with the fruits of their care in those
seminaries of corruption, a practice so common with young heirs of the present
day.

The difficulty of checking a license of conduct among a free people is made an
excuse for it by some, which is just in other words saying -- We are willing to
do as we please, and to give others the same liberty. Here, if I am not
mistaken, is the root of the mischief. The difficulty is really not so very
great, were the executive authority but men who joined example with their
power, paid a strict obedience to laws themselves, and with a becoming firmness
exacted it from others, always careful to punish the wilful violators. The
task, I believe, would then be easy. I myself a few years past traveled in
three of the New England states, and supposing taverns to be the same there as
in my own country, was very unwilling to lodge in them, and endeavored several
evenings to get private lodgings, offering to pay full price for what I had,
but could not succeed, and soon found I could lodge and be entertained as
quietly in their taverns, as in private houses; and for several weeks that I
was in those parts, saw no tippling or disorderly conduct in any of them, nor
one person disguised with liquor. If such order and decorum can be preserved in
New England, why not in New Jersey? And further, a kinsman who was in France a
considerable time during the late war gave me the like account of that country,
and assured me that from what he saw, a person might travel over the kingdom,
and not see a drunken man. This excellent economy appears to have been brought
about by not suffering their hotels, or houses for public entertainment, to
keep any spirituous liquors to sell. O America! were thy rulers virtuous enough
to establish a like regulation, how many millions would it save, that is now
spent upon thy lusts, and perhaps numberless souls from perdition. Reader,
reflect a moment. Can a single reason of weight be given against such a reform
here? at least that no spirits, simple or mixed, nor foreign liquor of any
kind, should be kept to sell in taverns. Their true use is to accommodate
travelers and passengers with lodging and necessary entertainment; a dram,
bowl of punch, or glass of wine, custom only renders necessary. Were taverns
upon such an establishment, people of the best characters would keep them, and
use them when occasion required. Whereas, in their present state, it is rather
a disreputation for a sober person to be seen in some of our taverns, nor will
they lodge in one if they can make any other shift, which occasions private
houses in some places to be much burdened. The public would also be much better
supplied with what is necessary and useful, their profits and attention being
now chiefly on tipplers; and indeed, if no other reason were sufficient, the
public debt we are likely so long to groan under ought to induce our rulers to
give every discouragement to the introduction of foreign liquors, that are
equally unnecessary and mischievous.

Every tavernkeeper enters into a recognizance of twenty pounds, not to game,
nor suffer others to game in his house for money, or the value of money, and in
all things, as a public housekeeper, to maintain good order and rules; and yet
-- how astonishing -- that persons who have entered into such a recognizance in
the face of the county should dare to suffer a conduct, and that the most
public and notorious, whereby they forfeit that recognizance almost every day
they live; but still more astonishing, that all this should pass unnoticed, and
hardly an instance ever known where it has been called in question. If this is
not a mockery of the solemnity of laws, I know not any thing which deserves the
term. But the scene exhibited in the case of Constables is still more
extraordinary; the sacredness of laws, and solemnity of oaths are treated as
objects destitute of the least binding force, and affords a sorrowful specimen
of the manners of a people, when the strongest bands human wisdom can provide,
to make man faithful to man, are treated with so little ceremony, which has a
direct tendency to dissolve, or render nugatory, every civil compact. This
ought indeed to alarm the community; for like a hole through a water bank, if
not stopped, the breach will grow wider until the whose enclosure is deluged.
If one good law may be trampled upon with impunity, it is a kind of license to
treat all laws in the like manner. Let us see if the portrait has wronged the
original. Constables are strictly commanded to make diligent search within
their respective districts, for persons who sell strong liquor without license,
and to inspect taverns at least four times in the year, and report to the
sessions all evil practices they discover, such as gaming, tippling, selling
more liquor than is necessary for refreshment, tippling on the Lord's day; if
rates are up in their houses as the law requires; if they demand, or receive
more than said rates allow; sell liquer to any apprentice, servant or slave; or
suffer any disorders contrary to their recognizance. And that they may have no
excuse from ignorance, the Clerk of the Court is enjoined to give each
Constable a list of tavernkeepers names, and the Court to acquaint them with
their duty, and command them to perform it, which they solemnly qualify they
will do; and there the farce ends, and little or no further notice taken either
by Court, Clerk or Constable. Yea, some Justices and Constables are themselves
perhaps as ready as any to trample upon these judicious regulations, and
thereby encourage others to do it without hazard. What name this deserves, let
every serious Christian judge. The consequences which naturally flow from such
a contempt of these laws is indeed felt by all, and every one appears sensible
of, but is become so familiar, that, generally speaking, it operates like
laudanum, lulls into a state of ease and content, without seeking a remedy.

I shall now exhibit a few extracts from the laws relative to horse-racing,
shooting-matches, immorality, etc.

Page 242. We, the House of Representatives, in order to guard as much as
possible against all indulgences which have a tendency to debauch youth,
impoverish families, and propagate vice and immorality, do pray that it may be
enacted, and be it enacted, etc. That all horse-racing for lucre of gain, are
hereby declared public nuisances; and the authors, parties, contrivers and
abettors thereof, shall be adjudged common disturbers of the public peace, and
shall be prosecuted by indictment, fine or imprisonment. And it shall and may
be lawful for any person or persons who shall lose any money, or the value of
money, by any wager, bet or agreement, to have his action and recover the same;
and if the person so losing shall neglect suing for the same, for five days,
then any other person may sue for and recover the same for his own use, with
costs of suit. Page 243. If any person or persons shall run any horse-race, at
any time or place where ten persons or more shall have convened together,
although no wager be laid, or be aiding and assisting, or any ways concerned in
such race, every person so offending shall forfeit forty shillings, to be
recovered by any person who will sue for the same, with costs of suit, to be
applied to the use of the poor, etc. And if no prosecution be commenced for
said fines within twenty days, the Overseers of the Poor for the time being, or
any one of them, are hereby required and enjoined to sue for and recover the
same; which fines shall be chargeable on and recovered by the said Overseers,
and by them applied for the support of the poor: And if any Overseer of the
Poor for the time being shall refuse or neglect to sue for said fines, for ten
days after knowledge or information thereof, he or they shall forfeit and pay
the sum of forty shillings for every such neglect or refusal, to be recovered
by any person suing for the same. Provided always, if any Overseer of the Poor,
upon failure of evidence, shall be nonsuited, he shall pay the costs out of the
public money in his hands.

Page 235. All shooting matches for lucre of gain (except on days of public
training) are hereby declared and adjudged public nuisances; and the authors,
contrivers, parties and abettors thereof, shall be adjudged common disturbers
of the public peace, and as such shall be prosecuted and proceeded against. --
And all wagers, bets, etc.

Page 3. Every person who shall be convicted of drunkenness, cursing, swearing,
or breaking the Lord's day, by doing any ordinary work thereon (excepting works
of necessity or mercy) before a Justice of the Peace of the county, upon the
testimony of one witness, shall be fined by the said Justice for drunkenness
and breaking the Lord's day the sum of six shillings, and for cursing or
swearing three shillings; said fines to be immediately levied upon the
offender's goods, and for want of effects, to be committed to the stocks four
hours for drunkenness, and two hours for swearing, etc.

I have said so much on the subject of taverns, etc. I need say no more to the
other laws mentioned, than just to show how much is in every man's power to
render an essential service by helping to enforce them; nor can I see how any
honest man, who really desires the good of his country, can see her laws
trampled upon and hold his peace, which is the case with the law that prohibits
giving rum at vendues, etc. a practice the pernicious and ruinous effects
whereof before this law was passed is well known; nevertheless, it is in some
places getting into common practice again, and no marvel, when civil officers
of the foremost rank will countonance it by receiving drams from the crier,
which he is furnished with to entice people to bid, as a reward to the highest
bidder, thereby to inflame his ambition, that he may disdain to be outdone. Now
the breach of this law is (...), that any private man might by a proper
exertion easily put a stop to it in the neighborhood where he lives, had he
virtue enough to bestow so much labor for the public good.

Of the same kind is horse-racing, which the legislature declares to be public
nuisance, That they tend to debauch youth, impoverish families, and propagate
vice and immorality. These ruinous mischiefs arising from this practice are so
easily checked, that it is really ^^^^^ful to hear so much complaint about
them, and so little done to prevent them, when nothing more is necessary than
to give the Overseers of the Poor proper imformation of any horse-race, where
above ten persons are present, and, if they do not prosecute the offenders,
prosecute them. I am acquainted with an instance of this kind, in a village
where seldom a week passed without several horse-races, when a neighbor who
lived several miles off, being grieved at the consequences, exerted himself in
the above manner, and so effectually stopped it, that for ten years past there
has not been an attempt to renew the practice.

That of shooting matches is still more easily punished, by only giving the
names of the persons concerned therein, and witnesses to prove it, to a Grand
Juror or States Attorney.

As to drunkenness and profane swearing, they are such fashionable Vices among
our superiors, that I despair of their being punished, while so many of those
who are chosen to make laws, and those appointed to execute them, think it no
blemish on their characters to bid open defiance in those respects, not only to
human laws, but in the most daring manner to the laws of that tremendous Judge,
before whom they know they must soon appear, -- and there I leave them, and
proceed to address my fellow-citizens at large.

The confusion of the late times were in a great degree such, wherein every man
did what was right in his own eyes, vice and profanity, with brazen front,
stalked about in open day, bidding defiance to restraint or control. The
Magistrate who was desirous to discharge his duty by enforcing the laws, found
himself unsupported, and too feeble for the mighty task. Hence a license of
conduct, and perversion of manners ensued; numberless abuses for want of the
curb of law were suffered, overlooked, (and sorrowful to say) too often
countenanced by some who held the sword of Justice. -- That this is a true
state of the case, hardly any one will deny. -- The storm is now past, the
raging billows are become calm, the channel of justice is now undisturbed by
the bloody sword and roaring cannon. -- Now, fellow-citizens, the calls of our
common interest, our country, our religion, and our God, is to each individual
in their several stations, to exert themselves in promoting the general good of
our infant States, and strengthen the blessings of society. -- May we with
thankful hearts improve the opportunity, and America become as conspicuous in
the annals of time, for the rectitude of her manners, and love of virtue, as
she is for the love of liberty, the continued enjoyment of which she can only
thus secure.

In all the departments of civil government, there are none who have it so much
in their power to check and suppress vice, as the magistracy. They may indeed
be justly termed the guardians of the laws, and manners of the people. But
alas! how few whose conduct manifests a conscientious care faithfully to
discharge the duties of that station in this respect, which ought to be a
serious subject to all entrusted with authority, if the opinion of an eminent
author is believed -- That each one must answer for their own offenses, and
rulers for the sins of others, which they could have prevented and did not.
Eli's care seems to confirm this doctrine. He appears to have been a worthy
man. Nevertheless how severe the sentence against him for not restraining his
son's vices. -- I most sincerely wish the reflection might make an impression
on every mind equal to its importance. It would occasion those in the foremost
stations to be very guarded in the appointing of others under them, like Moses,
to choose men fearing God and hating covetuousness. Such Magistrates are a
blessing to a people, ever mindful to discharge the duties of their stations,
not so much to please men, as him, at whose awful Tribunal they soon expect to
appear, to account for the use of that share of power he has delegated to them.

It would also lead Grand Juries to assert the ancient dignity of their office,
in a serious discharge of the very extensive and important power with which
they are entrusted, of impeaching mal-administration and dignified crimes,
dragging vice out of its dark lurking holes, and teaching a reverence to the
laws. -- Their power is indeed very great, as their title -- The Grand Inquest
for the County, and their qualification, point out; which were they religiously
to discharge, the effects would reach beyond what is generally supposed. I may
not be a competent judge, but must believe most of the abuses pointed out in
the foregoing extracts are objects of their enquiry and presentation; and
though a Judge is not punishable for an error in his judgment, where he
uprightly endeavors to discharge his duty, yet it may justly be questioned
whether Justices are not liable to be called to an account by Grand Juries for
granting licenses against their own knowledge, and a manifest evidence of want
of proper qualification in the person licensed, contrary to the true intent and
meaning of the laws. -- However, the legislative body might be addressed on
such a conduct to good effect, and is an object highly worthy attention. In
general, I expect the following are doubtless so -- Clerks and Constables who
show a contemptuous disregard to the duties required -- disorderly taverns --
such who demand more than their rates allow -- such who dare to impose on a
Court by signing an untrue recommendation -- Under Sheriff or Jailer, who shall
sell liquor to the prisoners -- shopkeepers who encourage frolicking, tippling,
etc. in their houses -- and those little pests, who, under pretense of selling
cakes, are many of them real tippling houses, where children and the refuse of
mankind resort, and so prolific is the (...) breed, as in some places to be in
sight of each other, an increasing evil, which calls for the vigilance of Grand
Juries to extirpate. -- Whether all these mischiefs are within their cognizance
and influence or not, the Council assigned them by the constitution can point
out; and surely the languishing calls of virtue, religion, and their country's
good, are forcible incentives to every suitable exertion.

And now a few words to Magistrates -- You, gentlemen, are raised above your
brethren by commissions. This is a gift from others, but to rise above them by
virtue and good works, depends on yourselves, will add dignity to the station,
give a weight and influence, and make you loved and revered. Without this, your
elevations will only expose your flaws the more to the notice and contempt of
those below you. Esteem begets a cheerful obedience, but to obey those we
despise, is like a stony piece of bread that almost choaks in swallowing --
Reflect, I beseech you, on the importance of the trust reposed -- how much the
scale of virtue and vice is poised by your example and your power. -- If you
fear God, and love your country, demonstrate it by using the sword of justice
as a terror to evil doers, and praise of them who do well. This is the true use
of power, which every human sanction ought to corroborate, and will promote at
the same time the two greatest events man can be employed about -- your
country's good, and your own present and eternal happiness.

I could wish every intelligent person would often advert to the foundation of
government, detached from society. Its original object was, to preserve order,
restrain corrupt nature, curb and punish the vices of the people for the good
of the whole, agreeable to rules and sanctions agreed upon by the whole. In
delegating this power, the society do not resign all further care about the
common good, but reserves in itself a power by its Representatives, Grand
Juries, etc. of enquiring into and impeaching peaching mal-administration. In
this sense each individual is, or ought to be, a watch upon the conduct of
those himself has agreed to invest with authority for the general benefit, and
if any of them betray their trust, neglect their duty, or pervert the end of
their appointment, the common good demands it of him to discover, and endeavor
to have the mischief remedied; this the very nature of things confirm.
Government is a creature of society, which invests it with all the power it can
legally have. The term Majesty (among human distinctions) ought only to be
ascribed to society. -- Society is the creator, government the creature;
government is created for society, and not society for government. But alas,
how liable are human institutions to be perverted, and none was ever more than
government. The first servant of the state is styled Majesty, and his
constituents generally treated as a stock of creatures on a farm, the property
of every new master. From this fountain a degree of the same insolence but too
much runs through every department of power, from the King to the Constable,
who think themselves ill used if their conduct is inspected, or in the least
called in question by those from whom their authority is derived; and indeed,
as matters stand, it is pretty ticklish to attempt, and would lead one to
suppose the above reasoning must be all wrong -- that a King was first created
and a country given him, and then a race formed of inferior mold to people it,
-- or, as a humurous author has it -- That mankind are born with saddles on
their backs, and the business of government is to ride them. What a humiliating
and degrading picture of the common herd of rational beings -- and is it not a
true one? --

But what does all this rant mean? What end is it to answer? Government is an
arduous business, and those who rule well are worthy of double honor. All this
I fully admit. No man can give honor and obedience to good rulers more
cheerfully than myself. Such neither neglect nor abuse their power, nor grasp
after more than is given them. They act in it as a duty the good of the
community demands, and when that requires, will more freely resign their
dignity than they received it: An example of this kind we have seen in the
first and most distinguished man in America. To worth of this sort the people
are never ungrateful -- But at strutting importance without merit, they cannot
but laugh (a sight not unusual in our time.) These, instead of being attentive
to the duties of their station, uniting their authority and influence for the
public good, spend their zeal in pursuing power, promoting parties, abusing,
calumniating, and worrying those who disapprove their conduct. Such rulers are
entitled only to contempt; they have no claim to honor.

These observations on government were suggested from an earnest desire, that
all persons united in civil society would assert the dignity of humanity, and
of freemen, in giving their assistance to enforce obedience to laws which
themselves have agreed to be governed by, and is the doctrine I wish to
inculcate -- That the good of each individual being inseparably connected with
the good of the whole, the good of the whole ought to be every one's care --
That laws and sanctions agreed upon by the whole, to promote their joint
interests, ought to be held sacred, and every wilful transgressor, so far lays
waste the enclosure of law, the only protection we have to our lives, liberty,
religion, etc. is so far an enemy to the community, and ought to be punished.
The law makes it criminal to conceal great crimes, or suffer the offender that
is in our power to escape. The same reason holds good in degree in every
species of offenses against law; nor can any one demonstrate a greater love for
his country, or yield her more essential service, than by exerting his
influence in promoting a due reverence for and obedience to her good and
wholesome laws, more especially such of them whose object is to encourage
virtue, and suppress vice, the basis on which government is founded; to impress
this sentiment is my motive for writing. A large part of my life I have at
times been pained on reflecting upon the mischievous effects, and flood of
corruption, spread abroad from houses for public entertainment, which indeed
admits a question, whether all the labor and pains bestowed by ministers of
the gospel promotes virtue, equal to what they promote vice; a portentous
mischief, which it appears very clear to me might be entirely remedied by a
virtuous execution of the laws now in force. To endeavor to stimulate my
fellow-citizens to an exertion of their power to effect this, drew me some time
back to cast a few hints together for the news-paper, but found myself too much
cramped in that way, and threw it by. But the subject continuing often to
present itself to my reflection, as a debt due to the community, of which I am
myself a part, I have now discharged it in as brief a manner as I well could,
omitting however much I intended to have said; and should it answer no other
purpose than to engage some abler hand to take it up, and do the subject
greater justice, I shall not think my labor wholly lost.

I shall now conclude with part of a speech delivered to a renowned, and then a
free people, but who did not long continue so, which this speech seemed to
predict. The observations it contains are worthy the notice and practice of
every government, and particularly those of America in the present day.

When a nation is puffed up with an opinion of her own strength and safety, it
is then that her councils are likely to be rash and imprudent, and their
consequences fatal, that I cannot help being alarmed at the security in which I
see my country at present sunk. Prosperity generally produces arrogance,
rashness and folly; want and distress naturally suggest prudent and moderate
resolutions: Therefore it is not so easy, as at first it may seem, to determine
which condition is for the purpose of real happiness, the most to be defired
for individuals, or for national prosperity -- a state of perfect superiority
to danger and fear -- or of circumstances requiring-caution, frugality and
attention: For perfect prosperity generally brings with it the causes of
misfortune; when narrower circumstances often lead to care, prudence and safety.

Government ought to promote to high stations men eminent for virtue, as a
means to excite a general emulation among all ranks, as the people are
constantly observed to form their manners upon the model of their superiors.

What chiefly tends to the establishment of a state is, a police founded in
habitual modesty, temperance, integrity, valor and patriotism. The general
prevalence of these dispesitions is not brought about by laws or sanctions, but
by education, example, and a judicious exercise of power, whereby vice is
discountenanced, without directly punishing it, and the subjects drawn into
that voluntary rectitude of behavior, which force will never produce. Laws
heaped upon laws, rendered necessary, show an unruly and perverse disposition
in the people. The sagacity of governors appears in planting their laws in the
hearts of an obedient people. The business therefore is, not so much to find
ways of punishing offenders, as to form the minds of the people so, that they
shall have no disposition to offend.

A FARMER.
NEW JERSEY, 1784.

