AN ADDRESS TO THE FREE AND INDEPENDENT CITIZENS OF THE UNITED STATES OF
NORTH AMERICA.

BY SILAS DEANE, ESQUIRE.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON and GOODWIN. M.DCC.LXXXIV.

To the Free and Independent Citizens of the United States of North America.
THE happy period being arrived, in which we may in peace, take a review of the
scenes, through which we have passed, and with calmness and impartiality
examine and judge of past transactions, encourages me to come forward, and to
address you, on a subject of infinite importance to myself, and of so much to
you, as to excuse me, from the making any previous-apology, on the occasion. --
Perhaps I ought rather to make one, for my having been so long silent, under
the many heavy charges, brought against me, in the public papers, in America.
-- Neither a want of sufficient proofs, to refute them, or any indifference, as
to the opinion of my countrymen, occasioned my silence, but the reflection,
that during the rage, and violence of war, and while party prejudices, heats
and jealousies, were in their full force, it was by no means the time for a
cool, and dispassionate discussion, of any subject, on which, appearances had
already prejudiced the minds of the public.

I resolved to improve the first moment, of public peace, and tranquillity, to
appear, and to plead my cause, at your bar; during near three years of
misfortunes, and exile, I have impatiently looked for it; I now flatter myself,
that it is arrived, and in that confidence, venture to call your attention to
my case.

It is of some importance, to you, to know, if one, who formerly had your
confidence, to a great degree, actually betrayed, and deserted you, and was
guilty of the frauds, peculation, and treachery, with which he has been
charged, or if artful, and designing men, inimical to him, have taken the
advantage of his weakness, or imprudence, to charge him with those enormous
crimes; to excite a general clamor against him, and from his silence, to infer
in the strongest manner, his guilt. -- Though I may solicit your examination,
of the subject, at this time, under very great dis^dventages, yet I am by no
means thereby deterred, from doing it; as yet, you have heard but one side of
the question, and that at a time, when your situation, made you justly
apprehensive, and jealous of danger, from every quarter, and rendered you, as
it were, feelingly alive in every pore; at present, when we are happily freed,
from the alarms, and dangers of war, you will not refuse, to hear the other
part, and thereby become capable, of judging on the whole, with certainty, and
with justice, to the accusers, as well as to the accused; which is all I ask,
or wish for -- unwilling to take up more of your time, than is absolutely
necessary, I shall not in this address, recapitulate the many surmises, and
insinuations, thrown out against me, by my enemies, in the course of their
persecutions of me, but confine myself, to the direct charges against me, which
are all of them, comprehended under two heads:

First, that I was guilty of fraud, and peculation, in the management, of the
public moneys, committed to my care; and secondly, that after my return to
France, in 1781, I wrote those letters, which were intercepted, and published
in New York, from interested motives, and with the base and treacherous design,
to injure my country; having engaged myself in the interest of her enemies.

If on an impartial examination of facts, you shall judge me guilty, of these
crimes, nothing that has hitherto been said, or done against me, will be deemed
unjust, or too severe; but if on the other hand, you shall, from the most
unquestionable facts, and circumstances, find those charges, to be false, and
groundless, whatever weakness, or imprudence, you may find me justly chargeable
with, you will at least, acquit me of any thing criminal, and pronounce me to
be "A man more sinned against, than sining."

My conduct in the early part, of the late contest, and until my leaving
America, in April 1776, to go for France, in the character of Commercial, and
Political Agent, and Commissioner for the United States, is too well known, to
require my referring to any part of it. -- The charges against me, originate
after that period; previous to it, I had no charge of public moneys. I arrived
in France, in June 1776, and acted as sole Commercial, and Political Agent, for
the United States until the month of December following, when I received a
commission, from Congress, appointing Doctor Franklin, Mr. Lee, and myself,
their joint Commissioners Plenipotentiary, and I continued to act, in this
character, until the first of April 1778, when in obedience to the orders of
Congress, I left Paris, on my return to America, and from that period, to the
present hour, have not been entrusted with the moneys of the public, or with
any public employ whatever; it therefore follows, that if frauds, peculation,
and embezzlements, were practiced, and committed by me, they must have been in,
and during that period, that is between April 1776, and April 1778, -- and that
I must have committed them, in my transactions at Paris, where I constantly
resided; the time and place being ascertained, the justice or injustice of this
charge, will at once be seen, by an examination, of my receipts, and
disbursements of public moneys. -- On the 4th of March 1778, I received a
positive order, from Congress, to return immediately to America, to acquaint
them, with the state of their affairs, in Europe; in the resolution of Congress
transmitted and in the letter accompanying of it, to me, this appeared to be,
the only motive, and object of my recall. -- Though the treaties with France,
had been concluded, and signed on the sixth of February preceding, yet they had
still been kept secret, and by agreement with the Court of France, were not to
be made public, in Europe, until intelligence should be received, of their
being arrived, and published, in America; But several circumstances, concurred
at that time, to induce the Court of France, to change their plan, and publicly
to announce, to the Court of London, their having entered into Treaties of
Commerce, and Alliance, with the United States, and to dispatch, with all
possible secrecy, and expedition, the fleet then at Toulon, to America, under
the command of the Count D'Estaing; and the Count D'Vergennes, and Dr.
Franklin, joined, in advising me, to keep my recall, and my intention to
return, secret, until the fleet should sail, in which it was proposed, that I
should embark.

At this time, most of the contracts, for stores, arms, clothing, etc. and for
ships to transport them to America, were completed; the execution of those
contracts, had been principally under my direction, but though moneys had been
advanced, on all of them, the accounts of the contractors, had not been brought
in for settlement, and it was impossible for me, if I literally complied with
the order of Congress, and with the urgent request, of the French Minister, and
of Doctor Franklin, to go out in the fleet; to do any thing previously, toward
the calling in, and settling the public, or even my private accounts; any
attempt that way, would have defeated the secrecy, and dispatch enjoined me --
though nothing appeared in the order of Congress, or in any of their letters,
which intimated, the least dissatisfaction, with my conduct, or any suspicion
of the faithful management, and application, of the public moneys, yet as I had
from the first, the misfortune, to have in Mr. Lee, one of my Colleagues, a
most jealous, and artful enemy, and sensible, that many ill offices, had been
done me in America, I was extremely desirous, to put off my return until all
the transactions in which I had had, any concern for the public, should be
settled, and closed, but finally, I submitted to the advice of Count
D'Vergennes, and of Dr. Franklin, and contented myself, with taking from Mr.
Grand, the Banker for Congress, an account of all the moneys, received, or paid
out, on account of Congress, up to that time, this was all that was in my power
to do, and as Mr. Grand, had mentioned in his account, the names of the
persons, to whom he had paid money, and as I carried out with me, the most
honorable testimonials, from his Majesty, from his Minister, and from my
colleague, and intimate friend Dr. Franklin, of my zeal, and integrity in the
service of my country, I had no reason to apprehend, the being censured, for
not having settled, and brought out with me, all the public accounts, and their
vouchers, in detail; but on my arrival in Philadelphia, I soon sound, that my
enemies, had been, to a certain degree, successful, in poisoning the minds of
the public by insinuating, that I had become immensely rich, in the service of
the public, and consequently that I must have been guilty of undue, and
dishonest practices; and though I had been sent for expressly, to inform
Congress, of the state of their affairs, in Europe, and notwithstanding the
honorable character, I had sustained, as their Political, and Commercial Agent
in Europe, and afterward as one of their Commissioners Plenipotentiary, I
could not obtain an audience, of that body, until after six weeks attendance,
and solicitation.

I then gave them verbally, a faithful detail, of the state of their affairs,
in Europe, and laid before them, Mr. Grands account of the receipts, and
payments of moneys, to the time of my leaving Paris; and requested, that if
their had been, any charge or insinuation against me, for mismanagement, or
neglect, that I might be informed of it, and be permitted to be heard, in my
defense.

I was not told of any, and though Congress appeared no^ way dissatisfied, with
the account, I then gave them, of the state of their affairs, in Europe, and of
my own conduct, in their service, and though the settlement of the public, as
well as of my private accounts, pressed me to return as early as possible, to
France, yet I could not obtain any resolution, of Congress, either to approve,
or to disapprove, of any part of my conduct, and though I almost daily
solicited, for a second audience, I did not obtain one, until late in December
following.

I then gave them a written narrative of my transactions, from my leaving
America in their service, until my recall and return, -- Congress then appeared
disposed, to take the matter up, and to examine it, and to come to some
determination, on the subject, a Committee was appointed to examine the state
of their foreign affairs, and into the conduct of their Commissioners, and
Agents, and for greater dispatch, the Committee were ordered, to meet every
evening, Saturday and Sunday evenings excepted; yet that Committee never
condescended to admit me to an audience, or to ask me a single question, on the
subject of their enquiry. -- And though I had been sent for expressly, to
inform Congress, of the state of their affairs in Europe, yet their Committee,
studiously evaded, the giving me an opportunity of laying before them, any
information on the subject, or of explaining any part of my own conduct, while
in their service.

During more than fourteen months attendance in Philadelphia, I obtained but
two audiences from Congress, and none from their Committee, whose proceeding,
and report, if indeed they made any, were kept secret from me, -- In December
1778, having waited five months in Philadelphia, almost daily soliciting
Congress to examine my transactions, while in their service, I found that a
party determined, on my ruin, had sufficient interest, to prevent all
examination, and to bear me down, by the most mortifying delay, and neglect; I
therefore resolved to lay my case, before 'my countrymen, and fellow-citizens,
but on my first address to them, Congress resolved to give me an audience, and
afterward appointed a Committee, as I have before mentioned.

As I flattered myself, that Congress had resolved, to examine, into the state
of foreign affairs, and of those transactions, in which I had been a principal
actor, and to come to some determination, on the subject, I could not consider
myself at liberty, to proceed in publishing the state of my case; in the mean
time I was attacked and abused, in the most base and outrageous manner, in the
public papers, -- I made no reply to the many calumnies, and falsehoods,
published by a noted s^ribler, his associates and patrons, but earnestly
requested, of Congress, and of their Committee, to grant me a hearing, and to
do me justice; -- but my solicitations were ineffectual, though from December
1778, to August 1779, I wrote more than thirty letters to Congress, humbly
petitioning for a public examination, and trial, yet they never condescended,
to take the least notice of my requests: -- In private conversation with the
members I was told, that the only difficulty lay in my accounts, not being
settled; to obviate this, I returned to France, on assurances from Congress,
that they had appointed, and empowered a gentleman in France, to audit, and
settle all their public accounts; but on my arrival in France, in July 1780,
and application to him, I found that his power, was so limited, that be
declined, acting under it. -- I wrote immediately to Congress, soliciting for
more ample powers to him, or to some other person, and set myself to put, not
only my accounts, but those of my colleagues, and of every one, with whom I had
transacted any business, on account of the public, in a state for being
audited, and settled; and I passed more than twelve months, at Paris, at a
heavy expense, flattering myself, that as Congress had made no objection,
whatever, to any part of my conduct, in their service, except my not having
settled my accounts, and as my enemies, both in Congress, and out of it,
professed to believe, that I was a defaulter, they would not, after the
prodigious expense, of time, and money, which I had been put to, delay the
appointment of an auditor, to examine my accounts, and to ascertain the only
point in question, with regard to me; but I heard nothing on the subject, until
November 1781, when I received a resolve of Congress, informing me, that by the
appointment of a Consul, provision was made, for the settlement of my accounts;
but in a few days after, I met with Mr. Barclay the Consul, who to my extreme
surprise, and disappointment, assured me that he h^ no instructions on the
subject; and a few days after, I had the mortification, of learning, that my
letters of May, and June preceding, had beed intercepted, and published in
New York, and that the most unfavourable construction, had been put on them,
both in America, and in France.

This placed me in a situation, in which I believe, but few men, have ever been
so unfortunate, as to fall into.

Proscribed in my own country, and in France, and obnoxions to the government
of this country, I submitted to a tedious exile, in Flanders, where I remained,
until the treaty of peace, was concluded, but in the mean time, I transmitted
my accounts to Congress, and solicited a settlement, and the payment of the
balance due to me; I also sent duplicates of them to Dr. Franklin, and to Mr.
Barclay.

It is now more than eighteen months, since Congress have been in possession of
my accounts, it is more than five years, since I had either the money, or any
employment for the public entrusted to my management.

Is it possible that any fraud or embezzlement committed by me, should still
remain undetected? Had I been guilty of any, would not my enemies with all the
particulars of my accounts in their power, have pointed them out, and published
them instead of charging me generally with being a defaulter for unaccounted
millions? -- In March 1778, Doctor Frankling assured Congress that he had been
an eye witness of my conduct in France, while his colleague, and that I had
acted the part of an able, active, and fathful minister, and to his knowledge
had in various ways rendered great and important services to my county SIR,
Passy, near Paris, March 31, 177^.
MY colleague Mr. Deane being recalled by Congress, and no reasons given, that
have yet appeared here, it is apprehended to be the effect of some
misrepresentation from an enemy or two at Paris, and at Nantz. -- I have no
doubt, that he will be able clearly to justify himself, but having lived
intimately with him, now fifteen months, the greatest part of the time in the
same house, and been a constant witness of his public conduct; -- I cannot omit
giving this testimony, though unasked, in his behalf, that I esteem him, a
faithful, active, and able Minister, who to my knowledge, has done in various
ways* great and important services to his country, whose interests I wish may
always be by every one in her employ, as much, and as effectually promoted.

With my dutiful res^ects to the Congress, I have the honor to be, Sir, your
most obedient and very humble ^ervant, (Signed) BEN FRANKLIN.

Honorable Henry Laurens, President of Congress.


. In December 1782, almost sive years after, when from our difference in
political principles, he was no way prejudiced in my favor, and when, had I
been guilty of fraud or embezzlement, it was impossible but that it must have
come to his knowledge; he certified, that he had never known or suspected any
cause to charge me with any want of probity in any purchase or burgain
whatever, made by me for the use or account of the United States Certain
^aragraphs having lately appeared in the English news papers, importing that
Si^ as Deane, Esquire for merly Agent and Commissioner P^enspotentiary of the
Unite^ States of America, had sometime after his first arrival in France,
purchased in that kingdom for the use of his coun^rymen, 30,000 muske^s, and.
-- that he gave three livres for each of them being old condemned arms; that be
had them cleaned and vamped up which ost^nearth ^livres mord, and that for each
of these ^e ^arg'd, and received a L^ois D'or, and that he also committed (...)
in the purchase of other articles for the use of his country; and Mr. Deane
having re^resented, that the said paragraphs are likely to injure him in the
opinions of many persons, unacquainted with his conduct while in the (...)
service; I think i^ my duty, in compltance with his request, to ^erci^y and
de^lare, that the paragraphs in question according to my best knowledge and
^elief, are entirely false and that I have neves known (...) any cause to
charge the said Silas Deane with any want of probity, in any purchase, or
bargain whatever made by him, for the use or a^ount of the United States.

Given at Passy, the 18th of December, 1782, si^ned, B. Franklin, Minister
P^eni^otentiary from the United States of America, at the Court of France.



. -- To charge me with being a defaulter, and with having desra^ed my country,
of large sums of money, and at the same time, to evade an examination, and
settlement of my accounts, by which only the justice, or injustice, of the
charge, could be ascertained, is a conduct, which needs no comment, nor do I
fear to rest my cause on it, and on the testimony, and certificate, of Dr.
Franklin, but clear, and convincing as these proofs are, of my innocence, I
have a sufficiency of others, independent of the testimony or certificate of
any man, or of the conduct of any set of men, whether friendly or inimical to
me. -- In January 1776, I contracted with the Commercial Committee, of
Congress, to make a voyage to France, and to purchase for the public, goods to
the amount of forty thousand pounds sterling, -- they engaged to furnish me
with that sum in cash, or good bills, and to allow me a five per cent.
commission, on the purchase -- At the same time the secret Committee, appointed
me the Commercial, and Political Agent, for the United States in Europe, and
directed me to purchase for them, 100 pieces of brass cannon, and arms, and
clothing, for 25,000 men, and ammunition in proportion, and to procure ships,
in Europe, to transport the whole to America; on these purchases, they also
stipulated, to give me five per cent. commission, and to make me a reasonble,
and adequate allowance, for any political services, which I might render my
country in France. -- When we reflect on the situation of our affairs, at that
period, it must be acknowledged, that no man was ever charged, with a more
important Commission, and when the circumstances of my being ignorant of the
language, as well as of the manners, and politics of the country, in which I
was to execute it, without friend, or patron to advise, to countenance, or to
introduce me, and without that best of all patrons, and supporters, a fund
adequate to the purpose; when these are taken into consideration, it must also
be allowed, that no Commission of this nature was ever attended with more
difficulties and embarrassments.

I left Philadelphia in the month of March 1776, in a brigantine bound to
Bordeaux, and such was the situation of our affairs at that time, that she
sailed with ballast only, for the want of any thing, to make remittances with
in a cargo; -- an accident at sea, obliged her to return, and I re-embarked in
a sloop, bound to Bermuda, and the whole of the funds, put into my hands to
enable me to make the purchases, above mentioned, amounted to 2375 l. ste^ling
in bills of exchange, and an order, to receive the proceeds of a cargo, in the
sloop, consigned to Mr. Pucker, at Bermuda. -- The secret Committee, gave me a
bill of 600 l. sterling, toward my expenses, these were the only sums, with
which I set out, for France; at Bermuda I received of Mr. Tucker, the amount of
the sales of the cargo, consigned him, which he paid me in foreign coin, except
two bills of exchange amounting to L 187 19 7, on my arrival at Bordeaux, I put
the whole of my bills, into the hands of Mr. Delap, to whom I had letters.

The bills he sent on for acceptance and the foreign coin he disposed of, which
amounted to livres, 16285 11 5, equal to L 712 10 1 The bills received of the
Commercial Committee were paid 2375 0 0 The bill for 600 l. received of the
secret Committee was protested. The two bills received of Mr. Tucker for L 187
19 7 were protested, but afterward paid but they were of no immediate use. The
sloop which I chartered at Bermuda took in logwood for ballast, which sold for
live. 2441 6 9 in Bordeaux, equal to 101 16 7 Total amount of the effective
funds, in my hands, on my arrival in France in June 1776, and adding the two
bills of Mr. Tucker, afterward paid, L 3189 6 8 187 19 7 L 3377 6 3

Makes up the whole, on which I could depend, to execute, the immense orders,
given me on account of the public; out of this I had to pay, the port charges,
and other expenses of the sloop, in which I arrived, and to send her b^ck, with
a cargo. -- Messrs. Livingston, Lewis, Alsop, and Morris, made remittances to
Mr. Delap, partly in bills, and partly in effects of cargoes, and ordered him,
after making the disbursements, which they directed, on their own account, to
hold the balance for my orders, to be employed by me, in executing the
contract, in which they had engaged, jointly with me, for the goods, before
mentioned, to the amount of forty thousand pounds sterling, but they never
remitted any moneys, directly to me, nor did I receive one shilling through any
other channel, from America, on account of Congress, but from Mr. Delap,
excepting the sum of 13804 livres, of Monsieur Soulier, being part of a cargo,
shipped by Capt. Wicks, and of a credit, given the Commissioners on him by Mr.
Thomas Morris deceased.

I received of Mr. Delap at different times, 42176 12 11 I borrowed of Mr. D.
Beaumarchais as per his account, 22811 16 0 Received of Mr. Soulier on account
of my private expenses, 13804 0 0 Of Mr. Grand, Banker on account of ditto,
69253 7 6 Live. 148045 16 5

Having on my arrival in France deposited in the hands of Mr. Delap, the whole
of the effects brought out with me, and having never received any moneys on
account of Congress, from my engaging in their service to the present time, but
from the persons above mentioned; it is easy to ascertain if I received more
than the above sum on my private account, or for my immediate disbursements for
the public. I know of no question that can arise on this subject, except it be
on account of the overcharge made against me by Mr. Soulier, which I have
explained in my account, and letters before Congress, and referred to Mr. R.
Morris to justify my explanation.

Though the funds which I put into Mr. Delap's hands in June 1776, amounted to
livres, 73870,14,11. and he received some remittances from Messrs. Livingston,
Lewis, Alsop, and Morris, over what he paid out on their account; yet his
disbursements on account of Congress, and the sums which I drew on him for on
the same account: So far exceeded the whole, that in December he refused my
bills, and on the 31st wrote me as follows: Time only permits us to inform you,
that we have received a letter from A. Nesbitt, Esquire of London, returning us
protested, 1200 l. sterling; David White's bill of 20th of April, at 30 days
sight on Sergeant Chambers and Co. 1000 l. sterling; of Margaret Livingston's
of 28th May, at 30 days sight, on S. Baker, L.570 9 sterling; of Ringhold and
Hennesly, of the 8th of November 1775, on Sergeant Chambers and Co. so that the
last remittances made us by Messrs. Livingston, Lewis and Alsop, and by Messrs.
Willing and Morris, has been all prohibited except two small bills making
together 230 l. sterling. Messrs. Livingston, Lewis, and Alsop since remitted
us for your account, 800 l. sterling in D. Shinger's bill of the 20th of
August, at 30 days sight on Ford, Courtoys and Co. of Barcelona, which is
likewise returned to us protested. We are sorry for all these disappointments;
but in the present situation of affairs, we look on bills as no remittance, for
scarce one in ten of them is paid. The bills you forwarded us for acceptance
must be returned, or lie by until funds arrive, etc.

I will not take up the time of the public, by attempting to describe the
distressed situation in which I found myself at that period, -- The whole of my
scanty funds expended, and indebt to near ten thousand pounds sterling on
account of Congress, for which I had given bills in my private name, and which
were refused by the House on which I was directed to value myself, and through
whom remittances were to be made to me, nor the advantages at that time taken
of our embarrassments to force us into a contract with the Farmers General for
a quantity of tobacco, to be delivered to them in France at little more than
the one half of its then current price.

It is well known, that the Commissioners obtained one million of livres to be
advanced them by the Farmers General on these hard terms, and about the same
time two millions from the Court, to be paid quarterly in the course of the
year 1777. At some future time, I shall enter mutually on the history of our
situation at that period, and of the whole of the negotiation in France from my
arrival in 1776 to the signing of the treaties of Paris in 1778, and to my
recall. At present it is sufficient to observe, that the money then received
and promised, gave me as well as my colleagues a temporary relief -- that the
whole of it was paid into the hands of Mr. Grand, whose account now more than
five years since laid before Congress, will show to whom and to whose orders he
repaid it. But if I received of him, as appears from his account, the above sum
of livres 69253 7 6, and of the others in the whole, with that sum, livres
148045 16 5, only somewhat less than seven thousand pounds; what must or can be
said of those, who for four years since have been charging me in all your
public papers, with being a defaulter for unaccounted millions? They could not
have been ignorant of the state of the public account so far as I was
interested in them, they were on the files of Congress in America, and in the
bands of Doctor Franklin in France, open for the inspection of every one, whose
interest or curiosity might-excite them to an examination. But what were my
disbursements during this term of more than two years on account of the public,
and for my time and expenses? My account before Congress show that they
amounted to a much larger sum than that which I had received, including my time
and expenses to America, and during my attendance on Congress, and for my
return to France, they amounted to livres 258,164 9 2, or, livres 110,118 12 9
more than I had received, leaving me a creditor for that sum, equal to L.4817
18 7 sterling. Mr. Arthur Lee in a letter to Congress of the 1st of June 1778,
says, I find that the expense of living in character, cannot well be less than
three thousand pounds sterling a year; and adds, if left to themselves, I
conceive that most persons will e^ceed that sum, that is, livres 68571 per
annum. I was as Mr. Lee expresses it, left to myself; yet from my leaving
America in 1776, until my leaving Paris to return to it in 1778, I have not
charged but about eighty thousand livres for all my expenses of every kind; the
remainder of the live. 258,164 9 2 was for disbursements on account of Congress,
and for my time and subsequent expenses, the particulars of which are in my
account before Congress.

Mr. William Lee made one journey to Vienna on account of the public, and Mr.
Izard who was at Paris for the education of his children, received while there
a commission from Congress to the Court of Tuscany, but never went out of
Paris, or quitted his family on the business of the public. The former of these
gentlemen received seventy-two thousand livres, and the latter sixty thousand
for their private expenses; yet these men are among the loudest against me for
an extravagant waste of public money.

And permit me here my countrymen and fellow citizens, to request of you, that
you will examine for yourselves, or that if your distance from Philadelphia
will not permit you to do it, that you will demand of your Delega^s in
Congress, an account of all the moneys ever remitted to me by Congress, and of
all that ever I received on their account, -- by this you will be able to form
a judgment with sufficient precision, if I am a defaulter for millions or one
of the public creditors. But exclusive of the above balance due to me, after
accounting for all the moneys received by me, I am entitled to a commission of
five per cent on goods and military stores purchased by me, agreeable to orders
received from Congress to the amount of livres 4756,393 17, which makes the sum
of L.238,445 0 7, including expense of postage. These goods and military stores
I purchased previous to the arrival of my colleagues, in consequence of the
orders given me by the secret Committee of Congress, and on which I was
promised the same commission as was then given to other agents and purchasers,
which was uniformly five per cent; for the purchases made jointly with my
colleagues, I have not charged any thing, being then in a different capacity,
as joint Commissioner Plenipotentiary with them. Thus it appears that instead
of being a defaulter, I am a creditor of the public's, and to a large amount;
and of all the public creditors, perhaps no one has suffered so much in point
of interest, certainly no one so much in point of character.

But of this, I shall take notice on a future occasion. I need not take up any
more of your time at present on (...) subject of my accounts, they have long
^^nce been before Congress, and to them I appeal to justify the general state
which I have given of my money transactions for the public. I have shown, and
it will appear from them, that from my arrival in France in June 1776, to the
December following, when joined by Dr. Franklin and Mr. Lee, I had had no money
or next to none of the public's at any time in my hands; but on the contrary,
was at that time in advance for my employers, and that afterward until my
return to America, I did not receive a sum any way equal to my expenses and
disbursements; and from that period to the present I have not had any public
employ, or public money committed to my management. The second charge against
me, is, on account of my having in May and June 1781, wrote my opinion of our
public affairs to my friends in America, and advised peace and an accommodation
with Great Britain. I confess that the letters published by Rivington in
New York, a^ mine, do not materially differ from those which I actually wrote
at that time, and which unfortunately for me were intercepted by the enemy, and
that they contain the undisguised sentiments of my heart at that time, on the
then apparent situation of our affairs; but I never yet heard of its being
deemed a crime in a free state, for its citizens to give their opinion and
advice on public affairs and measures. To suppose me to have been in the
interest of the Ministers of this country, and to have wrote those letters to
promote their views, is as absurd as to suppose, that I amassed an immense
fortune in the service of my country; yet although my well known circumstances
and connections at that period, and previous to it, as well as since,
demonstrate the absurdity and falsehood of such a supposition; yet both the one
and the other have been not only supposed, but positively asserted by certain
writers in America, who stick at nothing however extravagant.

I can hardly imagine, notwithstanding the late and present prosperous state of
our affairs, that any one can have forgot the situation in which they were in
1781, when I wrote those letters, and previous to the surrender of Lord
Cornwallis and his army at York. In May and in June 1781, the British forces
were in the possession of the whole of our sea coast, from the Cheesapeak
southward, and while they ravaged and distressed the inter^or country, their
ships of war and cruisers intercepted almost the whole of our trade and of our
supplies; we had no naval force to oppose to theirs, nor any probability at
that time of our ally sending to our assistance, a naval force superior to that
of the enemy. The army under General Washington was too weak of itself for any
offensive operations, and Congress had neither money or credit sufficient to
put it on a more respectable footing. General Washington did no^ scruple at
that period to declare, That without a decidedly superior fleet to that of
Great Britain in America, all opposition to the British force in America would
soon be at an end. All the letters from America were in the same style; many
circumstances, as the time, my own observations and the information I was the
in the way of, led me to conclude, that there was not the least probability of
there being a French fleet on our coast that campaign superior to the British.
Accidents and circumstances unforeseen at that time, and those extremely
improbable ones, joined to a neglect or breach of orders on the part of the
British, gave the French sleet that superiority, which alone decided the fate
of Lord Cornwallis and of his army at York; had not this event happened, of
which when I wrote there was not the most distant probability, the war must
have terminated against us in that campaign. In this I was supported by the
unanimous opinion of the best judges on the subject then in America, -- was it
a crime in me to write from Europe to America, in the same style in which our
Generals and leading men wrote to their friends in Europe? My letters have been
published, their's have not; this is the sole difference, except the cruel
circumstance of mine having been published by the enemy, at a time when our
danger was over, and when the publication could serve no other purpose, but to
ruin me in the opinion of my countrymen. At the time of my writing, every thing
conspired to convince me, that France had only her own interest and that of
Spain in view, in the war, and that however, it might terminate, she would be
very far from consulting our interest, in the peace, persuaded of this, I wrote
it, to be my opinion, and for this I have been deemed an enemy, and traitor to
France, as well as to the United States.

But have not events in part justified this opinion of mine? You best know, by
what intrigues, the French Court prevailed with Congress, to order our
Commissioners, not to sign any treaty with Great Britain, without the
knowledge, and consent of the Court of Versailles, and thus to put our future
peace, liberty, and safery absolutely into their power -- nor can you I presume
be ignorant, that the Court of France, having thus bound us, began to take off
the mask, and to take measures with, and to propose terms to the other powers,
for excluding us, from the fisheries, and for supporting the extravagant claims
of Spain to East-Louisiania, and that our Commissioners, alarmed at this,
wisely ventured to break the orders, sent them from Congress, and to sign the
preliminary articles, without either the knowledge, or the consent, of the
Ministers at Versailles. -- Are not these well known facts, abundantly
sufficient to justify me, for having in 1781, entertained suspicions, of the
sincerity of France, in her professions of disinterested friendship to the
United States? -- By our treaty with Great Britain, we are entitled to a right
in her share of the Newfoundland, and Nova Scotia fisheries, but has not France
wholly excluded us, from any in hers? -- Does not France, at this time,
encourage, and support Spain, in her claims to the richest, and most extensive,
part of the territory, allowed by Great Britain, in the late treaty, to belong
to us? These attempts are not marks of friendship, but are the most unequivocal
characteristics, of that insidious, interested policy, which I pointed out in
my letters, and warned my friends to be on their gaurd against. -- In my letter
to Mr. Morris, I gave him my opinion, with respect to the suture state of our
commerce, under independent sovereignty, and the grounds, on which I was led to
form it, and I shall be happy, if experience (which alone can decide in such
cases) proves that my opinion, and reasoning on that subject, were erroneous
and ill founded. -- Apprehensive at the time, and distressed by the thought,
that we must either fail in the contest, and in such case, submit to the laws
of our conquerors, rendered imperious, and severe from their success, or that
if successful ourselves, that in the situation, in which our country must be,
on the peace, burdened with heavy taxes, on account of the public debts,
contracted by the war, and still heavier, for the future support of independent
sovereignty, and at the same time, exposed, to the evils arising from internal
factions, and divisions, and from our jarring, and incomparible interests; that
our democratic governments, which we had established in Congress, and in our
several States, would not be found to have sufficient energy, and coercion, to
establish, and maintain such a degree, of order and of due subordination, as
must ever be indispensibly necessary, in all governments, to prevent anarchy,
and confusion; and that in such a situation, independent sovereignty, instead
of proving a blessing, must become the heaviest (...) fortune, which could
befall us; -- strongly impressed by this opinion, I judged it to be my duty, to
urge, and press my countrymen, by every argument, in my power, to improve that
important crisis, and by an accommodation, and reunion with Great Britain, on
equal, safe, and honorable terms, to secure our future peace, liberty and
safety, both internal and external; I then thought that are-union, not simply
on the condition of being replaced, in the state, in which we were previous to
1763 (for which alone Congress in 1774, and afterward in 1775 petitioned) but
on conditions, and terms, every way peferable, to those of being governed
solely by laws, of our own enacting, of being taxed only by our Assemblies, and
of enjoying the same commercial privileges, and protection, as other subjects
of the British empire are, or may be entitled to; I say, that it was then my
opinion, that an accommodation, and reunion on those terms, was to be
preferred, to a continuation of the war, to running the risque of its uncertain
issue, and to hazarding the dangerous experiment, of independent sovereignty.
This opinion of mine, has been deemed a crime in me, little short of that of
high treason. -- But it ought to be remembered, that this was my opinion, and
that I communicated it, to my friends, at a time, when our prospects, were
gloomy and discouraging. -- But we now enjoy independent sovereignty and peace,
on the most favorable and honorable terms, and have obtained every thing,
which we either hoped for, or demanded, and happy indeed should I be, were I
certain, that none of the evils, which I apprehended in 1781, were cither felt,
or feared by my countrymen, at this time, in such case, I should be contented
to be ridiculed or even pitied, for my weak, and gloomy forebodings in 1781. --
But General Washington in his circular letter says, that It is a question yet
to be decided, whether the revolution, must ultimately be considered, as a
blessing, or a curse. -- A blessing or a curse, not to the present age alone,
for with our fate, will the destiny of unborn millions, be involved. -- I ask,
that these expressions, of the General, after the great object of independent
sovereignty, has been obtained, and ratified, and confirmed to us, by treaties,
may be compared, with the expressions, in my letters of 1781, on the same
subject, and that my countrymen, will then say, if it was a criminal desertion,
of the cause of my country, or if it was an unpardonable weakness, and
despondency of mind, in me, at that time, to make a question of that which now,
when success and peace have secured our independent sovereignty, is by Genesis
Washington declared to be still a question undecided and doubtful, and that not
only so as to the present day, but to future ages. If indeed, the small degree
of order, of restraint and of subordination, which has for the last seven years
prevailed (...) our country, be now thrown off, and the legislative and
executive power once more return in effect, into the hands of Committees and
Conventions; if in place of that subordination to law and government, of those
decent, frugal, and ^tuous manners and habits, of that ease, and even affluence
in which our fellow-citizens, formerly lived, in peace, and safety, in a word,
if instead of those manners, principles, and circumstances, which once marked
our character, the reverse, should in future take place, and prevail, under a
government too weak to prevent, or remedy the evils; there cannot then remain a
question, on the subject; but suc^narchy, and confusion, must ensue, as to
render our independance, a curse, and the present, and future age, in America,
as unhappy, as any ages, to be met with, in the history of civilized nations,
have ever been.

The great end of civil society, is to secure to men, united in it, the great
blessings of peace, of liberty, and safety, both in their persons, and in their
property, and in de^iding what form of government, most effectually answer
this great, and beneficent purpose, experience, not theory, must direct us.

This is not a subject, for recluse Philosophers, or subtle Metaphysicians, to
decide on, in their closets. -- And whenever they have been refer^ed to, they
have given the preference, to Utopian, or ideal and imaginary systems of their
own, before those plain and simple on^^, which experience has shown, to be
practicable and safe. -- But without looking abroad, to profit, by the
experience of other nations, our own must now, with the utmost precision and
^^rtainty determine, this great question, as yet undecided, and bring
conviction home to every one, -- either that our present system of government,
is preferable, to that under which we and our ancestors, for more than one
century and an half were free, safe and happy; or that it is not. -- Our
situation previous to the late revolution, must be stil^ ^sh in our memories,
and our present, cannot long be disguised, or misunderstood, by us; from our
senses, from wh^^ we see and feel, we must judge with certainty of it, and by
comparing the present, with the past, this important question, must ultimately
be decided. -- If happily for us, it be in favor of the present, no man will
more sincerely rejoice, ^an what I shall, on the occasion; but if on a
comparison, of our present, with our past situation, the revolution should, be
found to be a curse, instead of a blessing, then indeed I shall be one of the
most unhappy of men, and the sole consolation, which will be left me, will be,
the almost only one, which I now enjoy, a consciousness of my integrity, in the
service of my country, and of the purity and rectitude of my intentions, in the
opinion and advice, which in 1781, I gave in my letters to my friends, in
America. -- Having shown that instead of being a defaulter, I am a creditor, of
the public's, to a considerable amount, and impartially stated, the contents,
and object of my letters, of 1781 -- I shall take my leave for the present, and
submit the whole, to your candid consideration, -- and whatever my fate may be,
if to be restored to your good opinion, and confidence, and to the bosom of my
friends, and country, or to remain far exiled from them, the first and most
ardent wish of my soul, will ever be, that my country's happiness may be
perpetual, in the full enjoyment of peace, li^erty and happiness.

I am with great sincerity and respect Your friend and fellow-citizen SILAS
DEANE.
London, August 10, 1783. P. S. I have avoided entering on the subject, of the
numerous calumnies, which have been propagated against me, by anonymous
writers, it would have been endless, and quite unnecessary, since every thing,
which has either been said, or sugges^ed against me, may be reduced to two
questions only:

First if I acted fai^hfully, and was an honest steward, of the public money,
while in the service of my country, and secondly, if the contents of my
letters, of May and June 1781, were of such a nature, as to merit the harsh
censures, passed on me, in America on their account; -- in France I can expect
no other, than to be condemned, it is what every one must expect to be, who
calls in question, the disinterestedness of the motives of France, in the late
war, or who attempts to prevent our country, from becoming virtually dependant
on that power; -- As to the reports, circulated here, and which may probably
reach America, of my being at the levees of the Ministers, and in frequent
conference, with them, and that I have acted, an unfriendly part respecting our
commerce, and the like, I can with the greatest truth, and sincerity declare,
that there is not the least foundation for them, I have not so much as seen,
any of the Ministers, since my arrival in this country, nor have I ever had the
least connection, or correspondence with any, either of the present, or late
Ministers of this country. -- And as to our commerce, I gave my opinion in
1781, in my letter to Mr. Morris, as to the restrictions, which I thought it
would fall under, on a peace; if any part of what I then apprehended, has been
realized, I am not to blame; I most heartily wish, that no part of it may ever
be so, but that experience may show me, to have been in an error, in what I
wrote on that subject.



APPENDIX.
MY address of the 10th of August has lain by me, to this time, although when I
wrote that, my intention was, as I inti^ated, to follow it, with a second, yet
I did not purpose to do it, so soon, but have been advised by some gentlemen,
lately from America, to take notice of certain report^, circulated in the
United States, and in this country, respecting me: they tell me that it has
been affirmed, and generally believed, in America, that I am rich, and in the
most affluent circumstances, from money made in the service of my country; that
I received a pension, to a large amo^nt, from this government; that I was
intimate with General Arnold, and that I had done every thing, in my power,
since my being in England, in prejudice of our commerce, and in particular,
that I had assisted, in the writing of a ^amphlet, entitled, Observations on
the American Commerce, published by Lord Sheffield. -- Now in any other
circumstances, than those of the present, I need do nothing more, than to
declare, that those reports are totally false and groundless, and call on the
authors to produce their evidence, if they have any in support of them; but it
seems that there are cases, in which a man must be put to prove simple
negatives; every news paper report, tending to calumniate one, already
unpopular, become of equal authenticity with proofs from holy wri^. -- I have
shown, that I expended and disbursed more money, on account of Cougress, than
ever I received from them, most certainly this is not the way, to grow rich, in
an employ, but I might have found means, by secret understanding, with the
agents and contractors for the stores sent out to America, to have ac^uired a
fortune, to myself, true, but the accounts of those agents and contractors,
have, one only of them excepted, been examined and passed by Congress, or their
auditors. -- The only person, who has not had his accounts passed by Congress,
has received their unanimous thanks, for his services rendered them, in the
supplies sent out by him; the presumption from this, at least is, that Congress
could have no doubt of the integrity and fairness, with which (...) conducted
that affair. -- Whence then could I have accumulated a fortune, in the service
of my country? It is true, that had Congress paid me, the balance honestly due
me, I should have been at ease in my circumstances, for by that means, I should
have received, some compensation, for the heavy losses, which I suffered by the
depreciation, but this they have not done; -- while in the service of Congress,
I engaged in two commercial adventures, I was ordered by the secret Committee,
to assume, and act the part of a merchant. -- But in both of those, I was
unfortunate, in one a total loss, by capture; in the other a failure of the
man, to whom I had given the direction of it, left me a great looser by it. --
It is delicate and even cruel, for a man, who has been in trade and means, if
possible, to return into that line, to expose his private circumstances, in
point of fortune, otherways I could give the most convincing proof, that of the
moderate fortune, of which I was possessed in 1774, I am not at this time,
master of the one half. -- I have not at any time been extravagant, when all
the funds of Congress in Europe, were open to me, my accounts will show, that I
lived but in a moderate style. -- I was not in a dissipated, or extravagant
line of life, while in Philadelphia, waiting the decision, or orders of
Congress; on my return to France, I was obliged to borrow money of Dr.
Franklin, and of other friends there, for my support; are these marks, or
evidence, of my having made a fortune, in the service of the public? Do they
not prove the contrary? But my acquiting myself of one charge, may give some
weight, some probability to the other, since if thus reduced, and obliged to
borrow for my private expenses, at that time, I might the more easily, have
been tempted, to accept of a pension from this government. -- But Ministers,
though attentive to their own interest and that of their friends, and liberal
of the public moneys, on certain occasions, never have such an overflow of it,
as to give it away at hazard, or to those, who cannot render them or their
cause, some immediate service. -- If every man is to be bought, at a certain
price, the purchaser will also estimate, the value of the man, he deals for,
and not throw away his money, in the purchase of one, who can be of no kind of
use to him; Of what use in 1781, could I have been of, to the British, or to
any other Minister? I had no public trust or state secrets which I could
betray, had I been so disposed. -- My popularity and influence, in the United
States, had been destroyed, by the calumnies, published against me, in
Philadelphia, and by the neglect and ingratitude of Congress, I most certainly
could offer nothing to the Minister, and he could expect nothing from me, there
did not exist, any foundation, for a contract between us, if my necessities at
that time, might have urged me, to seek for relief, from any quarter, or by any
means, still the Minister, to whom I must have applied, would not have parted
with the public money, solicited and scrambled for, by so many of his friends
and supporters, to one, who had been declaredly and openly his enemy, without
some prospect, without even a certainty of an equivalent -- I had none to
offer, none to propose -- what circumstance, what action of mine, from my
return to France in 1780, to this hour tends to support this charge, of my
being in the pay of this government? I never corresponded with any one of the
Ministers, or their agents, if they really had any in France. -- The Honorable
Mr. Walpole with whom I contracted, a very intimate acquaintance, soon after my
return to Paris, had ever been in the opposition in Parliament, yet in the
Philadelphia papers, I see him mentioned, as being the agent, who engaged me in
the service of the British Ministers. -- But to render this charge even
probable, it ought first to be shown, at least, that after my return to France,
I had it in my power to be of some service to this government, and that I
actually performed, or attempted to perform some service to it, but neither of
these, can be shown, or any thing tending that way.

My letters of 1781, contained no sentiments which I attempted to co^nceal in
my conversation with my countryme^ in France; a convincing proof, that however
erroniously I might think and reason at that time, yet that I was sincere, and
spoke and wrote without disguise or sinister view. My letters contained my
private opinion, at that time, had not every ci^izen of the United States a
right ^o give hi^ o^ on what so nearly interested him, on the best o^ wh^
appeared to him the best measures for securing the (...) and safety of his
country? If he has not that right, he is no longer a free citizen, but the
slave of arbitrary power, and it matters nothing to him whether this power, by
which he is thus enslaved, be lodged in the hands of many tyrants or of one,
except that it is generally better to have but one master than many. Of what
service could my declaring of my sentiments at that time be to the British
Ministers? I had lost my popularity and influence with my countrymen, and my
opinion and arguments were not likely to be attended to, or to have that weight
which they might otherwise have been entitled to. But the publication of my
letters in New York, is a strong proof that I was far from being regarded as a
friend, or as engaged in the British interest by their Ministers or by their
officers. Had not the Count de Grass unexpectedly arrived on our coast with a
superior fleet, Lord Cornwallis and his army, instead of surrendering
themselves prisoners of war, would have been victorious, and but for that, and
other circumstances unforeseen and extremely improbable at the time I wrote,
the campaign of 1781 must have terminated decisively against us; this was not
simply my opinion, it was the opinion of our ablest and most experienced
Generals. In this situation had my letters been published, their contents might
have had some weight with my countrymen, but to publish them immediately after
events had contradicted my predictions, served no purpose but to expose me to
ridicule and abuse. Had I been in the service and pay of this government, would
its Ministers have taken this effectual measure to destroy my influence with my
countrymen, and thereby render it impossible for me to be of any future service
to them? Nothing can be more extravagantly absurd than the supposition. But if
I was in the service of thi^ government, why, after the publication of my
letters had drawn on me the resentment of my countrymen, and the epithets of a
deserter and betrayer of the interests of my country, did I not venture over to
this country, (...) give the Ministers all the information and advice in my
power? My countrymen in France and Holland at the time, ^ho were the most
zealous for independence, and the most severe against Great Britain and every
thing in it, made no scruple of going over to London on their private affairs,
while I remained in Flanders in so obscure a situation, as to render it
impossible for me to be eitheir of service or prejudice to any one; and during
eighteen months, neither wrote a single letter to any one in Great Britain, or
received any from thence, except on account of a few books and other trifling
articles which I could not procure elsewhere. If from my arrival in France in
1780, to the signing of the preliminary articles, I had any other
correspondence in this country, let it be made to appear, I boldly challenge my
accusers to produce the least proof of any; full two months since, it was
published in the newspapers of this city, that I had been at Court, and was
presented to his Majesty, had an audience of the Duke of Portland, dined with
Mr. Fox, etc. etc. while to this hour I have not even seen his Majesty, or any
one of the royal family, except the Prince of Wales at a distance and on
horseback, nor have I any greater knowledge of any of the other great
personages, with whom it has been assirmed that I am on such terms of intimacy.
If it were not so, I could have no interest, no motive to deny or to conceal it.

But the truth is, that the style of life which my circumstances have obliged
me to take up, has prevented my forming a numerous acquaintance, either at
court or in the city, the former I have never so much as entered, and most
probable never shall. Soon after my arrival in London, Genesis Arnold called twice
on me at my lodgings, and was shown into my chamber without being announced, be
appeared not to reflect in how different a situation he now was, from that in
which he formerly stood, when we were in the habits of the most intimate
friendship; I therefore very freely put him in mind of it, and he discontinued
his visits, and I have not seen or spoke to him for more than five months past.

I my letters of the 10th of June 1781, to Mr. R. Morris, published in New York
by Rivington, I gave my opinion what the state of our commerce would be on a
peace, and on the confirmation of our independent sovereignty, and I gave at
large the reasons on which I had formerd that opinion, by an unfortunate
accident; the contents of that letter have been made public, and to them I
refer; hitherto I have seen nothing to contradict the sentiments I then
entertained on this subject, but many things to confirm me in them, though I
most sincerely wish that experience, the infallible test of truth in such
subjects, may finally prove them erroneous, and my arguments and conclusions to
have been ill founded. -- But neither for sometime before, or since my being in
this country, has it been in my power, had I been disposed, to do any thing to
the prejudice of our commerce, and I can with great sincerity declare, that
interest, as well as a disposition independent of interested motives, will ever
lead me to improve every opportunity, to do what little may be in my power, to
promote the commerce of my country, on the success of which, its future
happiness and prosperity, so greatly depend.

If present or future events justify my apprehensions in my letter to Mr.
Morris, am I to blame? Those events do not, and cannot depend on me; -- what
grounds have we to expect more from Great Britain, than what other aliens and
foreigners are entitled to? Or than what we are indulged with, by other
nations, in their West India possessions?

All the Spanish and Portugueze American ports, are shut against us, and
against all the world, the Dutch ports of St. Eustatius and Curacoa, which
islands produce nothing, are open without reserve to us, but Surinam and
Demarara, productive colonies, have never been but partially open, nothing
which could be sent to them from Europe, to any advantage, was allowed to be
received from us, nor any thing which Holland had a demand for in Europe, to be
taken by us, it has ever been much the same, in the French islands, and we are
not by the treaty, entitled to any thing more in future; the protection and
government of the West India possessions, cost the European powers large sums,
will they be at this expense, and give other nations, the trade of them?

This nation was the first in Europe which saw its own interest, with respect
to commerce, in a true light, and by the navagation act, came to a resolution,
to reserve the most certain all the profits of trade, that of the carrying
business, to its own subjects. -- That act was the corner stone, on which the
British commerce and matine rose, and on which it still rests. -- Can it be
expected, that this government should at this time repeal, or violate that act?
Or that it should be dispensed with, in our favor? They who expect this, look
for what I am convinced will never happen; ever since the existence of the
navagation act, all the maritime nations, in Europe, have been adopting
measures, in some degree similar, and now when commerce has become the first
object, with all of them, and is so well understood, they must necessarily
pursue the same system.

The armed neutrality was a mere temporary expedient, France furnished her
islands with provisions by it, but she lost the commerce of them, for the time,
she supplied herself, with timber, and naval stores, and manned her sleets by
it, but she laid the ax to the root of her navigation and commerce, so long as
it existed, and she was so sensible of this, that on the day of signing the
preliminaries for peace with Great Britain, she gave orders to exclude all
foreigners from her West Indies; and the Dutch who expected to gain, lost the
most by the armed neutrality; the consequences of it, and the war, into which
their republic was drawn by it, will be long and sensibly selt by their
commerce, perhaps never recovered.

The great object, with Lord Sheffield, is to urge this government, to
persevere in a system, which for more than a century past, the nation has never
deviated from, and which all the maritime, and commercial nations in Europe,
are now coming into. -- Can any one complain of his Lordship, on this account?
Or suppose that the British government, would not have done this, without
foreign advice? Without information and counsel given by me? It is too
ridiculous to merit any serious observations, or comment on, yet insinuations
and reports of this kind, once spread have a most surprising, and lasting
impression on the minds of honest, and unsuspecting people, who judging of
others by themselves, cannot suspect that any one, can be base and wicked
enough, to take up his pen, merely with the view of imposing on them.

S. DEANE.
London, October 12, 1783.

