THE CASE OF The INHABITANTS OF EAST-FLORIDA.

WITH An APPENDIX, CONTAINING PAPERS, BY WHICH ALL THE FACTS STATED IN THE
CASE, ARE SUPPORTED.

St. AUGUSTINE, EAST-FLORIDA: PRINTED BY JOHN WELLS.

MDCCLXXXIV.

TO THE READER.
THE following pages contain some facts, thrown together by a few gentlemen,
refiding in St. Augustine, and was originally intended for a news-paper. It
however being afterward suggested, that by adding the proclamations,
addresses, and other authentic papers, herewith printed, by way of appendix,
it might serve to inform our fellow subjects in Great Britain more fully, with
the conduct of the inhabitants of East-Florida during the war. It makes its
appearance as a pamphlet, flating their case, and assigning some reasons,
founded, it is humbly conceived, on the principles of the constitution and
natural justice, why they should be compensated by the nation, for the losses
they must sustain, by the cession of the province to the crown of Spain. Should
it answer no other purpose, it will at least serve to show, that the
inhabitants of East-Florida continued unmoved in their fidelity and attachment
to their parent country, at a time of general revolt; that the strongest cement
of civil society, that of their allegiance to their natural prince, was at no
period or moment lost sight of or disregarded by them; and that the same
sentiments and principles influenced their conduct, throughout all the
vicissitudes of the war. It may also tend to awaken in some part of the nation,
the emotions of sympathy and regard for men, whose loyalty could not be shaken
in the day of trial; and who must now apply to the justice of the nation, to
receive compensation for the property they are obliged to forego by the peace.

Although they are sensible, their remarks are none of them new; yet if they
have been so happy as to arrange with precision, such arguments and doctrines
as are furnished by our constitution, and should this little piece any wise
tend to elucidate or place in a clear point of view, the claims of the
inhabitants to compensation, which they conceive to be just, the principal
object the compilers had in view, will be attained.

THE CASE OF THE INHABITANTS OF E. FLORIDA.
BY the Treaty of Peace, concluded at Paris in 1763, East-Florida being ceded
and secured to the Crown and Empire of Great Britain, his present Majesty was
graciously pleased to issue his Royal Proclamation, notifying the great
benefits and advantages, that his Subjects would derive to themselves, by
settling there; holding out considerable encouragement, and giving every
assurance of protection for their liberties and properties; and, that they
should, to the fullest extent, enjoy all the invaluable privileges of British
Subjects. A Civil Government was established, and many persons from
Great Britain, and other parts of his Majesty's dominions, resorted thither;
obtained grants of lands, agreeable to certain terms prescribed by Government,
which they settled and improved, and on which they beflowed great labor and
expense. Others residing in Great Britain, obtained letters patent for lands,
which they also caused to be settled; and in various kind of improvement, laid
out large sums of money, in hopes of future gain and permanency, founded on the
assurances of Government.

The Colony began to flourish, and the Inhabitants to reap the fruits of their
industry, when, in the year 1775, the spirit of revolt manifested itself in
North America. East-Florida, however, continued unshaken in her loyalty, though
strongly solicited to join in the confederation; and in the year 1776, when a
storm appeared to be gathering in Georgia, which threatened Florida, the
Inhabitants, at the instance of the Governor, signified by proclamation, met,
chose, officers, embodied themselves, and cheerfully prepared to make a
defense. And in 1777, his Excellency found himself supported by a body of
Volunteers, consisting of about two hundred men, pretty well trained, armed and
clothed at their own expense; who, when occasion required, and at particular
periods, were continued on constant duty, occupied posts as far as Picolata;
and, in short, were ready to devote their lives to the service of their
Sovereign, without pay or reward.

In the latter end of the year 1775, his Excellency issued proclamations,
inviting all such loyal Americans as wished to quit the revolted colonies, on
account of their principles, and attachment to the Royal Cause, to resort to
Florida; and gave the most solemn assurances, on the part of Great Britain,
that they should meet a (...) and comfortable asylum; and that every (...) and
assistance, and great advantages, would be ^^^orded them: In consequence of
which, families and individuals resorted to St. Augustine, and expended the
wreck of their fortunes in purchases and improvements. Many unfortunate
Loyalists were also banished to Florida, at the evacuations of Savannah and
Charlestown; who also settled, erected buildings, and made purchases, previous
to the publication of the preliminary articles of Peace.

In the year 1781, when a Legislature was formed, both Houses, in the first
moments of their existence, avowed in the fullest manner, in addresses to the
Governor, their principles of loyalty; and acknowledged the supreme,
uncontrollable authority of Parliament over the Colony. And they also, by act
of Assembly, granted a perpetual revenue to the Crown, of two and an half per
cent. on certain articles imported. They also, amongst other acts to strengthen
the hands of Government, passed a law, empowering the Governor to call forth
their Negroes, for the purpose of erecting and repairing public works and
fortifications, for the defense of the Colony: And his Excellency did, on more
occasions than one, exercise the authorities so vested in him. They also
repeatedly expressed, in addresses and resolves, their attachment, zeal, and
affection for his Majesty's sacred person, and the happy constitution of
government, under which they lived; and tendered life, fortune, and every
thin^, that was dear, in support of their declaration.

Previous to the calling of an Assembly, as a Militia, they repelled the enemy,
when inroa^s were attempted; and at one time, when a regular siege was planned
in Georgia, and all America was invited to share in the spoils of EastFlorida,
the then Rebels having advanced across St. Mary's river, were beat back, and
frustrated in their designs, chiefly by the spirited exertions of the Militia
embodied by Governor Tonyn, for the defense of East-Florida, and paid by
Government, under the conduct and command of that active and enterprising
officer Lieutenant Colonel Brown. At another period, when it became necessary
for his Majesty's service, and the defense of the Province, to encamp the
Regular Troops, which was done by Lieutenant Colonel Glazier, the Inhabitants,
as a Militia, without pay, rations, or arms, from Government, cheerfully
mounted the guards, patroled, and did all the town duty; as indeed they did on
other occasions, when deemed necessary.

In short, the Inhabitants did, at all times, with their purses and personal
services, exert their utmost to support the honor, dignity, and sovereignty of
their King and Parent Country, in their rightful possession. And it is
asserted, that no one instance can be produced, wherein they were wanting in
their duty as Subjects, or wherein they did not, with alacrity, cheerfulness,
and, it may be added, with the warmest zeal, support the cause of Government.
With the aid of his Majesty's Troops, they have, under Divine Providence,
weathered every storm incident to War; and at the expiration of a sever; years
struggle, Peace has taken place, and the Colony is ceded and guarantied to the
Crown of Spain; to be delivered up to such Commissary or Commissaries, as shall
be empowered by his Most Catholic Majesty to receive it: And the Inhabitants
may withdraw with their moveable effects, and are at liberty to fell their real
estates, if they can, to his Catholic Majesty's subjects. They, in
consequence, are now preparing to depart, in quest of new settlements, in some
other part of their Sovereign's dominions.

From the foregoing State of the Case, the following Questions naturally arise.

Have the Inhabitants of East-Florida discharged faithfully, all the duties of
liege Subjects? If it should be found they have, it is then asked, What return
is the Subject to receive, for a faithful discharge of his allegiance? Can the
Subject be divested of his property, under the British Constitution, by the
King, or by the Legislature, or by any man or set of men, without receiving a
recom^^n^ or equivalent for it? Will the Inhabitants of this Province be
divested of their property, by the terms of Peace? If they will, are they then
to have no compensation for their losses? Is this to be the reward of their
past services and ze^d?

In order to know, whether the Inhabitants of East-Florida have faithfully
discharged all the duties of liege Subjects, it will be necessary to enquire
what those duties are.

Allegiance is certainly that tie, which binds the Subject to his Sovereign, to
support, protect, and defend him, in his possessions and just rights, against
all his enemies; and is applicable, not only to his Royal Political Capacity,
but to his Natural Person is due, without any oath of allegiance taken; and
ought to be so strong and rooted, as to induce us, when necessary, to hazard
life, fortune, and all that is dear, in defense of our liege Sovereign; we say,
in his possessions and just rights: And, therefore, it becomes equally
obligatory on us, to submit to the Peace, as it was to defend and support our
Sovereign in his possessions, during the War.

The King, by our Constitution, is vested with the Prerogative of making Peace
and War; and being so vested, he may, to attain the ends of Peace, dismember
this Province from the Empire; and a Treaty concluded by him with a foreign
Crown, must irrevocably bind the Nation.

This enquiry being made, we can now answer, that the Inhabitants of
East-Florida have faithfully discharged their duty as Subjects: For, during the
whole course of the War, they, with their lives and fortunes, used their best
exertions in the cause of their Sovereign; and they are now in the act of
withdrawing from the Province, and of relinquishing their plantations, their
comfortable houses, and real property, in consequence of the Peace, and have
paid every obedience thereto.

The next Question then naturally arises, What return is the Subject to
receive, for a faithful discharge of his allegiance? We answer, Protection in
his possessions, and in all his just immunities and privileges.

Protection and allegiance are reciprocal duties. The thing itself is founded
in reason, and the nature of government. A fundamental principle in the Feudal
Law was, that a mutual trust subsisted between the Lord and the Vassal, viz.
that the Lord should give full protection to the Vassal, in his territorial
property; and the Vassal was to defend and support his Lord, to the utmost of
his power, against all his enemies. All lands held by British Subjects, are
derived, mediately or immediately, from the Crown; and the oath of allegiance,
(before it was curtailed at the Revolution,) ran nearly in the same words as
the Vassal's oath of fealty. They are both derived from the same feudal source;
and the King is called our liege Lord and Sovereign.

The Subject is not only to be protected in his possessions, but also in his
just immunities and privileges; and, as a natural born Subject cannot be
discharged from his allegiance, or put it off, or cancel, or alter it, by any
act of his own, by change of time, place, or circumstances (...) words are
strong: They have been adopted, however, by very (...) ^as ancient, writers on
the subject; and it is conceived, (...) that would be an exception to this
general rule, must be attended with circumstances of the most inevitable
necessity. Such cases (...) occur, no doubt; but they must be (...) with a
degree of (...), that cannot be too closely guarded; as they tend to (...) the
strongest ties of (...).
, without the concurrent act of his Sovereign; so, he has a great variety of
rights and privileges, acquired by being born within the King's allegiance,
which he cannot forfeit by any distance of time or place, but only by some act
of misconduct, or misbehaviour of his own.

Having premised thus much, it will be necessary here to enquire, Can the
Subject be divested of his property, agreeable to the British Constitution, by
the Crown or Legislature, without receiving an equivalent for it? We answer, He
cannot.

No Freeman shall be taken or imprisoned, or be disseized of his freehold, or
liberties, or free customs, or be outlawed, or exiled, or any otherwise
destroyed, but by lawful judgment of his peers, or by the law of the land.
These are the words of Magna Charta. My Lord Coke commenting upon these words,
says, "hereby is intended, that lands, tenements, goods and chattels, shall not
be seized into the King's hand; nor any man shall be (...) of his lands or
tenements, or dispossessed of his goods and chattels, contrary to this Great
Charter, or the law of the land.

No doubt, an individual, or a body composing part of the community, may, by
act of Parliament, that is, the law of the land, be deprived of property, for
the good of the whole; but the individual or body so deprived, must be
compensated: And it is every day's practice to compel an individual to part
with property, by act of Parliement, for public use, for a road, or the like;
but he must be paid for it. The Public, in these instances, is like an
individual treating with an individual, for his property; and so great is the
regard of the Constitution for private property, that it will not admit of the
least violation of it. "The public good is in nothing so essentially
interested, says Sir William Blackstone, "as in the protection of every
individual's private rights, as modelled by the municipal law.

It is part of the law of the land, founded on the principle of necessity, that
a Subject, in time of War, may be deprived of his effects, for public use; or
his house may be burnt or destroyed, to prevent the enemy from occupying it:
But he must be paid, out of the public treasury, for his loss. So in a storm,
goods may be thrown overboard, to preserve the ship; but the loss must be
proportionably borne by all the shippers. So, it is conceived, that in our
case. his Majesty, (as has been already said,) may, for the good of the Nation,
by a Peace, lawfully yield up this Province, and dismember it from the Empire.
But if, in so doing, private property is sacrificed, individuals owning that
property, must be paid for their loss.

This then leads to the next enquiry, Will the Inhabitants of this Province be
divested of their property, by the terms of the Peace? Let us hear what the
terms of it are.

Peace is made by our Sovereign, and ratified by the Nation, in which it is
stipulated, that East-Florida shall be yielded up and guarantied to the Crown
of Spain; and his Majesty's Subjects may withdraw themselves, with their
effects, within a given time; and in the interim, they are at liberty to sell
their immovable property to the Subjects of his Most Catholic Majesty. Thus
far the Treaty goes, and no further.

But, in order to elucidate the matter more fully, it may be admitted, that his
Catholic Majesty will permit individuals to stay. Suppose his Catholic
Majesty's Subjects will not purchase, or will only give the most trifling sum
for a valuable property; and the British proprietor, agreeable to treaty,
withdraws; where is the reciprocal duty of protection for the property? Can it
be said, that he is not divested or disseized of his property, by the
Spaniards, in consequence of an act of Government. If he goes a step beyond the
Peace, and can reconcile it to himself to change his religion, (a case put
merely for the sake of argument, as it cannot happen,) and remain; where are
his invaluable birthright immunities and privileges? What has he done against
his Sovereign, to forfeit his rights as a British Subject? And, in case a War
should break out, at a future day, between Great Britain and Spain, and he is
called upon by the Nation that gives him protection in his property, to take up
arms; what will he do in this case? No time, no place, no circumstances, can
enable him to shake off his natural allegiance, without the consent of his
Sovereign. He has not the consent of his Sovereign, to stay under the Treaty of
Peace. On the contrary, although the Province is guarantied to Spain, yet care
is taken to make it a positive stipulation, on the part of his Catholic
Majesty, that the British Inhabitants may withdraw, with their effects, without
molestation; which plainly evinces, that if any of his Majesty's Subjects
remain, they do it at their own risk, and still owe allegiance to
Great Britain. If that had not been the intention, the article ought to have
gone on, and declared, that such of his Majesty's Subjects as chose to stay,
were absolved from the duties of natural allegiance to the Crown of
Great Britain.

In the year 1747, Eneas, alias Angus, M'Donald was tried for high treason. He
had been taken prisoner in the rebellion of 1745. It appeared upon the trial,
that he was born in Scotland, but left it very young. He had a commission from
the French King, as his Subject: He was, in education, and all other respects,
except by birth, a Frenchman. But he was convicted upon this principle, that no
change of place, time, or circumstances, could enable him to get rid of the
allegiance due to the Government, under which he was born.

By this state of the case, the Inhabitants of East-Florida, agreeable to the
Treaty of Peace, must either lose their property by withdrawing, or, if they go
a step further than the Treaty has, carried them, (that is, if they stay and
become Spanish Subjects,) they must forego all their civil and religious
rights. But can it be supposed, that British Subjects will change their
religion, and forego their civil rights, for the sake of gain? To conceive,
that the People of EastFlorida can, would be harboring the injurious idea,
that all governments were alike to them, provided they can hold their property.
It would also be concluding, that their struggles for seven years, have not
proceeded from principles of attachment to the Constitution and Parent Country,
and of loyalty to their Sovereign. It is conceived, a moment's reflection must
satisfy every thinking man, that such suppositions are founded in gross error.
They have, most of them, heretosore sacrificed their property, in discharge of
their duty, as liege Subjects: And they still, notwithstanding all that has
passed, are unshaken in their attachment and principles.

We might here go on to show, by maxims drawn from the Law of Nations, that
where the interests and effects of a part of a Society are sacrificed for the
good of the whole, the losses sustained by such sacrifice, must be borne by the
whole. We might also show, that we have, not only the implied assurance,
founded on the doctrine of protection and allegiance, and on the principles of
the Constitution; but there is, in our case, an express contract on the part of
Government, entered into and declared, in proclamations and other public and
solemn acts, for the security of our privileges and property. And arguments
might be drawn from the universal principles of natural justice, to show, where
one of two contracting parties performs his part of the contract, if the other
party cannot perform his, some other recompense must be made, by way of
satisfaction.

These, and many other arguments, might be adduced; but having already said so
much upon the subject, we shall, lastly, enquire, Are the Inhabitants to have
no compensation for the losses they must sustain, by withdrawing, agreeable to
the Treaty of Peace? Is this to be the reward of their past services and zeal?

From what has been already said, from the principles of our Constitution, from
those of natural justice, and from the present and past conduct of our Mother
Country, we must conclude, the means to make us compensation, for the loss of
that property we shall be obliged to abandon by withdrawing, agreeable to the
Treaty of Peace; as she cannot, or does not find it convenient to, protect us
in the possession of it; and, for the accommodation of national exigencies, has
thought proper to cede private property to a foreign Crown.

We must recollect, that hitherto nothing has been done, but what the
Constitution warrants. Great Britain gave us protection during the war, and
nurtured us during our infancy. Here we must feel emotions of gratitude. She
has, it is true, dismembered this Province from the Empire; but she had clearly
a constitutional right so to do: And it must be recollected, she has provided
in the Treaty, that we shall be at liberty to withdraw. She has also given us
the chance of selling our property, if we can; and ships are furnished, at the
expense of the Nation, to accommodate us at our departure. We were formerly,
and now are, told from authority, that every attention will be paid to us, in
whatever situation we may be placed. From all which we must draw, that ample
and substantial justice will be afforded us. To admit a contrary idea, would be
to assert, that Great Britain has lost all public faith; that, instead of
rewarding, she most severely punishes, her faithful adherents; that the sacred
principles of the Constitution, and the rules of natural justice, are by her
disregarded; and, that from being a Nation renowned for her probity, justice,
and good faith she has become the reverse; that she has untied the strongest
bond, that unties Civil Society; and, that the Constitution has l^st its
vigor. This language may (...) our northern neighbors; but the faithful and
ever loyal Inhabitants of Fast-Florida, must have full considence in the
justice and honor of their Mother Nation. They have always experienced her
kindness, and felt her fostering hand; and, therefore, must not as yet complain.

APPENDIX.
CONTAINING PAPERS, by which all the Facts stated in the foregoing CASE, are
supported.

APPEND
No. I.
IN the Royal Proclamation, issued at St. James's, in October, 1763, the
following clauses, amongst others, are inserted.

WHEREAS we have taken into our royal consideration, the extensive and valuable
acquisitions in America, secured to our crown by the late definitive treaty of
peace, concluded at Paris the tenth day of February last; and being desirous,
that all our loving subjects, as well of our kingdoms as of our colonies in
America, may avail themselves, with all convenient speed, of the great benefits
and advantages, which must accrue therefrom to their commerce, manufactures,
and navigation; we have thought fit, with the advice of our privy council, to
issue this our royal proclamation, hereby to publish and declare to all our
loving subjects, that we have, with the advice of our said privy council,
granted our letters patent under our great seal of Great Britain, to erect
within the countries and islands ceded and con^^med to us by the said treaty,
four distinct and separate governments styled and called by the names of
Quebec, East-Florida, West-Florida, and Grenada.

And whereas it will greatly contribute to the speedy settling our said new
governments, that our loving subjects should be informed of our paternal care
for the security of the liberties and properties of those who are and shall
become inhabitants thereof; we have thought fit to publish and declare, by this
our proclamation, that we have, in the letters patent, under our great seal of
Great Britain, by which the said governments are constituted, given express
power and direction to our governors of our said colonies respectively, that
so soon at the state and circumstances of the said colonies will admit thereof,
they shall, with the advice and consent of the members of our council, sammon
and call general assemblies within the ^^^d government respectively, in such
manner and form as is used and directed in those colonies and provinces in
America, which are under our immediate government; And we have all so given
power to the (...), (...), with the consent of our said (...) and the
representatives of the people, so to be summoned as aforesaid to make,
constitute, and ordain laws, statutes, and ordinances for the public peace,
welfare, and good government of our said colonies, and of the people and
inhabitants thereof, at near as may be agreeable to the laws of England, and
under such restrictions and regulations as are used in our other colonies: And
in the mean time, and until such assemblies can be called as aforesaid, all
persons inhabiting in, or resorting to our said colonies, may confide in our
royal protection for the enjoyment of the benefit of the laws of our realm of
England; for which purpose, we have given power under our great seal to the
governors of our said colonies respectively, to erect and constitute, with the
advice of our said council, respectively, courts of judicature and public
justice, within our said colonies, for the hearing and determining all c^^ses,
as well criminal as civil, according to law and equity, and as near as may be
agreeable to the laws of England, with liberty to all persons who may think
themselves aggrieved by the sentences of such courts, in all civil cases, to
appeal, under the usual limitations and restrictions, to us, in our privy
council.

We have also thought fit, with the advice of our privy council as aforesaid,
to give unto the governors and councils of our said three new colonies upon
the continent, full power and authority to settle and agree with the
inhabitants of our said new colonies, or with any other persons who shall
resort thereto, for (...) lands, tenements, and hereditaments, as are now, or
hereafter shall be in our power to dispose of, and them to grant to any such
person or persons, upon such terms, and under such moderate quit-(...),
services, and acknowledgements, as have been appointed and settled in our other
colonies, and under such other conditions as shall appear to us to be necessary
and expedient for the advantage of the grantees, and thimprovement and
settlement of our said colonies.

No. II
IN the month of November, 1775, his Excellency Governor Tonyn issued the
following proclamation.

WHEREAS in the present unhappy and distressed situation of great numbers of
his Majesty's loyal and faithful subjects, in several provinces in
North America, (...) under the despotick tyranny of a few (...) who have, from
private view, by (...) imposed upon and (...) Majesty's well disposed (...)
unlawful committee, have (...) suspended the (...) (...) authority over all
persons within the respective provinces now in reb^llion; using not only abuse
and threats, but inflicting actual and unprecedented punishments upon such as
are firmly attached to their King, and the laws and constitution of their
country, or refuse to sign seditious and treasonable articles of combination,
and submit to their (...) authority: And whereas his Majesty from his usual
attention to the peace and safety of all his subjects, in whatever part of his
extensive dominions re^^^ing, and from his wonted compassion for the ^^^tresses
of others, has been most graciously pleased to signify to me, by the right
honorable the Earl of Dartmouth, his royal intention and wishes to afford
every protection to such of his subjects in the colonies in rebellion, as shall
be too week to resist the violence of the times, and too loyal to concur in the
measures of those, who have avowed and supported this unnatural rebellion: And
that this province, may not only p^o^e a secure asylum to such, but induce them
to settle here, his Majesty has been further graciously pleased to suspend the
execution of the instructions of the 3d of February, 1774, respecting the sale
of lands, for the present, also all other reservations and restrictions, and to
authorize me, for the encouragement of such persons as may, under these
circumstances, be induced to seek a happy asylum in this province, to make out
for them gratuitous grants of lands, exempt from quit-rents for ten years. I
do, therefore, by and with the advice and consent of his Majesty's honorable
council, (...) this my proclamation, inviting all persons suffering under the
above circumstances, to come and reside in their his Majesty's, loyal colony,
where they may umm^l^sted follow their lawful occupations, and enjoy the quiet
possession of their property, and the valuable blessings of that liberty which
is an enemy to (...), friendly to government, and consistent with the laws of
Great Britain; and that upon application to me in council, they shall have
grants of land as a family right, under the usual (...) and limitations, with
an exemption from quit-rents for ten years from the due of the grant, and every
possible protection and encouragement. And whereas many of his Majesty's
honest, well meaning and loyal subject, in these factious and rebellious times,
when (...) while may prevail over truth, and force and violence in part over
just authority, may be greatly imposed upon by the (...) insinuations and false
representations of his Majesty's disa^^ected subjects, I have thought fit, and
do with the advice of his Majesty's honorable council, further encourage them
to take up their residence here, from the following considerations, viz. That
the climate I^ healthy, as many of the spaniards for(...) lived here to a (...)
old ^^e; and as from the establishment of the civil government of this colony
under the Crown of Great Britain, his Majesty's subjects have enjoyed a state
of good health, which is particularly (...) from the returns of his Majesty's
troops in garrison at St. Augustine: That the climate is sufficiently cold in
winter, to brace up the constitution after the summer months, which are
refreshed by a regular sea breeze: That several kinds of grain and vegetables
produced in Great Britain, may be cultivated here with success in winter;
indian corn, rice, indigo, cotton, and sugar canes, in summer: That i^ it
should be thought too expensive, or the seasons too precarious for raising
sugar and rum for exportation, a planter may, at a small expense and trouble,
raise sugar canes sufficient to supply his family with both: That the winter is
not so severe as to destroy the West India cotton, but that it grows up with
great luxuriancy in the spring: That the climate and soil seem peculiarly
adapted for producing indigo weed, from which the planters have made indigo of
a quality superior to any made in the British colonies in North America: That
the country is well pastured, and fit for raising cattle and stock of every
kind, without the assistance of artificial grasses, or laying up provender for
winter: That the country is conveniently (...) with rivers plentifully stored
with variety of fish, and fit for navigation and for bringing down produce and
lumber to their respective ports: That their banks are covered with large oaks,
and other timber fit for building vessels: That there is a variety of other
timber for staves and lumber, fit for the West India market. And I do further,
by the advice of his majesty's honorable council, and in obedience to his
Majesty's commands, hereby offer every possible encouragement in my power, for
the exportation of lumber to the West India islands: and that I will, upon
application to me, grant (...) to cut wood for lumber, upon any part of his
Majesty's lands, upon sufficient security being given, to land it in some
island belonging to his Majesty.

No. III.
A Proclamation issued by Governor Tonyn, in August 1776, pro^ibiting all
correspondence with the Revolted Colonies.
WHEREAS several during incursions have lately been made into this province by
lawless and abandoned men, in open and avowed rebellion, from the province of
Georgia, who have disturbed the quiet of his Majesty's loyal subjects of this
province, and attempted to desolate and lay waste the country: And whereas I
have, by a former proclamation, prohibited and forbid all correspondence
between the inhabitants of this province and the neighboring colonies in
rebellion, and cautioned his Majesty's subjects against (...) or abetting them
in their unjustifiable proceedings, and requiring them to communicate to me
every information they could, concerning so (...) vebels and traitors, or their
associates, aiders, and abettors. To the end therefore, that none may plead
ignorance, I have thought fit, and do, by and with the advice of his Majesty's
honorable council of this province, issue this my proclamation, warning all
his Majesty's subjects to guard against their perfidious insinuations, and from
holding any secret correspondence with them, by letter, message, signal, or
otherwise, and from giving them any assistance or protection whatever; also
requiring, that they be diligent in giving me every faithful information they
can, with respect to their hostile intentions and proceedings against his
Majesty's his crown and dignity, and against the peace and quiet of this his
Majesty's province. And whereas I have been informed, that some infatuated men,
inhabitants of this province, have wantonly joined the rebels of Georgia, I
hereby strictly require and charge all persons whatever, who can give evidence
of their traitorous conduct, that they communicate the same to me, that means
may be used to bring them to that punishment which their crimes deserve. And to
prevent as much as may be all correspondence and intercourse with the rebels in
the neighboring colonies, and for the greater security of this province. I do
hereby require, that no boats or canoes be allowed to remain in the night time
on the north and west side of St. John's river, and that no person do pass, or
be aiding and assisting in carrying others over the said river from this side,
without leave from me in writing. I do likewise forbid all persons from keeping
boats, canoes, or other vessels, on the south and west side of St. Sebastian's
creek, after sun set; and from siring guns on any pretense whatever, unless by
lawful authority, within the out lines of this town. And where as it is the
duty of every member of the community to use his utmost endeavors to suppress
rebellion and to distress rebels, to the end that peace and good government may
be restored in all his Majesty's dominions: and whereas the frequent incursions
of the rebels into this province, renders it necessary for us to cooperate as
far as we can for procuring that end, and for opposing and repelling their
incursions into this province in future; I do hereby call upon and invite all
the male inhabitants within the town of St. Augustine, to assemble at the state
house on the parade, on tuesday next, at 7 o'clock in the morning, that they
may voluntarily incorporate and embody themselves, to cooperate with his
Majesty's troops for the defense of this province. I do also hereby call upon
and invite all the male inhabitants on St. John's river and the Mosquitoes, to
assemble respectively for the above purposes, at a time and place to be fixed
by persons commissioned by me, of which timely notice shall be given.

No. IV.
THE following proclamation was issued by Mr. Gwinnet, the president of
Georgia, in 1777.

WHEREAS the southern frontiers of this state have been frequently alarmed by
the inroads and depredatious of sundry persons inhabitants of the province of
East-Florida, and acting under the commission and authority of Patrick Tonyn,
Esquire; governor of the said province: And whereas it has pleased divine
Providence to bless the American arms, in an unexampled manner, to that there
is every reason to expect, we shall be enabled to repel those enemies of
liberty and mankind, and entirely to drive them off from this vast united
continent. Taking these premises into consideration, and being unwilling to
destroy or distress any that are disposed to accept of the protection of the
united states, I therefore, by virtue of the powers vested in me, do issue this
my proclamation, signifying my intentions to all the inhabitants of the
province of East-Florida, and acquainting them with the motives of ^ay
appearing among them, with an army sufficient for the reduction of the said
province.

Be it therefore known to all the inhabitants of East-Florida, that the
American standard is now erected among them, to the intent that all who will
repair to the same, and take an oath of allegiance to the free and independent
states of North America, shall receive the protection and assistance of the
said states, and shall be secured in their persons all property. And left any
person or persons should be deceived by the insinuations of our enemies, and
induced to disbelieve the proposals now offered unto them, I therefore by the
authority of the state of Georgia, do (...) them, that I do not come do
destroy, but to protect and receive them as our friends and brothers, and as
men engaged in the most glorious cause of asserting our rights and privileges,
in oppo^^^ to the opp^es^ive schemes of tyranny. All therefore that will on
this occasion faithfully join and adhere unto us, agreeable to the terms above
mentioned, shall receive every indulgence and encouragement, and be entitled to
all the rights, and privileges of the (...) of our fellow citizens. And
further, I would request every person who may have an opportunity of perusing
the contents of this proclamation, seriously to consider, and reflect, what
they can propose to themselves in standing out in opposition to the united
states of America; since the God of armies has to remarkably appeared in our
savor, and the period cannot be far off, when the enemies of America will be
clothed with everlasting shame and dishonor.

Given under my band and seal the (...) day of (...) 1777. BUTTON GWINNET.

No. V.
In the year 1778, the following invitation to share of the plunder of
East-Florida, was issued by the Governor and Council of Georgia.
STATE of GEORGIA.
To all Friends of (...) and Independence, in and throughout the United States
of America.
THE governor and council of the state of Georgia, deeply impressed with a
sense of the injuries and losses which the inhabitants of this state and
South Carolina have sustained by the daily depredations of the rovers from
East-Florida, and of the encouragement which the contiguity of that province
affords to disaffection and treason, have determined upon a vigorous ^ertion of
(...) against the same: and with the blessing of God, have not the least doubt
of being able to reduce it to a state of submission to us. They therefore
invite and encourage all persons whatsoever, the wellwishers to freedom and
right, to come in with the utmost expedition, and partake of the (...) and
profits of this enterprise. They further inform all those who are disposed to
accept of this invitation, that a camp is already formed in Burke county, where
there will be immediately placed a large quantity of provision, and plenty of
ammunition; and those who incline to adventure, have nothing to do but repair
to the camp, and from thence march under the command of the governor of the
state of Georgia. Provision and ammunition will be supplied gratis, and all
captures free plunder.

By Order of the ^^ard, SAMUEL STIRK,
S. E. C.
No. VI.
By Lieut. Colonel Fuser, of his Majesty's (...) re^iment, commanding his
Majesty's Troops, now at St. (...)
WHEREAS it is probable, considering our present circumstances, that the rebels
may appear every instant the bar, or there about, and may effectuate a landing
without our being apprized o^ it; it is the duty of the commanding officer to
be upon his guard, not only, for his own observation, but also to protect the
(...) this town: consequently he hopes, they will exert themselves in their own
defense. But as an effectual defense cannot be (...) without some (...) he take
this opportunity to invite all his Majesty's loyal subjects who have not (...)
themselves in the (...), to meet him on (...) next the ayth instant, at 11
O'clock in the morning, with (...), upon the grand parade, where he will be at
the head of a company with his Majesty's standard, in order to take their
names, visit their arms, and furnish those that are in want of them, and show
them their place of alarm, in case they are wanted.

The commanding officer gives notice at the same time, that whoever does not
pay proper attention to this necessary invitation, must not take it amiss if he
is looked upon as a coward, disaffected to his Majesty's person and government,
and a notorious rebel; and consequently be treated as such.

L. V. FUSER.
St. Augustine, June 27, 1778.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
No. VII.
His Excellency Governor Tonyn being pleased to call a general assembly, for
the first time, in March 1781, delivered the following speech to both houses at
their first meeting.
Honorable Gentlemen, Mr. Speaker and Gentlemen of the Assembly,
I AM happy that during my administration of the government of this province,
it has arrived at such a state of a assluence and importance, as to enable me
with propriety to fulfill his Majesty's most gracious engagement^, in his royal
proclamation of the 7th of October, 1763, by establishing a provincial
legislature for the purpose of making constitutions, ordaining laws, statues
and ordinances, as near as may be agreeable to the laws of England, under such
regulations and restrictions as are used in other colonies, for the public
welfare and good government of this province and its inhabitants.

To this period, his Majesty's honorable council have acted as a privy
council, with respect to matters of government; and I am greatly indebted to
that honorable board, for their ready assistance, and the candor they have
ever discovered, in giving their opinions on such points as were laid before
them.

From this date, they assume the authority and privileges of an upper house of
assembly, in a legislative capacity; and you will, honorable gentlemen, I am
convinced, maintain the same recard to the constitution, the same loyalty to
his Majesty, and attention to the true interests of this province, which has
been your ruling principle in the capacity of privy counselors.

It has been frequently represented to me by the grand juries of this
province, that local laws were much wanted, and that a provincial leg^^lature
would be beneficial to the community. I said these presentiments before his
Majesty's council, who concurred with the grand (...) that provincial laws were
wanted; but sensible that numberless expenses and hardships unavoidably attend
forming new settlements, and imagining that it would be expected, the instant a
provincial legislature existed, taxation for defraying the expenses of
government should be imposed, I thought it more eligible to suffer a few
inconveniences, than either to burden you in an infant state, or disappoint
the reasonable expectations of our most gracious Sovereign and an indulgent
mother country, by whose patronage, care and support, we have been fostered and
protected, at a time of general revolt; when the untoward behavior of the
other colonies might have justly induced the most benign Prince in the world to
alienate his affections from such contumacious and refractory children, and the
Parliament to withdraw its aid from breeding up others that, like them, might
prove unworthy and ungrateful.

Of late, gentlemen, the increase of property from your success in commerce and
planting, has been considerable; and the industry and judgment of a few may
evince to Great Britain, that amplereturns in produce may be made for money
laid our in raising a produce equally beneficial to the planter and the mother
country, in one of the most healthy and fertile climates upon earth.

These and other motives impelled me to summon the freeholders of this
province, to elect representatives to act in the house of assembly, for the
purpose of assisting in framing laws, statutes and ordinances, for the good
government of the province, whose representatives, gentlemen, you are; and I do
assure you, that I shall most dispassionately and cordially concur with you, in
framing such laws and ordinances, as best correspond with the constitution and
laws of England, and best suit with our local situation and circumstances; and
that I am zealous of preserving inviolate the liberties of the subject, and the
right and prerogatives of the crown.

My address to you, gentlemen, upon the present auspicious occasion, shall be
short, confident of your loyalty to the King, and attachment to the
constitution, and that you have a perfect knowledge of the true interests of
this colony.

Framing laws for the regulation of the conduct of the members of community,
has ever been deemed a most momentous and important object; they require the
most penetrating discernment, and soundest deliberation; and particular
circumspection is necessary, at this alarming crisis of public affairs, and
general revolt of the colonies: A revolt, which I cannot mention without the
greatest indignation, and in which they have so wickedly persevered, that by
their new and unnatural political alliances they have sacrificed to their
caprices and prejudices, their most sacred rights, religious and civil;
renounced their allegiance to the mildest and best of kings, and their
attachment to the most ben^h^ent of mother countries; and have attempted to
destroy a constitution, under which they possessed a freedom, restrained only
by the most wholesome and beneficial laws, and all the sweets of good
government, without feeling the weight of its support and maintenance.

The result of your deliberations, gentlemen, will not only be of consequence
to this province, but to his Majesty's government in general, and it will at
least give a tincture in future assemblies: And as one of the chief reason
assigned for this unnatural rebellion, is the colonies refusing to acknowledge
the supreme right and authority of the British Parliament, to prevent as far as
possible any further contest upon so just and equitable a point, I hope your
good sense and attachment to the constitution, will lead you, in the most
public and avowed manner, by an act of the provincial legislature, to
recognize your allegiance to the blessed Prince upon the throne, and the
supremacy of Parliament; thereby to establish, upon the most solid foundation,
our constitution liberties and dependence.

As the King and Parliament have, with an astonishing and unprecedented
condescension, relinquished their just right of taxation, provided the
provincial legislature will make due provision for defraying a reasonable part
of the expense of the government of the empire at large, and for the internal
government of the colony; I trust that you, gentlemen, in the first moment of
your existence, will make a provision appropriated to these important purposes,
more as a mark of your regard to justice and affection, and gratitude, for the
government under which we have been protected, and generously fostered and
maintained, than for any immediate real service our supply can afford it.

The quota you in your present circumstances can make, I am sensible, will not
be adequate to the expenses of the provincial government; but I am consident,
that such provision, appropriated as I mention, will be an additional motive
with our most gracious Sovereign to continue his immediate protection, and to
an unprejudiced and liberal Parliament, its bounty in our progression toward
maturity.

In my correspondence with his Majesty's principal secretaries of state, I have
ever represented the inhabitants of this province, to be loyal and well
attached to his Majesty's person and government, and ready upon every occasion,
to assist by their personal services; and I take this opportunity of returning
my thanks, to those gentlemen, who, with a manly spirit, served in the militia,
upon the repeated invasions of the province.

I presume, gentlemen, I have no occasion to mention, that the present
situation of public affairs, surrounded as we are on all sides by foreign and
domestic enemies, demands our attention to the important object of defense;
and that we may lend our aid in an uniform and proportioned manner, a militia
act will be beneficial to the province.

I have only to entreat, gentlemen, that you will preserve harmony and good
temper, in your deliberations; and be assured, I have nothing so much at heart,
as to concur with you in promoting his Majest's service, and the prosperity and
true interests of this province.

PATRICK TONYN.
St. Augustine, March 29, 1781.
The ADDRESS of the UPPER HOUSE of ASSEMBLY.
May it please your Excellency,
We his Majesty's most dutiful and loyal subjects the upper house of assembly
for this province, in general assembly met, beg leave to return your excellency
our grateful acknowledgements for your most affectionate speech to both houses
of assembly.

It affords us a very sincere satisfaction, that under your excellency's wise
and mild administration, this province has reached that state of importance
and affluence, as to enable your excellency to constitute a provincial
legislature, which we flatter ourselves will be conducive to the prosperity of
this his Majesty's colony, and the success of its inhabitants; and in justice
to your excellency's merit, we do acknowledge, that a considerable increase of
inhabitants has proceeded from that warm and distinguished reception the
friends of government who came to this province, have met with.

Your excellency's zeal for this Majesty's service, your constant and umen^tted
attention to whatever you thought would contribute to the advancement of
commerce and agriculture, and the caudour and freedom with which your
excellency on every occasion laid the business of the province before the
council board, was always very greateful to us, and tended to inspire the same
ardor and liberality of sentiment in giving our opinions, that actuated your
excellency, and stimulated us to that zeal for his Majesty's service and
prosperity o^ this colony, which we hope ^ver to preserve.

It is our earnest with and highest ambition to exert our utmost abilities in
discharging the honorable trust, reposed in us as an upper house of assembly;
and we shall in all our deliberations strictly adhere to the spirit of that
excellent constitution of government under which we live, and study to model
our laws as near as may be to that justly admired system, which has been
framed by the wisdom of the British Parliament.

Whilst we admire his Majesty's royal clemency in holding forth terms of
accommodation and offers of pardon and remission of past o^^ences, it is with
the deepest concern and affliction that we ^erceive our deluded fellow (...),
in the revolted colonies, contrary to their true interests and the principles
of generosity and justice, contumaciously persevering in open rebellion against
their lawful Sovereign; and as if no terms of accommodation were ever intended
by them, have entered into unnatural alliances with foreign states, whom the
experience of past ages evinces to be enemies to religious and civil liberty;
thereby audaciously attempting to dismember that, glorious empire which gave
them existence, and under whose protection they arrived at a degree of
affluence and importance, which they have licentiously perverted to the worst
of purposes.

With the warmest sentiments of loyalty and gratitude to our most gracious
Sovereign, whose uniform conduct evinces that he is truly the best of Kings, we
acknowledge to have received his Majesty's support and protection, when we
apprehended the untowardly behavior of the other colonies might have led his
Majesty and the Parliament to have withdrawn their aid.

We esteem our civil and religious liberties dear to us as our liver, and with
to transmit them inviolate to our posterity, as their best inheritance; and
humbly conceiving that they never can be better secured, than under the
protection and patronage of the royal house of Brunswick, and firmly con^iding
in the wisdom of the British Parliament, and convinced of the necessity that an
absolute supreme and uncontrollable power in a state must exist somewhere, we
will most cheerfully concur with the other branches of the legislature, in
recognizing our allegiance to the King, and supremacy of parliament.

We should be void of every sentiment of gratitude, not to acknowledge the
great obligations we are under to our most gracious Sovereign, for the succor
and protection he has afforded this province; especially for that body of
brave troops, who have upon sundry occasions signalized themselves in repelling
the united forces of the French and rebels, in restoring the neighboring
province to his Majesty's allegiance, and securing this from plunder and
devastation; and we are greatly indebted to your excellency, for that spirit
and vigilance, which you have ever exerted for the defense of this government,
and the happiness and prosperity of people over whom you preside.

JOHN MOULTRIE,
President.
His Excellency the GOVERNOR'S ANSWER.
Honorable Gentlemen,
I return you my heart thanks, for the expressions of loyalty and gratitude to
his Majesty, and regard for the constitution, contained in your address to me.

It is a very particular satisfaction to me, that gentlemen so well acquainted
with the constitution of Great Britain, fill the honorable station you hold in
this province.

I am happy that his Majesty's paternal care of his people enabled me to soften
the distresses of the loyal, but sorely oppr^sted refugees; and your
approbation of my conduct, and the favorable opinion you entertain of me, are
exceedingly pleasing to me.

PATRICK TONYN.

The ADDRESS of the COMMONS HOUSE of ASSEMBLY.
May it please your Excellency,
WE his Majesty's most dutiful and loyal subjects, the commons house of
assembly of East-Florida, in general assembly met, return you our most sincere
and cordial thanks for your excellency's speech, on our meeting in the first
provincial legislature convened in this colony.

With the most heartfelt satisfaction we congratulate your excellency, that
during your administration of the government of this province, it has arrived
at such a state, as to enable your excellency with propriety to fulfill his
Majesty's most gracious m^entions, by the establishment of a legislative body
in this province.

Sensible from experience of the numberless hardships and heavy expenses which
unavoidably attend the forming of new settlements, we have hitherto cheerfully
submitted to such inconveniences as our situations and circumstances subjected
us to. But from the increasing population of the province, the necessity of
some local laws in this infant colony, became daily more evident; in the making
and framing of which, and of such other ordinances and regulations as the
public welfare and good government may require, it shall be our study to
conform, as far as may be, to the constitution and laws of Great Britain, under
such restrictions as have been used in our sister colonies.

Thoroughly convinced of the patronage, support and care, with which this
province has been and continues to be fostered, cherished and protected by our
most gracious Sovereign and indulgent mother country, we cannot altogether
disappoint their reasonable expectations, and will therefore cheerfully
contribute toward the general expenses of government, what on mature
deliberation we shall judge suitable to the circumstances of our constituents;
which being well known to your excellency, we hope the present smallness of our
quota may not be considered as the measure of our loyalty and affection to the
most beneficent Prince in the world, o^ of our attachment to our bountiful
mother country. But we find great satisfaction in the prospect that through a
continuance of the benevolent assistance and attention of the British
Parliament, the gradual increase of property amongst us, from the returns of a
produce valuable to the planter and beneficial to Great Britain, will enable us
in progress of time, to to make our proportion of the general supplies, an
object of more importance than can at present be expected.

We are impressed with sentiments of gratitude for your excellency's assurance,
that you will most dispassionately and cor^ially concur with us in framing such
laws and ordinances, correspondent to the constitution of Great Britain, as
shall be found best to suit with our local situation. And we promise you^
^^^ellency, that zealous as we are to preserve inviolate the liberties of the
subject, we will ever hold sacred the rights and prerogatives of the crown.

The making laws for a community, at all times deemed a most momentous and
important object, must now call forth our particular circumspection and most
serious deliberation, at this alarming (...) of public affairs, and revolt of
the colonies; a revolt which we want words to express our indignation and
abherence of, aggravated if possible as it is by their most wicked and
flagitious perseverance therein, and by the most unnatural and detestable
political a^hances, by which our rebellious fellow subjects seem quite left to
every sense of gratitude and attachment to their merciful and most gracious
^overeign, and beneficent mother country; having sacrificed to their ambitious
views and misguided prejudices, their most sacred ^ights, religious and civil,
renounced their allegiance to the (...) and best of Kings, and done what in
them lay ^o demolish and (...) a constitution and empire, the envy, admiration
and dread of surrounding nations, under which they had enjoyed the sweets of
good government, without feeling the weight of its support and maintenance.

As one of the first steps leading to this unnatural revolt, wa^ a refusal of
the rebel colonies to Acknowledge the supreme right and authority of the
British Parliament, to prevent as far as (...), any future contest on so just
equitable a point, it was (...) us in the most public and avowed manner, to
(...) a^eg^ance to the blessed Prince on the throne, and the supremacy of
Parliament; thereby establishing on the most solid foundation, our
constitution, liberties and dependence.

We are full of acknowledgement to your excellency, for the favorable
representations you have made to the King in your correspondence with his
Majesty's principal secretaries of state, of the loyalty and attachment of the
people of this province, to his Majesty's person and government. We trust and
are persuaded your excellency's favorable reports of us and our constituents,
will continue to be justified by our readiness on all occasions to assist your
excellency by our personal services, and otherwise in the defense of this his
Majesty's province; and that during the present arduous situation of public
affairs, surrounded as we are by enemies both foreign and domestic, we may
lend our aid in an uniform and proportioned manner therein, a militia law will
demand our early attention, as it will certainly be beneficial to the province.

We cannot omit this occasion of expressing our gratitude for your excellency's
unwearied attention to the interests of this province, to his Majesty's
service, and to the dictates of humanity, in the ready and effectual
protection, assistance and countenance, which your excellency has uniformly
granted to such of the King's good subjects as driven by the rebels from the
^^^abitations and properties in the adjacent provinces, took refuge under your
excellency's wing, where they have never failed to find shelter, and which
diverse members of this house have experienced.

By Order of the House, WILLIAM BROWN,
Speaker.
St. Augustine, April 2, 1781.
His Excellency the GOVERNOR'S ANSWER.
Gentlemen,
I return you my sincere thanks for the sentiments of loyalty and duty to our
most gracious Sovereign, expressed in your very acceptable address to me.

I am consistent that your regard to justice, and the constitution under which
we live, will induce you to fulfill your engagements, by contributi^^ a quota
toward the general expenses of government proportionable to the circumstances
of your constituents, which will accumulate with the crowing produce of the
colony. Such grant will be a motive with his Majesty, to continue his paternal
care and protection.

It has ever been with the (...) emotions of sympathy, that I have contributed
all in my power to make this province a happy, asylum to those gentlemen, whose
firm attachment to government, led them to relinquish their possession, and
properties, rather than sacrifice their allegiance; and I am convinced that I
could in no means better fulfill his Majesty's gracious intentions toward them.
I only regret, that it could not be done to the extent of their merit,
sufferings and distress.

PATRICK TONYN.

St. Augustine, April 2, 1781.
NO. VIII.
GOVERNOR TONYN'S SPEECH to both Houses of Assembly, at the opening of the
second session in October, 1781.
Honorable Gentlemen, Mr. Speaker and Gentlemen of the Commons House of
Assembly,
The present alarming visits of affairs, when your advice and assistance may be
wanted and useful, and the immediate advantages that must accrue to this
province from enacting a few more salutary laws, are powerful motives with me,
to call upon you after a short recess, to reassume the consideration of public
concerns, and to proceed to complete, upon loyal and constitutional principles,
such other provincial laws, as you shall think most wanted, and whose effects
will be most beneficial to the province...

The framing laws for regulating the conduct of our fellow citizens, and our
own, merits the utmost deliberation, being of the utmost consequence; and it is
with peculiar satisfaction, that I perceive a precision and correctness in
those that passed last sessions, which entitle you to my thanks, and to the
esteem of the public.

I was so full and explicit in my speech to you at the commencement of last
session, and you in your address to me, were so expressive of your warmest
attachment to our most gracious Sovereign, and the glorious constitution of
government under which we live, that I shall not trouble you on the present
occasion with new matter for your consideration. I only beg leave to recommend
a retrospection to that speech, and to your assurances of recognizing the
establishment of the crown in his present Majesty, the supremacy of Parliament,
and of making such provision^ for the internal government of the province, and
of the empire at large, as is suitable to our present situation and
circumstances, and as will in good policy recommend us to our Sovereign, and
the generous people of the mother country, for the continuance of their
protection and regard; and it is with particular satisfaction that I observed,
that the laws of last session, bear evident marks of your loyalty and
confidence in government, and your veneration and regard for the British
constitution: and their salutary effects are now manifest in the state of the
fortifications which are nearly completed, and your readiness and adherence to
the same principles by a vigorous opposition to any daring invader will, under
providence, render us secure in the enjoyment of our most invaluable rights and
privileges, and honored and revered by posterity.

PATRICK TONYN.

St. Augustine, October 1^, 1^^1.
The ADDRESS of the UPPER HOUSE of ASSEMBLY.
May it please your Excellency,
We his Majesty's most dutiful and loyal subjects, the upper house of assembly
of this his Majesty's province of East-Florida, in general assembly met, return
your excellency our most hearty thanks for your speech to both houses.

We beg leave to assure your excellency, that we shall most cordially
cooperate with your excellency in every measure that will contribute to his
Majesty's service, and the interests of this province; and that whenever we
take into consideration the grand object of legis^ation, we shall have these
ends constantly in view, and as nearly as possible, conform to that most
excellent constitution of the government of the mother country, and the spirit
of those laws, which are the ^oast and ^lory of Britons...

The enacting laws for the regulation of the conduct of our fellow citizens and
of our own, is indeed a most arduous task, a trust of the highest importance to
the interest and happiness of the community; and requires the greatest
deliberation and a most dispassionate temper, influenced by no other motive
than that of the public good.

It is highly pleasing to us, to receive in the public manner your excellency
has been pleased to express them, your excellency's thanks for, and approbation
of, the laws framed in the first session of the general assembly; and what
gives us peculiar satisfaction, is the consciousness that we have, in our
deliberations, aimed at such accuracy and precision as the importance of the
subject merited, and that we were and still are ambitious of promoting the true
interests of the province.

We hope your excellency will do us the justice to believe, that we shall pay
every attention to your excellency's speech to both houses, at the commencement
of the last session, and to those assurances we then most sincerely made to
your excellency in our address.

Your excellency must have perceived from inspecting the journals, that a bill
was framed and passed this house, which we humbly apprehend did fully recognize
the establishment of the crown in his present most sacred Majesty, whom God
long preserve, as protector of our most invaluable rights and privileges, and
the supremacy of Parliament; and recognizing at the same time, the great
outlines of our rights and privileges, as British subjects; deeming them a
mutual security to each other.

We are happy to find that your excellency is of opinion, that the laws of last
session hear evident marks of loyalty, and of confidence in government, which
are peculiarly necessary at this alarming crisis, when the wisdom and strength
of all ought to be united and exerted for the defense of the whole. And it is
with pleasure we find the fortifications in such a state, as will render this
town, we trust, a safe retreat to the inhabitants of the province, in case of
an attack from his Majesty's enemies, and give his Majesty's brave troops and
loyal subjects, a confidence of success against any hostile invader.

By order of the Upper House, JOHN MOULTRIE, President.
St. Augustine, October 18, 1781.
His Excellency the GOVERNOR'S ANSWER.
Honorable Gentlemen,
I return you my sincere thanks, for your address to me, and expressions of
your loyalty to his Majesty, and attachment to the constitution and laws of the
mother country; and for your assurances of cheerfully cooperating with me in
every measure that will contribute to his Majesty's service and the interest of
the province: And I should be wanting in justice to your zeal not to
acknowledge, that your conduct and the journals of your house evince the
sincerity of these assurances, and that you have been actuated by these
principles: And I doubt not, gentlemen, that you will in your future
deliberations, with a dispassionate temper, be influenced by the same
principles, and study the same precision and accuracy in framing laws, which
the importance of the subject merits.

It was with very singular satisfaction that I perceived, that a loyal and
constitutional bill, recognizing the establishment of the crown, the supremacy
of Parliament, and asserting the rights and privileges of the inhabitants of
this province as British subjects, all naturally and firmly united,
strengthening and supporting each other, had originated in and passed your
house; and I have the utmost confidence, that so important and necessary a bill
will meet with no obstruction in being passed into a law.

PATRICK TONYN.

St. Augustine, October 19, 1781.
The ADDRESS of the COMMONS HOUSE of ASSEMBLY.
May it please your Excellency,
We his Majesty's most dutiful and loyal subjects, the commons house of
assembly of his Majesty's ever faithful and loyal province of East-Florida, in
general assembly met, return your excellency our hearty and warmest thanks, for
your excellency's very judicious and acceptable speech, at the opening of the
present session.

At this alarming crisis of affairs, it is our duty as well as incli^ation, to
reassume the consideration of public concerns, being called thereto by your
excellency; and we assure your excellency of our best advice and animated
assistance, when your excellency shall judge either of them may be wanted or
useful.

As the want of a ^ew more salutary laws has long been extremely felt, so we
perceive with your excellency the immediate and great advantages, which must
acc^^ to this province, by enacting such; and with the utmost alacrity and
willingness shall we proceed to complete, upon loyal and constitutional
principles, such other acts as seem to be wanted, and of which the effects may
prove most beneficial to the province; the framing whereof will merit and call
forth our utmost deliberations, being of the greatest consequence to ^s and our
fellow citizens: And it is with peculiar satisfaction we find those passed last
session, meet with your excellency's approbation.

Your excellency was so full and explicit in your well adapted speech at the
commencement of last session, that we shall find sufficient matter for our
present consideration, by a retrospection thereto. And though in our address to
your excellency on that occasion, our sentiments were so fully declared, yet we
are happy in every opportunity of repeating assurances of our warmest
attachment to our most gracious Sovereign, and to the glorious constitution of
government under which we live. We bear in mind and confirm to your excellency,
our to me^ assurance of recognizing the establishment of the crown in his
present Majesty, the supremacy of Parliament, and of making such provision for
the internal government of the province, and of the empire at lar^e, as may be
suitable to our present situation and circumstances; and as we trust may
recommend us and our constituents to our Sovereign, and the generous people of
the mother country, for the continuance of their protection and regard.

We had particular satisfaction during the last session in evincing our
inviolable loyalty and confidence in government, and our infinite veneration
and regard for the British constitution; the law then passed hearing evident
marks thereof: And we are happy to find the salutary effects of one of them,
now manifest in the advanced and forward state of the fortifications, which are
nearly completed.

By a steadfast adherence to the same principles, and by a ready and vigorous
opposition to any daring invader, we trust and hope, by the favor of
Providence, to remain secure under your excellency's paternal care,
participating the blessings and security attending the constitution and power
of Great Britain, which compose our most valuable rights and privileges; by a
perseverance in the support and maintenance of which, your excellency's name
will descend honored and revered to posterity.

By order of the Commons House of Assembly, WILLIAM BROWN,
Speaker.
St. Augustine, October 18, 1781.
His Excellency the GOVERNOR'S ANSWER.
Gentlemen,
The sentiments of loyalty and duty to our most gracious Sovereign, and the
assurances of your firm attachment to the British constitution, so warmly
expressed in your polite and affectionate address to me, are justly entitled to
my sincere thanks; and they impress me with the most sanguine expectations,
that mutual confidence and respect will subsist between the different branches
of the provincial legislature, and that the public business will be carried on
with temper and harmony.

With these sentiments, and that disposition, I doubt not, that the result of
our deliberations will be wholesome and constitutional laws, calculated for
maintaining good government, and adapted to the circumstances and situation of
the inhabitants, and be assured, gentlemen, that I shall with equal
cheerfulness assent to such laws as assert the just rights of the people, as to
those that recognize the prerogative of the crown.

PATRICK TONYN.

St. Augustine, October 18, 1781.
No. IX.
GOVERNOR TONYN'S SPEECH to both Houses of Assembly, in January, 1782.
Honorable Gentlemen,
Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen of the Commons House of Assembly.

Our most gracious Sovereign ever zealous to promote the interests and
happiness of mankind, by extending the influence of pure religion and free
government, upon the cession of this province to the crown of Great Britain,
was most graciously pleased to give to those, who should become inhabitants,
the fullest assurances of protection in the enjoyment of all the rights and
privileges of denizens of the realm of England, under a colonial constitution
of government, resembling, as near as might be, the glorious constitution of
the mother country, with authority to make laws, statutes, and ordinances for
their internal government, to be confirmed or repealed by his Majesty's
approbation of disallowance.

This province, by the blessing of God, having arrived at some degree of
importance, agreeable to those assurances, and in obedience to his Majesty's
royal instructions, I called last year a general assembly, and a provincial
legislature was established.

Some constitutional laws, expressive of our loyalty, were enacted; the
salutary effects of which are now visible in the fortifications, which, under
the direction of Capt. Burrard, are nearly finished, and this town is thereby
rendered in case of invasion, I trust, a secure asylum for the planters. The
militia of the province is also established under proper regulations.

Sensible that you, gentlemen, are well acquainted with the situation of the
province, the circumstances of the inhabitants, the attention due at this
alarming crisis to our defense, and that your utmost endeavors will be
exerted, to encourage and promote agriculture and commerce, I shall not be
particular in pointing out objects for your consideration.

Let me only request, that you have a due regard to the obligations we are
under to our most gracious Sovereign, for his paternal care of this infant
colony, and to the Parliament for its bounty, in contributing so liberally to
our support, protection and defense; and that we express our sense of those
benefits, by a recognition of their respective rights, as well as by asserting
our natural inherent birth rights, as denizens of the realm of England; thereby
endeavoring to render the happy union incontrovertible and lasting.

There just acknowledgments ought the more readily and cheerfully to be
sanctioned by an act of the provincial legislature, because from the whole
tenor of our most gracious Sovereign's conduct, we may have the utmost
confidence in his most sacred regard to the rights of mankind, and the
liberties of his subjects, in every part of his extensive dominions.

You know, gentlemen, that considerable expenses were incurred by the last
general assembly, and that immediate provision ought to be made for discharging
them. Desirous of rendering the fortifications more formidable, I applied to
the planters for their assistance; and they have readily complied with my
requisition, at a great expense to themselves.

In framing a tax bill, I have no occasion to suggest the justice and good
policy of contributing our quota, according to our circumstances, for defraying
the expenses of the empire at large; as by an happy and lasting union, and
dependence thereon, this province can alone hope to become flourishing and
prosperous; and such contribution, however inconsiderable, I will venture to
say, our most gracious Sovereign will receive as a mark of our regard to
justice, and expressive of our gratitude to them, and affection for our mother
country.

With the deepest sympathy, let me call your attention to the unhappy situation
of his Majesty's loyal subjects in the neighboring colonies, who groan under
the calamities and horrors of civil war. This worst of evils, by the blessing
of God, has been, and I trust will continue, remote from us. Did our
circumstances and abilities correspond with our feelings for those distressed
loyalists, they would soon find relief; and this province would have an
accession of many valuable settlers, and we an additional security.

His Majesty, sensible of the oppression exercised by the tyranny of usurpers
over those loyalisits, who with a truly landable fortitude, in spite of the
cruel^est persecution, adhered to their a^egiance, was graciously pleased, on
the commencement of this unnatural rebellion, to (...) me to give every
encouragement and protection to refugees resorting to this province, as an
asylum; and to grant them either unappropriated lands, or for their further
convenience to parcel out for immediate settlements such tracts as had formerly
been run out in obedience to his Majesty's orders in council, and remain
uncultivated; many grantees, contrary to justice, and regard^^, of the terms of
the royal grant, not having formed and settlements on their respective lands,
by which means his Majesty's gracious intentions, in speedily sett^ing the
colony, have been in some degree disappointed, the royal revenue deprived of
the sources that might have been expected, and this province retarded in its
growth.

You will, gentlemen, be pleased to consider the propriety of making a
provincial law, corresponding; with his Majesty's gracious intentions, to
alleviate the (...) of his loyal subjects, and to render this province a
comm^^^^ asylum, where they may enjoy the sweets of health, case and plenty;
and be assured, no encouragement on my part shall be wanting.

Your religious sentiments will lead you early to the consideration of
establishing a public worship and a ministry, upon the most liberal principles
of toleration, consistent with the excellent constitution of the church of
England.

It is with concern that I view the ruinous condition of the parochial church
in this town. I have appropriated some money, from the funds granted by
Parliament, for the contingencies of this province, for its repairs; but the
desire of having a suitable (...) for such important duty, induced me to
postpone them, until a further fund should be provided; and I look for your
assistance thereon.

In the fullest expectation, that the several branches of the provincial
legislature will carry on public business with harmony and mutual confidence,
I am happy to meet you in general assembly. Be assured, genetlemen, I shall
most heartily concur with you in every measure, that will contribute to the
good of his Majesty's service, and the interests of this province.

PATRICK TONYN. St. Augustine, January 21, 1782.
The ADDRESS of the UPPER HOUSE of ASSEMBLY.
May it please your Excellency,
We his Majesty's most dutiful and loyal subjects the upper house of assembly
for this province, in general assembly met, ret^^^ your excellency our most
hearty thanks for your speech to both houses.

When we compare our happy situation, as to pure religion and free government,
with the state of other nations and people, we are impressed with the warmest
sentiments of piety to an all directing Providence, and of loyalty and
gratitude to our most gracious Sovereign, for those inestimable blessings. And
we most sincerely implore the protection of Heaven, to preserve his Majesty's
^oval person, to direct his councils, and grant success to his arms, in
securing to his loyal, and restoring to his deluded subjects, those blessings,
and extending to other nations their happy influence.

This province, by the blessings of God, under the fostering care of our most
gracious Sovereign, and from the unwearied attention of your excellency to its
truest interests, is of some importance to the mother country, and yields
grateful returns, for the sums expended on its settlement; and we doubt not,
that under the same favorable anspices, and with the advantage of a provincial
legislature, it will proceed to maturity with accelerated progress.

It is with very great satisfaction, that we p^recive the fortifications of the
town strengthened by the attention of the Capt. Burrard, and that the
inhabitants have contributed to amply to this very essential part of his
Majesty's service; as this town i^ thereby rendered, we trust, as safe asylum
for the country inhabitants, in case of necessity: and as the cheerful and
ready assistance of the planters will be to his Majesty, a pleasing testimony
of the loyalty of his subjects of East-Florida.

In all our deliberations in a legislature capacity, we shall have in view, the
obligations this province is under to our most gracious Sovereign, and to the
Parliament and people of Great Britain, for their bounty, in contributing so
amply as they have done, toward our support, protection and defense. We deem
the interest of this colony so intimately connected with, and dependent upon
GreatBritain, that we shall use our utmost endeavors to render its union
close, permanent and lasting, as the forest means of our becoming prosperous
and flourishing.

Actuated by the principles of justice, gratitude and found policy, we shall
most readily concur with the other branches of the legislature, in recognizing
the legal and parliamentary authority, and our civil and religious rights, as
subjects and denizens of the realm of England, thereby rendering them as far as
lays with us, incontrovertible; and in contributing according to our
circumstances, as a most reasonable t^bute, our quota toward the support of
the empire at large.

It is with the deepest a^^^ction and sympathy, that we hear of the distress of
his Majesty's loyal subjects, who still ^roan under the (...) and calamities of
civil war; and we (...) to assure your excellency, that we shall early take
into our consideration, the most effectual means of promoting his Majesty's
most gracious intentions toward distressed loyalists, in rendering this
province a commodious retreat to them.

Sensible of the advantages of public worship, and the cultivation of piety
and good morals in every community, and that the present ruinous state of the
parochial church is prejudicial to these, we shall likewise take into our
consideration the recognizing a public worship and a ministry, upon the most
liberal principles of toleration, conformable to that most excellent
constitution of the church of England, which so perfectly harmonizes with the
free constitution of our government; and we hope means will immediately be
adopted, for effecting a thorough repair of that edifice, and rendering it
suitable to so pions a purpose as that of religious worship.

Fully persuaded that mutual harmony and confidence are absolutely necessary in
carrying on public business, we beg leave to assure your excellency, that we
shall maintain and promote them to the utmost of our power, and do with
pleasure look forward to their beneficial effects.

By order of the Upper House, JOHN MOULTRIE, President.
St. Augustine, January 23, 1782.
His Excellency the GOVERNOR'S ANSWER.
Honorable Gentlemen,
I return you my hearty thanks for your polite address to me, and the
assurances you are pleased to give of your early attention to the important
objects I took the liberty of recommending to your consideration; and I am
confident you will use your utmost endeavors to fulfill the same.

PATRICK TONYN.
St. Augustine, January 23, 1782.
The ADDRESS of the COMMONS HOUSE of ASSEMBLY.
May it please your Excellency,
We his Majesty's loyal and dutiful subjects, the commons of East-Florida, in
general assembly met, beg leave to return your excellency our unfeigned and
sincere thanks, for your affectionate speech to both houses, at the opening of
the present session.

Impressed with a lively sense of the happiness and freedom we enjoy, under our
most gracious and benevolent King, and the most liberal system of government on
earth; we cannot better express our loyalty to the one, and attachment to the
other, than by assuring your excellency, that it will be our earnest and
constant endeavor to act in all things as becomes dutiful subjects.

We have much satisfaction in the prospect of this colony, growing into some
degree of importance, which we are convinced will be greatly advanced by the
introduction of many necessary provincial laws, the want of which has been
long and severely felt by the inhabitants of this province.

We are happy to be informed by your excellency, that the fortifications about
this town are nearly completed. In the present critical situation of this
province, nothing is more to be wished than that they were entirely so. We
agree with your excellency, that the provision made by the last general
assembly for this purpose, was a very heavy tax upon the proprietors of negroes.

Permit us to repeat to your excellency, our firm determination to act on all
accasions becoming a loyal and grateful people.

Deeply impressed with the obligations we owe to our most gracious Sovereign,
for his paternal care of this infant colony, we will most cheerfully concur
with your excellency in every constitutional recognition of the rights of the
crown, consistent with the natural inherent privileges of the people.

Your excellency is pleased to express a confidence (...) knowledge of the
situation of this province, and the circumstances of its inhabitants; which we
will endeavor to merit, by exerting our whole attention at this alarming
crisis for the defense of the province, and for the preservation of its union
with the empire of Great Britain.

In framing a tax bill, your excellency may be fully assured, that we shall
give the requisition of contributing to the expense of the empire at large, the
attention and deliberation due to a matter of so great moment: convinced of the
justice and right of our venerable mother country, to demand a proportionable
aid from all her colonies and dependencies, we have only to lament that our
ability is not equal to our inclination, and that our mite must of necessity be
so small, as hardly to be felt or acknowledged. Thus disagreeably
circumstanced, we depend upon your excellency's known humanity and benevolence,
to represent the good disposition of us and our constituents, to comply as far
as in our power, with all his Majesty's expectations.

We sincerely join your excellency in sympathizing with our distressed fellow
subjects in the neighboring colonies, and we are sorry our circumstances and
abilities do not correspond with our feelings, and are not adequate to their
distresses; so far as respects the large uncultivated tracts of patent lands in
this province, we will give your excellency every constitutional assistance, to
make them, commodious for settlers of the foregoing description.

We are apprehensive that the large demands, which we shall have to make upon
our constituents for the internal regulation and defense of the province, will
for the present put it out^ of our power to add to the fund your excellency has
so piously set apart, for the purpose of repainting the parochial church in
this town.

We shall take into serious consideration the establishment of public worship
and a ministry, consistent with the excellent constitution of the church of
England; and shall in all these things concur as far as possible with your
excellency's wishes.

It shall be our particular study to conduct the business before us with the
utmost circumspection, and we cannot doubt from experience of receiving every
assistance in your excellency's power to promote the welfare of this province.

By order of the House, WILLIAM BROWN, Speaker.
St. Augustine, January 24, 1782.
His Excellency the GOVERNOR'S ANSWER.
Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen of the Commons House of Assembly.
I return you my sincere thanks for your address to me; and I an happy at the
assurances you give me of your intentions, to act as become the subjects of a
Sovereign, who is the guardian and protector of the rights of mankind, and
enjoying the blessings of a free government.

Impressed with sentiments of loyalty, and a due veneration for the happy
constitution under which we live, salutary effects to this province may be
expected from your deliberations.

A few local laws will be of service, as that excellent system of
jurisprudence, the laws of England, which we have hitherto enjoyed in their
fullest extent, is not in all cases suited to the circumstances of infant
colonies; and the application of them, must depend upon the decisions of the
courts of justice.

The zeal and alacrity with which the planters have contributed to render the
fortifications of this town respectable, deserve the highest commendations: in
justice to them, I have represented the same to his Majesty's secretary of
state.

As a few outworks only are wanting to render the fortifications complete, I am
happy from the sentiments of your address to expect your assistance in
constructing them; and the more readily, as they will prove a great additional
security to the province.

I have ever represented to his Majesty's secretary of state, in the strongest
terms, the loyalty and attachment of his Majesty's subjects of East-Florida;
and I flatter myself that your conduct in a legislative capacity, will evince
the truth of my assertions, and that you are a loyal and greatful people.

The distresses of many of our fellow subjects in the neighboring colonies,
are indeed great, and their wants such as we cannot altogether supply; those
who come here, may be assured of every assistance and support in my power, and
of fertile lands fit for producing grain and naval stores, to form settlements
exempt from quit rents for ten years.

I am sensible that the expenses incurred already, will be heavy on your
constituents for the ensuing year. The state of the parochial church is become
so ruinous, as to render it unfit for public worship and religious ordinances,
the discharge of which is so essential for the morals of the people. I shall
therefore set about such necessary repairs, as the small fund in my hands will
admit of.

The framing of laws in an object of the utmost importance, and merits
clearness, precision and circumspection.

PATRICK TONYN.

St. Augustine, January 25, 1782.
No. X.
In June 1782, the following message was sent to each house, accompanied with
the letter thereunto annexed.
Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen of the Commons House of Assembly.
It is with the deepest concern, I have the honor of laying before you, a
letter from Lieutenant. General Leslie, commanding his Majesty's troops in the
southern district, and conveying to me the Commander in chief Sir Guy
Carleton's express directions to him, for the evacuation of this province by
his Majesty's troops, and such loyalists as are desirous of withdrawing with
them. As this is of the most weighty and important consequence to his Majesty's
faithful subjects, I take the earliest opportunity of communicating it to you.

PATRICK TONYN.

St. Augustine, June 18, 1782.
Lieutenant General LISLIR'S letter, referred to in his Excellency the
Governor's message.
Charlestown, June 4, 1782. SIR,
I take the earliest opportunity of acquainting your excellency, that I was
yesterday honored with a letter from Sir Guy Carleton, containing his express
directions for my withdrawing his Majesty's troops from the town of St.
Augustine and its dependencies: the execution of which resting with the
military officer in command there, I have to him sent instructions for that
purpose; but I thought it necessary, at the same time, to give your excellency
the first notice in my power of a measure, which so essentially affects
yourself, and the King's loyal subjects committed to your charge; to provide
for (...) and accommodation on this distressing occasion, I am happy to assure
you has been an object of prime consideration with the Commander in chief; by
whom I am directed to extend every proper attention and assistance to your
excellency, your follower, and such of the inhabitants whom you may think fit
to recommend. And as I have communicated these instructions to
Brigadier-General Clarke, I am confident you will meet from that officer, every
attention, which your situation and wishes can demand.

It may be necessary I should add, that your excellency may make arrangements
accordingly, the transports which are to take off the loyal inhabitants and
(...) of St. Augustine, may be expected dany with you.

I have the honor to be, Sir, your excellency's most obedient and most humble
servant, ALEXANDER LESLIE.


The joint ADDRESS of the UPPER and COMMONS HOUSE of ASSEMBLY, to the GOVERNOR.
May it please your Excellency,
We his Majesty's most dutiful and loyal subjects, the upper and the commons
house of assembly of this province, in general assembly met, return your
excellency our cordial thanks for your early communication of the Hon.
Lieutenant General Leslie's letter, ^^^nating that the Commander in chief had
given express directions for the withdrawing his Majesty's troops from the town
of St. Augustine and its dependencies; and that transports may be daily
expected, to carry off your excellency, your followers, and such of the
inhabitants whom your may think fit to recommend.

Upon to every extraordinary and alarming an occasion, we conceive it our duty,
with deference, but at the same time with the freedom and candor that becomes
the representatives of a free people, to express our own sentiments, and what
we are convinced are the sentiments of the inhabitants at large.

We beg leave to represent what must be well known to your excellency, that
this province consists entirely of loyal subjects. many of whom being refugees
from the neighboring colonies, have given the strongest proofs of their
attachment to government, by quitting their former habitations and all their
property, rather than forego their allegiance; and that the whole have upon
every occasion, with the greatest ^^^rity, contributed by every means in their
power toward the support of government, and the defense of the province.

We must also remind your excellency, that this province has been held out as
an asylum for the well affected in the other colonies; ^o resort to, where they
might expect every protection and assistance; which assurances your excellency,
in your proclamations, sanctioned with the legal authority, and which we have
to this moment fully experienced.

It is equally necessary that we represent to your excellency, that the loyal
inhabitants who may be enabled to embark, must depart this province divested of
their property, and in a state of the greatest indigence be obliged with their
families to look out for new habitations, or become burdensome to that
government, which they have ever (...), to the utmost of their power; and those
inhabitants who are obliged to remain, must be in the most deplorable and
distressed situation, without government, laws or arms, surrounded on all hands
by enemies and savages, and exposed to the de^^edations of every lawless
banditti or hostile invader.

Under all the above circumstances, we earnestly solicit your excellency to
acquaint us, whether you mean to embark with the king's forces, thereby to
abdicate the civil government. And at all (...), we most humbly request your
excellency to apply to the commanding officer here, for such provisions and
military stores as may enable ^s to make a defense, until we can receive
further succor; and that your excellency will be pleased to lose no time in
making the like application to the Commander of the southern district. But in a
more particular manner, we most earnestly intereat your excellency, as you
regard the welfare of the inhabitants of this province over whom you have long
happily presided, that you will be pleased to make the most immediate and full
representation to his excellency Sir Guy Carleton, of the deplorable situation
we must soon be reduced t^, and use your utmost endeavors and influence to
obtain a counter^^^d of the present orders; and in case the troops should
actually be ^^moved, that he may as soon as possible afford some protection, by
sending a military force here.

By order of the Upper House, JOHN MOULTRIE, President. By order of the Common
House, WILLIAM BROWN, Speaker.

St. Augustine, June 19, 1782.
His Excellency the GOVERNOR'S ANSWER.
Honorable Gentlemen, Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen of the Commons House of
Assembly.
I thank you for your very loyal and spirited address to me, upon the al^^ming
occasion of the removal of the King's troops, and the prospect of my being
instructed to leave East-Florida.

I have as yet received no (...) royal mandate.

Unfortunately the (...) by the (...) from England (...), (...) lost; by which
means I remain in the dark.

I am sensible of the deplorable situation to which the loyal inhabitants of
this province must be reduced, without arms and mlitary stores for our defense;
and I shall most warmly recommend to the respective commanding military
officers, that we may be supplied with some; and shall not, without a positive
instruction, or the most absolute necessity, think of giving up to a state of
anarchy, his Majesty's subjects, who have so faithfully manifestted their
attachment to their Sovereign and the British government, as you, gentlemen,
and the inhabitants, upon every occasion, have some.

PATRICK TONYN.

St. Augustine, June 19, 1782.
Upon this, both houses came to the following resolutions.

Resolved, That in the present alarming situation of affairs, when the
inhabitants expect his Majesty's troops, and garrison to be removed from hence,
it behooves them to take every step for their defense.

Resolved, That this house will support his excellency the Governor with their
lives and fortunes in the defense of this province, and in preserving it to our
most gracious Sovereign.

Resolved, That the clerk of this house do forthwith furnish his excellency the
Governor with a copy of these resolutions, that he may have the earliest
notification of their assurances.

Both houses likewise prepared a joint address to the King, which was as
follows.

To the KING'S Most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Address and Petition of the Upper House and the Commons House of
Assembly, of this your Majesty's province of East-Florida, in General Assembly
met.
Most gracious Sovereign,
We your Majesty's ever faithful, most dutiful and loyal subjects, the upper
house and the commons house of assembly of this your Majesty's province of
East-Florida, in general assembly met, on behalf of ourselves and constituents,
under the immediate appr^^h^n^ion of the most dreadful of all calamities, that
of anarchy, presume with all humility to lay at the foot of the throne, this
dutiful address and petition.

With the warmest sentiments of gratitude, we (...) leave to return your
Majesty our thanks, for that paternal care and royal bounty, uniformly afforded
us, from the cession of this province to your Majesty's crown and dominions
till this moment; and we are truly sensible, that from the blessings and
Advantages we have hitherto enjoyed under your Majesty's mild administration of
civil government, and from the protection of your Majesty's arms, we have been
rendered happy, and the province has become flourishing.

We persume, ^ire, at the same time to affirm, that your Majesty's colony of
East-Florida is altogether inhabited by men most firmly attached to your
Majesty's sacred person and government, which they have ever manifested by
cheerfully and voluntarily tak^^ up arms, whenever it became necessary for the
defense of your Majesty's province; and that a vast proportion of them consists
of persons who have taken refuge here in consequence of proclamations,
(fanctioned by royal mandate ^,) issued by your Majesty's Governor, holding
(...) that they should find in East-Florida, besides other advantages, a secure
and safe (...) against the cruelties of their unrelenting enemies, which they
have hitherto most amply experienced. This being the state of your Majesty's
colony, they presume to look for a continuance of that protection and regard,
which faithful subjects (...) themselves entitled to; and they conceive that
some discrimination ought to be made betwixt them and those colonies, where a
large proportion of the inhabitants, regardless of their allegiance, have
rebelled against your Majesty.

To our utter astonishment and confusion, however, and under a distress not to
be expressed by words, we discover by a message received from your Majesty's
Governor, accompanying a letter from the Hon. Li^uterant General Leslie, that
your Majesty's troops are to be immediately withdrawn from the province,
together with the military stores, etc. and that transports may be daily
expected to carry off your Majesty's Governor, his followers, and such loyal
inhabitants as may chase to embark.

On so very alarming an occasion, when we have such dismal prospects before us;
when we may soon expect to be deprived of all protection, government and laws;
when those who may be enabled to embark, must be under the cruel necessity of
reli^quishing the^^ property, and consequently must depart indi^^nce, and
become a ^urthen to that government, which they have hitherto supported to the
utmost of their power; and when those who remain, will be left altogether
(...), (...) ^unde^ by banditti, (...), savages, and enemies of every (...)
^phere^ with that reliance which supports men confident of success; and most
earnestly solicit our Sovereign to (...) his immediate aid and protection to
men, who trust they are stilldecmed subjects of the British empire, and flatter
themselves they are entitled to the peculiar regard of their Sovereign; and
being so entitled, are certain of receiving it at his royal hands.

No. XI.
The colonists from Minorca, settled in the neighborhood of St. Augustine, on
this occasion presented the following Address to the Governor.

May it please your Excellency,
We his Majesty's most dutiful and loyal subjects, truly sensible of the ma^y
blessings we enjoy under the British constitution and government, and deeply
impressed with sentiments of gratitude to our Sovereign and your excellency,
for the parental care taken of us under your excellency's mild, just and wise
administration, beg leave to offer you our thanks for your humanity and
goodness to us, since we were lucky enough to come under your excellency's wing.

We are much concerned to hear that Sir Guy Carleton, the Commander in chief in
America, has sent express directions for the evacuation of this province, by
his Majesty's troops and such loyalists as may ch^se to depart this country;
and we most sincerely condole with your excellency upon this melancholy
occasion; but we still have hopes, and pray to God, these orders may be
countermanded.

Happen what will, we beg leave to assure your excellency in the most solemn
manner, that we are determined, individually and collectively, with our persons
and property, which property we have honestly earned, chiefly through the aid
and assistance of your excellency, to do our utmost endeavors, should the same
be thought necessary, to repel any force whatever, that may come against this
province, and to protect your excellency our best benefactor.

Should an evacuation actually take place, we shall always, lament the dire
necessity which must occasion it; and we shall ever pray that our Sovereign,
his subjects and particularly your excellency, may flourish and be happy in
this world, and the world to come.

St. Augustine, June 25, 1782.
His Excellency the GOVERNOR'S ANSWER.
Gentlemen,
I thank you for your address to me, so expressive of your sentiments of
loyalty, and your sense of the blessing, you leave enjoyed, under the British
government, and of your warm attachment to me.

It gives me very great pleasure, to be the means of rendering an honest and
industrious body of men, good and loyal subjects to his Majesty, and useful
members of the community; and I hope by your honest industry, you will continue
to be such and prosperous; and be assured, that every protection and assistance
in my power shall ever be given to persons so well affected to the British
government and constitution, as I have every reason to believe you to be.

PATRICK TONYN.

St. Augustine, June 25, 1782.
No. XII.
On the arrival of the preliminary articles, both house joined ^n the following
address to the Governor.
May it please your Excellency.
We his Majesty's most dutiful and loyal subjects, the upper and the commons
house of assembly, in general assembly met, conc^iving it a duty to ourselves
and constituents, to prepare an address to the throne upon the distressed
state, to which the inhabitants will be reduced by the cession of this province
to the crown of Spain, flatter ourselves that your excellency, from your
constant and unwearied attention to the interests and welfare of his Majesty's
loyal subjects, will be pleased to transmit the same by the earliest
opportunity, to be laid before the King.

By order of the Upper House, JOHN MOULTRIE, President. By order of the Commons
House of Assembly, WILLIAM BROWN, Speaker.

St. Augustine, May 1, 1783.
His Excellency the GOVERNOR'S ANSWER.
Mr. President, and Honorable Gentlemen,
Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen of the Commons House of Assembly

I am exceedingly happy that you have thought fit to address his Majesty, upon
the distressed state to which the inhabitants will be reduced, by the cession
of this province to the crown of Spain.

I am confident every possible (...), consistent with justice, may be expected
from that loyal (...), which has been constantly exerted toward the
inhabitants of this proviu^^; (...) upon government, is perfectly correspondent
with those principles of (...) loyalty, which during the (...) of a long and
(...) ^^^, and at a (...) of general (...) we have (...).

I shall by the packet transmit your address to his Majesty's principal
secretary of state, to be laid before the King.

I return you my hearty thanks, for the favorable opinion you are pleased to
express of my attention to the interests of this province; that I have ever
considered as the In (...) basis upon which to establish my reputation, and as
the surest means to recommend me to the loyal favor of my Sovereign.

PATRICK TONYN.

St. Augustine, May 1, 1783.
The following is the Address to his Majesty, which accompanied the above.

To the KING'S Most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Address of the Upper and the Commons House of Assembly of the
province of East-Florida, in General Assembly met.
May it please your Majesty,
We your Majesty's most dutiful, loyal and ever faithful subjects, the upper
house and the commons house of assembly of this your Majesty's province of
East-Florida, in general assembly met, at a time when it is fixed that they, as
the representatives of the people, must soon for ever be disolved; when the
political existence of the inhabitants as a body, is drawing to a speedy
annihilation; at such a moment, the most critical they have hitherto
experienced, they presume once more to approach your royal person.

Amidst the vicissitudes incident to a long and calamitous war, your Majesty's
faithful subjects in East-Florida, strengthened from time to time by addition
of virtuous men, breathing the same spirit of loyalty, trusted that by the
protection of your Majesty's troops, the unwearied attention of your Majesty's
Governor to the interest of the province, and their own exertions, they would
be able, as the event has proved, to repel the attacks of your Majesty's
enemies, during its continuance; and con^^iving the resources of the nation to
be great, they also trusted that men, the favorites of fortune, would at last
be brought forward, equal to the (...) of conducting your Majesty's powerful
fleets and armies to sure and certain victory; and your Majesty's faithful
subjects were encouraged in these their sanguine expectations, when they
preceived the gallant Lord Rodney triumphing over your Majesty's enemies in the
West Indies, and the noble defense made by General Elliot against the
formidable attack of the other branch of the House of Bourbon: These, added to
the brilliant successes in the East, induced your Majesty's subjects here to
hope, that at a moment when fortune seemed to (...) upon your Majesty's (...)
in all quarters, a peace more upon the principles of reciprocity, might have
taken place, and that in this the day of it, they would have continued to enjoy
the fruits of their industry and improvements, with this secret but
satisfactory reflection, that they had to the best of their abilities,
faithfully discharged their duty to their King and country, during the
continuance of the contest.

Whilst with admiration we perceived your Majesty's condescension in gratifying
the wishes of your people, even at the expense of the dismemberment of the
empire, your Majesty's subjects here felt themselves much disappointed at the
event; as they had humbly presumed to entertain an idea, that as the strength,
so the grandeur of the parent country, greatly depended on keeping the whole
dominions entire; in the support of which idea, they ever were ready to assist
with their lives and fortunes. Time must discover, and they trust they will be
convinced by it, that the mother country, notwithstanding the separation, will
continue her consequence in the class of nations.

Whatever may have been the true causes that induced your Majesty's servants to
conclude a peace, which places your Majesty's loyal American subjects in so
humiliating a situation; whether the distresses of the nation made it
necessary, or the politics of the day brought it forth, we beg leave to assure
your Majesty, that as it is a plain and undisguised truth, that no success can
change vice into virtue, so your Majesty may rest convinced, that the most
grievous misfortunes will never shake integrity supported on the basis of fixed
principle; and we trust the day will come, when our struggles in the cause of
loyalty and the constitution, will command the esteem of all ranks of men in
Great Britain; and that when party and faction die away, calm and dispassionate
reason will rise up in their stead. At a juncture, when we must soon expect to
be deprived to those most inestimable of all blessings, during our stay here,
that of protection in our lives, liberties and properties, under the mild and
lenient administration of a British government; at a juncture, when the
inhabitants must soon determine either to live for a time under a government in
the hands of the natural enemies of their country, or abandon their territorial
possessions, improvements and houses, many of them just finished and purchased
with the small wreck of their effects saved at the evacuation of Carolina and
Georgia, to seek another asylum, and that not pointed out, nor the means of
conveyance; when we have also to dread the resentment of savages enraged by
disappointment, and governed by those passions only, revenge and cruel^y,
incident to human nature unrestrained by civilization; when we are to depend
upon recommendations from one body of inveterate and unrelenting enemies to
other bodies of the same class of men, for a restoration of our paternal and
other estates in America, ruined and laid waste in most instances, and seized
for no other cause but for manifesting our zeal for and attachment to your
Majesty, and that glorious constitution of government, to which we are and
always have been firmly wedded: At such a juncture, inclination as well as duty
dictate to us to address our Sovereign, in behalf of ourselves and our virtuous
fellow sufferers; and at the same time, that we request he will be graclo^^^y
pleased to accept of our strongest assurances of continued and unshaken
attachment to his sacred person, also humbly to entreat, that he will cast his
eyes toward, and lend a favorable ear to, their sufferings and heavy losses
of property, past and present; property, they conceive given up to answer the
purposes of the nation; and also that some relies may be afforded those
unfortunate families, whose fituation and want of money must compel them to
continue for a while here. That the remainder of your Majesty's regin, may be
long prosperous and happy, is the sincere and earnest prayer of the legislature
and loyal people of East-Florida.

By order of the Upper House, JOHN MOULTRIE, President. By order of the Commons
House, WILLIAM BROWN, Speaker,

St. Augustine, May 1, 1783.
NO. XIII.
In March 1784, the following joint Address of both Houses to the Governor,
closed the business of the legislature of East-Florida.

May it please your Excellency.
We his Majesty's loyal and ever faithful subjects, the upper house and the
commons house of assembly, in general assembly met, request your excellency to
accept our thanks, for the gratification your afforded the public, by your
early communication of the interesting intelligence by the packet, contained in
your excellency's proclamation, and in the correspondence of the right
honorable Lord Hawke with his Majesty's ministers.

It affords us great consolation to find, that every possible attention will be
paid us, in whatever situation we may be placed; and that it is the inclination
of his Majesty's servants, to afford us every relief, which they have in part
manifested, by the supply of shipping, and other advantages we are to receive;
for which, we request your excellency will be pleased to return our most
cordial acknowledgements; perfectly satisfied at the same time, that to your
excellency's good offices, and just representations, we must be in a great
measure indebted for the intended assistance. We beg leave to assure your
excellency, that your unremitted attention on all occasions, to the interest
and welfare of the inhabitants of this over loyal colony, has made a deep and
lasting impression on our minds; and during the distressful scene we are soon
to experience, we are convinced your excellency will enjoy the pleasing
reflection, that every thing on your part was done to avert the blow, and being
disappointed in that, to soften the misfortune.

We should be greatly wanting in sentiments of gratitude, were we not in the
fullest manner, also to acknowledge the great attention, that has been paid to
our interest and concerns in Great Britain, by the right honorable Lord Hawke,
and the other members of the committee of East-Florida proprietors; and also to
the other noble characters, who humanely interested themselves in our behalf;
by which they have fully shown, that they largely posses those benevoient
principles, so inestimably valuable, and that are the greatest ornaments to an
exalted character.

Confident that absence will no wise abate your excellency's regard and
affection for his Majesty's loyal subjects, who long experienced the invaluable
blessings of a mild and free administration of (...) government, under the
auspices of your excellency; we beg have to draw your attention, and engage, we
hope, your zeal in our (...); and as ours is the cause of justice and humanity,
so are we sure of support from your excellency.

The time being (...) at hand, when this country is to undergo so great a
change; when it is to be yielded up, 'and the sovereignty to be transferred to
a foreign crown, and the British constitution and government to be disolved; we
should be greatly wanting to our constituents, were we not to make a few
remarks on our present very peculiar situation.

It must be recollected that this province, being ceded to the imperial crown
of Great Britain, at the peace of one thousand seven hundred and sixty three,
our most gracious Sovereign, as an encouragement for his subjects to settle in
East-Florida, was pleased to issue his royal proclamation, declaring amongst
other things, that the inhabitants should enjoy all the privileges of British
subjects, and every protection in their persons and proprrty; and your
excellency, no doubt instructed by his Majesty's servants, by repeated
proclamations, invited the loyal inhabitants from the revolted colonies, to
resort to East-Florida, as a secure and safe asylum; and we were also assured,
that in all possible situations the utmost attention and regard would be paid
to their welfare and safety; under all which encouragements and assurances, his
Majesty's province of East-Florida had arrived at some degree of opulence, and
began to be in a flourishing state.

It is also well known to your excellency, that the inhabitants of
East-Florida, ever conceiving it one of their chief blessings to be deemed a
part of the British empire, have uniformly, with cheerfulness and alacrity,
been ready to support with their lives and fortunes, that nation, and that
community, of which they are a part, and to contribute their mite toward the
national support; and being always ^ends to under and (...) government, they
have constantly and at every period, acknowledged that supreme uncontrollable
(...) must exist (...) here in every state, to be lodged in the (...) and (...)
of (...) and during the course of a long war, they have at all times, and upon
all occasions, assisted to the utmost of their power, in defending that part of
the empire, where it was their lot to be placed; viewing a mismemberment, as
the greatest of all possible political evils that could befall them. With these
sentiments most powerfully prevailing, and still. wedded to that favorite
principle, a subordination to legal government, they do with readiness admit,
that our most gracious Sovereign, armed by the constitution with the power of
making war and peace, and the necessary of the state, and the public interest
no doubt requiring it, had an indisputable right to dismember this province
from the empire; and to this measure we submit, as it is our duty to do to
every constitutional act of government, done by his Majesty, and sanctioned by
his parliament; and being by this act of government reduced to this
alternative, either to remain and forego our civil rights, as British subjects,
and at the same time to become apostates in religion, or quit our comfortable
and valuable settlements and property; we, as a matter that requires little
reflection, choose the latter, and shall forth with prepare to withdraw to some
other part of our Sovereign's dominions. But at the same time we beg leave to
put your excellency in remembrance, that this dismemberment not being
chargeable to any vicistitudes accruing in the course of the war, nor to any
internal convulsions occasioned by insurrection or revolt, nor to the political
or natural wishes of the people; nor being sensible of having done any crime,
for which we ought to be deprived of our property, or for which it ought to be
given up to a foreign power; and the war not being chargeable to any particular
fault of ours, but on the contrary, having ever during the storm, acted the
part of faithful members of that nation, of which we are a part; we conceive,
and we trust our conceptions are founded on the firm basis of constitutional
principles, supported by the doctrines that have been adopted by mankind for
the conduct of nations in similar cases, that as we are obliged to forego our
property, and it is thus annexed to a foreign power by an act of state, and
must have been coded for the good of the nation, we ought to bear no more than
our proportion of the loss, and consequently will receive compensation.

It may perhaps be alleged; that the sovereignty only of EastFlorida being
coded, our territorial property is not thereby transferred, but remains to the
British proprietors becoming subjects to his Most Catholic Majesty, or
otherwise for sale to the natural subjects of Spain; in answer to which
sophistry, should any such be advanced, we beg leave to ask if it can possibly
be supposed, that a people so renowned for national honor, public faith, and
liber^^ sentiment, and enjoying the most desirable constitution of government
in the world, could intend to compel her most faithful colonists and adherents,
to exchange all their natural and me^^imable privileges as Britons, for the
domination of Spain; to their (...) exclusion from the benefits of future
industry, in the pursuits of agriculture and commerce, notoriously subject to
such discouragements and restrictions in the Spanish dominions, as to us appear
intolerable; the general tendency and natural effect of which seem also to
preclude the hope of purchases for the numerous valuable plantations and
settlements formed in this province, under a British government; on which
subject our apprehensions are co^roborated from a consideration of the immense
tracts of superior natural fe^tility, remaining waste and uncultivated in all
the Spanish American territories. Or further, can it be imagined, that our
parent country, (where so much blood has been shed in the cause of religion,
and of the protestant succession,) will expect ^er most faithful, and we trust
conscientious East-Florida colonists, to sacrifice their principles both
religious and political, to temporal considerations, were the objects even
attainable thereby; we humbly conceive so rigorous and cruel an alternative
never was intended to be imposed on us, which seems apparent from there being a
period stipulated, and means provided for our emigration.

But while we have the fullest confidence in the justice and honor of our
parent country, we feel for the numerous individuals, who either from poverty,
infirmities or former losses and mi^fortunes, cannot resort to Great Britain,
to solicit their just claims in person, as we understand is at present required
by the commissioners appointed to enquire into the losses and services of the
American loyalists; and who, should the adjustment be delayed, must undergo
great distress in addition to their present and past sufferings, and after all
their personal and other services and assistance, given either in defense of
this province, or in other parts of America, during the continuance of a
tedious war, they at last will be involved in ruin. We therefore call upon your
excellency, who no doubt must sympathize with them, and whose humanity must
already be awakened, to become their advocate; and as your excellency can bear
testimony of their zeal, attachment and unshaken loyalty, we make no doubt,
disposed as his Majesty's servants and ministers are, that every attention will
be paid to any application you may think proper to make in their behalf.

As at the expiration of a given time, such part of the immovable property as
cannot be sold, must be altogether abandoned, we conceive it is a clear and
self evident position, that his Catholic Majesty's subjects, if disposed to
purchase, will not, under such circumstances, give a price equal to the value
of the property transferred; and as individuals; will rather (...) on the
justice of parliament, than dispose of their estates (...) a sum greatly under
their value, should an idea prevail that (...) sale will (...) them from
further (...): we (...) (...) the nation, that a commissioner should be
appointed to keep (...) exact account of the property sold, and the price
given, so that it may be fully known, what sums are received by individuals on
this ^oore. We presume to hope your excellency will point out some mode,
whereby this business may be regulated and conducted, as no doubt his Majesty's
servants must have given your excellency some instructions on this head.

We hope your excellency clearly understands that we do not mean to convery the
most distant insinuation, that his Majesty's Ministers, or the nation, would
preclude from a further claim, individuals, selling property under its value;
for this would be supposing them capable of adding insult to misfortune and
distress; but as the matter may not be thoroughly understood by the community
at large, and the sums received cannot be so readily known, unless some method
similar to that pointed out is adopted, we hope it will meet with the
approbation of your excellency.

As it is probable this will be the last opportunity we shall have, in our
legislative capacity, to address your excellency, we think it no more than a
just offering to your character, to declare, that the true interests of the
parent country, and of this province, as part of the British empire, has ever
appeared to be your chief study; and the great concern you have u^^ormly taken
in the welfare and safety of the loyal inhabitants, is on the present occasion
particularly conspicuous, in the steps adopted by your excellency, for
preserving the peace and security of the country; especially of the frontiers,
by giving (...) to the laws, and maintaining the government in its pristine
energy and vigor, at a crisis when outrage and disorder were beginning to
appear, and might have become prevalent.

We beg leave to assure your excellency, that it is with the deepest regret we
look forward to our approaching separation, as well from esteem for your
excellency's private character, as from the favorable light through which we
view your excellency in your public capacity.

Our earnest wishes for your happiness and welfare, we request your excellency
will accept as the strongest mark we have to give of our perpetual regard and
esteem, and of our approbation of your excellency's conduct.

By order of the Upper House, JOHN MOULTRIE, President. By order of the Commons
House, WILLIAM BROWN, Speaker.

St. Augustine, March 25, 178^.
His Excellency the GOVERNOR'S ANSWER.
Mr. President, and Honorable Gentlemen,
Mr. Speaker, and Gentlemen of the Commons House of Assembly.

Deeply impressed with the warmest sensibility upon this affecting occasion. I
beg leave, gentlemen, to return you my most hearty thanks, for your very
respectful and affectionate address to me.

The interest and happiness of this community, have ever been my favorite
objects of attainment; and be assured, gentlemen, that my utmost ex^^tions
shall be used, in supporting every constitutional claim and expectation of the
inhabitants of this unfortunate colony: Such important concerns, will continue
to influence every action of my life.

It would be a great violation of justice, and of my own feelings, were I in
any instance to neglect to make a faithful representation of the distinguishing
merits of his Majesty's most dutiful subjects of East-Florida; of their
inviolable attachment to his sacred, person and government, and uniform
alacrity in promoting his service; in which, upon every emergency, they have
appeared ready to devote their lives and fortunes.

These considerations, in addition to the ^^lial generation and regard, you
have ever exhibited for the mother country, and that cheerful acknowledgement
of the supremacy of it legislature, extending to the very act, by which you are
to be despersed in search of new habitations, being compelled to relinquish;
our valuable settlements and pleasant abodes, risen to: flourishing condition
by your own industry and labor: on the basis of all which, (...) may ground
substantial hopes, that compensation adequate to so great a sacrifice, will be
obtained, from the justice and wisdom of parliament, and the people of
Great Britain.

There is, gentlemen, an evident propriety in your desire of a superintendency
of transfers, which may be made of your immoveble property, to the subjects of
his Most Catholic Majesty; the means of effectuating which, shall have every
proper consideration.

My relative situation to the inhabitants of this province, earnestly involves
me in their concerns; the image^ in my mind of their impending separation and
sufferings, and the long farewell I am to bid them, gentlemen, through your
medium, on this probably last occasion of our meeting in a legislative
capacity, till me with the tenderest emotions of sympathy and (...).

I most heartily, gentlemen, wish you and your constituents, the fullest
measure of success and happiness, in your future pursui^s; and I beg leave to
assure you, that I shall forever retain the greatest attachment for and regard
to his Majesty's ever faithful subjects, the loyal people of East-Florida.

PATRICK TONYN.

St. Augustine, March 25, 1784.
ERRATA.
Page. Line. 2. 7. from the bottom, instead of (...) read account. 3. 9.
instead of 17^0 read 1781. 25. 10. from the bottom, before community insert ^.
31. 8. instead of the inhabitations read their habitations. ^^ 10. from the
bottom, instead of warrant read warmest. ^^. 7. instead of (...) read (...).
41. ^. from the bottom, instead of for read ^^ 44. ^. instead of (...) read
case. 47. 8. instead of taken read taking 48. ^. instead of (...) read (...)
52. 7. from the bottom, instead of (...) read (...) 55. ^. instead of (...)
read (...)


