THE BENEVOLENCE OF THE DEITY, FAIRLY AND IMPARTIALLY CONSIDERED. IN THREE
PARTS.

The first explains the sense, in which we are to understand Benevolence, as
applicable to GOD.

The second asserts, and proves, that this perfection, in the sense explained,
is one of his essential attributes.

The third endeavors to answer objections.

Under one or other of these heads, occasion will be taken to view man as an
intelligent moral agent; having within himself an ability and freedom to WILL,
as well as to do, in opposition to NECESSITY from any extraneous cause
whatever: -- To point out the ORIGIN OF EVIL, both natural and moral: -- And to
offer what may be thought sufficient to show, that there is no inconsistency
between infinite benevolence in the Deity, which is always guided by infinite
wisdom, and any appearances of evil in the creation.

BY CHARLES CHAUNCY, D. D. SENIOR PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH OF CHRIST IN
BOSTON.

AMERICA: MASSACHUSETTS: BOSTON: PRINTED BY POWARS and WILLIS MDCCLXXXIV.

INTRODUCTION.
BENEVOLENCE is that quality, in the human mind, without which we could not be
the objects of one another's esteem: Neither, were we wholly destitute of it,
could we, whatever other qualities we might be endowed with, place that
confidence in each other, upon which the well-being of the world, in so great a
measure, depends. Were we possessed of power, but no benevolence, it would
operate in tyranny; were we the subjects of wisdom, but no benevolence, it
would be nothing better than craft: And the higher we enjoyed these properties
in degree, the greater reason we should have, had we, at the same time, no
benevolence, to shun one another through fear of mischief. It is benevolence,
tempering our other qualities, and making way for their exercise in the methods
of kindness, that constitutes us worthy objects of each other's love, and lays
the foundation for that mutual trust between man and man, without which there
could be no such thing as public happiness.

And this observation, extended to all other created intelligent agents, is
equally true: Yea, it is so far true, with respect even to the uncreated
Supreme Being himself, as that, if we had no idea of him as benevolent, we
could not esteem him, though we might fear him: Neither could we place our
trust in him, though we might in a servile way, do homage to him. Benevolence
is that ingredient in his character which exhibits him to our view as amiably
perfect, and worthy of our warmest love, and entire confidence. His other
attributes, separate from this, are insufficient to inspire these affections;
nor are they indeed at all suited to such a purpose. "Eternity and immensity
amaze our thoughts: Infinite knowledge and wisdom fill us with admiration:
Omnipotence, or irresistible power, is great and adorable; but, at the same
time, if considered simply by itself, it is also dreadful and terrible: Dominion
and majesty, clothed with perfect and impartial justice, is worthy of our
highest praises; but still to sinners it appears rather awful and venerable,
than the object of desire and love: Holiness and purity are inexpressibly
beautiful and amiable perfections, but of too bright a glory for sinners to
contemplate with delight. It Is goodness that finishes the idea of God, and
represents him to us under the lovely character of the best as well as greatest
Being in the universe. This is that attribute, which both in itself is
infinitely amiable, and, as a groundwork interwoven with all the other
perfections of the Divine Nature, makes every one of them also to become
objects of our love, as well as of our admiration. Immense and eternal
goodness, goodness all-powerful and all-wise, goodness invested with supreme
dominion, and tempering the rigor of unrelenting justice: This is indeed the
description of a Perfect Being; a character truly worthy of God." Dr. Clark's
sermons.


But though Benevolence thus essentially enters into the character of the
Deity, it has been objected to by some, and abused by others. And it may be,
more objections have been levelled against, and greater reproaches cast upon,
this attribute of the Divine Nature, than any of the other; though it is, in
itself, the most lovely of all the perfections of God, and eminently that
perfection, which, being intimately conjoined with the rest, in all their
exercises, is the true and only source of all created existence, and dependent
happiness, whether in present possession or future prospect.

With respect to some, their abuses of the Divine benevolence don't so much
spring from any distinct notions they have formed of the nature of this
principle, as existing in the Deity; or the methods, in which they conclude it
ought to operate, as from a wrong state of mind. They are dissatisfied with
their situation in the world, and quite out of humor, because they don't
partake so liberally of the good things of providence, as they imagine they
might do. And their discontent is still heightened if they meet with
disappointments, and are reduced to suffering circumstances, though by their
own folly. And being out of frame, uneasy and restless in their spirits, they
find fault with their Maker, and vent themselves in reflections on his
goodness; as though it were greatly defective: Otherwise, as they imagine, a
more advantageous condition in life might have been alloted to them; and would
have been, if the Deity had been as good as they can suppose him to be. These
are the complaints, by which the infinitely benevolent Creator, and Governor,
of all things, is abused by the less knowing and inquisitive, who are the most
numerous: But, as their complaints don't so much originate in judgment, as a
bad temper of mind, this chiefly needs to be rectified, and then their
complaints will cease of course.

There are others, whose objections against the Divine Benevolence arises from
a vain mind, proudly aspiring to comprehend that which is above the reach of
their capacities. Some appearances, in the constitution of nature, and
government of providence, are such as they cannot account for, upon the plan of
infinite benevolence. They find themselves unable to connect these, with other
appearances, so as to constitute an whole which they distinctly and
particularly perceive to be an absolutely good one, freed from all
difficulties: And they are therefore rather disposed to dispute the existence
of an infinitely perfect principle of benevolence, than to call in question
their own capacity to see through the whole of its operations: Though, if there
be such a principle, it must be employed about the universal system of things;
and, for that reason, require an understanding, in order to adjust its
exercises, that can take in connections, and dependencies, vastly transcending
the most enlarged conceptions of such imperfect creatures as we are. Nothing
can be sufficient to satisfy such objectors, till they have first learnt to be
modest; entertaining just apprehensions of their own weakness, and the
unsearchable greatness and goodness of God.

There are yet others, whose objections against, and abuses of, the benevolence
of the Deity, take rise from their misconceptions of the nature of this Divine
attribute. Having formed to themselves wrong apprehensions of supreme absolute
benevolence, and the methods of its display, they either deny that God is thus
benevolent, because some detached appearances of goodness are not such as they
were led, from their mistaken notions, to expect they should be: Or else, they
reproach this glorious attribute of the Divine Being, giving false and
dishonorable representations of it, conformably to the erroneous thoughts they
have previously entertained of its nature, or manner of exercise.

Some there be who seem to have no other idea of absolutely perfect
benevolence, than an unconcontroulable impulsive principle, necessarily urging
on to the greatest communication of good, and the total prevention of evil; its
prevention so as that it should have no place in the creation, in any shape, or
view whatsoever: And the constitution of nature, not falling in with this
notion of goodness, they question the reality of any principle of benevolence:
Not considering that benevolence if seated in an infinitely perfect mind, like
God's, is never exerted blindly, or necessarily, but always under the conduct
of reason and wisdom: Which thought justly pursued, will sufficiently account
for all appearances, however seemingly inconsistent with goodness; as we may
have occasion to show hereafter, in its proper place: Whereas, a principle of
benevolence, thou^h of infinite propelling force, if not guided in its
operations by wisdom and intelligence, instead of producing nothing but good,
might, by blindly counteracting itself, produce, upon the whole, as the final
result of its exertions, infinite confusion and disorder.

The effect of mistaken notions of Divine Goodness, in others, is, not their
denying that God is good, infinitely good, but speaking reproachfully of this
attribute of his nature. And, perhaps, the reflections which have been cast
upon the benevolence of the Deity, from this cause, have been equally malignant
with a total denial of it, and done as much disservice to the interest of true
religion, and real virtue, in the world. A m^re shocking idea can scarce be
given of the Deity, than that which represents him as arbitrarily dooming the
greater part of the race of men to eternal misery. Was he wholly destitute of
goodness, yea, positively malevolent in his nature, a worse representation
could not be well made of him. And yet, this is the true import of the doctrine
of absolute and unconditional reprobation, as it has been taught, even by those
who profess faith in God as a benevolent, yea, an infinitely benevolent Being:
But they could not have taught this doctrine, it would have been impossible, if
they had not first entertained entirely wrong conceptions of benevolence, as
attributed to the Deity. It Is indeed strange that any, who feel within
themselves the working of kind affection, should give in to an opinion so
reproachful to the Father of mercies. To be sure their ideas of goodness in
God, if they have any, must be totally different from all the ideas we have of
goodness, as we apply the term to ourselves, or any created intelligent agent
whatsoever. And if their ideas are th^s different, and may consequently signify
the same thing with what we call cruelty in men, or any other creatures endowed
with moral agency, they can really mean nothing when they say, that God is
good: And it is of no importance, ^f not the least significancy, whether they
call him good, or not.

From those, and such like causes, he that is good so far beyond all other
beings, as that it may be justly said of him, in a comparative sense, he only
is good, has been basely traduced, either by objections against the existence
of any principle of goodness in him, or by such representations of it as have
tended to exhibit him, to the view of the world, rather an odious than a lovely
being. An attempt therefore to remove away these objections, wipe off these
aspersions, and set f^rth the benevolence of the Deity, in its true glory, will
not be condemned as a thing needless. -- This is the design of the present
undertaking; and I have the rather entered upon it, as I am fully persuaded,
that the knowledge of God, in his amiable beauty, as an infinitely benevolent
being, will lay the best and surest foundation for that sincere esteem of him,
and love to him, and trust and hope in him, in which consists the sum of true
religion.

I shall offer what I have to say, in prosecution of this design, under the
three following general heads.

I. I shall ascertain the sense in which I attribute perfect and absolute
benevolence to the Deity.

II. I shall look into the natural and moral world, and endeavor to make it
evident, from what is there to be seen, that this is the idea we are most
obviously and fairly led to form of God.

III. I shall examine those appearances which may be alleged as objections
against the supremely perfect benevolence of the Deity, and show that they are
no ways inconsistent herewith.

And in discoursing to these points, I shall rather apply to m^n's
understandings, than their imaginations; endeavoring to set what I have to say
in the clearest, and strongest point of rational light, that I am able. And if
I should now and then be led to speak of things abstruse in their nature, I
hope, I shall give no just occasion for complaint, that I talk so as not to be
understood. And if I should be really unintelligible to an attentive reader,
tolerably versed in such matters, I am willing it should be attributed, not so
much to the obscurity of the things themselves, as to my own confused
conception of them. For it is with me a settled point, that any man may express
that clearly and intelligibly, of which he has clear and distinct ideas in his
own mind, unless he is either criminally negligent, or has some design to serve
by covering himself with clouds and darkness.

PART I. Explaining Benevolence as attributed to the DEITY.
THE first thing necessary, in treating of Divine Benevolence is to ascertain
the sense in which this perfection is ascribed to the Deity. In order whereto,

It may be proper to begin with fixing the general notion of goodness, as a
moral attribute. And here we shall meet with no great difficulty. We have clear
and distinct ideas of this moral quality. It Is as readily perceived by the mind
as any sensible quality whatsoever, and as readily distinguished from all
others.

'A principle disposing and prompting to the communication of happiness,' is
the first idea that enters into its composition. As therefore perceiving beings
only are capable of happiness, they only are the objects of goodness. Inanimate
matter, it is true, in all its various forms, may passively be the occasion of
happiness, to creatures that are either sensible, or intelligent. And, upon
this account, it may be considered as an object, about which goodness may be
employed, and by means of which it may be manifested: Though, being void of
perception, it cannot itself immediately be the object of goodness, because an
incapable subject of happiness. But whatever beings are endowed with
perception, as they are hereby rendered capable of happiness, in an higher or
lower degree, in proportion to their faculties, they are the proper objects of
goodness: And goodness consists in 'a disposition to make them happy.'

'This disposition also must be exerted freely.' And hence it is that we don't
attribute goodness, as a character, to the ^ute creatures. Not that they exist
without kind propensions, or that happiness to others, in various kinds, is not
the effect of their several exertions: But as these instinctive principles are
thrown into exercise by mechanical impulse, we look upon the animals, in whom
they are implanted, as instruments only in the diffusion of good, not the moral
causes of it. Communicated happiness must be the chosen act of some agent,
otherwise we never consider it as a moral quality, and call it commendable
goodness. Accordingly, the good man, is not a mere passive instrument in the
bestowment of good. Neither do we call a man good, though he does good, if it be
beside his intention, and by accident only. But he is the good man, and he
only, who voluntarily acts for the benefit of others. His offices of kindness
are the result of free choice; and for this reason we apply goodness to him,
under the notion of a moral virtue.

This disposition must also be exerted with a truly benevolent design. We don't
call that man good, whose actions may be productive of good to others, if it
was beside his intention in doing them: Much less will he deserve this
character, if he did them with a view to serve himself only, not them. And,
instead of benevolent, he will be quite the reverse, if, in the instances
wherein he manifests goodness to others, his design is to entrap and ensnare
them; making use of that which has the appearance of intended kindness, as an
enticement to lead them aside, and bring upon them some greater evil. A worse
character can scarce be given a man. It is indeed the character of that Being,
who, of all Beings, is the most malevolent.

In fine, 'this disposition must be exercised under the guidance of reason, and
in consistency with right and fit conduct:' Nor otherwise do we consider it as
a moral perfection. If we look within, and reflect upon our perceptions, we
shall find, that our idea of benevolence, as a commendable quality, is not a
single disposition; but a disposition exercised under the conduct of
intelligence, and within the limits of moral truth and right. Conformably
whereto, experience teaches us, that we do'nt expect, that the man, we call
benevolent, should act for ou^ advantage without thought, and at random: We
should esteem such blind benevolence great weakness, and look upon the
expressions of it as little better than so many instances of folly. Neither do
we expect, that the benevolent man should do us kind offices, in contradiction
to the known laws of justice and truth. Such a display of goodness would make
an odious appearance to ou^ uncorrupted minds, and we should rather call it an
instance of vice, than virtue. The truth is, whenever we speak of benevolence,
as a moral character, we consider it as directed by wisdom, and exercised
within the bounds of right reason: And the more wisely and justly it is
conducted, and exercised, the higher do we rise in our estimation of it, as a
lovely quality.

These are the ingredients that constitute the complete general idea of moral
goodness; which is the same, whether we apply it to men, or angels, or any
created intelligences whatsoever; or even to the Supreme Being himself. Only,
when we ascribe goodness to the Deity, we must remove away all defects, and
conceive of it as infinitely perfect. Goodness in men is always mixed with
frailty and imperfection. Even in angels, and the highest order of created
moral agents, it is finite and defective. But as to the quality itself, it is the
same in kind, in all intelligent moral Beings whatsoever. Every Being, in
heaven and earth, to whom this attribute may be applied, partakes of the same
quality, though not in the same manner, nor in the same degree and proportion.

Some, I am sensible, pretend, that the goodness, and other moral attributes of
God, are not only different in degree, but in kind likewise, from moral
qualities in the creatures: insomuch that the words goodness, justice,
veracity, and the like, are no otherwise applicable to the Deity, than as they
stand to signify some unknown qualities answerable indeed (as they unintellibly
speak) to those dispositions in inferior moral agents; but yet, in their
nature, altogether transcendent; and not to be conceived of by us. But this is
certainly a most absurd notion. For, if when we apply the terms good, just,
faithful, and the like to God, the qualities signified by these words, are
applied to men, o^ other created intelligent agents, are not the qualities
intended, but other inconceivable ones of a quite different kind, we really
mean nothing when we say, that God is just, true, and faithful; but ascribe to
him an unknown character. In which case, how can we make him the object of our
adoration and worship? We must certainly, upon this supposition, worship him as
an unknown God, if we worship him at all. The truth is, we must know what
goodness, justice, and faithfulness, in God, are, or we shall unintelligibly
apply these attributes to him; using words that have no meaning at all: And,
without all doubt, we are capable of this knowledge. The moral attributes of
the infinitely perfect Being, it is true, are incomprehensible by such narrow
understandings as our^, and perhaps by the understandings of all creatures
whatsoever. But this does not mean, that we know nothing at all about their
true nature; but only that their mode of existence, manner of exercise, and
degree of perfection, transcend our, and all other finite, capacities. In this
sense, the moral qualities of the Deity surpass all understanding; while yet,
we have as positive, clear, and distinct ideas of their real nature, as of the
nature of any qualities applicable to ourselves: Insomuch that we may, with all
desirable certainty, argue from them, to the directing of our worship, forming
our expectations, founding our hopes, and governing our conduct: Nor otherwise
would religion be an intelligible, or reasonable service. I may add here, the
opinion which makes moral qualities, in God, totally different in kind, from
moral dispositions in men, and other inferior intelligent agents, is altogether
unintelligible. We have no conceptions of different kinds of goodness, or
justice, or veracity; though our ideas of a difference, in degree, between these
qualities, are clear and distinct. Accordingly, nothing more common than to
speak of goodness, and justice, and faithfulness, as qualities more or less
excellent and perfect, in proportion to the manner, and degree, of their
exercise. But we never severally distinguish these qualities into kinds,
attributing one kind of goodness, or justice, or veracity, to these beings, and
another to those. Nor indeed is there any foundation in truth for such a
distinction. They are properties, in their nature, invariably one and the same,
whatever subjects they are applied to, whether finite or infinite, God of man.
And it would be grossly absurd to rank them severally into sorts, as truly so
as if we should divide roundness, or squareness into different kinds of
roundness or squareness. We properly distinguish these figures into more
perfect or less perfect; and we have distinct ideas of such a difference: But
of different kinds of roundness or squareness, we have no idea at all: And thus
to distinguish them is a self-evident absurdity. The same is true of goodness,
and all other moral qualities. They are invariably one and the same thing in
kind, whatever beings they are applied to. They are incapable of a division
into different kinds. We have not the least conception of such a difference;
though we clearly understand what is meant, when they are distinguished as to
their degrees of perfection, and modes of exercise. So that to ascribe goodness
and justice, and the like, to God; and to say, at the same time, that these
qualities, as applied to him, mean something wholly different in kind from what
they mean, when attributed to inferior moral agents, is to talk in the dark,
using words without any ideas: The tendency of which must be to destroy all
real knowledge of the moral character of the Supreme Creator, and consequently
all religion; for if we have no ideas of the moral attributes of God, we can
have no foundation on which to build any rational religion, but must live as
without God in the world.

It appears then, upon the whole, that the goodness of God, is the same thing
with goodness in all other intelligent moral beings; allowing only a due
difference in degree and proportion. So that if we remove from our ideas, even
of a good man, all frailties and defects, and add to it boundless perfection in
mode and degree, we shall entertain just thoughts of the Divine Benevolence,
and need not fear being led into a mistaken notion of this most glorious
attribute of the Supreme Being.

But it may be worth while to be still more particular, and critical, in the
application of the general idea of goodness to God, and in going over its
several parts as thus applied.

A natural disposition then in the Deity, moving him to the communication of
happiness," is the first ingredient in the notion of goodness as attributed to
him. When I speak of goodness as a natural disposition in the Deity, I would be
understood to mean a certain state of mind, call it inclination, propension,
disposition, or whatever else may be thought more proper, analogous to what is
signified by a benevolent disposition in men, or any other created moral
agents. Such a disposition we find within ourselves. It Is natural to us, one of
the principles implanted in our original frame, and what we all partake of, in
a less or greater degree. And some principle answerable hereto, I suppose
inherent in the nature of the Supreme Being, and necessary in him, in the same
sense that intelligence is a natural and necessary perfection: Insomuch that we
should as truly wrong him, to conceive of him without a benevolent, as without
an intelligent principle: Only, the principle of benevolence in God, like that
of intelligence, ought always to be considered as infinitely perfect, both as
to its mode of existence, and manner and degree of operation: Nor should we
allow ourselves to think of this disposition in the Deity, without removing out
of our minds those weaknesses and imperfections, which attend the like
dispositions in ourselves.

In order whereto, and to help us in forming the most just and honorable
thoughts of benevolence, as a disposition in God, it may be proper to observe,
that the two grand principles, in human nature, self-love and benevolence, the
former determining us to private, the latter to public, good, are accompanied,
each of them, with particular appetites and passions, severally adapted to
promote the more effectual prosecution of these ends, as occasion may require:
Nor should we have been so well qualified to pursue either our own good, or the
good of others, had it not been for the implantation of these appetites and
passions, which are filled to hasten our exertments, and give them an
additional force, answerable to the state and circumstances, we ourselves, or
others, may be in. Self-love is a general, calm, dispassionate principle; and
would not, in a variety of cases, especially considering the slow progress we
make in knowledge, and the weakness of it at best, have been sufficient, singly
and alone, to put us upon seeking, or shunning, with requisite speed and vigor,
the things necessary to our own preservation. And therefore the author of our
beings has kindly and wisely provided against this defect, by the implantation
of particular appetites and propensions, attended with uneasiness proper to
rouse our attention, and call us forth to action. The same may be said of the
general common principle of Benevolence. It Is calm and dispassionate: And though
a strong and noble principle, yet, as planted in such imperfect beings as we
are, might prove insufficient to put us upon those exertions, for the good of
others, which their circumstances, in this present state, would render
necessary. The God of Nature has therefore given us particular affections, apt
to be excited upon proper occasions, and make us active in using our endeavors
to contribute our part toward the production of social happiness. Thus, the
helpless state of children, requiring the constant care and patience of others,
in ministering to their wants, a strong affection is planted in the hearts of
parents, disposing them both to do, and bear, almost any thing for their
advantage: Nor without this STORGEE is it conceivable, how they should so often
deny themselves, and go through so much toil and labor, for the sake of their
offspring: which yet their circumstances make absolutely necessary. In like
manner, the dangers mankind are liable to, and the difficulties, sorrows, and
distresses, they meet with, so often call for the sudden, vigorous exertment of
some kind hand, that pity is an affection God has fixed in our nature: And to
this it is owing, that we are so readily moved to activity, in proportion to
the distress of the object presented to our view.

Now, when we attribute benevolence to God, we must cautiously distinguish
between the general principle itself, and those particular affections which
accompany it in us men, and are attended with uneasiness, though wisely suited to
the imperfection of our present state. They are easily and evidently
distinguishable from each other. And, it is probable, there are orders of
created beings, in whom they are in fact distinguished; the perfection of whose
powers and state are such, as that they have no need of these additional
excitements. Much more may this be supposed to be the case, with respect to the
infinitely perfect cause of all existence. It Is common, it is true, in speaking
of the Deity, to ascribe to him these passions and affections. Instances to
this purpose are frequent, even in the sacred writings themselves. But such
attributions are to be understood in a loose and figurative sense only. And we
should always take care to separate from benevolence, when attributed to God,
all the modes of it that are suited only to imperfect beings, in an imperfect
state; as is the case with respect to us men. But as to the principle itself,
considered without these affections, arguing weakness, and uneasiness, in the
subjects of them, and heightened beyond all conceivable bounds, in mode and
degree, I see not but it may, in a strict and proper sense, be attributed to
the Deity; as containing nothing in it but what is worthy of him, and
consistent with his character as an absolutely amiable and perfect being.

It is the opinion, I am well aware, of some great and learned men, that
benevolence, as a disposition, inclination, or propension, ought not to be
ascribed to the Deity. They allow indeed that benevolence, as a disposition, is
planted in man; but say, that the general principle itself, together with the
particular affections belonging to it, are designed only as auxiliaries in
support of reason, which needed such help, in creatures so weak and imperfect
as we are: But that, in God, whose understanding is infinite, and who perfectly
sees all possible connections of ideas, and fitnesses and unfitnesses of
actions arising therefrom, there can be no need of such an additional aid. And
consequently, that we ought to conceive of him as giving existence, and
happiness, to his creatures solely from the fitness and reasonableness, of the
thing as an object of intelligence: And that it would reflect dishonor on him,
to suppose him in the least excited hereto from any natural state of mind, call
it temper, inclination, disposition, or by any other name, signifying the like
idea.

The answer whereto is, that the particular propensions, belonging to
benevolence in us, were undoubtedly planted in human nature (as has been
observed) in consideration of the imperfection of our present state and powers:
But that this is, by no means, the truth of the case, with respect to the
general principle itself; which seems to have been a matter of such necessity,
as that, if it had not been planted in our nature, our reason, though ever so
perfect, would have been insufficient to put us upon exerting ourselves in
pursuit of social happiness: Nor indeed could we have reasonably done it. And
the same, perhaps, upon examination, will be found to be the real truth, with
respect to the Deity likewise: Which, that we may clearly conceive of, let it
be observed,

It is necessary, with respect to all beings whatsoever, that they have some
constitution or nature; which nature must be previously supposed, and, in some
measure, known, or it will be impossible to determine whether they are capable
of action, or not: Or, if they are, what would be reasonable and fit action in
them. As for example -- It is by knowing the constitution of man, that he is
formed with a capacity to receive pleasure; with a state of mind inclining him
to pursue it, both for his own private good, and the good of others; with the
powers of intelligence and volition, qualifying him to discern what will
conduce to these ends, and to will the exertion of his endeavors for the
accomplishment of them: I say, it is from our thus knowing the constitution of
man, that we understand what is fit and reasonable conduct in him: Was he
differently constituted, what is now reasonable and fit, might not be so: On
the contrary, it might, as to him, be unreasonable and unfit.

Had man been formed with the powers of intelligence and volition, but without
any capacity in his nature for the enjoyment of happiness, or any state of mind
naturally inclining him to pursue it, as a valuable end, either with respect to
himself, or others, of what use would intelligence or volition have been to
him? Most certainly, upon this supposition, he could never have been excited to
action, either with reference to himself, or others: Neither would there have
been, as to him, any reasonableness or fitness in action of any kind.

Or if, in addition to the principles of intelligence and volition, he had had
planted in his nature, a capacity for the perception of happiness, and private
affection, inclining him to seek his own interest, as an ultimate end, he
would, in this case, have been excited to action; but then, his actions would
have wholly centred in himself: Nor could he have put forth his endeavors, in
pursuit of social happiness, otherwise than as he might perceive a tendency, in
such pursuit, to promote his own. This would have been his governing end, and
every thing would have appeared (yea, and really would have been, as to him)
reasonable, or unreasonable; fit, or unfit, as it stood connected with this
end, and had a tendency in its nature to forward, or obstruct it.

But if, together with the powers of intelligence and volition, we suppose
social as well as private affection, to have been implanted in him, disposing
him to pursue the happiness of others, as well as his own, a proper foundation
is now laid in his nature for benevolent actions. He is as truly constituted
for the pursuit of social as private good: And it is now easy to understand the
meaning of fitness, when predicated of benevolent actions and how it is
eternally reasonable, from the fitness of the thing itself, for a being so
constituted to seek the welfare of others, as well as his own: Nor is this
language readily intelligible, upon any other supposition.

And this reasoning extends to all created beings whatsoever; and I see not but
it equally takes place with respect to the Supreme Being himself. We must
suppose him existing with some constitution or other; which constitution, as to
him, being self-existent, must be looked upon as necessary, in the same sense
that we call his existence itself necessary. And what constitution can be
imagined more worthy of the Deity, or consentaneous to all the ideas we have of
perfection, than that which supposes him to exist, not only with the powers of
intelligence and volition, heightened in degree of perfection beyond all
bounds; but with the principles also of self-love, and benevolence, heightened
in like manner) disposing him to seek his own, and the happiness of others?
Upon the previous supposition of such a constitution of nature, the conduct of
the Deity, in creating the world, and giving being and happiness to so many
creatures is intelligible: Otherwise, not very easily to be accounted for. It
can indeed be scarce conceived, if the Supreme Being existed without any
natural state of mind inclining him to the communication of happiness, how he
could have communicated it, or judged it reasonable to do so.

It will probably be said here, the communication of happiness is, in itself, a
fit, reasonable thing: And the Deity, if supposed to be an infinitely
reasonable being, must have seen a fitness and reasonableness in it, and
accordingly have willed it. For, to a perfectly reasonable being, there cannot
be a more suitable or effectual motive to action, than the reasonableness of
the action itself.

The reply is, It is readily acknowledged, that to a reasonable being, the
reasonableness of an action is a sufficient excitement to it, and the only one
that is so: But then I add, that no reasonable being can be supposed to exist
merely with the principles of reason, without any other ingredient in his
nature. And if a constitution of nature is previously supposed, no action can
have any reasonableness in it, but in consistency with this supposed nature. To
apply this particularly to the Deity. If, when he is spoken of as a reasonable
being, nothing more is meant than his simply existing with the powers of
intelligence and volition, it does not appear how he could have seen any action
to be reasonable, or chosen it as such. Intelligence and volition, considered
simply, and as abstracted from all perception of happiness, and connection with
it, in any view whatsoever, are really worthless powers, and can serve for no
manner of use: And the case would be the same, should we heighten them in
degree, even to infinity. The being, possessed of them, could have no
excitement to action, but would eternally exist indifferent to every thing. The
Deity therefore must be supposed to exist with sentiments of happiness, and a
capacity for it, in addition to the powers of intelligence and volition,
together with a natural state of mind inclining him to pursue it, either with
respect to himself, or others, or both: And according to the idea we frame of
his nature, in these respects, so must our ideas be of reasonable action in
him. If we suppose him existing with a state of mind disposing him to pursue
happiness, with respect to others, as well as himself, it is now easy to
understand the meaning of fitness of benevolent action in him; and how it would
be reasonable, eternally reasonable, from the fitness of the thing, for him to
communicate being and happiness: But if a principle of benevolence is not
supposed to have place in the Deity, if he is to be conceived of as naturally
destitute of all desire of the happiness of others, and as having no
inclination to pursue it as a valuable end, how could he do it? What exciting
reason could he have to do it? It Is true, he might, from his all-comprehensive
understanding, perfectly know all the various ways in which creatures might be
made, and constituted happy: But the desire of making them happy, not being
supposed natural to him, this knowledge of his could have no tendency to put
him upon acting for the procurement of this end: Nor can it be supposed fit or
reasonable that it should. For no conduct, in any being, is fit and reasonable,
but what agrees with his natural state, and powers, not perverted. So far as he
acts in consistency with his nature, he acts as it is fit and reasonable he
should act: Not otherwise. Reasonableness, or fitness therefore, in
benevolence, to a being who has no disposition to it in his nature, is
unintelligible and absurd.

I shall only add, we can judge of the benevolence of the Deity, only from the
ideas we have of benevolence in ourselves; removing away all weaknesses, and
adding infinite degrees of perfection. And, in this way of judging, we are
directly led to conceive of this quality, as originating in some state of mind,
analogous to that we call benevolent in ourselves. With respect to ourselves,
it is found true, in fact and experience, that the spring of social action is
benevolence of temper; a disposition natural to us, though capable of being
strengthened, and rendered still more perfect. And if we have any idea at all
of benevolence in the Deity, it is the same in kind. The only difference is,
that the disposition in him is originally and absolutely perfect, both in mode,
and degree. -- To proceed,

'This disposition in the Deity must be exerted freely'. Otherwise, it will be
a mechanical principle, not a moral one; which would destroy our idea of it as
a commendable quality. Nor is there any inconsistency in saying, that this
disposition necessarily inheres in the Divine mind as a natural principle, and
yet that it is capable of being exerted freely. For thus it is, in fact, with
respect to ourselves. Benevolence is a disposition planted in our nature, and
exists necessarily there. What I mean is, we possess this turn of mind,
disposition, or inclination, independently of our own choice; and yet, our
exertions, in acts of beneficence, spring from our wills, which are determined
freely, and not impelled by force. We feel it to be in our power,
notwithstanding the propension in our nature, inclining us to benevolence,
either to will, or not will, these or those beneficent acts. And accordingly,
we neither esteem ourselves, or others, virtuous or praise worthy, otherwise
than as our or their offices of kindness proceed from free choice.

There are, it is true, some particular propensions, in our nature, which have
the appearance of being mechanical. Not only the inclinations themselves, but
the exertments in consequence of them, seem to be, in a degree, necessary, as
not resulting from any proper act of the will. Such is the STORGEE, or natural
affection of parents toward their offspring. And such is the affection of
pity, which is a more universal propension, and common indeed, in a less or
greater degree, to all mankind. These propensions seem to be of the mechanical
kind, operating necessarily, and not from choice: At least, this appears to be
the case, in some instances, and with respect to some persons. And if, instead
of trusting the well-being of helpless children, and persons in imminent
distress, to the general, cool principle of benevolence, in such weak,
imperfect creatures as we are, the Deity has planted this propelling force in
our constitution, for the good of the world, which could not otherwise be so
effectually provided for, it is no more than might be expected from his wisdom
and goodness. But then, as parental kindness, and pitiable exertions upon the
view of miserable objects, are thus, in a measure, mechanical, we scarce allow
the name of virtuous to them: To be sure, we never call them virtuous, only as
there was room for choice, and in proportion as they sprang from the free
determination of the mind. Nay, even with respect to the general principle of
benevolence itself, ther^ (...) no virtue in it, considered simply as a natural
affection, nor in any of its exertions, otherwise than as they are chosen acts:
And the more they are so, the higher do we rise in our opinion of them as truly
excellent and virtuous.

And the same reasoning extends with equal force to the Deity. He is morally
good, and we speak of him as such, because his exertions for the benefit of
others are chosen acts; though, at the same time, they originate in a natural
principle of benevolence. Such a principle necessarily inheres in him, i. e.
independently of his own choice: And yet, his benevolent exertions, in all
instances, and kinds, are perfectly voluntary, and so entirely depend on his
will, as that they could not have been, if he had not freely willed that they
should be. And it is this that gives us the idea of benevolence in God as a
moral character. If he was necessarily urged on to the bestowment of being and
happiness, from the benevolent state of mind that is natural to him, there
would be no value, morally speaking, in his communications of goodness: But as
this disposition, though necessarily inhering in his nature, is yet freely
exerted, he is justly looked upon as a moral agent in the good he dispenses,
and therefore worthy of the highest love and gratitude. Nor is it at all more
difficult to conceive how benevolence in the Deity should be a necessary
disposition, and yet a moral perfection, than it is to conceive how
intelligence or volition in him should be in one sense necessary, and in
another moral. The Deity necessarily exists a being endowed with the principles
of intelligence and volition; and yet, he freely exerts these principles: Nor
otherwise would they be moral ones. The same may be said of his benevolence: He
necessarily exists with this state of mind; and yet, he truly wills the
communication of good, in all instances whats^ever. And this constitutes
benevolence in him a moral character.

This disposition must be exerted also with a nobly benevolent intention, not
with a secret, hidden view to make those miserable, and with inhanced
aggravation, who are the objects of that which has the appearance of
communicated goodness. Some there are, who, though they call the Deity
benevolent, yet, represent him as making some of his crea^^res, and bestowing
upon them riches of goodness with an express design, that they should misuse
them, and by this means give occasion for the infliction of his wrath upon
them, and in an inhanced measure, and this forever. Yea, there are those, who
make the infinitely benevolent God the grand and only efficient, not only in
the bestowment of good, but even in the abuse of it; and that he has so laid
his plan, and connected a chain of causes, as that this abuse shall inviolably
be brought into event, and on purpose that its final result should be the
everlasting damnation of a great number of the creatures his hands have formed.
Some late writers will not disown, that this is a just representation of their
published sentiments. What their idea of benevolence is, I will not pretend to
say; but this I will say, that it essentially differs from that moral quality,
which goes by the name of benevolence among men; and it most certainly would,
in any created intelligent moral agent be deemed, not merely malevolence, but
malevolence in the highest degree. And to attribute such benevolence to the
all-perfect Deity, would be to make him, not constructively and by distant
consequence, but directly and in explicit terms, a more malevolent being than
even the evil one has ever been represented to be. For he is only a tempter to
wickedness; but, according to this scheme, the infinitely good God is its
efficient, its only proper cause, and in order to produce eternal misery as its
effect. Far be it from reasonable creatures to harbor in their breasts such
dishonorable conceptions of the only good God! If he is possessed of that moral
quality we call benevolence, he must, if we can form any idea of what
benevolence means, in all the manifestations of it to his creatures, intend
their good, without any secret reference to the contrary; insomuch, that if
they choose that to their hurt, which was truly designed for their good, they
themselves, and not the God that made them, and has been kind and good to them,
are chargeable with the guilt and folly of their misconduct.

Finally, this disposition in the Deity must likewise be exerted 'under the
direction of intelligence, and in consistency with fit conduct.' I say under
the direction of intelligence, because otherwise it would be that blind sort of
benevolence which is really of no worth, morally speaking. And I add, in
consistency with fitness of conduct, because there is certainly such a thing as
unfitness, as well as fitness of conduct, in the production of happiness. And
the latter must be regarded by an infinitely wise and intelligent being: Nor
otherwise would he act reasonably, whatever benevolence he might discover in
his exertions.

Some may be ready to think, that the will of the Supreme Being is the only
measure of fitness, in the communication of good; that what he wills is for
that reason fit, and there is no need of any other to make it so. But this is a
great mistake. There is, bey^nd all doubt, a certain fitness and unfitness of
conduct, in order to the production of good, antecedently to, and independently
of, all will whatsoever, not excepting even the will of God himself. Love and
hatred, justice and injustice, truth and falsehood, hypocrisy and sincerity,
gratitude and ingratitude, are, in their natures, separate from all choice,
fitted to the contrary purposes of social good, and social evil: Nor is it
possible for any will, whether in heaven or earth, to alter their natures, or
that fitness there is respectively in them to promote these ends. This may be
more readily understood, perhaps, in an instance of some other kind. Circles
and squares are fitted, each of them, from their very nature, to serve
different purposes: Insomuch that it would be preposterous and absurd to make
use of a circle to answer the purposes, which are peculiarly fitted to the
nature of a square, and vice versa: Nor could any will whatsoever make an
alteration in the case. All intelligent beings capable of knowing the
respective uses of these figures, must know that they are fitted to answer
different purposes; for which reason, they could not will, without the
supposition of absurdity, the employment of a circle for that use to which the
nature of a square only is peculiarly fitted. And the same is equally true,
with respect to those qualities we call moral and immoral. The making a number
of creatures with malevolent affection, branching itself into the several
modifications of hatred, bitterness, wrath, malice, and the like, is a method
of conduct unfit in itself to promote their common happiness: Nor could it be
constituted a fit method to attain this end, by any will whatsoever, not the
will of the Supreme Sovereign himself. For wrath, malice, and hatred, are, in
their natures, absolutely unfit to promote social good. And this is as self
evidently true, as that three and three are unfit to make seven; and would be
so, whether such creatures were brought into actual existence, or not; and must
have been seen to be so by an eternal being, comprehending all the possible
ways, wherein creatures might be made to exist: And, to such a being therefore,
it must have appeared unreasonable and unfit to make creatures, with such a
constitution, in order to such an end: And he must, accordingly, if wise, have
refused to do it. In like manner, falsehood, deceit, injustice, ingratitude,
and the like, are, independently of all will, unfit in their nature to produce
social happiness, and must have been perceived to be so, by a being infinitely
intelligent: Upon which account, he could not be supposed, without palpable
absurdity, to make creatures, in order to their mutual and common good, with
natural dispositions urging them on to those unfitnesses of action, with
reference to this end. And I may add, neither can it be supposed, that the
Deity should be himself unjust, deceitful, and the like, in order to promote
the common good of his creature^ any more than that he should bring them into
existence with dispositions to be so. For injustice, falsehood, deceit, and the
whole train of acts we call immoral, are, in their nature, absolutely the same,
whether we attribute them to God, or man; and so far from being fit to promote
the good of the creation, that they would, if repeated without restraint,
certainly bring about its ruin. And this must be known to a perfectly
intelligent agent: For which reason, he would never in the methods of
injustice, deceit, and falsehood, exert his benevolent disposition in order to
effect the happiness of his creatures. It would be unreasonable in him to do
so, and reflect dishonor on him, as not regarding the eternal fitness and
propriety of action, in prosecuting his designs.

It may perhaps be thought reproachful to the Deity to have it said, that he
cannot, by a sovereign act of his will, constitute good, evil; and evil, good.
And it might, with as much reason, be looked upon as dishonorable to his
infinite understanding, that it cannot make truth, falsehood; and falsehood,
truth; For these are equally impossible. There is such a thing as et^l and
immutable truth; And it reflects honor, no^ dishonor, ^n the infinite
understanding, that it will, and must, perceive this to be truth. And it is, in
like manner, eternally and immutably true, that some acti^ns are fit, and
others unfit, in order to such an end: And it is an honor, not a dishon^r, to
an infinitely perfect will, that it is limited, in its determinations, by the
fitness of action. It is not a real lessening to the true liberty of the will
of God, that he is thus confined, as it were, by the ^nesses of action, any
more than it is to his power, that it does not extend to impossibilities.

And as there is fitness and unfitness of conduct, in order to the production
of good, so is there likewise a greater fitness in one method of cond^ct than
another, in order to promote this end. We know this to be the truth with
respect to ourselves. And indeed one great use of our reason is to help us in
cases of this nature, by pointing out that particular method of conduct, among
a variety that may open to our view, which is best fitted to answer the end we
have in pursuit. And the same is as true, with respect to the Supreme Being.
There are, antecedently to all will and choice, some ways of acting better
accommodated to answer the design of common happiness than others. And as he
must be supposed to have, in his all-comprehensive mind, an entire view of all
the ways, wherein it is possible happiness should be promoted, he must if he
acts wisely, pitch upon that, which is the fittest, and best adapted, upon the
whole, and all circumstances considered, to answer this design. And the reason
here is the same, as in the case of fit and unfit methods of conduct. As the
former is selected because fit, for the same reason, in general, that must be
chosen which is the fittest, and will best answer the end.

So that happiness, as communicated from the Deity, is, by no means, the effect
of mere inclination, blindly and boundlessly exerted: Neither is it the result
of unaccountable will and pleasure; pleasure not excited by the eternal fitness
and reasonableness of action: No; but the exertions of the Deity, in benevolent
acts, are all directed and governed by an unerring principle of wisdom and
intelligence: Insomuch that he cannot do a benevolent action, but within the
limitations (if I may so speak) of reasonable and fit conduct. It is not
possible (I mean morally so, in the sense in which we say, it is impossible for
God to lie: It is not possible,) for him to dispense happiness in any other
way. It would argue some defect in wisdom, or some depravity in disposition,
which is inconsistent with the supposition of his being infinitely perfect and
intelligent. No happiness therefore ought to be expected from the Deity, but
what may result from wise and fit conduct: But I may properly add, all the
happiness that can, in this way, be communicated, may fairly and reasonably be
looked for.

The sum of what has been said concerning benevolence, as attributed to the
Deity, is, that it supposes 'a natural state of mind, inclining him to the
communication of good;' a state of mind analogous to kind affection in us men,
only as kind affection in us is attended with frailty, in him it is absolutely
perfect, both as to mode of existence, and manner of exercise: That, as he
exists a free agent, in the highest and most glorious sense, he is not
mechanically, or necessarily, urged on, from this natural disposition, to the
communication of good; but acts herein voluntarily, and of choice: And, in
fine, that, as he is an infinitely wise and intelligent, as well as free,
agent, his exertions, in order to the production of good, are never unfit,
never unreasonable, but always fit reasonable, and absolutely and perfectly so.
So that, in one word, benevolence in the Deity signifies precisely the same
thing with "a disposition freely to communicate all the good that is consistent
with wise and fit conduct:" For, supremely perfect benevolence of nature,
being, in him, conjoined with an all-comprehending understanding, and unerring
wisdom, he must know all the ways of producing happiness, and the greatest sum
of it that can be wisely produced: And this therefore is the happiness that may
reasonably be expected should be produced by him; that is to say, all the
happiness to the whole, and every part of the creation, than can be, not in
respect of omnipotence, considered as a natural power, but in the way of fit
and reasonable conduct. What this comprehends, is not distinctly and fully
known by creatures, formed with such narrow capacities as our's: F^r which
reason, in all perplexed cases (as true there must necessarily be many) it
becomes us to be modest and cautious; ever taking care that wo^d not ^ainly
determine that to be inconsistent 'with ^dn^ss, wisely and reasonably
dispensed,' which, in reality, may be a good argument in proof of it, and would
appear so us to be so, had we one entire view of the whole case, in all its
connections and dependencies,

I should have now proceeded to look into the constitution of nature, and
inquire whether we are not therefrom led into this conception of the
benevolence of the Deity: -- But I shall first dilate a little upon a few
deductions, which seem too important to be wholly passed over in silence.

In the first place, it is obvious to deduce, from the explanation that has
been given of benevolence as a moral quality, a just conception of the thing
meant, when the Deity is spoken of as infinitely good. There may have been, in
the minds of some, indistinct, if not wrong, apprehensions of what is signified
by this adjunct. The application of it, if applied intelligibly, is not
intended to suggest, that benevolence infinite in degree is displayed in every
communication of goodness from the Deity. For it is evident to common sense,
that these communications are various; some manifest goodness in one degree,
others (...) another; and so on, with incon^vable diversity. Neither is it to
be supposed, be^e God is infinitely benevolent, that he has in fact made an
infinite manifestation of his goodness. This, perhaps, is impossible; and for
this very good reason, because infinity in benevolence knows no bounds, but
there is still room for more, and higher displays of it. The true idea
therefore of the epithet, infinite, when applied to God as benevolent, is, as I
apprehend, plainly this; that he has within himself a boundless source of
benevolence, that he is so benevolent, in his nature, as that he may go on
eternally making discoveries of his goodness, or, in other words, that this
perfection of his is, strictly speaking, inexhaustable, not capable of being
exerted to a ne plus. It is observable, we do not say that God is almighty,
omnipotent, because he has exerted his power to the utmost; for he may go on
exerting it without end; otherwise, he could not be said to be infinite in
power. In the same sense God is infinitely benevolent. But then, as he is
infinitely intelligent and wise, as well as benevolent, he never manifests
either his power, or goodness, but under the guidance of intelligent wisdom.
Whatever this directs to, he wills shall be; and whatever he wills shall be, is
actually brought into event. This points out the reason, and the true one, why
God, though infinitely powerful and benevolent in his nature, is yet under a
limitation as to the display of those attributes. He manifests no more power,
or goodness, than unerring wisdom directs to: Nor could it be otherwise, unless
these perfections were to be manifested blindly, and at random; the absurdity
of which is too glaring to be supposed. This leads

To another obvious and important deduction, which is, that no communications
of goodness may reasonably be looked for from the Deity, though infinitely
benevolent, but such as fall in with what wisdom directs to, as fit and proper.
We may please ourselves, and too often do, with vain expectations, taking rise
from false ideas we have in our minds of infinite benevolence, as existing in
the breast of G^d. But it ought to be remembered, and seriously considered,
that the same Deity who is infinitely benevolent, is also infinitely
intelligent, wise, just, and holy, and cannot therefore, unless with gross
absurdity, be supposed to manifest his benevolence in any acts of goodness, but
in harmony with those perfections, all which are equally essential ingredients
in his nature. Many men are apt to imagine, that God is all goodness, and that
they may hope for every thing from this attribute of his, without so much as
once thinking h^w unreasonable, and unfit it would be in an infinitely
intelligent, wise, and just being to make displays of his benevolence in any
instances, or degrees, but under the guidance of wisdom, and in perfect
consistency with rectitude. What are our sentiments of those good-natured,
kindly affectioned men, who dispense their bounties, not with understanding and
wisdom, but in a random way, without thought or consideration? We pity their
weakness, and wish they had more discretion. And shall we attribute that to the
all-perfect Deity, which we esteem a disgrace even in man! Benevolence, though
infinite in its source, or principle, must yet be limited, restrained, and
governed in all its manifestations, by wisdom, equity, and justice, or it may,
in the final result of its operations, do more hurt, than good; to be sure, it
will not otherwise bring honor to the being possessed of it, if, at the same
time, he is supposed to be endowed with intelligence and wisdom, in a
sufficient degree, for his direction in the displays of his goodness.

Another deduction still, highly interesting and important, is, that
intelligent moral beings have no just ground, from the infinite benevolence of
God, to expect the enjoyment of that happiness they are made capable of, but in
consequence of, or connection with, a wise and virtuous use of their implanted
powers, under such advantages as they may be favored with. The reason is,
because God, though he has within himself an infinite, never-failing spring of
benevolence, yet will not suffer it to flow from him, in any instance or
degree, but under the guidance of wisdom that cannot err. And can it be thought
wise or fit, that moral agents, whether they are virtuous or vicious, without
regard had to their respective opposite characters, should be indiscriminately
treated as suitable objects of the Divine benevolence? How would such a conduct
comport with the design of heaven in the bestowment of intellectual and moral
powers? To what purpose were they given, if it was a matter of indifferency, in
relation to their being fit objects of their Maker's kind notice, how they
employed them? And how could even these moral beings themselves, entertain in
their minds, becoming conceptions of the wisdom and rectitude of the Supreme
Creator and Ruler, upon this plan of manifesting his benevolence? Besides, it
may be justly questioned, whether moral agents can be made truly happy, but by
a wise and right use of their implanted faculties. The goodness of God, under
the direction of wisdom, has given them various faculties, and placed them
within reach of objects fitted to yield them the enjoyment, they were formed
capable of; but if they will seek for happiness in other ways, and not in this,
which a good God has purposely adapted to give it to them, how should they be
the subjects of it? It cannot be. There must be an agreement between faculties
and objects, and a due application also of these faculties to their respective
objects, or there can be no proper satisfaction. It is indeed impossible there
should be, according to the present constituted way of enjoyment. The nature
therefore of intellectual moral beings must be changed into some other, or they
must, in a measure, act up to their character as p^ssessing this nature;
otherwise, they can no more enjoy the happiness pr^per to this kind of beings,
than righteousness can have fellowship with unrighteousness, or light have
communion with darkness."

I have hitherto considered this deduction only in general, as it respects all
intelligent moral beings, in all worlds. But it may, with pertinency be applied
more particularly to us men, as containing that in it which is well worthy of
our most serious attention. We are formed by the God that made us, not only
with animal, but intellectual and moral faculties; in which view of our
constitution, we have nothing to expect, in a way of favorable notice, from the
Deity, though infinitely benevolent, but what is suited to the faculties, he
has given us, and to be enjoyed only in connection with, or in consequence of,
a due and proper use of them. Was benevolence in God a propensity in his
nature, of the instinctive kind, blindly urging him on to a gratification of
it, it might be done at any rate: But, far from this, it is a disposition
inhering in an all-perfect mind, and that is inseparably conjoined with
infinite knowledge and wisdom, and can therefore be never manifested ad extra
but with reason, and in consistency with rectitude. And as we men are formed,
not only with bodily appetites, but with intellectual and moral powers also,
shall it be imagined, that such a being as God is should make us the objects of
his benevolence, in any way but that, which is suitably adapted to the nature
he has given us? And if, instead of cultivating our superior powers, and
exercising them in a due manner upon their proper objects, we neglect their
improvement, or, what is much worse, pervert them to the purposes of vice and
folly, making use of them, not to answer the noble ends for which they were
given us, but to invent and contrive ways for the more enlarged gratification
of our inferior inclinations: I say, if, instead of acting up to our rank as
men, we thus degrade ourselves into the class of br^tes, what may we reasonably
expect, but evil, rather than good, from even the infinitely good God? It is
owing to such characters as our's, that the creation has been marred and in so
great a meas^re filled with disorder and confusion. And shall that Being, who
is the righteous King and Judge, as well as Creator of men, make this kind of
persons the special objects of his benevolent notice? Is it not far more
reasonable, and fit, and this, even, from a princple of benevolence, that he
should recompense to them according to the evil of their doings? As one
expresses it much better than I can do, -- "Because God is supremely good,
therefore will he punish the obstinately vicious; since to be indulgent to
them, would be to encourage what must produce the greatest misery to the r^
world. As certainly as God desires the ^a^e of his rational creatures, that is,
as certainly as he is good, he will punish obstinate transgressors, and
maintain the hon^r of his laws and government, nor suffer those to be tra^pled
upon with impunity, until impiety, cruelty, injustice, intemperance, and brutal
debauchery, become universal. No state of things can appear so evil, as this
appears, to an infinitely wise and good Parent and Governor. He will therefore
certainly take the methods proper to prevent it. And as punishing the perverse
and obstinately wicked, according to their demerits* and with circumstances of
terror, sufficient to restrain others from like practices, is a proper and
necessary means to this end, obstinate sinners must expect such punishments;
and to promise themselves impunity because God is good, is to hope that G^d
will cease to be good to the whole, and to the best deserving, that he may be
fatally indulgent to those who are not objects of his mercy." He goes on, in
the foll^wing pathetic but infinitely reasonable exhortatory advice, "Give up
then, presumptuous sinner, all thy deceitful hopes. As God has made thee
rational and free, thou can^ not be happy, but by piety and goodness, by an
imitation of the Deity, and in his presence and favor. As long as thou
continuest wicked, thy temper incapacitates thee for the Divine favor, and for
real happiness. God cannot show mercy to such as thee, without letting in a
deluge of wickedness, the greatest evil conceivable, on his moral creation. And
to punish such is necessary to the welfare of the pious and virtuous, and of
all who may become holy. Repent therefore immediately, and become qualified for
mercy; otherwise, the unchangeable goodness of the Divine nature, instead of
promising thee impunity, will insure thy destruction; which will be the more
dreadful, as proceeding from infinite goodness, and evidencing thy guilt to be
so malignant, that even infinite clemency could not extend to thee."

It may with propriety be added here, that the Supreme Being himself, as he is
an intelligent moral agent in absolute perfection, is infinitely happy from the
delight he takes in always choosing, willing, and doing, and with perfect
freedom, that which is right and fit. And as he has made us men with
intellectual and moral powers, after the similitude of his own, though in a low
degree, he has planted a capacity in our nature of being happy with the like
kind of happiness, he himself exists in the enjoyment of. But then it should be
remembered, we must be the subjects of this happiness in the same way that he
is, that is, by a wise and fit use of our rational and moral faculties; or, in
other words, by so governing our elections, volitions, and consequent actions,
as that they may be conformed, as nearly as may be, to the eternal rule of
right. This is the way, and the only one, in which we can attain to the
happiness that is suited to the nature of such beings as we are. Benignity of
heart, probity of mind, conscious integrity, self-approbation, and a good hope
of the approbation of our Maker, evidenced to us by an habitual, steady course
of freely choosing and practicing the things that are comely, 'just, pure,
lovely, and of good report,' are die true source of the moral happiness we are
formed capable of. We may, in consequence of the imperfection that is natural
to us as creatures, from free choice, act below our character as men; walking
in impiety, sensuality, unrighteousness, deceit, malignity, and the like
vicious ways: But, instead of being adapted* to yield us real, solid
satisfaction, they powerfully tend to make us miserable; and misery will be the
result of such a walk, according to the constitution of nature, unless
counteracted by the Deity, which, to expect, would be the vainest thing in the
world. Yea, it should seem impossible, that a rational moral being should be
happy, whose choice, and consequent practice, are a contradiction to his
reason, and a violation of the rule of right. It would be a subversion of that
order, which is the establishment of a good God, that the happiness proper to
an intelligent nature might, in this way, be attained to. If we would be happy;
as beings of our rank in the scale of existence, we must act up to our
character, and not as if we had no understanding, and there were no difference
between us* and the beast that perishs. The blessed God himself, as an
intelligent moral being, is morally happy, and completely so: But how? By
invariably choosing, and acting, so as to approve himself perfectly holy, ju^,
faithful, and good, both in the internal disposition of his mind, and in all
the manifestations he makes of himself to his (...). We are made capable of the
like kind of happiness: But how shall we become the percipients of it? By an
imitation of God in benignity of temper and conduct, in purity, in
righteousness, in charity, and in every thing that is amiable, and worthy of
esteem. In this way God is happy; and in this way we may be happy also: but in
no other. If, according to our measure, we are perfect as God is perfect, holy
as he is holy, just and true as he is, we may depend we shall never fail of
being as happy, with a God-like happiness, as our nature will allow of. In this
way, he has judged it wise and fit to make us happy; nor has he given us the
least reason to expect he will do it in any other, or to imagine it possible he
should, in consistency with wisdom and rectitude.

PART II. Proving, that the Deity is supremely and perfectly benevolent, in the
sense that goodness, as a moral quality, has been explained to belong to him.
SOME have endeavored to prove, by metaphysical reasoning, that the Deity is
perfectly and infinitely benevolent. And I see not, I must confess, but that
may be offered in this way of reasoning which is strictly conclusive. We may be
as sure, from the exercise of that power of discernment we are naturally
endowed with, of the perfect benevolence of the Divine Being, as of his
existence, or of any of the perfections we connect with it. The same
intellectual power that assures us there must be an eternal self-existent
Deity, assures us also, and in the same way, that he must be possessed, not of
this or that perfection only, but of every perfection. For, having always
existed without any exterior cause to limit his existence, either as to its
nature, manner, or properties, there is, and must be, precisely the same reason
to suppose him the subject of all perfections, as of any one in particular.
Benevolence, therefore, supremely perfect benevolence, is as justly applicable
to him* as immensity, spirituality, omnipotence, or any of the Divine
attributes, to which the epithet, natural, is commonly applied, to distinguish
them from (...) and the same may be said, and with equal truth, of his
all-perfect benevolence. Do we attribute almighty power to God, from the
effects of power he has produced? And shall we not conceive of him as perfectly
benevolent, from the effects of his goodness we every where see in our world,
and in all parts of the universe we have any knowledge of? How numberless are
the creatures he has formed with capacities of enjoyment? How amazingly various
are these capacities? What abundant provision has he made for filling them with
the good that is suited to their respective natures? And how immense is the
quantum of good enjoyed by them all, considered in one collective view? Every
creature we cast our eyes upon, discovering pleasure in its existence, from the
good it is made capable of enjoying, and actually does enjoy, is, at once, both
an instance, and proof, of the Divine benevolence. How inconceivably is this
evidence increased in its strength, when such multitudes of beings in the
creation of God, the number of which no man can count, have been, through a
long succession of ages, and still are, the percipients of his bountiful care,
and munificent goodness! Can any one, in the sober exercise of his
understanding, question, whether this is a clear proof of benevolence in the
Deity? Especially, when there has been the display of such astonishing skill
and contrivance in the formation of faculties, and the making and placing
objects within the reach of them, so admirably suited to yield them delight,
and in ways and degrees beyond conception various. Who can help, in this view
of things, breaking forth in some such words of admiration as those of pious
David, "Thou, Lord, art good, and d^st good! Thy tender mercies are over all
the works of thy hands!"

But, as it is a matter of no small importance, that we entertain in our minds
lively conceptions of the benevolence of the Deity, I shall be particular and
distinct in mentioning some of those effects of it, which must, unless we are
greatly faulty in the use of our intellectual powers, oblige us to confess,
that God is good, supremely and perfectly good.

Only, before I enter upon this argument, and in order to clear the way to it,
I desire the following remarks may be previously well considered.

The first is, That this system of our's is not to be considered singly, and by
itself, when we are arguing about the benevolence of the Deity. And for this
plain reason, because there are other systems of beings, to whom God has made
manifestations of his goodness. If we may depend upon the bible, as a sacred
book, there are certainly other beings, capable of happiness, and in actual
possession of it, besides those which dwell on this earth. Nay, more than this,
their capacities for happiness are much larger, than the capacities of any of
the beings belonging to this system; and they actually enjoy it, in a much
higher degree. But if any should esteem this a consideration of little weight,
I would add, there are so many globes visible to our sight, equally capable;
with this globe we live upon, of containing inhabitants* furnished with
sentiments of happiness, and means of obtaining it, that it is, without all
doubt, the truth of fact, that they are filled with such inhabitants. With
respect to our earth, we certainly know, that it has relation to life and
enjoyment. It is indeed so constituted as to support in being and happiness
innumerable animated creatures of various kinds. And why should the other
globes, revolving in the same heavens, be looked upon as mere dead matter? We
have infinitely greater reason, from what we see to be fact, in our own globe,
to suppose that they also are so formed as to be subservient to the
preservation of numberless perceiving beings, to the h^nor of the Creator's
munificence. The all-powerful, and infinitely wise, God could as easily have
modelled the other globes to the purposes of maintaining life, and rendering it
comfortable, and happy, to millions of creatures, as he has done this: And the
thought that he has actually so^ade and contrived the other globes, in the
heavens, is perfectly anal^gous to what we behold of his goodness, with respect
to our own system: It is indeed the most obvious and natural inference, from
the consideration of him as a benevolent, as well as powerful and wise Being.

If now we are naturally led, from known appearances, to argue, that there are
other beings besides those on this gl^be; and that this globe, with all the
animate and intelligent beings dwelling on it, is only one of the systems that
has been produced by the infinitely benevolent cause of all things, the
consequence is plain, viz. that this world of our's ought to be considered as
only a part of some great whole, about which the benevolence of the Deity is
employed. And in this view of the case, the full discovery ^f benevolence is
not to be lo^ked f^r; in our system singly and separately, but in them all
collectively considered. And it would be inj^rious to the Deity, to complain of
him for want of goodness, merely because the manifestation of it to our
particular system, considered singly, and apart from the rest, is not so great
as we may imagine it could be. It is no argument that the Deity is not
absolutely good, because the greatest communicable good is not to he found in
our world. Was our world indeed the only one in which there were perceiving
beings, and we knew this to be fact, the argument might then carry weight with
it. For, if the Deity was absolutely and perfectly good, our world, in this
case, would be the proof of it, considered simply in itself. But if there are
other systems, they m^st be taken care of, and provided for, as well as our's:
And no more happiness is required for our system, even from infinitely perfect
benevolence, than is proper for a part of some great whole: And it is enough to
illustrate the real being of an absolutely perfect principle of benevolence, if
the displays of it toward our world, one ^f the constituent parts of this
wh^le, are clearly discerned to contain as much good as can reasonably be
supposed to fall to our share.

A second remark though not very foreign from the former, is, that, in arguing
concerning the Divine Benevolence, we ought not to consider its displays as
they affect individual beings only, but as they relate to the particular system
of which they are parts. For, as all particular systems are, probably, related
to some universal one, and, properly speaking, are so many parts constituting
this great whole, designed, by the Deity, for the full manifestation of his
infinitely perfect benevolence: In like manner, the several beings, in any
particular system, are the parts constituting that a particular whole: And the
Divine benevolence therefore, is to be estimated from its amount to this whole,
and not its constituent parts, separately considered. These, it is true, must
partake of good; but then, the good lo^ked for ought to be no other than is
proper to parts, bearing such a relation to such a whole.

To be sure, the only fair way of judging of the Divine benevolence, with
respect to our world, is to consider it, not as displayed to separate
individuals, but to the whole system, and to these as its constituent parts.
For it is true in fact, that the Deity originally made, and constantly governs,
all the various kinds of beings, on this earth, and all the individuals in each
of these kinds, with a relative view. He considers them not simply as so many
kinds of beings, much less as so many single individuals, but as parts
constituting such a particular system in the universe. We therefore find, that
the individuals in every kind are wisely and variously related to each other;
and not only so, but the kinds themselves are, in like manner, related to one
another, so as to be parts properly fitted to fill up this system, and
constitute it a good particular whole. And, accordingly, our ideas of the
Creator, as benevolent, are to be fetched from the discoveries he has made of
goodness to the system made up of these parts, and not to any of the parts as
detached from the system to which they are related. And, in this way of judging
of the infinitely benevolent Deity, no more good is to be expected from him,
with respect to any species of beings, or any individuals in these species,
than is reasonably consistent with the good of the whole system, of which they
are parts. And, if there appears to be the manifestation of so much goodness
toward them as might reasonably be expected for such parts, bearing such a
relation to a good whole, it is all the goodness that can be expected from
benevolence, though infinite, if, at the same time, it is wise and reasonable.

It will probably be said here, infinite benevolence is not to be restrained,
by constitutions and systems, from doing all the good it possibly can to every
individual capable subject of happiness; and that the most good ought to be
produced, though it should be by single unrelated acts of benevolence. To which
the answer is, that infinite benevolence will do all the good it can: But for
any to suppose, that it may do more good, upon the whole, by single unconnected
displays, than by relative ones, is only talking in the dark. For who can so
much as guess at the result of such unconnected displays of goodness? It may
be, in the nature of things, for aught any man living, knows to the contrary,
impossible that so much happiness should be communicated in this way, as may be
communicated in the way of acting that, in fact, takes place. And as the Deity
has thought fit to display his goodness, not by unrelated acts, but such as are
connected with some general plan, constitution, or system, this ought to be
presumed to be the fittest and most effectual method for the communication of
the greatest good, unless it can be fully and clearly proved, that it is not:
And till then, if we would judge fairly and impartially of the Divine
Benevolence, we must form our sentiments of it, not from its display to
individuals singly considered, but to the systems of which they are parts;
looking for no more good to the individuals than is consistent with the place
they bear in the constitution of the whole.

Another remark is, That we must not judge of the benevolence of the Deity
merely from the actual good we see produced, but should likewise take into
consideration the tendency of those general laws conformably to which it is
produced. The reason is, because the tendency of these laws may be obstructed,
and less good actually take place, than they are naturally fitted to produce:
In which case, it is no argument of want of goodness in the Deity that no more
good was c^mmunicated; though it may be of folly in the creatures.

This I look upon to be the most important remark deserving previ^us
consideration, in the present debate; and shall theref^re ^e particular in
explaining myself upon it. In order whereto let it be observed,

It is, in fact, true, that the Deity does not communicate either being or
happiness t^ his creatures, at least on this earth, by an immediate act of
power, but by concurring with an established course of nature. What I mean is,
he brings creatures into existence, and makes them happy, by the intervention
of second causes, operating, under his direction and influence, in a stated,
regular, uniform manner. They are all brought into being, and preserved in
being, in this way: And not only so, but all the happiness they attain to the
enjoyment of, is, in like manner, dependent on general laws, whose operation
the Deity does not counter-act, but concurs with, in order to produce this
effect. This is universally true of all the animate kinds on the earth: And it
is particularly true of men, its only inhabitants that are endowed with
rational and moral powers. They are brought into existence according to a
settled uniform course of nature: And their existence, which, at first, is
nothing more than a variegated capacity for happiness, is upheld by stated
laws; and it is by stated laws still that this capacity, agreeably to its
diverse nature, is opened and expanded, and gradually fitted for the happiness
that is proper to it.

These are all unquestionable facts. And the consequence from them is another
fact as indisputable, viz. that less good may be produced by the operation of
these causes, than they naturally tend to produce, and actually would produce,
if they were not obstructed in their operation. To illustrate my meaning by an
example. It is by the intervention of ourselves, in a great measure, that we
come to the enjoyment of that happiness our implanted capacities tend to. The
good we are originally formed for is put very much into our own power; insomuch
that we are more or less happy, in consequence of our own conduct. This is one
of the general laws, according to which the Deity operates in the communication
of good. And it so universally takes place, that he does not so much as uphold
us in being, exclusively of our own care in providing, and using, that
sustenance, without which, according to another law of nature, we cannot be
preserved in life. Neither does he open and enlarge our implanted faculties, or
fill them with the good that is suited to them, but with the concurrence of
ourselves: insomuch that the increase, especially of our mental and moral
capacities, is so far put into our own power, that it is, in a great measure,
dependent on ourselves, whethey they attain to any considerable degrees either
of perfection, or happiness. And it is true, in experience, that a great part
of mankind do not arrive to that extent, either of perfection or happiness,
their original capacities would have allowed of, and they might have attained
to, had they more wisely fallen in with the tendency of that general law, which
makes their perfection and happiness so much dependent on themselves. They do
not use their own powers, in order to their own good, as they might do; and so
come short of that degree of good, this general law tended to produce, and
would actually have produced, had it not been their own fault. It is therefore
owing to themselves, and not to the Deity, that they do not partake of good, in
larger measures: And it would be a wrong to his infinite benevolence to judge
of it merely from the good they actually enjoy, without taking into
consideration the tendency of this, among the other general laws by which he
operates in displaying his goodness.

It will possibly be said here, infinite benevolence cannot be confined to
general laws, in the communication of good: Or if general laws are expedient,
it may reasonably be expected, that a perfectly benevolent being should
interpose, as occasions may make it necessary, to prevent that mischief which
might take place, if general laws were steadily and rigidly adhered to.

As to the first part of this objection, that infinite benevolence is not to be
restrained, in its exertions, within the limits of general laws; it is more
than we can pretend to affirm, upon any other foot than that of mere
conjecture. For notwithstanding all that we can prove to the contrary, the
method of communicating good by general laws may be the fittest: And the Deity,
who is perfectly acquainted with all the methods in which it is possible, that
good should be communicated, might see it to be the fittest; and, for that
reason, select it from all others, as the only one in which he was determined
to manifest his infinite benevolence. And indeed, we ourselves, weak as we are,
can discern this to be the fittest and best method we are able to conceive of.
For it is the alone foundation of all our rational exertions, whether of body
or mind, separate from which they would be, in a manner, useless, as they could
not be directed to any end. Did the Deity observe no rule, no order, no stated
course, in his communications, what should we be able to make of such a method
of conduct? What beauty or harmony could we discover in it? What rules could we
form from it to govern our own pursuits? Appearances that do not result from
established laws, operating in a stated, uniform way, are absolutely
unintelligible. For being, by supposition, single, separate, independent
effects, nothing could be argued from them: They could not be ranged in order,
so as to serve any valuable purpose; but must be perceived by every intelligent
mind as a loose, rude, unconnected heap of irregularity and confusion. Those
appearances only, which take place in a uniform way, according to established
laws, are capable of being reduced to a certain rule, and so as to lay a proper
foundation, either for science or foresight: Nor do any other seem to become
the wisdom of an infinitely intelligent agent.

Inconveniences, it is true, may arise from this method of acting by general
laws, in a stated way. And, perhaps, it is impossible, in the nature of things,
that general laws should be so framed as absolutely to prevent all
irregularity. But may not the same be said, of any other method of conduct that
could be pitched upon, with equal truth? And f^r aught we can say to the
contrary, there may be less danger of irregularities in this, than any other
method whatsoever; at least, of irregularities that cannot be rectified in the
final issue of things, so far as it can be done in consistency with wisdom and
rectitude.

The other branch of the objection is, that, if general laws should be thought
expedient, it may however be expected, that an infinitely benevolent being
would interpose, as occasion required, to prevent the mischief which would
otherwise take place. In reply whereto, it may be observed, though inconveniences
will probably arise, for the present, when general laws are statedly kept t^,
yet it may be possible, as has been just hinted, that these inconveniences may
be remedied, so far as it can be wisely done, in the final result of their
operation: And if so, there can be no absolute need that they should, by
interpositions, be prevented for the present. But was this impossible, who
knows what would be the consequence of these desired interpositions? It is
certain they would entirely alter the present method of communicating good: And
will any man take upon him to determine, that good upon the whole, and not
evil, would be the result of such an alteration? Possibly this method of
communicating good by general laws, uniformly adhered to, is, in the nature of
things, a better adapted one to produce the greatest good, than the other
method by interpositions continually repeated. It is true, if by interpositions
no other effect would follow than the prevention of the mischief they are
introduced for, they might well be desired: And I see not indeed but they might
reasonably be expected from an infinitely benevolent being. But it is certain,
they would be followed with other effects; and I may add, bad ones too, which
might be more than a balance for the good it is intended they should produce.
As thus: -- They would render all foresight absolutely uncertain, and, in no
measure, to be depended on; they would put a final bar in the way of men's
activity and industry, in the use of their various powers, whether bodily, or
mental; and, in short, they would totally destroy the whole business of life,
which is carried on, upon this supposition, that such and such actions will be
followed with such and such consequences, in virtue of those established laws,
which uniformly take place in the world. No one indeed can so much as
conjecture what these interpositions would finally issue in. If they did some
good, they might possibly do more hurt. And for aught we know, they might, upon
the whole, counter-act the very end for which they were introduced: That is to
say, they might be the occasion of an over-balance of mischief. And if so, so
the Deity,s not interposing, in the manner pleaded for, is an instance of
goodness, and not an argument in proof of the want of it.

The great thing more particularly aimed at, by these interpositions, is, the
prevention of moral evil; which has done so much hurt in the world. And could
the Deity, in this way, have prevented the abuse of moral powers, without
bringing on, at the same time, other consequences, as truly fatal to the
happiness of moral agents, he would, no doubt, have done it. And his not doing
it ought to be looked upon as a strong presumptive argument, that he could not,
without the following of these bad effects; unless it can be clearly shown,
that no such effects would have followed thereupon. The entrance of wickedness
into the world, it is readily owned, has done vast mischief: But will any ^an
undertake to prove, that less mischief would have been done, if this had been
prevented by the interpositions pleaded for? Possibly, no interpositions, but
such over-bearing ones as would have destroyed moral agency, would have
certainly and absolutely prevented moral evil: And the destruction of moral
agency would, I will venture to say, have at once destroyed the true and only
foundation, on which the greatest and most valuable part of the happiness, that
is communicable from the Deity, is built; as any intelligent reader will easily
perceive, by pursuing the thought in his own mind, and as we may have occasion
largely to pursue it hereafter.

It appears then, upon the whole, that we have no just reason for complaint,
that the Deity communicates good by general laws, whose operation he does not
counter-act, but concurs with, in a regular uniform course. The main question
therefore, in the present argument, is, whether those laws are as good as it
might reasonably be expected they should be, if established by a perfectly
benevolent being? And this must be determined (the other previous remarks
having had their due weight) by the tendency of the laws themselves to the
production of good, as well as by the good that is, actually produced by them.
These should be considered not singly, but in one conjunct view. The good
actually produced ought to come into consideration, because it cannot well be
s^pposed, that an infinitely benevolent God would have established any laws for
the manifestation of his goodness, unless he had foreseen by his infinite
prescience that it would hereby have been eventually and actually displayed: It
should seen as though he would not have carried any plan into executi^n, but
what would have had this effect. But then, the tendency of these laws ought to
be considered likewise, because this might manifest greater benevolence than
the good that is actually produced. The laws might be well adapted in their
nature, and tendency, to effect more good than is actually accomplished: And
that more good is not produced may be owing, not to any defect in the laws, but
to a misuse of them by his creatures: for which they are answerable, and not
the Deity.

And this is particularly worthy of consideration, with respect to our world;
which is not in the state now, that God originally made it, but abounding with
evils, introduced by ourselves, against the manifest tendency of those laws
which he was pleased to establish, in order to effect its greater good, so far
as it could reasonably and wisely be done. And that this end is not
accomplished, is wholly chargeable to that abuse of our faculties, whereby we
have perverted the tendency of those laws, which would otherwise have operated
to its taking effect. It is impossible therefore we should judge fairly of the
Creator's benevolence, from a view only of our world, under its present actual
enjoyments: But if we would form right sentiments of it, we must consider the
tendency of the Divine scheme of operation, and what the state of the world
would have been, if the rational and moral beings in it had acted up to the
laws of their nature, and given them full scope to operate for the production
of good. This will give us the idea of good, in some measure, answering the
plan of it, in the Divine mind. Every other view of it, separate from this,
will be either partial, or false, and fall short of exhibiting to us the true
character of the Deity as benevolent.

The last remark, though not the least important, is, that, in judging of the
Divine benevolence, we must carry our thoughts beyond the present to some
future state of existence, and consider them as connected in the Divine plan of
operation for good. Was death the entire destruction of all the intelligent
moral beings that have existed, or will exist, on this earth, it would be
difficult, I may say impossible, to entertain the thought, that the Creator was
benevolent, in the sense we are pleading for. And one of the reasons, why some
are so ready to call in question his absolutely perfect goodness, is their
looking upon the present state, in an independent view, and not as inseparably
conjoined with some future one. And no wonder they are puzzled with
difficulties, and find them selves unable to reconcile actual appearances with
the idea of infinite benevolence. For if it should prove the real truth of the
case, that the present state of things is nothing more than a part of the
Divine plan carried into execution, and a part too that is related to another
state, that will succeed in due time, it cannot be but that present
appearances, considered independently of this connection, should be such as are
not to be accounted for. It is no other than might reasonably be expected. And
the only way to remove them, and judge impartially of the Divine Benevolence is
to extend our thoughts to another state of existence, c^nnecting the present
with one hereafter to come, and considering both in one conjunct view.

And, possibly, there are no irregularities, in the present state, but are so
taken care of, in some future (...), as that they will finally prove an
illustration of t^ Deity's benevolence. We are too short sighted to trace any
irregularities, in the present state, through all their connections, either
here or hereafter; and therefore cannot pretend to affirm, with any degree of
probability, that they may not finally turn out a proof of benevolence, rather
than an objection against it: Nor is there the least room for dispute, but that
the evils now suffered may hereafter be repaid by an over-balance of
enjoyments. And, in this way, the goodness of God, notwithstanding the present
intervening dark appearances, may gloriously shine f^rth, in the winding up of
his scheme for the production of good.

And it is the rather proper, in arguing about the Deity's benevolence, to take
into consideration another state of existence, because this is the thought we
are must obviously led to, even from present appearances themselves; which
carries, in their nature the evident marks, not of a completed plan of
operation, but of one that is dependent on something still to come to render it
perfect. Though there is enough visible, in the present state, to give us an
idea of the Supreme Being, as prosecuting a scheme for good; yet there are, at
the same time, plain discoveries that the scheme is but begun, that what we now
see is only a part of it carried into execution, and that what is wanting to
finish it, is to be looked for in some future state of existence. It is quite
natural, from what we know of the present state, to look upon it as only
introductory to another, and preparatory for it. Present appearances are fitted
to give us this idea of it. They are such as well suit a probation state, one
that is intended to train us up for some future one, that will take place in
due time. Whereas, if we consider these appearances, without any connection
with futurity, and as designed to exhibit an entire view of the Divine plan,
with respect to this world, we shall needlessly run o^rselves into perplexity,
and unavoidably think more dishonorably of the Deity, than we have any occasion
to do. For* so far as we are able to judge, present appearances, if they
completed the scheme ^f God, are not so perfectly adjusted as it might
reasonably be thought they would, by such a being as we can demonstrate God to
be. And, without the supposition of a future state, perhaps it is impossible,
in the nature of things, that such creatures as we are, in such a world as
this, should be universally treated by the Deity, at all times, and in all
cases, as it is eternally fit and just that we should be. And if this should be
the truth, as I am confident no one can prove it is not, it may be necessary,
in the nature of things, that the Divine scheme, with reference to this system,
in order to its being perfect, should extend to another state, and not be
confined to this.

Having briefly mentioned these previous remarks, the way is now clear to the
main point, which is to make it evident, that the appearances of good, in our
world, are such as fairly lead us to conceive of the Supreme Creator as
absolutely and perfectly benevolent. I do not mean, that the present actual
amount of these appearances is so much good as will answer to the idea of
infinitely perfect benevolence: But what I intend is, that they arise from such
laws, and are so circumstanced and related, as that, in this view of them (as
has been explained above) we may clearly and fully argue, that the original
author of them is supremely and infinitely good.

I have it not in my view, here, minutely to consider all the effects of
benevolence apparent in the constitution, and government of this world of
our's. This would be beyond the reach of my ability, and a needless labor. It
will be a sufficient enforcement of the present argument, if so much is said as
to make it plain, that all the good, suitable for such a system as this, is
apparently the tendency of nature, and the Divine administration; and that it
actually prevails so far as this tendency is not perverted by the creatures
themselves, whom God has made; for which he is not answerable, as has been
hinted already, and will be more fully shown hereafter.

The way in which I shall endeavor to illustrate this important subject shall
be, by giving, in the first place, some general touches on the visible frame of
inanimate nature; then by taking some transient notice of the inferior
creatures made capable of happiness; and finally by viewing more critically and
fully the intelligent moral beings, in this world, toward whom the Divine
goodness has been displayed, in the largest measures.

We shall begin our illustration of the present argument, with some general
touches on the visible frame of inanimate nature, and the purposes of goodness
to which it is subservient. Not that goodness is communicable to inanimate
matter. Neither the sun, nor moon, nor earth, to which they are related, are
themselves capable recipients of good. The sensitive and intelligent beings, in
these globes, are the only objects of benevolence. But yet, the globes
themselves may well be considered as illustrations of this noble quality, if it
be found that they are constituted so as to be possively instrumental in
occasioning good to numberless beings, formed with capacities for enjoyment.
And this is the real truth.

An illustrious instance of it we have in the sun, whose constituent parts,
magnitude, and situation in the heavens, are admirably accommodated to the
design of conveying light and heat, in the m^st suitable proportions, to this
earth; without which it would have been an unfit habitation for any of those
animated, and intelligent beings, who now exist happy on it. And it is an
additi^nal display of goodness, as well as wisdom, in the Creator, that he has,
by the earth's annual and daily revolutions, so conveniently distributed these
blessings; causing the vicissitudes of day and night, seed time and harvest,
summer and winter. It is true, all parts of the earth are not, by this means,
equally favored with light and heat: Neither was it possible that they should.
But yet, the kindness of the Deity has adjusted this inconvenience, as well as
the nature of things would permit. For, on the one hand, he has guarded the
earth against the mischiefs of frost, in th^se parts where there is a defect of
heat, by providing for it a covering of snow, that, instead of lessening,
improves its fertile capacity, which capacity he has also wisely adapted to
such productions as require a less degree of heat to bring them to maturity;
hereby providing for the support of life, even in these places; which he has
likewise taken care to render comfortable both to the rational, and merely
animal subjects of it: To the former, by a growth of wood, in vast plenty,
furnishing them with fuel to keep them warm; and to the latter, by a natural
increase of furr upon their skins, in those seasons when it is needed as a
defense against the severities of the cold. On the other hand, he has contrived
refreshing breezes, where the earth and its inhabitants are exposed to the
direct rays of the sun; which commonly increase as that ascends, whereby the
heat is so corrected, as that they are both preserved from suffering by its
violence. Besides which, he has fitted the earth's fertility, in these parts,
to this proportion of heat: insomuch that its productions, in certain kinds,
are abundant for the supply both of animal and intelligent life. And wherein
could the Deity have made the sun more serviceable to our world? It is not
conceivable, how he should, in this respect, have given a more full and ample
discovery of his benevolence.

Our globe is another instance, manifesting the riches of the Divine goodness,
as well as wisdom. For though it is, itself, incapable of good, yet it is
wonderfully adjusted to occasion good to innumerable creatures capable of it,
by its disposition into seas, dry-land, and air encompassing it about, all
accurately corresponding with each other. Had the surface of this globe been
all dry-land, none of those animated kinds, in their numberless individuals,
c^uld have had existence, whose proper element is water; and who are fitted, by
a suitable organization of parts, to live in it, exerting themselves, and
moving about, with ease and pleasure: And consequently there would have been a
less manifestation of good, than there might have been, because a greater, by
this method, is n^w actually seen. Besides, if there had been (...) seas, there
could have been no rains, without which the dry land ^u^ have been useless to
the purposes of vegetation; and then animal life would have wanted a support,
at least, in the present way. -- Or, had the earth been universally covered
over with water, none of those creatures, on the other hand, could have had
existence, whether rational or merely animal, who are fitted, by their make,
for a dwelling on the dry-land: Neither could there have been those infinitely
various productions for necessity, convenience, and delight, which are now so
many evidences of the Creator's bounty. -- And it is beyond man to imagine a
better contrivance for good, than the air that surrounds our earth. It is this
that makes way for the transmission of light, without which the faculty of
seeing, in all animals, would have been useless: It is this that provides for
the ease and freedom of motion upon the earth, without which life itself had
been bestowed to little purpose: It is this that communicates sound, without
which we could not have conveyed our thoughts to one another, by the help of
speech; not to say any thing of the pleasure, in various kinds, which results
from the harmony there is between one sound and another: It is this that gives
rise to the wind, which mixes and tempers the exhalations interspersed in the
atmosphere, corrects the heat in hotter climates, and carries the clouds, from
place to place, to distill the rain that is needed: And, in a word, it is this
that preserves life, by the power of breathing, in all creatures, from the
highest to the lowest: And to this it is also owing that so many clases of
creatures, by the help of suitable organs, are able to wing their way threugh
the regions above, ascending to the tops of mountains, and tall trees, where
they find both nourishment and shelter. -- The proper reflection from all which
is, that the benevolent Deity could not have better adapted inanimate nature
for the diffusion of good. It is visible wherever we cast our eyes. Neither
earth, nor sea, nor air, are empty of living inhabitants; but they are all
filled with them; and provision, at the same time, made both for their support
and comfort.

The disposition of material nature, I know, has been objected to, and
complaints made, because its parts were not better adjusted. But the more
accurately these complaints have been examined, the more groundless they have
always appeared. Is it complained, that there are too wide seas? It has been
made evident, by the best observations, that the proportion between the sea and
dry-land could not have been settled with greater exactness, for the supply of
that moisture which is necessary to render the earth fruitful. Is it
complained, that the water in the sea is salt? This was a necessary quality to
keep it from putrefaction. And besides, it loses this quality, before the
exhalations from it fall in rain, or, by being condensed on the tops of
mountains, are formed into springs whether for the service of the earth it
self, or the creatures that are on it. Is it complained, that the surface of
the earth is too unequal? Some inequality was absolutely requisite in order to
guard against inundations from the sea: Nor is that inequality useless which
makes even the highest mountains; for these are the sources of springs, to the
great benefit of all living creatures: And, in their bowels, are contained
those minerals and metals, which are so advantageous to mankind. In a word,
there is nothing in the order or disposition of the parts of this earth that
can justly be complained of; as is evident from this, that, if we do but make
an alteration in our thoughts, and pursue it in its consequences, we shall soon
see our own folly. There is not indeed any part of inanimate nature but what
serves to show forth the Creator's goodness, by that variety of uses it is
accurately fitted to serve, some of which we are acquainted with, though the
entire number of them, the wisest philosophers have not been yet able to
investigate, and it may be never will: But yet, the more closely they view the
constitution of the world, the more reason they continually find for surprise
at the riches of goodness, as well as wisdom, therein so clearly shining forth.

We go on, in the next place, to take a transient view of the animal world, in
which I include all the creatures, on this earth, endowed with perception and
life, mankind only excepted. And I thus distinguish them from mankind, calling
them animal, not because I suppose they exist without some superior principle
of the same kind with the highest principle in men; but because, if they do
possess such a principle, it is in so low a degree as to render it improper to
rank them with intelligent, much more with moral beings, as men are. But
whether they have minds, or not, they are capable objects of goodness; and the
Deity has accordingly contrived, in the best manner, to make the displays of it
t^wards them.

One signal instance where^f is, his distributing their animal life into s^
many different sorts. Herein the order ^f the material world is consulted, and
one unif^r^ design of good evidently carried on. And, by this ^eans also, the
wisest and best method has been taken for the fullest manifestation of animal
good. For no one species of animated beings could have supplied the place of
various species, so as to have made way for an equally large discovery of
benevolence. It is only among different kinds of animals, constituted variously
capable of happiness, that all the happiness mere animals may be f^r^ed to
enjoy, is to be looked for. This we find to be the truth of fact. And it is by
this method likewise, that chasms are prevented, and the creation filled with
being and happiness. These inferior kinds are so many well adjusted parts in
the chain of existence: And, perhaps, this system could, in no other way, have
been constituted so full and coherent a whole.

Another instance illustrating the Deity's goodness is, the care he has taken,
notwithstanding this disposition of animals into such various kinds* so to
provide for them all, as that they are severally capable of attaining the
happiness that is proper for them. It is accordingly true of them ^ll, in all
their various classes, that they have ^gans fitted to give them pleasing
sensations; and their implanted instincts are wisely adapted to their
respective natures, severally determining them to that which is suitable for
their preservati^n and happiness: Besides which, they are not only end^wed with
the power of propagating their kind, but favored with such a contexture of
lady, or furnished with such instruments of defense, with a natural sagacity to
use them, as are admirably fitted to guard them against the injuries, to which
they are more peculiarly exposed. And, in consequence of this provision, the
general tendency of their nature is to good: And they actually enjoy a great
over-balance of it. So far as we are acquainted with them, instead of going on
heavily with life, they give plain indications that it is comfortable and
pleasant to them. And, from what we know of our own animal frame, so analogous,
in many respects, to their's, we have sufficient reason to believe, that life,
under the circumstances in which they hold it, is accompanied with many
gratifications* rendering it infinitely preferable to nonexistence.

Nor does it argue any want of goodness in the Deity, that they are not all
equally happy, or that they none of them enjoy that degree of happiness which
is common to other beings of a superior order. It is enough to the purpose of
the present argument, if so much happiness is allotted to them, as is proper to
creatures in their state, and filling up such a place in the scale of beings.
This is all that can be reasonably looked for, in order to a perfect display of
the Creator's benevolence.

Neither are the inconveniences they may naturally be liable to, an objection
of any weight. For as their structure is material, (at least so far as it is
so) they are, from their very make, subjected to the same general laws which
take place in the material world. And i^t might be an impossibility that they
should be so framed as not to be liable to inconveniences. And unavoidable
inconveniences are not to be mentioned, as inconsistencies with the most
perfect benevolence; unless it can first be proved, that no system ought to be
made, nor laws established, but what are absolutely freed from them: Which
perhaps may not be the case, with respect to any system, in the whole circle of
existing nature.

It is a still further manifestation of the Creator's goodness toward these
inferior kinds, that he has contrived to make them, in some measure, useful to
one another. Perhaps, they are so classed into sorts, as that they not only
fill up the creation, but, at the same time, do it so a^ to be, in the best
manner, conducive to the good of each other. There may be an established
general relation between all the species of inferior creatures, in consequence
of which the particular interests of the several kinds, instead of interfering,
are mutually subservient to each other. This is undoubtedly the truth of fact,
in many instances. Several of the lower kinds are serviceable to the superior:
And it looks as though they were purposely placed in such a subordination to
this end. Nay, some of the highest animal species are, in like manner, useful
to mankind: And they seem to have had this degree ^f subordination assigned
them for this very purpose. And there may be a certain order running through
the whole animal (...), tending to render all the various kinds as servic^ to
one another, as the nature of things would permit.

There is certainly a bond of union established between the individuals of
every species. As they have some instincts determining them to their own
private good, so have they others that unite them to their respective kinds.
They dislike solitude and discover pleasure in the company of each other. Some
live together in flocks, seem uneasy when separated, and will run ventures that
they may get associated with their species. And there is universally a strong
affection in the females toward their young. They are urged on by their
natural STORGEE, not only to exert themselves in providing for their
sustenance, but in securing them against danger. They will risque their own
ease, and engage in combats for the sake of their young; exposing themselves to
greater extremities on their account, than their own. Even the most savage
animals are affectionate to their offspring; and will take care of them with
all desirable tenderness.

It is readily acknowledged, the instincts by which individuals are attached to
their own kinds are not so strong, but that they may be mischeivous to one
another; and the relation between the several species may be still more loose,
insomuch that it may seem as though some kinds were rather destructive, than
beneficial, to other kinds. But this notwithstanding, individuals may exist
with respect to their own kinds, and the several kinds with respect to each
other, in the best manner it was possible they should, in order to their
conspiring, as parts, to promote the common happiness. And if some instances of
a contrary aspect, to such short-sighted creatures as we are, could be
mentioned, it ought not to be esteemed a counter-balance to what is so
evidently the general tendency of the animal constitution. It becomes us, in
such cases, to take care how we rashly censure the benevolent Deity;
especially, if it be considered, that detachea instances may have the
appearance of evil, to our imperfect view; while yet, in their connection, they
may be good. And as good is so apparently the general tendency, we have
sufficient reason, from hence, to think that this is the real truth, with
respect to these special instances; unless we could clearly prove the contrary.
In order whereto,

It is pleaded, I know, that some animal kinds live on others, to the entire
destruction of their being and happiness. But this notwithstanding, they may,
in the wisest manner, be useful to one another; and even this very objection
may be a strong evidence of it. It is true, the destruction of life will
follow, if some animals are food to others. But it may be true also, that there
could not have been so much life, and consequently happiness, in the creation,
had i^ not been for this expedient. Perhaps, so many kinds of creatures as now
exist, and it was necessary should exist in order to fill up this system, could
not, in any other established way, have been supported in being. And if it was
necessary, as we cannot say it was not, in order to the maintenance of life, in
such a variety of kinds, that it should be upheld, by a succession of
individuals in each kind, and not by the continued existence of the same
individuals, we are, at once, let into the wisdom and goodness, not only of the
general law subjecting all animals to death; but of that more limited one also,
according to which some species live upon others. The scheme, in this view of
it, is certainly intended for good: And more good, upon the whole, may be
communicated in this, than any other way. And therefore it is so far from
arguing a defect of benevolence in the Deity, that it is a strong illustration
of it. Besides, we know not the entire plan of heaven, with reference to the
animal world. Perhaps, their present existence is only an introduction to
something further. It may possibly be the first stage of their being, and a
step to some other state, this may be previously necessary to fit them for. And
as we are able to see but a little way into the design of the Deity, with
respect to these inferior creatures; and yet, are at no loss, from what we do
see, certainly to determine that it is a design tending to good: instead of
complaining that it is not a better contrived scheme, we have reason rather to
look upon it as the best in its kind, and to believe that it will turn out so,
in the final result of its operation. -- To proceed,

The most important head of argument, in the present debate, is the
constitution and government of the intellectual and moral world; by which I
mean ourselves, the highest order of beings it has pleased God to place on this
earth, and that order toward which he has made the largest displays of his
benevolence.

And there is one thing peculiar in our constitution which it may be proper to
give a general touch upon, before we come to particulars. What I speak of as
thus peculiar, and worthy of notice, is our compound make; in consequence of
which we are partly animal, and partly rational, being allied both to the
highest, and the lowest orders of beings in the universe. And the giving us
this constitution is an illustrious instance of the Divine goodness, and
naturally leads us to conceive of the Deity as absolutely and perfectly
benevolent.

It may indeed seem, at first view, as though there was an argument rather
proving the imperfection than perfection of the Deity's benevolence. But it is
far otherwise. For it is by means of this compound make, that inanimate nature
is not only enjoyed but perceived to have beauty and order, and to be a
contrivance worthy of the Supreme Creator. The inferior kinds are variously
capable of a lower sort of happiness, from their relation to, and situation in,
this material world: But this is all. Being destitute of reason, at least in
any considerable measure, sensitive enjoyment is the highest they can attain
to. It is the uni^ o^ (...) and sense, in such a superior degree, that (...)
men, at the same time that we enj^ (...) good, in common with the inferior
creatures, to discern the wisdom, and power, and benevolence, of the Deity,
herein displayed. And it is from hence also, that we become capable of that
more noble happiness, which is the result of the exercise of reason upon the
order of the material world, and the adjustment of bodily organs thereto, so as
to occasion so much sensitive pleasure. In a word, if there had not been some
order of beings, like us, of a compound make, who were, at once, qualified for
enjoyment from this material world, and for perceiving, in some measure, the
connections and dependencies by means whereof this is accomplished: I say, if
there had not been some such order of creatures, this material world must have
been comparatively lost. No honor would, in an active way, have been reflected
on the Deity; and little, very little, of that happiness would have been
enjoyed, which there is now a proper foundation laid for, according to the
established course and order of nature. So that such a constitution as our's
seems to have been necessary in order to a complete display of that good, this
material world was fitted to produce: And it looks as though it was principally
made with a view to us men, and that the inferior creatures, in their various
kinds, were formed for the prevention of needless voids, and to fill up this
system: To which purpose they are admirably fitted, as, by their gradual and
insensible subordination, they make it the best coherent whole, in its kind.

It is not pleaded, that we are, by this compound make, the most perfect beings
that can be brought into existence: Neither is this necessary in order to the
most perfect display of benevolence. It is sufficient, if by this make, we are
fitted for the world to which we are more especially related, and rendered
capable of as much happiness as is proper for beings in our situation, and
bearing such a part in the general plan for the manifestation of good.

Neither is it pretended, that this compound constitution is not liable to
inconveniences. For, so far as we are material, be the matter of which we are
made what it will, or our bodily organization what it will, we must of course
be subject to those laws, by which the material world we are related to, is
governed. And, if some inconveniences should arise herefrom, it ought to be
attributed, not to want of goodness in the Deity, but to necessity in the
nature of things: especialy if it appears, that he has, in the best conceivable
manner, taken care to prevent these inconveniences; as we shall presently see
that he has.

And so I proceed to a distinct consideration of both parts of our frame, in
order the more fully to illustrate the Divine benevolence from its displays
toward us, the highest order of beings in this system.

Our lower part first presents itself to view: As to which, we are allied to
the inferior kinds, and partake, in common, with them, of a bodily
organization, rendering us capable of pleasure, in various ways: Though we are
highly set above them, even with respect to this our animal part. Its exterior
form has greatly the preeminence; as bearing the evident marks of superior
beauty and majesty. And the same may be said of its several members; which are
fitted for a much greater diversity of useful exertions. Besides, it is endowed
with some powers, which they are destitute of: Such is the power of speech; and
such are the powers of perceiving beauty and harmony in the objects of sight
and of hearing: All which are rich sources of good, and administer unspeakably
to the benefit, and delight, of life. The advantage, it is true, would, in some
respects, have been on the side of the creatures below us, had not the union of
reason with sense, in our constitution, turned the scale in our favor. They
have a quicker sagacity, with respect to the things which belong to their
preservation and safety. They surpass us, at least many of them, in the natural
firmness of their make, whereby they are better fitted to endure hardships.
They can more easily provide themselves with the means of subsistence, not
being called to that labor and pains, which nature has made necessary for us.
And they sooner come to an ability to shift for themselves. And this
disposition of things is just as it might be expected it would be, upon the
scheme of perfect benevolence. For, the giving those creatures the advantage,
in th^se respects, is, on the one hand, a sit display of goodness toward them;
as they have only their appetites and instincts, with a low degree of reason,
at most, to guide and direct them: And, on the other hand, it is no evidence of
any defect of goodness toward us, because being endowed with reason and
understanding, in a comparatively high degree, the advantage, by this means,
turns greatly on our side; as indeed it ought to do. If they have a stronger
animal sagacity, our larger degree of reason is more than a balance for it. If
they are, any of them, more robust in their make, we are notwithstanding better
able, by the help of our reason, to guard ourselves, than nature has guarded
them. If they are supported with less care, we, by the exercise of reason, can
make our greater care a pleasure, and, by means of it, bring in a much richer
supply for the comfort of life. And if it is in a more gradual and leisurely
way, that we come to the use of our animal powers, we can, by the help of
reason, make them more extensively useful afterward, by employing them to a
vastly greater variety of good purposes. Besides, our animal frame is
originally made for a longer duration; and the time required in order to its
coming to its perfect state, may be, in the best manner, adjusted thereto. And
further, as we are designed for intellectual and moral, as well as animal
growth, this method of coming to maturity, by slow and gradual steps, may be
the most suitable one to promote these several intentions, as united in the
same constitution.

So that there is no comparison between the inferior creatures, and us men. We
have much the advantage of them: At least, we are qualified to turn the balance
in our own favor. For it is in our power, by the help of our understandings,
to render our animal life far more easy and happy, by guarding it against
injuries; by providing for it necessaries; by diversifying its pleasures; by
multiplying its delights; and by refining and exalting its enjoyments, in a
variety of ways, not within the reach of their capacities.

But we have considered as yet only that lower sort of happiness we are
furnished for, by means of our animal make. This, it is true, is very
considerable: And mankind have such an opinion of it, if we may guess at their
thoughts by their practice. For sensual pleasures are the great object of their
pursuit. Too many indulge to them, as though they were designed for no higher
happiness. Our fault indeed is, not that we have no value for animal
gratifications, but that we value them too highly, and place too much of our
happiness in them; as they contain only the lowest sort of good we are fitted
for the enjoyment of, by means of our animal part. For it is to be remmembered,

That a great proportion, even of that happiness which is proper to us, as
intelligent and moral agents, originates in our animal frame, which fits us, by
its various well adjusted organs, to have communication with the material
world, in a certain stated way, established by the author of nature. How many
of our ideas are we beholden to our senses for? They are indeed the primary
inlets to the materials of knowledge, the true foundation of all intellectual
happiness. It is from hence, in a great measure, that our reason, imagination,
invention, and other mental powers, are supplied with objects, which not only
employ their exercise, but yield those various pleasures which vastly surpass
the highest animal delights. Nay, even the social and moral happiness we are
formed for, takes rise, in part at least, from our animal nature, by means of
which we become visible to, and conversible with, each other, and capable of
interchanging those various offices of justice, and kindness, and friendship,
which chiefly lay the foundation for those moral and social pleasures, which
are the most refined and exalted we are made capable of enjoying: Nor, unless
we had possessed such material bodies, could there have been those ways of
communion with one another which now take place, or those occasions for helping
and pleasing each other, which so frequently arise from our present
constitution, and give so large a scope for social and moral exercises, and
those sublime pleasures which are the res^lt therefrom. Besides all which, it
is owing to our animal frame, that we have senses and appetites to restrain
within the bounds of a just decorum; which constitutes a proper sphere of
do^ion for our reason, and gives opportunity ^o employ it to very excellent
purposes, by putting us upon the practice of sobriety, chastity, and
moderation, those private virtues which tend to ennoble the mind, and prepare
it for the most exalted exercises and enjoyments it is made capable of.

And it is this view of the inferior part of our constitution, that gives us
the true and full idea of its main design and use. We should entertain but a
poor low thought of our bodily organization, if we looked upon it as contrived
for no higher an end, than mere animal gratifications. It was proper indeed,
for many reasons, that it should be furnished, as it really is, for this kind
of pleasure: But the great thing aimed at, by the Deity, in employing so much
skill in adjusting the structure of our bodies, was, that he might fit us, by
this means, for such a communication with material nature, as might ^ay the
best foundation for those intellectual and moral exercises, and the noble
pleasures resulting therefrom, which so highly exalt our natures, justly giving
us the first place among the numerous classes of beings which inhabit this
earth.

I may properly add to what has hitherto been said, that the Deity's
benevolence, with respect to our inferior part, is conspicuous, not only in the
positive good he has fitted it to be the means of to the mind, but in the care
he has also taken to secure it against inconveniences. It may possibly be
thought, that perfect goodness would have absolutely freed our bodies from all
inconveniences whatsoever. But this may be only a mistake of our own. It is
certain, in point of fact, that that bodily organization, whereby we are fitted
for the perception of good, is liable to be disordered, yea, destroyed, in
numberless ways: Nor can we say, that it was possible, in the nature of things,
absolutely to have secured it from this liableness to disturbance. All
therefore that can, with reason, be required of the Deity, upon the scheme of
perfect benevolence, is, that he should provide for the security of our
animal-structure against mischief, in the best manner that was consistent with
the operation of those laws, he has established for the displays of his
goodness toward this system. And this, so far as we are able to judge, he has
actually done; partly, by putting it in our power to contrive suitable methods
for our own safety; and partly, by planting within us a variously modified
principle of self-preservation, urging us on to avoid every thing that we
apprehend will be hurtful to us: But principally, by annexing the sensation of
pain to those touches upon our bodily mechanism, which tend to disturb its
order; hereby rousing the principle of self-love, and putting us upon the most
effectual exertions in order to our own security. And wherein could the Deity
have contrived better for our being guarded against mischief? I know indeed
that the very capacity of perceiving pain is urged as an argument against the
benevolence of the Deity: But with nothing more than the bare shadow of reason.
For it is a most useful capacity. Even the principle of self-preservation, with
all its appendages from the body, and assistances from the mind, would have
been essentially defective, was it not for this additional stimulus: Nor is it
conceivable, how we could have been, in any tolerable measure, secured it from
danger, without some such expedient as this. Some warning seems to have been
absolutely necessary, especially to creatures, whose knowledge of the material
world, and its capacity to do them hurt as well as good, is not intuitive, but
gradual and experimental; as it is best it should be for many reasons: Some of
which we may have occasion to mention hereafter: I say, some warning of the
mischiefs we are exposed to, in such a world as this, was necessary: And what
more proper one than that, which makes every thing hurtful at the same time
painful? What warning short of this would have been effectual to have answered
the purposed end? Notwithstanding the new force or stimulus, herefrom awakening
the principle of self-preservation, we are careless enough in guarding
ourselves against even those things which we know to be hurtful, by feeling
that they are painful. And was it not for the sensation of pain, which we are
so ready to complain of as inconsistent with goodness, in the Creator, we
should not enjoy any happiness in comparison with what we do now. It is this
that rouses our attention to guard ourselves against those external objects
that may cause wounds and bruises, or in any other way do mischief to our
bodies: It is this that minds us of the necessity of food and ra^ent, and puts
us upon the use of care properly to supply nature in these respects: And it is
this, in one word, more than any thing in our constituon, that tends to make us
cautious and prudent, looking about, and employing our thoughts and pains that
we may enjoy life with as little inconvenience as may be. So that the sensation
of pain is a noble contrivance for good, and strongly argues benevolence in the
Creator, rather than the contrary. It is indeed the grand expedient to prevent
those inconveniences, which, had it not been for this contrivance, must have
been inevitable. And as to those that are so, notwithstanding this provision of
nature, such as the disposition of our animal frame, and those disorders we are
naturally subjected to, we shall particularly take notice of them, hereafter,
in a more proper place.

In the mean time, let us go to the other part of our constitution, whereby we
are allied to the highest order of beings in the universe, and rendered capable
of intellectual and moral pleasures, the highest in kind that are communicable
from the Deity. And here it will be worth while to be a little particular in
illustrating the Creator's benevolence, from the provision he has made for our
enjoyment of both these sorts of happiness.

To begin with the care he has taken to provide for our enjoyment of
intellectual happi^; which we shall show to be such as is sufficient ^lead us
into an idea of him as perfectly and ^bsolutely benevolent.

The mental capacities we are endowed with here ^operly come into
consideration. And these we ^ll find, upon inquiry, to be wonderfully ^pted to
qualify us for intellectual acquirements; it is not indeed conceivable how an
order ^ings situated as we are, should have been ^etter furnished for this
noble purpose.

Our mental capacities are of two sorts. The ^st furnishes us with the
materials of knowledge; ^e other qualifies us for the proper use of them.

The powers furnishing ^s with the materials ^ knowledge are sensation and
reflection; both which are admirably fitted to answer the end ^r which they
were implanted in us.

Sensation, the first of these, is that capacity by ^eans of which impressions
from without become ^rceptions within, variously affecting the mind, ^d giving
rise to what we call sensible ideas. And ^ vain had our bodies been so
curiously fitted ^ith organs, and external objects fitted, by their ^ediation,
to make impressions on our minds, ^s it not for this capacity. Barely a
suscep^ility of impressions, from material nature, would ^t have been
sufficient for the purposes of in^ligence. Besides this, a perceiving power in
the ^n^ was necessary. And it is in consequence (...) this, that corporeal
objects, by the medium of bodily organs, are the occasion of various distinct
sensations, presenting to the view of the understanding so many ideas, as
objects to employ its exercise. The inferior creatures, it is true, are formed
with this capacity, in common with us men; but with this difference. It was
planted in them for the sake of animal life, as an expedient to render that
comfortable and happy; whereas we are endowed with it, not for this end only,
nor yet principally, but that we might be furnished with the proper materials
for the acquirement of knowledge, and the enjoyment of that pleasure which
results therefrom. And a noble capacity it is to this end. It is from hence
that we derive all our sensible ideas; that is to say, all our ideas of color,
taste, sound, light, heat, cold, and, in a word, whatever ideas we have of
external objects, or any of the modes or properties that belong to them.

The other power, furnishing us with the materials of knowledge, is reflection,
on the mind's ability to look within, and take notice of its own operations.
And these, thus observed, give rise to another set of ideas, different in kind
from those we received from sensation. New objects, by the exercise of this
faculty, are presented to the view of the mind, which have no affinity ^h
external nature; such as thinking, willing, knowing, believing, ^ting, loving,
hoping, fearing, and the like: ^shing the materials for a new sort of
knowledge, superior in its (...) which results from sensible ideas, and suited
to yield us far more exa^ed pleasure. It is from this set of ideas that we use
above the material world, and are enabled to turn our view to moral objects, in
the mental survey of which we may entertain ourselves with the highest
satisfaction.

These now are the inlets, and the only ones, to all our ideas: Insomuch that
we have no notion in our minds, n^r can form any, but from the ideas we receive
in those ways. I am not convinced, by any thing I have seen wrote upon the
subject, that we have any ideas, but what take rise from (...) and reflection,
or that we can have any, upon the (...) ^s^blishment of nature, any other way.
They are all (...) from this source, and may be traced up to it.
But yet, we have no reason to complain for want of intellectual materials. It
is true, the simple ideas originally let into the mind, whether by sensation,
or reflection, are but few: Yet, they are capable of being put together with
such variety as to make new complex ones almost to infinity. Some conception we
may frame of this, from the composition of words out of the letters of the
alphabet. These, though few in number, are yet sufficient for the formation of
words without end: Which words are again capable of being placed in such
positions, with respect to each other, as to be proper signs for the conveyance
of all manner of truths to the mind. In like manner, our simple ideas, though
not very numerous, are yet capable of being compounded so as to exhibit new
images beyond account* And these complex forms are again capable of being put
together with almost an infinite variety. So extensive is the ground work laid
by those powers of sensation and reflection, for acquirements in knowledge, and
mental pleasure the consequence therefrom.

The other sort of faculties, or those which qualify us for the use of these
materials of knowledge, are such as these.

The first is, the mind's ability to lay up the ideas it has received, in
either of the above ways, as it were, in store for use afterward, with a
readiness to revive them, without the presence of external objects, or the help
of those inward reflections, by which they were at first occasioned. This is
done by the memory; which is a necessary faculty. For, the mind not being
capable of attending to many ideas at once, we should have been but poorly
qualified for proficiency in knowledge, had we not been endowed with a power to
recall ideas into view, as we might have occasion for them, after they had lain
out of sight. And this ability we are accordingly furnished with: Nor is it a
mere passive one; but dependant, in a good measure, on the will. It is true
formerly in printed ideas will sometimes obtr^de themselves upon the mind, and
come undesired to the view of understanding: But this notwithstanding, the mind
can of choice lay up ideas; and is able to a good degree, as it pleases, to
recall them. It can, on purpose, employ itself this way: And the readiness,
with which it often revives the perception of past ideas, is really
astonishing. -- I need not say any thing to point out the usefulness of this
faculty, and the mighty help it is fitted to afford us in intellectual
acquirements. Were we not thus furnished, we should necessarily be confined to
present ideas, as they might happen, in a passive way, to be excited in our
minds: Whereas now we have it in our power to employ our thoughts on any of
those ideas which have, at any time, been imprinted on our minds, as we are
pleased to call for them, in the purs^it of intellectual happiness. And what an
unspeakable advantage is this? It not only makes the way to knowledge much
easier and quicker than it could otherwise have been; but greatly enlarges the
capacity for it, by laying a proper foundation in our nature for very
considerable seize in this kind.

Another power is discernment; by which I understand an ability to distinguish
ideas from one another, according to the real difference there is between them.
And a very important faculty this is. Witho^t it the former faculties would be,
in a manner, useless. It is not merely the power of receiving ideas, or the
power of recalling them into view after their disappearance, that would have
been sufficient for seize in knowledge. A faculty to discriminate them
from one another was further necessary: Nor otherwise would our thoughts have
been any other than so many conf^sed ideas. What we call judgment is chiefly
dependant on this faculty. It consists in the mind's readiness to discern the
difference there is between ideas: And the more nicely and accurately it is
able to distinguish them, the better and more perfect is the judgment. It is
owing to this faculty that ideas lie clear and determinate in the mind; and by
the help of it we are not only preserved from perplexity in our notions, but
from mistakes also, arising from a seeming likeness in ideas when they really
differ. It is, in short, in consequence of this faculty, that we are able to
reason clearly and solidly, setting before our own view, and the view of
others, the evidence of truth in a strong and satisfactory p^int of light. The
usefulness of this faculty may be learned from those perceptions of truth,
which have taken rise from it, to the increase of knowledge, in so many
instances, redounding so greatly to the benefit of mankind.

Another power the mind is furnished with, is that of compounding, enlarging,
and diminishing, the ideas that have been let into it: By means whereof it is
capable, in a sense, of making new objects of perception, by presenting to the
view of the understanding the original ideas, received by sensation or
reflection, in new complex forms without end. In consequence of this
compounding power, we become, as it were, Creators; being able to frame images
at our pleasure, hereby multiplying the objects of thought, and giving occasion
for infinitely various new perceptions, accompanied with pleasure, we must
otherwise have been strangers to. The imagination is chiefly employed in this
work of making new complex ideas. It is able indeed, with quickness and
vivacity, to revive former images; but its power lies principally in framing
new forms or species, which exist only in conception. And a wonderful faculty
it is to this purpose. How admirably quick is it in its operations? How
suddenly can it unite and blend together the m^st distant ideas, varying them
from their simple originals, and setting them before the mind with infinite
diversity? This power, it is true, is peculiarly liable to abuse. It may be
prostituted to vain and base purposes. It may be debased with mean images, or
polluted with vicious ones. But yet, it is in itself a noble capacity: And had
we not been endowed with it, th^se excellent productions of art and genius
would never have had a being, which are so variously fitted, both for the
service of life, and the entertainment of the mind.

A still more useful power is that whereby we are enabled to assemble ideas in
various positions and arrangements, in order to compare them together, and view
them in the respects and relations they bear to each other. It is owing to this
faculty that we perceive new truths. For every different juxta position of
ideas exhibit to the mind some agreement or disagreement it was not before
acquainted with, and opens to its view some new discovery. This faculty, as
employed in finding ^t new truths, by placing ideas in various positions or
orders with respect to each other, is what is principally meant by invention.
But as it is employed in placing invented truths, or propositions already
perceived to be truths, in like positions, in order to deduce still other
truths, it is called reasoning; which is them blessed and most useful operation
of the mind, and that indeed for which all its faculties were principally
designed.

The last power of the mind which I shall mention, and indeed I have only
mentioned the foregoing ones; for it would require a volume to enlarge
severally on them, as might easily be done: I say, the last power the mind is
furnished with is that of abstraction; by which it makes particular idea
general ones. And this it does by withdrawing or separating from them these and
those circumstances which accompanied them, as excited by particular objects,
and considering them in that general view only, wherein many other objects do
agree with them. As for example: -- The same idea, signified by the term
redness, being perceived to day upon the sight of a cherry, which was perceived
yesterday upon the sight of a brick, and the day before upon the sight of
blood, the mind considers this idea abstracted from these particular objects,
or at least those c^nco^itant ideas which accompanied its perception from each
of them* making it a general idea comprehending all existences that agree in
being red. And to this faculty we are beholden for the benefit of language.
Particular names for particular ideas would, in a great measure, have destroyed
the use of speech, by rendering it infinitely tedious. Abstraction is the
remedy against this. It is the mind's capacity to make general ideas that has
given rise to general names; by means whereof language is made easy, and we are
qualified with convenient speed, by the intervention of words, spoken or
written, to convey our thoughts to one another. Besides, it is of vast use, in
acquiring knowledge, to have this power of considering ideas in an abstracted
view; as, without it, the making progress in understanding would have been an
infinitely lengthy business. And further, we have it in our power, by the help
of this faculty, more fully and thoroughly to examine ideas then we could
otherwise have done; considering them singly, and apart from all others, and
so as to have the compleatest conception of them, in their several properties
and relations.

Those now are the powers, qualifying us for intellectual acquirements. And how
admirably fitted are they to this end? Material nature is, by this means, in a
great measure, subjected to our command. We can view external objects, even in
their absence, by their images retained in the mind; examine their relations
and dependencies; enquire into their properties and powers; and investigate
numberless truths concerning them: Applying them to the uses of life, or the
entertainment of the min^i^ speculation. And this intellectual pleasure is
always ready at hand: And it will not, like animal delight, pall the desire,
and bring on satie^y and disgust; but the oftener we repeat it, the more we
shall be delighted: For it is, in itself, a noble exercise, and fitted to yield
continually growing satisfaction to the mind. -- Nor are we confined to
material nature only; but, being furnished by reflection, with another set of
ideas, have it in our power to bring even the moral world also under
examination; enquiring into its qualities, relations, and dependencies, and
herefrom discovering the most important truths, not only applicable to the
purpose of governing our own conduct, but of giving our minds the highest
pleasure it is capable of from contemplation. It is from hence that we perceive
a difference of powers in our own constitution, some superior, others inferior,
and become acquainted with that government of them wherein consists that moral
economy, which is our greatest glory as men: It is from hence that we argue,
with so much probability, the existence of numberless orders of beings, of like
mental powers with ourselves, though possessing them in far more exalted
degrees: And, in fine, it is from hence that we are capable of rising in our
thoughts to the existence of some uncreated original being, at the head of all,
endowed with the highest possible perfections, in the contemplation of whom the
mind may take the greatest complacency. The forming us with faculties whereby
we are qualified for such noble intellectual seize, evidently carries
with it the marks of benevolence. Nothing indeed but supreme and perfect
goodness, could have so wonderfully adorned and endowed our nature.

It is readily acknowledged, these capacities, as planted in us, are but low
and small, in comparison with what we may suppose them to be in many other
beings above us. And this may seem to some an objection, if not against the
benevolence of the Deity in general, yet against that absolute perfection of it
which we are pleading for. But it is an objection of no great weight. For if
these capacities in us, however low and imperfect, in comparison with what they
are in other beings, are well adjusted to the state and circumstances of an
order of creatures bearing such a part in the general scheme for good, it is
all that can be required of reasonable benevolence, though heightened to
infinity. Had no other beings been brought into existence besides us men, the
objection, in this case, it is owned, would have h^ld good: But as we are only
one of the numerous orders that constitute a general system, this quite alters
the case; making those capacities only an evidence of wise and reasonable
benevolence, which are fitted for a particular part, sustaining such a place,
in the constitution of this whole. In this view of the matter, it is easy to
see how benevolence may be infinitely perfect, while yet the creatures that are
produced by it are variously endowed with capacities, some superior, others
inferior; Nor could they otherwise have been fitted to fill the place assigned
them in the chain of being: Neither could they have answered those good ends,
they were particularly formed for. Had the brute creatures, for instance, been
endowed with the capacities that belong to us men, they would have been unfit
for the place they now take up in the creation: Neither could they have been
the means of that good, they are now properly the occasion of. And the same may
be said of us men. Had we been endowed with the capacities of angels, we should
not have been formed for such a world as this, and for answering those ends, in
it, which we are now fitted to answer, and it might be necessary should be
answered in order to a full manifestation of Divine goodness. The truth is, the
perfection of benevolence consists, not simply in the largeness of the
capacities it bestows upon any beings, but in fitting them to the state and
circumstances of beings in such a situation, and bearing such a place, in the
general plan of operation for good: And if our capacities are thus adjusted,
which cannot be disproved, it is all that can reasonably be expected. It is no
argument of the want of benevolence in the Creator, that they are not greater:
Nay, had they been greater, the benevolence discovered would have been, in the
same proportion, less wise and perfect.

It is confessed likewise, that mankind are not endowed with those mental
powers, in equal degrees. So far is this from the truth of fact, that the
capacities of scarce any two men are exactly alike. Some excel in one turn of
mind, others in another; some have no great genius for any thing, others are
distinguished with a very extensive one, fitting them for almost every thing:
And perhaps some individuals in the human species differ as widely from others,
in their rational powers, as those others do from the next species below them.
And this may possibly be esteemed by some another objection against the plea we
are making for an absolutely perfect principle of benevolence in the Deity. But
neither does this appear to be an objection, carrying with it any considerable
force. It may be, some such diversity, as that which is visible in men's mental
powers, could not have been prevented, in consistency with those general laws,
according to which mankind were intended to be made happy. One of these laws
(which we have had occasion already to mention) puts it very much into men's
own power, by industry and proper application, to enlarge their capacities, and
make progress in intellectual seize: And in consequence of this law, a
difference in men's powers will be unavoidable; though we should even suppose,
what perhaps is not true, that they were alike in their original implantation.
Besides, the exercise of mental powers, being, according to another law of
nature, in so great a measure, dependant on the mechanism of the body, this
also renders it impossible but that they should be different; for a difference
in bodily organization cannot but take place, in such a world as this, unless
the laws of nature should be interrupted in their course. So that to object
against a disparity of mental powers is, in true consequence, to object against
the general plan according to which this system is made, upheld, and governed:
Which, in such short-sighted creatures as we are, can be no other than
objecting in the dark, by urging that which finally terminates in our own
ignorance.

But to come more directly to the point. -- This difference in men's
capacities, whatever it is owing to, whether a difference in their original
implantation, or a difference in the body's mechanism, either of which amounts
to precisely the same thing, in the present argument: I say, this inequality of
powers is so far from arguing want of goodness in the Deity, that it strongly
illustrates the glory and perfection of it.

Possibly, the gradation in beings, by means of which all spaces are filled up,
could not have been so accurately complete, unless there had been a difference
between the individuals in each species as well as between the species
themselves. Some disparity between men compared with one another, and between
the creatures in every other class considered, in the like comparative view,
^ight be necessary to link together the several species, so as to make one
coherent chain, without any void or chasm.

Or however this be, it is easy to see the preferableness ^f the present
constitution to its contrary; as being better fi^ed to promote the happiness of
such an order of creatures as we are. Were our mental powers so exactly alike,
as that one man could not go beyond another, but every man must have within
himself the whole source of intellectual furniture, there would be no room for
that converse between man and man, which is, in the present state of things,
one of the chief pleasures, as well as improvements of the mind: To be sure, it
could not be carried on with that mutual satisfaction it now may; nor could it
turn out to so great advantage. Besides, if there was no such thing as one
man's excelling another, as there could not be upon the present supposition,
the strongest stimulus, that now prompts us to exert ourselves in order to
enlarge our intellectual powers, would be wanting; and by means thereof our
very powers themselves, so far as we can judge, must be in danger of being
rendered inactive, and of decreasing in their fitness for exercise. And
further, if our capacities had been precisely the same, that subordination in
the human species, those superiorities and inferiorities, could not have taken
place, without which life itself could not have been enjoyed, in such a world
as our's, with tolerable comfort. And what is of yet greater importance, there
would not have been the occasion for those interchangeable offices of humanity
and social kindness, which, upon ^he present scheme, not only enlarge our
sphere of mutual serviceableness, but give opportunity for the exercise of many
virtues perfective of our nature, and fitted to yield us high degrees of
happiness we must otherwise have been strangers to. The plain truth is, the
conveniences and pleasures, possible to be enjoyed by the human kind, do not
seem to have been obtainable, in a world constituted as this is, but by an
union of counsels and endeavors; every one doing his part in order to promote
the good of the whole. And different capacities are the requisite expedient to
this purpose. These not only fit the several individuals for reciprocal
services, but secure their mutual dependence on each other; hereby properly
linking them together, and making way for those various exertments which are
necessary for the common benefit. If mankind could at all have enjoyed the
advantage of society, without this inequality of powers, it is very evident
that they could not have enjoyed it to so good a purpose as with it. Their
being variously endowed is that which puts it in their power to be variously
useful to each other, so as that the happiness of every individual may hereby
be increased beyond what it could otherwise have been. And it is the
insufficiency there is in every man for his own happiness by himself singly,
and alone, and his being obliged to depend on others for many things, without
which he must be very uncomfortable, that is, in reality, the only effectual
bond that unites the human species, securing their attachment to each other,
and stimulating them to those mutual services, upon which the good of all the
individuals does very much depend.

It is still further acknowledged, that our intellectual powers, at first, are
weak and feeble, and it is in a slow and leisurely way, under due cultivation,
and in the use of labor and pains, that they gain strength, and advance to any
considerable degrees of their attainable perfection. And this likewise may be
thought an objection against the plea for an absolutely perfect principle of
benevolence in the Deity. But it is, duly considered, an argument rather
enforcing this plea, than in any degree lessening its real weight.

Perhaps, no mind, the infinitely comprehensive one only excepted, can be so
perfect as to be incapable of progression in understanding. For one degree of
knowledge is so connected with another, and so naturally prepares the way for
it, as that it may be an impossibilitity but that every created mind should be
capable of attaining still higher degrees of it. So that if we were at all made
capable of intelligence, it should seem as though it must have been, in
general, in the way of progression. And as to the particular method of
progression that takes place, with respect to the human mind, it is the most
natural and rational one that could have been contrived, for an order of beings
constituted in other respects, and situated, as we are; as we shall evidently
see by going over its parts that are objected to.

It is complained, that our faculties are weak at first, and advance in a slow
and gradual way to their attainable maturity. To which the reply is, That, as
the only way, according to the established order of nature, in which the mind
can be furnished with ideas, is by the medium of the bodily senses, and its own
reflections afterward, it was impossible but that the attainment of knowledge,
with respect to us, should be in a slow and leisurely manner. And though our
faculties are feeble at first, it is best they should be so, and an instance of
goodness, in the Creator, rather than the contrary. For, it is to be
remembered, they could be of no manner of service till supplied with proper
objects, and there had been time to learn the use of them. We must have been,
at first, whatever was the state of our faculties, totally unacquainted with
ourselves, and with the world about us: And is would have required time, and
experience, and instruction, before we could have acquired knowledge sufficient
for the proper application of any thing to the purposes of life. And as this is
the condition of our nature, faculties feeble at first, but yet capable of
gradually advancing to a mature state, seem the best suited thereto of any we
could have been endowed with. There is evidently a congruity and proportion
between such faculties, and the method according to which knowledge is
attainable by such creatures as we are. Instead of having faculties in their
full strength and vigor, before it was possible, conformably to the established
order of nature, that we could make the proper use of them, it seems much
better that they should gradually open and enlarge, as ideas are gradually let
into them to employ their exercise, and fit them for the offices and enjoyments
of life. And perhaps the time of our coming to a mature state of faculties, is,
in the best manner, adjusted to the time requisite for the mind to get stored
with ideas, and furnished with that skill in the use of them, which is proper
for full grown powers. Besides, as we come into the world, and must do so
according to the present laws of nature, with infant bodies, what more fit than
that we should have at first infant minds also? How unsuitable would a manly
mature state of mind be, for an infant body? What mis-matched companions would
they be for each other? It is most proper, as the body slowly and gradually
advances to its attainable maturity, that the mind should do so likewise. There
is, upon this scheme, an apparent adjustment between the two grand parts of the
human frame; and it is all along preserved in the joint progress they gradually
make toward the maturity they are designed to attain to. And, it may be, that
state of tuition and discipline we are placed under, while we leisurely pass
through the several periods of infancy, childhood, and youth, is the best
fitted initiation into a state of manhood, or full grown faculties. It is
certainly of eminent service in many respects; as hereby opportunity is given,
while ideas are letting into the mind, and the faculties are opening and
expanding, to introduce that attentiveness, teachableness, and modest
diffidence, which are the grand preparatives for considerable seize in
useful knowledge. And that exercise which we are now called to, and put upon,
is the most natural and suitable method, not only to strengthen and improve our
faculties, but to form that habit of industry and diligence, without which we
shall in vain think of advancing in intellectual pursuits. And this leads to
the other part of the complaint, which is,

That our seize in knowledge are connected with care and labor; insomuch
that we can never make any considerable progress in understanding, unless we
apply ourselves, with diligence, to cultivate and improve our minds. And here
it is queried, Why could not we have been formed, at once in the same degree of
intellectual perfection we are ever capable of attaining to? And would not this
have discovered greater benevolence than is discovered in the method that now
takes place? Why should the benefit of intelligence be trusted, in such a
measure, with ourselves, and be made to depend upon our own industry? What need
of so much pains, and such a tedious round-about way in order to knowledge, and
the happiness that is consequent thereupon, when it might have been given at
once, without so much ado^? To which the proper answer is, that the
communication of knowledge, in the way here pleaded for, may be an
impossibility in the nature of things: Or, at least, such a communication of it
may be less fitted, upon the whole, and all things considered, for the
production of so much good, as is capable of being produced in the method that
at present takes place. Perhaps, the putting intellectual seize into the
power of creatures themselves, in a good measure, making them possible only in
the way of due care and diligence, is the best adapted of any method, that
could have been pitched upon to produce the greatest sum of happiness. It it
certain, that if as much knowledge, as we are ever capable of attaining to, was
the absolute gift of nature, and (if the supposition may not be thought an
impossible one) a gift bestowed at once, upon our first coming into existence;
it is certain, I say, that knowledge communicated this way would not be an
endowment that had any value in it morally speaking: For which reason it could
not be the source of that pleasure, which might have resulted from it, had it
been an acquisition of our own. And it cannot be denied, that pleasure is
naturally connected with the idea of knowledge, as the fruit of our own
industry. We need only attend to our perceptions, in order to be convinced that
we feel pleasure in viewing this quality under the notion of a purchase of our
own, in the way of diligence: And it is indeed one of the highest and noblest
sorts of pleasure we are capable of enjoying. But, it is plain, this pleasure
could not have been perceived; there would have been no foundation laid for it
in nature, if it was not in our own power, by care and pains, to make
intellectual improvements. If knowledge had been the gift of the Deity,
independently of ourselves, we should have had no reason, were we endowed with
it in ever so high a measure, for the least self-approbation on this account:
Nor could we rationally have enjoyed that pleasure which is now a natural
consequence therefrom. So that the present method for the communication of
intellectual good is a better fitted one for the purpose, than that which is
pleaded for in the objection; because knowledge absolutely communicated is not
capable of yielding so much happiness, as that which is attained to, by proper
faculties, in the use of labor and pains: For there would be wanting the
conscious reflection on our own merit in the procurement of it: We could not
look upon it as our own acquisition, and consequently could not, unless upon a
false bottom, perceive that self-approbation, from whence alone can result the
noblest-kind of pleasure we are capable of. The truth is, it is really best
that intellectual, and indeed every other kind of good, is made to depend, in
so great a measure, upon ourselves. For it is this that gives rise to the
various exercise of our faculties, affording, at the same time, both proper
scope and reason for their employment: Whereas, if good was communicated
without the concurrence of our own endeavors, it is not easily conceivable,
how there could have been either room or reason for those noble exertions,
which, upon the present plan, are properly called forth; and suitably
recompensed. Besides, there could be no such thing as any moral attainment, if
nothing could be acquired by the due exercise of our natural faculties. The
capacity of making acquisitions, by our own endeavors, suitably employed, is
the true and only basis of all our moral perfection. It is in consequence of
this, and this only, that we become capable of virtue, and worthy of praise and
commendation: And had we not this power, we should be nothing more than mere
perceptive beings, who do not act, but are acted upon: Nor, if we were thus the
passive recipients only of good, would there have been any foundation laid in
our nature, for the highest and noblest of all pleasure; the pleasure. I mean,
which is consequent upon the reflection on good as our own attainment, by a
right application of our own powers.

So that, upon the whole, instead of complaining of God for not furnishing us
with powers, wonderfully contrived to fit us for intellectual seize, and
the happiness consequent thereupon, we have reason rather to admire the
greatness of his benevolence. It does not indeed appear, wherein he could have
displayed his goodness, as guided by wisdom, more conspicuously than he has
d^ne, to an order of beings in such a world as our's, and as sustaining such a
place in the scale of intelligent existences.

I now go on to illustrate the benevolence of the Deity, by taking as concise a
view as I well can of those powers, he has endowed us with, fitting us for
moral happiness* the highest any being can be made capable of. And those, the
other mental powers, already mentioned, not being unattended to, are, in
general, the following ones.

The first power in our nature [call it common sense, moral sense, moral
discernment* or give it any other name that may be thought better] is that by
which we are enabled at once, without the labor of a long train of reasoning,
to distinguish between moral good, and moral evil, in all instances that are of
primary importance, and essentially connected with the good of the moral world.

There is an unalterable difference between virtue and vice, or, what means the
same thing, between moral good, and moral evil. They have their respective
natures, and are unchangeable opposites. Vice cannot be made virtue, nor on the
contrary, can virtue be made vice. They are in themselves what they are, and
will remain so without variation, or the shadow of turning. It is, on the one
hand, fit and right, that we should be pious toward God, righteous toward our
fellow-men, and sober with respect to ourselves; and, on the other, unfit and
wrong, that we should be impious toward the Deity, unjust in our treatment of
men, and intemperate in the gratification of our animal appetites: Nor is it
possible this moral order should be inverted. No will, no power, either of men,
or angels, or even the Supreme Ruler himself, can make it right to be impious,
instead of pious toward God; or unrighteous, instead of righteous toward men;
or intemperate, instead of sober, in regard of ourselves. To suppose this,
would be to erase the foundations of the moral system, to destroy the relation
that subsists between the Creator and his creatures, and between the creatures
with respect to one another, and to make virtue and vice nothing more than
arbitrary names, having in themselves no certainly fixed nature.

And as virtue and vice, moral good and moral evil, are thus different from
each other, so is this difference obviously and at once, perceivable by all
morally intelligent minds, unless they have been greatly corrupted. There may
indeed be instances of moral conduct, in matters of comparatively small
importance, with respect to which it may be difficult to distinguish between
the right and wrong. And the analogy here, it may be worthy of notice, is very
exact between the natural, and the moral world. Light and darkness may be so
mixed, that one can scarce know which to call it. Sweet and bitter may be so
blended together, that it may be difficult to say which is prevalent. Colors
may be so dilated, and placed ^on^a^ portrait, that the eye of a skilful
painter may not be able to discern the precise point where one begins, and
another ends. But, notwithstanding these mixtures, light is never the same
thing with darkness, nor bitter with sweet, nor one color that of another; and
they are, unless in such complicated cases, readily and at once distinguished
from each other. In like manner, there may be, and often are, in the moral
world, cases wherein the boundaries between good and evil, and the spot that
divides them, may not be easily, if at all, discerned, so as to be able to say,
with precision, here virtue runs into vice, and vice into virtue* But this
hinders not but that, in the main and essential branches of morality, the
virtuous, and the vicious conduct may obviously be perceived, where the mind's
perceptive power has not been, in a great degree, vitiated, and hurt. And, in
very truth, the God of nature has, in his abundant goodness, so formed our
minds, and given us such a power of discernment, that it must be owing, unless
we are idiots, or madmen, to some heinous faultiness, we ourselves are justly
chargable with, if we are not able, without difficulty, to discern the
difference right and wrong, in the more important points of moral obligation.
Will any man, who has not strangely perverted the proper use of his perceptive
powers pretend, that he cannot, or that he does not, see it to be fit and
right, on the one hand, that such a creature as he is so related to God* and
dependant on him, should yield to him the love of his heart, and the obedience
of his life; and, on the other, that it would be unfit and wrong to withdraw
his affection from him, and behave with disrespect toward him? Will any man,
in the due use of his discerning power, calmly and deliberately say, that he
cannot perceive it to be right, that he should do to others, as he would they
should do to him, in like circumstances, and wrong, unalterably wrong, that he
should do otherwise? Will any man, not having darkened his heart, declare,
speaking the truth, that he does not see it to be right, that he should govern
his passions, and keep his sensual appetites within the restraints of reason;
and wrong, evidently wrong* to give way to anger, wrath, malice, and to take an
unbounded liberty in gratifying his animal nature? That man, be he who he may,
if not void of common sense, is wholly inattentive to its dictates, who
perceives no moral difference between revering, and mocking his maker; between
being honest and knavish, in his transactions with his neighbor; between being
chaste, and lewd; between living soberly and in the practice of drunkenness? Or
if he does not perceive the former to be amiable virtues, and the latter
detestable, infamous vices? The moral difference in these ways of conduct is
self-evident. There needs no argumentation, no series of intermediate ideas, to
point it out. Barely mentioning them, provided it is done in words that are
clearly understood, will at once, enforce conviction, unless in seeing men will
not see; in which case it would be a vain thing to expect, that reasoning
should have an effectual influence on them. For illustration, I shall bring to
view here a particular instance. That rule of conduct, "do to others as you
would they should do to you," is so evidently fit and right, that, upon the
bare proposal of it, the mind at once discerns it to be just and equal. To use
arguments to make it appear reasonable, would be only to darken the evidence of
its being so. No medium of proof could, in this case, be introduced, which
would not more need to be proved, than the thing itself it is brought to prove.
It is not indeed easily conceivable, that any man, who has the understanding of
a man, and is not under undue influence from evil affection, should hesitate
one moment in his judgment as to the suitableness of this moral rule of
conduct, its equity is so obvious, and so instantly and glaringly strikes the
discerning power, we are all naturally furnished with. And, in truth, however
common it may be, among men, to throw practical contempt upon this rule in
their treatment of one another, none do it because they entertain in their
minds an opinion of it as an unfair, unequal regulator of their behavior; but
because they are thoughtless and inattentive, or suffer themselves to be
enticed, and led aside by ungoverned pride, passion and lust of one kind or
another. This is the true reason, why they act in contradiction to the rule of
right, not only in this, but in all other great and important cases in moral
life. They indulge these and those vicious gratifications, not because they do
not perceive them to be unreasonable, but because they are excited hereto by
the lusts of the flesh, or mind, or both. It is true, the moral power of
discernment, as well as the other intellectual faculties, may, in common with
the bodily organs, be so debilitated, if not spoiled, by men's accustoming
themselves to do evil, as to be unfitted for the proper use for which they were
implanted in their nature. And, perhaps, there are some, among wicked men, who,
by having long habituated themselves to live and act, as hurried on by the
impetus of ungoverned passions and affections, such as an irregular love of
themselves, and their own separate interest; the love of honor; the love of
riches; the love of sensuality, and other lusts: I say, there are those, who,
by a course of thus conducting, have gradually so weakened their moral sight,
as to be, in a great measure, if not totally, unable to discern those actions
to be wrong, which are glaringly so, and appear to be so, with a meridian
luster, to all who have eyes to see. But this is not the common and ordinary
state even of wicked men. There are, it may be, comparatively few, but have so
much moral discernment, as not to be able to go on in vicious practice, in
instances that are great and heinous, without remonstrances from within. They
do not sinfully gratify their appetites, because they have no sight, or sense,
of its being unfit, and wrong that they should do so; but because they are
tempted of their lust and overcome. The law in their members, getting the
better of the law in their minds, influences them to do that they approve not;
yea, many times, that they even hate, it is so opposite to the light in them,
which ought to be the guide of their conduct.

The account I have thus given of that implanted power in our nature, which
enables us at once, without labor and pains, to discern the difference between
right and wrong in all great and important instances in moral life, is, I
imagine, strictly just, and verified to be so by the universal experience of
mankind. The plain truth is, we are so formed by the God of nature as that we
as readily, and with as much certainty, perceive moral qualities as those that
are possible. By the intervention of our bodily organs, we directly perceive
the difference between white and black, sweet and bitter, and know that the one
is not, and cannot be, the other. By the discerning power of our minds we
perceive, in the like direct and immediate way, these and those qualities of
temper and conduct, and are at once satisfied that they are either morally
good, not evil; or morally evil, not good: Nor is this moral discernment
confined to some among men, in distinction from others; but is common to all;
as being a power the whole human race come into the world endowed with. And it
is from this power that moral reasoning takes rise. It supposes such a
perception of moral qualities as is common to all, and in which all, not having
corrupted their minds, acquiesce as primary principles; and in these,
reasoning, with reference to the moral world, must finally terminate in order
to its being strictly conclusive; and wherein it fails of doing so, by a
non-connection in the chain of intermediate ideas brought to view, it is
essentially defective; or should the connection be just, but not discerned by
any to be so, it must, as to them, be the same as if it was really insufficient
arguing. Primary moral truths, such as are perceived, and assented to, as such;
and this, without hesitation, by mankind in common* in consequence of that
power of discernment they come into being furnished with, are the only basis on
which there can be reasoning to any purpose among men, with relation to the
moral system. Reasoning powers, if there were no first moral principles, in
which mankind could agree without debate would serve rather to promote endless
wranglings, than virtuous pursuits, in opposition to those that are vicious.
The author of our beings has therefore wisely, as well as kindly, taken care to
plant in our nature a morally discerning power, which is admirably fitted to
distinguish without difficulty, between right and wrong, that we might choose
and pursue the former, and refuse and avoid the latter. In virtue of this
power, and by the exercise of it, if we have not weakened, nor spoilt it, we
may, as it were, by a glance of our moral sight, in all important cases, so
perceive the difference there is in actions as to pronounce with certainty,
that these are morally good, those morally evil. What a noble implantation is
this power in our nature? What a mighty guard against vice, and preparative for
virtuous practice? Wherein could better provision have been for such imperfect
beings as we are to engage our care to act up to that which is right, and not
allow ourselves in doing what is wrong? We are certainly laid under the
strongest obligations of love and gratitude to that Glorious Being, who has
implanted in us this excellent power, and shall be inexcusably blind if we do
not see that he is benevolent, and base to an high degree if we do not find
ourselves disposed to make our humble and thankful acknowledgements to him as
such.

Another power in our nature is that of self-determination, which gives rise to
our volitions, and consequent actions, and is, in true propriety, the cause of
them. This power in us men, whether it be called self-determination, or by any
other name, is the only basis of moral obligation. Unless this be first
supposed, to talk of moral agency is a contradiction to common sense, and in
itself a gross absurdity. We might, it is true, without the implantation of
such a power in our nature, in consequence of a chain of exterior causes, not
within the reach of our control, be made instruments in the production of any
effects which are unavoidably connected with their chain of fatality, should
even volition or choice be one of its links. But agents, free agents, we could
not be, of whom it might, in consistency with truth, be affirmed that they were
the producers of these effects: The author of this chain of causes, which
inevitably gives existence to them, is their real, and only proper cause. A
power in man that will subject his volitions to his command, and constitute him
the efficient of those effects that are consequent upon them, is the only
bottom upon which agency can, with the least shadow of propriety, be grounded.
There is, in the nature of things, an essential difference between conscious
voluntary machines, and agents; that is, in other words of precisely the same
import, beings that are, strictly speaking, causes of the effects that are
ascribed to them. Such agents are we men; and we are, or maybe, as certain of
it as that we possess existence. For it is as evident a truth, and as evidently
perceived by the mind to be so. We do not ordinarily make ourselves so
ridiculous as to endeavor, by reasoning, to prove to ourselves that we exist.
We know that we do without argumentation, because we feel that we do. It is an
object of direct, immediate, and unavoidable perception, superseding the use of
arguments, and indeed rendering it needless, not to say absurd. The same may be
said, and with equal propriety, of that power, we are naturally endowed with,
which constitutes us agents, or beings that are efficiently the causes of their
own volitions and actions. To go about to prove this, by a long train of
reasoning, would be very like holding a candle to the sun, in its meridian
luster, for light that we might be able to see. It is a first, and fundamental
principle in morals, and to be evidenced, not by arguing, but by an appeal to
common sense, or, in other words, the perceptions of mankind universally. We
all feel the existence, and operation of this power every day we live. The
language of all the world, their projections, their pursuits, and the whole
frame and order of their affairs, relative both to this, and the state that is
beyond it, are founded on this supposition, and would be so many downright
inconsistencies, if they were not, from their own perceptions, so certainly
convinced, that this supposition was the real truth, as to admit it into their
minds as such without the least hesitation.

Many there were, I know, among the pagan philosophers, in former ages, who
thought, and some there are among the philosophers, not to say divines, of the
present age, who agree with them in thinking, that all effects take rise from a
chain of causes, with the Deity at its head as the only efficient, so
unavoidably linked together, connected with, and dependant on each other, that
the coming of these effects into event, in consequence of the unavoidable
operation of these causes, is not only certain, but absolutely inevitable. And
they consider mankind, with all their powers, as so many links in this
adamantine chain, no one of which can possibly fail in the production of the
effect assigned to it.

Those, among the abettors of this scheme, who are capable of looking forward
to consequences not very far distant, clearly and fully perceive its
inconsistency with men's being free agents, and that it totally destroys the
idea of moral good and evil. They accordingly declare with an honest, frank
openness, that the distinction that is commonly made between moral good and
evil has no foundation in nature, however well adapted it may be to vulgar
prejudices and conceptions. And they are herein consistent with themselves. And
fu^t^er, as it is supposed in this scheme of their's, that there is no evil in
the creation but what is natural, intended for the production of good, and so
unalterably connected with it as that it shall finally terminate in it, by
effecting the complete happiness of all, without limitation, or exception, it
reflects infinitely less reproach upon the Deity than the scheme of those, who
would graft free agency upon the doctrine of fatality, and ill-desert in men,
upon the operation of causes over which they have no power; and, as the result
of all, fix vast multitudes of them in the place where they shall be tormented
day and night, without intermission, forever and ever. This is the scheme
embraced by some at this day, and by some too who are called divines, and would
be looked upon as the only orthodox ones among their brethren. But it is so
grossly false an one, so debasing to the nature of man, and so dishonorary to
the perfectly benevolent God, that it is strange any should entertain a
favorable opinion of it.

The chief thing they say in its support is, that it leaves mankind at liberty
to do as they shall please, to conduct without restraint conformably to what
they have willed, and chosen. And what greater liberty can be desired? If we
may not be thought capable of acting morally well or ill, while we are able,
without hindrance from exterior causes, to do as we choose to do, what can make
us moral agents? What more is necessary? What more are we conscious of, from
any perception of our minds? The answer is at once obvious. It is not true,
that our perceptions go no further than to assure us, that we can do as we have
willed, and are pleased to do. Besides this, and far beyond it, they certify it
to us, that we are at liberty to will or not to will, to choose or not to choose,
the doing of these and those actions. We feel in ourselves a power over our
volitions, and such an one as enables us to direct, suspend, overrule, or put
an entire stop to them: Nor, unless we were possessed of this dominion, could
we be agents, however great liberty might be allowed us in bringing into event
what we have previously willed. It is essential to free agency, and such a use
of it as to make us capable of good or ill deserts, that our volitions upon
which our actions follow, should be within the reach of our command. The birds
of the air, and the beasts of the field, will and choose what they do as really
as we men; and it may, with as much truth, be said of them, as of us, that they
do as they are pleased to do. Their whole course of conduct is the effect of
previous choice and pleasure. But we never call them agents, nor do we esteem
them such. And why? The reason is, because they have no power over their
volition. They are effects produced in them by the operation of causes, not
within their governing command. The same may be said of madmen. Their actions
are voluntary. They do nothing, but in consequence of previous will and
pleasure; but we do not account them capable either of moral good or evil.
Should they do ever so much mischief, we do not charge them with ill desert,
however loud we may be in complaints that they are not restrained from doing
hurt, by being kept under due confinement. And what is the reason of our
thinking thus differently of distracted men, and others who have the full use
of their mental powers? The true and only reason is, the former are hurried on
to volition by a wild impetus, over which which they have no power; but the
latter have it in their power, to restrain and govern their wills and choices:
Nor, unless they were endowed with this power, would it consist with common
sense to think, or speak, of them as moral agents. If, instead of being the
causes of their volitions, they were produced in them as unavoidable effects of
an established co^t^nation of causes exterior to them, and over which they had
no dominion, not more than they have over the palpitation of their hearts, or
the motion ^f^eirl^ngs, they might be conscious machines, mere passive
instruments, capable of being wrought upon in various ways; but agents they
could not p^ss^b^ be. With respect to them, the application of the words,
virtue or vice, reward or punishment, would be nothing better than so many
unmeaning sounds. Most certainly, the ideas those words are made the signs of,
in common speech, could not be applied to them with the least degree of
propriety, I might rather say, without the greatest absurdity: What conceivable
absurdity can be more shocking to the human mind, not corrupted with a false
glare of vain science, than for men to commend or blame themselves, or for
others to do it, for what they are no more the causes of, than of the beating
of their pulse, and could no more prevent than the ebbing and flowing of the
sea, the rising or sitting of the sun, or the motions of any the stars they see
rolling in the heavens!

It may be worthy of remark here, this plan of fatalism is wholly the product
of metaphy^ical subtilty, and on direct contradiction to the invariable
c^nsci^usness mankind have of a power within themselves to give motion to the
faculties, both of their souls and bodies. Nay, even those who pretend to
believe the doctrine of fatal causality, directly contradict, by their
practical sentiments, and in a steady uniform course, what they profess in
words. For their wh^le conduct in life is just as their's is, who really think
they are possessed of an active self-moving power, and are the causes of their
own volitions, and the effects consequent upon them; and, I may add, just as it
would be, if they were fully of the same speculative opinion. Their practice in
life is a confutation of their faith in theory.

It is readily allowed, liberty in man, in opposition to necessity, is one of
the great wonders of God. The power in our nature that constitutes us free
agents is an amazing contrivance of infinite wisdom. The modus of its existence
and operation is too great a deep for us to fathom. It has tried, and puzzled
the greatest geniusses in all ages, and in all parts of the world. And,
perhaps, we shall never be able, at least on this side mortality, to take in a
comprehensive idea of it. But is this a good reason why we should deny, or
dispute, the real being of such a power in our constitution? Do any know, or
can they, by metaphysical searching, find out the nexus between soul and body?
Can they tell us how they influence each other? And yet, it is certain there is
this nexus, and mutual influence between them: Nor can it be disproved by all
the subtilty of vain reasoning. The same may be said with respect to the power
of man over his volitions, and consequent actions. The manner of its existence
goes beyond our investigation; but the real existence of such a power can never
be disproved, however it may be darkened and perplexed. We feel it to be a
truth, in consequence of which we are, in a reasonable sense, masters of
ourselves. Our daily experience, if attended to, will indubitably assure us,
that the exertions of our minds and bodies are under our own dominion.

The plain truth is, such a power in men as will make them causes, real proper
causes, of their volitions, and the effects consequent upon them, is the grand
supporting pillar of the world, considered as moral. Take this away, and it at
once falls into desolation and utter ruin. If men's volitions, and their
consequent effects, are the result of invariable necessity, in virtue of
exterior causes so inviolably connected, as that they will, and must, come to
pass, the author of this connection, which, according to this plan, is God, is
the only agent in our world, and the only efficient, and real author, of
whatever has been, or shall hereafter be brought into event; not excluding any
of the most complicated villainies that have been, or may be perpetrated by any
of the sons of Adam. Is this a scheme of thoughts fit to be embraced by
intelligent creatures? Will it not directly, and certainly follow, from the
supposition of its truth, that virtue and vice are idle names, having no
reality in nature? That men's accountableness to God, and liableness to be
punished, upon the foot of ill-desert, are vulgar notions only, incapable of
any solid support? That the character of God, as a moral Governor, is a vain
imagination? And, in a word, that religion, whether natural or revealed, is a
senseless pretense, suited only to serve the purposes of politicians and
priests? It would indeed, upon this scheme, be ridiculously absurd to suppose
there ever was, or could be any such thing.

Having thus evinced, from our conscious perceptions, that we are the subjects
of an inward, governing power over our faculties, in virtue of which we are
constituted free agents, as being the true and proper causes of our volition,
and consequent actions, it will be easy to point out the benevolence of the
Deity in putting this power in our nature. It is indeed the most important one
we are endowed with, and the only basis of the highest happiness, in kind, we
are made capable of enjoying. Had not this power been planted in us, we should
have been passive instruments, not moral agents. It is this power that
distinguishes us from all the various classes of inferior animals, and renders
it possible for us to perceive pleasure far superior in its nature to any, they
can be the subjects of. They have no perception of self-approbation, from a
consciousness of having done well, nor of the pleasure that is the natural
result therefrom. This, perhaps, is the highest kind of pleasure communicable
from the Deity; and it is perceivable only by moral agents. No beings, to whom
the Deity has not committed the care of governing their faculties, can, by the
exercise of them, deserve the applause of their own hearts, and enjoy the
sublime satisfaction arising herefrom: But it is within the reach of the
capacity of all such to feel this self-approbation, and consequent pleasure;
and they may go on in this enjoyment with continually increasing degrees, in
proportion to the degrees of virtue they discover in the good government of
these various faculties, they are entrusted with the care of. What a nobly
interesting power is this, that makes us free agents, as, by doing so, it makes
us the capable percipients of happiness more highly exalted, in kind, than it
could otherwise have been? It is not conceivable, wherein the perfectly
benevolent Being could have made a better, and, at the same time a wiser
provision for our enjoyment of the highest kind of happiness: Especially, if it
be remembered, that he has constituted such a connection between this happiness
he has made us capable of, and the actual enjoyment of it, as that it cannot be
enjoyed but in consequence of a right exercise of that power, which
characterises us moral agents; by which means, our coming to the enjoyment of
this happiness, we may be the subjects of, is a constant, continually abiding,
and powerful motive to engage our care thus to exercise this power in our
nature. What an admirable contrivance for our good is this? How amazingly does
it illustrate both the wisdom, and benevolence of God! It may further enlarge
our idea of this benevolence, if it be considered, that our Creator has, in
like manner, constituted a connection between carelessness in the exertion of
this power, or, in exerting it an undue wrong manner, with self-disapprobation,
and consequent uneasiness. This, it is possible, may appear to some, at the
first glance, an objection against the Divine benevolence, rather than a proof
of it. But a little attention will show the contrary. What was the design of
our maker in thus connecting disapprobation and uneasiness with a careless,
inattentive, and wrong exertion of the power that constitutes us agents? Was it
that he might make us unhappy? No; but quite the reverse. It is an expedient he
purposely contrived, a connection he wisely and kindly constituted, that he
might prevent our making ourselves miserable. His view was, that we might
perpetually carry in our own breasts a powerful motive to make ourselves happy.
And one of the most constraining motives it is to put us upon so using our
determining power, as that we may hold existence with self-approbation and that
heartfelt pleasure which results therefrom. I may properly add yet further
here, this command we are entrusted with over the exertion of our faculties,
and a right use of it, are the true and only basis of that approbation of our
Maker, and that consciousness of it within ourselves, upon which is raised,
that inward peace and satisfaction of soul which yield the highest relish to
life, and have in them a sufficiency to support and comfort us under all the
various vicissitudes, trials, and events, we may be called to pass through,
while in the world; and, what is more, inconceivably more, this inward sense of
the approbation of God, the foundation of which is the right use of the power
of determination we are endowed with, is that only which can rationally relieve
us in the view of death, and inspire the hope of a glorious immortality beyond
the grave, as the reward a good God will bestow upon those, who have acted
their part well on the stage of life. Some, perhaps, may be disposed to treat
the notion of happiness, as taking rise from the approbation of God, and the
perception of it in the breast, with sneering contempt. But they ought, without
fear of giving them any just occasion of offense, to be freely told, they are
so formed by the author of nature, that they could not be chargable with this
guilt, if they had not first corrupted, and in a great measure spoilt, their
perceptive powers, by having walked according to the course of this world,
fulfilling the desires of the flesh and mind. It is, beyond all doubt, owing to
this, if any can find within themselves a disposedness to profane this highly
important and interesting matter with banter and ridicule. If there is such an
existing being as God (as there most certainly is) his approbation must be
worth more than all earthly good; and a consciousness that we are the objects
of it must yield inward delight, greater than can be conceived of by those
whose affections are set upon the infinitely lower pleasures of time and sense.
Free agency, in opposition to necessity, is that only which can, in consistency
with reason, prepare the way for what we mean by the approbation of God. And it
is an argument of his benevolence, and the greatness of it, that he has so made
us, as that, by a right use of our powers, we may attain to a consciousness of
being the objects of this approbation, and a perception of pleasure in
connection herewith, or consequent hereupon, which exceeds all other
pleasurable sensations, while yet it is only a fore-taste of far more noble and
exalted pleasures at God's right hand forever.

Besides what has hitherto been said, it may be further worthy of notice, our
being free agents is that which not only makes us living images of the Deity in
that perfection of his nature which is his greatest glory, but capable
percipients, in a degree, of that happiness which is his highest. Did the
exertions of the Divine Being take rise from the same necessity as his
immensity, or eternity, he would not be a free agent. In order to this, he must
be possessed of a power over his volitions, as well as a power of exertion in
consequence of which he has willed and chosen. Had he not this power, it would
be absurd to attribute to him that liberty, which is inseparable from free
agency: Nor would any displays of his perfections be morally valuable in the
least degree, as they would, in this case, be the effects of natural necessity,
not of free choice. It is their being exertions, following upon what was freely
willed that gives them the denomination of moral, and claims our love and
gratitude. This power in the Deity, which enables him with freedom, in
opposition to necessity, both to will, and to do, is his greatest glory. And it
is, perhaps, from the exercise of this power, that his blessedness, in the
enjoyment of himself, principally flows. Now, by the implantation of a like
power to this in our nature, we are made after the similitude of God; and, by a
right use of this power, we are capable of being, in a noble degree, happy a^
he is, and with the like kind of happiness. Without controversy, the most
exalted happiness, it is possible we should enjoy, is that which is connected
with, and dependant on, a free, but wise and good, use of that power, in the
exercise of which we may manifest it both to ourselves, and others, that we are
benevolent, holy, just, faithful, and, in a word, perfect, according to our
measure, as God is perfect. Had we not this power, we could be happy in no
other sense, than that in which all merely percipient beings are so. Our
happiness could not be the result of our own choice, in the free exercise of
our powers; but the effect of exterior causes, over which we had no command. We
might, it is true, in this way be in a degree happy; but our happiness would
not be worthy the name, in comparison with that which arises from a morally
good conduct, in consequence of a right use of that power which makes us free
agents. It may be subjoined here, the Supreme Being would not have been so
happy as he might have been, had not this freedom of will and choice been one
of the glorious perfections of his nature; and the exercise of this perfection
is invariably accompanied with delight. He is ever pleased with his elections,
and they are a source of eternal satisfaction to him. The same may be said of
us men, all due allowance being made for the infinite superiority of God to
such creatures as we are. We could not have been so happy without freedom of
choice, as we may now be in consequence of our being endowed with it. It is
with pleasure we view ourselves as dignified with the power of free election,
and the exercise of this power is always attended with satisfaction; but with
satisfaction of the highest kind, and in the highest degree within the reach of
our capacities, when exercised in a due manner, and in consistency with what is
right and fit. If we cannot discern the benevolence of God, and the greatness
of it, in implanting this power in our nature, it should seem as though it must
be because we have so blinded our eyes that we cannot, or hardened our hearts
that we will not, see and own it to the praise of the glory of his goodness.

Another power still, relative to moral agency, and an highly beneficial one,
is conscience. No one will deny, that this is one of the powers implanted in
our nature. It is an object of immediate perception. We all feel, or have felt,
its operation in us.

It would carry me too far out of the way of my present design, should I
enlarge in ascertaining with precision the more special office of this power,
in distinction from the other powers we are endowed with. It may, however be
needful just to say, that its office is that of a witness, not of a lawgiver.
The work appropriated to it is, not to point out to us the virtues we ought to
practice, or the vices we ought to avoid, which would be to invade the province
of some other of our powers; but to be in our breasts a testifier for, or
against us, as we have done that which we knew to be right, or wrong. The
apostle Paul has given us a very exact account of the work of conscience, in
his epistle to the Romans. Speaking there of those Gentiles, in his day, who,
not having the revealed law, yet practiced, from the principles planted in
their nature, the duties which this law prescribed, he says, they herefrom made
it evident, that they were not wholly destitute of a rule or standard for their
moral conduct, for that the law of God appeared from hence to be, as it were,
engraven on their hearts: Upon which he adds, "their conscience also bearing
witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing or else excusing one
another." This great apostle accurately distinguishes here between "the law
written on the heart," and "conscience;" not making it the work of conscience
to tell men what the precepts of this law were, but to testify in their favor,
or disfavor, as they had been either obedient or disobedient to them; in
consequence of which their thoughts either acquit or condemn them. This
witness-bearing power of conscience may, it is true, be obstructed in its
influence, and diverted in such a variety of ways, that the design and tendency
of its implantation in us may not be so fully answered, as might be wished.
Virtuous men may, through superstitious fears, wrong notions in religion,
unreasonable jealousies and suspicions, lose in a great measure, the advantage
that would otherwise arise from the testimony of conscience in their favor. And
vicious men by blinding their eyes, and hardening their hearts, may so hinder
the operation of its witness, as that the check it would give to their mad
course of conduct is, in a manner, taken away. But it is capable, even with
respect to such men as these, of being so roused as that its voice shall be
hearkened to. In spite of all their efforts to the contrary, it will assure
them, and upon testimony carrying with it stronger evidence than a thousand
outward witnesses, if God has not been in their thoughts, but they have behaved
with irreverence and undutifulness toward him, that they are impious wretches;
if they have gone on in a course of fraudulent, unjust dealing, that they are
knaves; and if they have accustomed themselves to an intemperate, unchaste,
lewd way of living, that they are thorough-paced debauchees. In these, and such
like cases, it will say to them, as Nathan did to David, "Thou art the man."
How advantageous a power then is conscience? How kindly, as well as wisely, is
it adapted to promote, on the one hand, the right exercise of our moral
liberty, and, on the other, to restrain us from all vicious practice? Our
Creator therefore has manifested benevolence in giving this power a place in
our constitution. And his benevolence will shine out with yet more conspicuous
luster, if we go on, and consider the affections, or passions, he has annexed
to conscience, as auxiliaries in order to answer the end of the implantation of
this power in us. They are such as these.

Joy, upon its giving testimony to a man's having acted his part well. If there
are any, who have not felt the working of this affection, it must be because it
was never in the power of conscience to set it in motion. For the pleasurable
sensation to which we give the name of joy is naturally connected with its
witness to a man's having done what was right. The apostle Paul has expressed
this in very significant words. Says he, "This is our rejoicing, the testimony
of our conscience, that in simplicity, and godly sincerity, not by fleshly
wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world."
And what he has thus said perfectly accords with the truth of known experience.
A conversation ordered, not by the wisdom of this world, but by the rule of
strict virtue, will put it in the power of conscience to tell the man, whose
character this is, that he has done well; upon which, agreeably to a Divine
establishment, that affection, unless obstructed in its motion, will be
excited, which will yield joy much greater, both in kind and degree, than
their's, whose only pleasure is that which takes rise from their bodily senses.
A most kind and powerful incentive this, to virtuous practice.

And as the witness of c^nscience, when in favor of a man, is connected with
joy; so is its testimony, when against him, accompanied with shame. This is a
passion we can much better understand the meaning of by internal feelings than
by outward description. And we are none of us ignorant of what is intended by
it, as we have often had occasion, from our own perceptions, to know what it
is. Its proper object is that which is, in its nature, reproachful. And as
nothing is more reproachful than moral deformity, nothing is more powerfully
fitted to excite the exercise of this passi^n. And the God of nature has so
formed us, that we cannot easily avoid the motion of shame, upon having made
ourselves morally deformed, especially when conscience shall speak to us, and
tell us that this is our just character. There have all along been, it must be
owned, and there now are those, who, by debauching their minds, and weakening,
if not destroying, their natural sensibility, have, in a manner, eradicated the
innate principle of shame, being able, without a blush, notwithstanding the
power of conscience, to do those things which are grossly ignominious and
reproachful. This is emphatically expressed, by Jeremiah, in these words, "Thou
have a whore's forehead, thou refusedst to be ashamed." And again, "Were they
ashamed, when they had committed abomination? Nay, they were not at all
ashamed, neither could they blush." But this is not the ordinary state of
vicious men. Few, comparatively, are so blinded, and hardened, as not to be
filled with confusion of face, when conscience tells them in direct and
positive terms, that they have been, and know that they have been, adulterers,
fornicators, oppressors, extortioners, and the like. Such is the turpitude of
these vices, and such the suitableness in their nature, to excite shame, that
this passion, when they have committed these abominations, and conscience
testifies to them that they have, will be put into motion, in a less or greater
degree, even by an established constitution of heaven, till the very passion
itself has been so debilitated, as to have no power to raise a blush. And it is
in kindness to the world, that the God of nature has implanted in man this
passion of shame. It is one of the strongest restraints from an undue, wrong
use of our moral liberty. And was it not for this powerful restraint, mankind
would be more abandoned to vicious conduct than they now are, as we may
reasonably conclude from the mad behavior of those, who, by their
debaucheries, have so suppressed the operation of this passion, as that they
are able, notwithstanding its implantation in them, to commit abominations in
almost every kind, without being ashamed of what they have done. But it may be
worth remembering here, even these shameless livers in the practice of vice
may, upon some solemn alarm in providence, have their conscience so awakened,
as to bear witness to their abuse of their moral liberty in so lively and
powerful a manner, as to disenable them to look back upon their past follies
without the emotion of shame, and to a degree that will not suffer them to live
at ease. The exact truth is, Such is the moral deformity of vice, such its
ignominious and disgraceful nature, that it is naturally fitted to excite
shame; and there will accordingly be the perception of it in the breasts of
wicked men, whenever they live in the practice of it, and it is testified to
them by conscience that they have done so, till by an habitual course of
immoral conduct, they have so blinded their eyes, and stupefied their their
hearts, as to be past seeing and feeling.

There is yet another passion capable of being excited upon the witness of
conscience against a man, and this is that uneasy sensation, which is signified
by the words, remorse, regret, horror of mind. Few there be, perhaps none, but
have felt, in a greater or less degree, the meaning of these words, and of the
passion intended to be pointed out by them; and they know also, and from inward
perception, that it is a kind of uneasiness quite different in its nature from
every other. It is essentially connected with self-condemnation, a
consciousness, and feeling of ill-desert, upon having done wrong. And the pain
of mind capable of being excited herefrom is inexpressibly great. The wise
Solomon has said, "a man may sustain his infirmities, but a wounded spirit who
can bear?" And this observation of his has often been verified in experience.
Such has been the pressure of remorse, in consequence of the testimony of
conscience, that it has exceeded the patient's art as well as ability to live
under it without sensations of distress beyond all description. Some may
disposed to think, that this is an argument of defect in the display of the
Deity's benevolence, rather than an illustration of its greatness. But such a
mistake in their apprehensions must arise from not duly considering the design,
and tendency of the connection between this remorse, and the witness of
conscience against a man, which is, that he might be powerfully guarded against
vicious practice, which will not only deprive him of the happiness that is
peculiar to morally good conduct, but expose him to ruin as the final result of
a licentious, debauched course of life. In this view of the matter, the
bitterest remorse, from a sense of guilt, is an argument of kindness in our
Maker; yea, of the greatness of his benevolence in thus taking care that we
might be happy, and not miserable.

I have now said what was in my intention to offer, in illustration ^f the
Divine benevolence, in the provision he has made, by the constitution of the
nature he has given us, that we might be morally happy.

Before I proceed, I shall subjoin a thought not unworthy of notice, though it
should be a digression. It is this. -- The passions of shame, and remorse, upon
the convicti^n of conscience, are not only an illustration of the Deity's
benevolence, in guarding us against an ill use of our elective power, but a
strong proof that we are endowed with this power. Every one knows, from what he
has felt within himself, the difference between those uneasy sensations, that
are occasioned by evils, which are the effects of exterior causes, whose
operation is necessary, and over which we have no command; and those that are
the production of our own folly, in misusing the power we have over our own
volitions. Uneasiness will be excited in a man's breast, when he meets with
disappointments; losses, and misfortunes, which were brought upon him by
mechanical causes, in a train of necessary operations; but he will not feel
remorse, self-condemnation, and conscious guilt. And why? The true reason is,
because these evils, however grievous, are the effects, not of his own will, or
choice, but of c^uses extrinsick to himself, and whose operation it was not in
his power to counteract. A man that is born blind may feel the emotion of
uneasiness on this account, he may be sorry, and wish he had not come into
existence with this defect; but he cannot reproach himself for it, or feel the
least degree of guilty remorse: Whereas, if he lost his sight by an
intemperate, debauched course of living, he will, if conscience is suffered to
do its office, be self-condemned, and filled with bitter resentments against
himself. In like manner, if the lightning of heaven should destroy the life of
his wife, or child, he would feel the working of grief, but not of shame, or
remorse: Whereas, if he maliciously laid violent hands on them, and slew them,
he would, if he was not a monster, reproach and condemn himself, feeling that
bitter remorse which flows from great conscious guilt. What now should be the
reason of these different sensations? It can be no other than this, that there
is a difference in the cause of their production. If a man had no power over
his volitions, but they were the effects of invoilable necessity, in virtue of
a previous concatenation of causes, he would be no more to blame, nor could be
any more the subject of remorse, than fire which occasions mischief, or a stone
that breaks a man's head by accidentally falling from some height. The plain
truth is, the sensations of shame and remorse are grafted on the supposition of
liberty of choice, in opposition to necessity. Take away this liberty, and
consider men's volitions, not in their power, but as effects produced in them
by causes exterior to them, over which they have no control, and they are not,
nor can be, the subjects of blame, or of that shame, and remorse, which flow
from it. And as we are so constituted by the author of our beings, as that we
shall, and must, blame ourselves in consequence of certain volitions, and
effects proceeding from them, and feel shame and remorse upon this account, it
should seem as evident as it well can be, that we have within ourselves a power
to will, or not to will; to choose, or to refuse. We certainly think we have
this power; and we have, at the same time, as much reason for this conception,
as we should have, if this was the real truth. And if it is not, we are so made
as that, by deception blended with our very nature, we are inevitably
influenced to condemn ourselves, and feel the anxieties of guilt, and bitter
remorse, for what we are no more the causes of, and no more worthy of blame
for, than being laid senseless by an apoplectic fit, or a stroke of the
numb-palsy.

I now go on, in as brief a manner as I well can, farther to illustrate the
Divine benevolence from the providential care he has taken, not only to
perpetuate the existence of percipient beings, in all their various classes,
but to support them in life, and to render it, agreeably to their respective
natures, comfortable and pleasant to them.

Existence in our world is perpetuated, with respect to all the classes of
percipient beings, not by a continued prolongation of life in the same
individuals, but by a succession of others of the same kind, in their room, as
they, in various periods, are taken off from the stage of time. And an
admirably wise and benevolent contrivance this is for the bestowment, and
enjoyment, of more life and happiness, than there could have been, if existence
had been perpetuated without death, in the same individuals; as we shall have
occasion hereafter to point out particularly. In the mean time, it is to be
observed, that this succession in percipient life is effected conformably to a
general established law, that of propagation, which extends to all orders of
percipient beings, from the highest to the lowest. Almighty God, without all
doubt, could, if he had so pleased, have constantly supplied the place of all
individuals, of every species, as they ceased to be here any longer, by
bringing new ones into being, as he did the first of our race, by immediate
creation; but he chose rather to do it, by the intervention of second causes,
operating under his influence and direction. It would have argued benevolence,
and to an high degree, had he perpetuated life and enjoyment in the former of
these ways; but, as his benevolence is always manifested under the guidance of
wisdom, he has preferred the latter of them; and with good reason. For amazing
skill and contrivance are displayed in carrying into effect this law of
propagation; and it is so done, in concurrence with other wisely contrived
laws, as to set off the goodness of God in the most conspicuous luster. This is
a point we shall more fully consider afterward in its proper place. I shall
therefore only say at present, if the giving of life, and a capacity of
enjoying happiness, to vastly various classes of beings, with innumerable
individuals in every class, is a proof of benevolence, it must be a greatly
enhanced evidence of it, to perpetuate this life, and capacity of enjoyment, in
so many successions, through all ages, from the beginning of time. It will
surely betray blindness of intellectual sight, or badness of heart, if we
cannot discern the display of riches of goodness, in thus making provision for
prolonging, and multiplying, both life and happiness to such millions of
creatures.

The manifestation of the Divine benevolence is likewise marvellously
conspicuous in the care God continually takes for the preservation and comfort
of life in all the classes of percipient creatures, however numerous, when, by
propagation, they are brought into existence.

To support life, so as that it may be enjoyed with pleasure, in a single
individual only, argues benevolence; it will argue it, in a still higher
degree, should it be supported, with enjoyment, in a class of percipient
beings, containing a goodly number of individuals: But how amazingly must the
argument rise in strength, when the classes of creatures are numerous beyond
conception, and the individuals in those classes much more so! Did we behold,
among men of large ability to do good, one who found within himself a heart to
provide and distribute supplies to hundreds of persons, conflicting with the
straits and difficulties arising from poverty, and in such noble measures as to
render life pleasant to them, and saw him going on doing this in a steady
uniform course, accounting and feeling himself happy in the satisfaction of
others from the communications of his bounty: I say, if we knew of such a man,
what would be our sentiments of him in regard of benevolence? We should think
him a miracle of goodness. We should never mention his name but with honor, and
esteem him worthy to be held in high reputation by all who have any degree of
rational moral discernment. But what a nothing is the benevolence of this good
man, in comparison with the benevolence of God, whose bounty daily supports
millions of men, and numberless millions of inferior creatures, has supported
them through thousands of past successions in life, and will yet support them,
having settled an establishment herefor, till time shall be no more.

The preserving providence of God extends even to vegetables, who, in all their
kinds, and individuals, have life though without perception; which life is
preserved and perpetuated by succession, and so as to manifest all-wise
goodness, though not to those existences themselves, not being capable of
enjoyment, yet to others, who, together with life, are endowed with a
perceptive power. Of these I am now more particularly speaking, and they are
all the providential care of a good God. He maintains life in them, in their
numerous classes, and still more numerous individuals, and carries it on to its
appointed state of maturity and perfection, and all along with a balance of
pleasure in their favor. Whether they are men or beasts; whether they are fowls
of the air, or fishes of the sea; whether they are insects, or other animals so
low in the descending scale of subordination, as not to be visible to human
sight, but by the help of glasses; the benevolent God is the grand efficient in
supporting their life, and providing for its comfort. It is true, they are both
supported, and provided for, by the intervention of second causes; but, far
from lessening, this increases the greatness and glory of the Divine goodness.
Did God immediately preserve and happily life in his creatures, the beneficence
hereby displayed would be confined to a single act of his power only; but as he
does this by a trai^ of intervening means, and instrumental causes, his
goodness is, as it were, multiplied in proportion to the variety of these
wisely adapted means and causes. For they are all instances of goodness, as
truly as one immediate act of power would be. A very sensible writer has
pertinently expressed himself upon this head, in these words; "whatever God
effects by the interposition of means, and a train of intermediate causes, he
could produce by his own immediate power. He wants not clouds to distill rain,
nor human industry to make the earth fruitful, nor the fruitfulness of the
earth to supply food, nor food to sustain life. He could do this by his own
immediate power. But he chooses to manifest his providence, power, wisdom, and
goodness, in a variety of instances, and dispositions; and yet, his power and
goodness are not only as much concerned, and exercised, in this way, as if he
produced the end without the intervention of means, but even much more: Because
his power, wisdom, and goodness are as much exerted, and illustrated, in every
single intermediate step, as if he had done the thing at once, without any
intermediate step at all. There is as much power, wisdom, and goodness
exercised in producing rain, or in making the earth fruitful, or in adapting
food to the nourishment of our bodies: I say, there is as much power, wisdom,
and goodness, exercised in any one of these steps, as there would be in
nourishing our bodies by one immediate act, without those intermediate means."
In the method of preferration therefore, which God has pitched upon, he has in
admirable wisdom contrived so to exercise his goodness, as both to multiply and
beautifully diversify the displays of it. For this is the real truth, with
respect to every intermediate step in the way of preserving providence. It is
by vapors exhaled from the earth and seas, by the heat of the sun, that the
clouds are formed: it is from the clouds that the rain falls; it is by the
rain, and other concurring causes, that vegetables of every species, with their
individuals, are preserved in life and growth; it is by means of these
vegetables, that innumerable multitudes of inferior perceptive creatures are
supplied with food; and it is from both these, that we men, the highest order
of beings in this lower world, are nourished and supported in life and vigor.
What an astonishing train of intermediate instrumental causes are held out to
view, as made use of in carrying on the great and important work of
preservation! And yet, every one of these instrumental causes, as intended,
established, and adapted, to accomplish the preservation of life, manifest
goodness, and to a mavelous degree, as truly as if it was effcted by one
almighty act of immediate power; and as justly gi^e occasion for grateful
acknowledgments to that infinitely benevolent being, who is thus good to all
his creatures, and continually so, as he every moment concurs with each one of
these various subordinate causes by whose operation, under his influence, they
are so provided for as to be supplied with the supports of life.

It may with pertinency be added here, that the benevolence of God, had it not
been displayed under the guidance of perfect wisdom, would probably have
preserved life, in the creatures to whom he had given it, in an immediate way
by one continued single act of power. But his goodness, as manifested in such a
way, would have been less, far less, than in the way of instrumental means and
causes, the way in which it is now done. In order to convey a clear and just
idea of this, let it be observed,

It is not conceivable, how the inferior creatures, in any of their classes,
could have had pleasure in life, had it been supported without means, by a
continued single act of almighty power. For it is by the means employed in
preserving their life, that they are the percipients of most of that enjoyment
they are made capable of. Was it not for the food they live upon, and the
satisfaction they take in procuring, and then eating it, of what advantage
would life be to them? In what way could they enjoy it, or be happy in its
continuance to them? It is owing to the wisdom of God, in so contriving to
preserve their life, as that his goodness is not only manifested, but the
manifestation of it is multiplied in proportion to the multiplication of the
means that are used to this end, for that these means give rise to the delight
they take in life. Had your life been preserved by an immediate act of power,
where should we have looked for the happiness proper to their respective
natures? Their life, so far as we are able to judge, must have been preserved
in vain. There would have been nothing, which could have yielded them pleasure.
The admirable contrivance discovered in their various senses, and suiting
objects to them, would have been to no purpose. Both their senses, and these
objects, would have been altogether useless. They could not have been the means
of gratification to them.

And the same may be said of us men, so far as we agree with the inferior
creatures, as to our animal part. We, as truly as they, are so made with
respect to our bodies, that life, considered as bodily only, would have yielded
us, comparatively, little or no delight, had it been supported by an immediate
exertion of the power of God. There would, in this case, have been no room for
those instrumental, secondary causes, in the administration of providence,
which are now, not only the means by which we are continued in bodily life, but
the means also by which our life, in this view of it, is rendered pleasant and
happy to us. To what purpose was the wisdom of God employed, in so curiously
contriving our bodily ^culties, and adapting so great a variety of objects to
give them pleasure, if it was not, that he might display his goodness, and the
riches of it, by preserving life in a way, that should be closely connected
with making it, at the same time, desirably sweet and pleasant? And this
goodness of his is enlarged in proportion to the number, variety, and
adaptation of those objects, which are, at once, the means both of preserving
life, and rendering it more happy than it could have been, in the way of power
immediately exerted from above.

But the goodness of God, in the work of preservation, with respect to us men,
is not confined, as it is in regard of the inferior creatures, to the animal
pleasure only, which he has connected with his continuing us in life, and the
mediate way in which he does it. For, as we are endowed with intellectual and
moral powers, as well as bodily senses and appetites, we are made capable of
happiness, and in a noble degree, by the exercise of these powers upon the very
means, and instrumental causes, by which we are supported in life. The amazing
contrivance God has manifested, in the formation of our bodies with senses and
appetites, and in the adaptation of such a multiplicity of objects to give them
satisfaction within reasonable limits, is a vastly plentiful source of pleasure
to the mind, as well as body, but in a far superior and more exalted kind. Is
the body so fitted, by its make, to be supported, and, at the same time,
delighted by this variety of objects, the mind also is so framed, as to be
capable of being much more delighted in the view it may take of the riches of
wisdom and skill, the Deity has manifested in so contriving the method of
sustentation, as that, by means of it, we may enjoy the happiness that is
suited to the nature of intelligent, as well as animal beings. The
constitution, indeed, of the earth we live on is such, that most of its
productions appear to have been intended, as they are well adapted, to carry
into effect the work of preservation, so as that, we might not only be
supported by a vast variety desirable for food, raiment, and the reasonable
gratification of our bodily appetites, but that we might also take occasion,
even from this very way in which our bodily life is supported, and with
pleasure, so to exercise our mental powers, as that, unless it be owning to
ourselves, we may be even more happy as intelligent, than animal creatures. And
we may be still more happy as moral beings. For among all the objects in
nature, though they are inconceivably multiplied with variety, there is not one
that is suited to the preservation and comfort of life, and made use of by the
Deity to this purpose, but what affords just matter for, and a powerful
excitement to, those religious, devotional, grateful acknowledgments to our
daily preserver and benefactor, which constitute no small part of that moral
happiness we are made capable of. There are, perhaps, few truly pious persons,
bu^ have felt more pleasure in contemplating, admiring, and adoring the
amazingly wise, and benevolent way, in which they are supported in life with so
much comfort, than they ever did from the gratification of their bodily senses.
They certainly might; and if they have not, it must be ascribed to the dullness
of their moral perception, or a faulty perversion of it.

The truth is, had the preservation of life, in the creatures on whom God has
bestowed existence in this world, been affected by a single continued exertion
of Almighty power, there would not have been that multiplied manifestation of
the Divine goodness, which we have now so much reason to admire, and be
thankful for. The alwise God, no doubt, could have made man, and the other
percipient beings on earth, and preserved them in life, by an immediate act of
power; but then their make, and the way in which they might be fitted for the
enjoyment of happiness, must have been, in many respects, different from what
it now is, and the whole constitution of the world also must have been modelled
upon a different plan. Possibly, there may be such creatures, ^risting in such
a world. But for such creatures as exist in such a world as our's, prefervation
in life, not by secondary instrumental causes, but an immediate exertion of
power, would be so far from increasing, that it would lessen, the
manifestations of the Divine benevolence. For, in the latter of these ways, its
manifestation would be confined to one act only, whereas, in the latter, it is
manifested in every intermediate step, and is consequently diversified, and
multiplied, in proportion to the number, and variety of them.

There is yet, in the administration of providence, another proof of the Divine
goodness, and a more striking one, to those who are believers in revelation,
than any that have been mentioned. It is the redemption of man by Jesus Christ.

This great work of God, as we are told in the scriptures, from whence alone
all our knowledge of this matter must be fetched, took rise from his rich love,
and disinterested good will toward the race of man. The infinitely good God,
if we may depend upon the bible, was not excited to purpose, or contrive, or
reveal, or execute the gospel-plan of salvation, by any motive extraneous to
himself; but benevolence of heart was the true source, and the only one, from
whence it all proceeded. Had not God been moved by the essential, immense
goodness of his own nature, he would not have come into it. The movement hereto
was within himself. He consulted his own bowels of love and mercy, and from
hence it was, that he employed his wisdom to contrive it. It sprang from this
source antecedently to all other considerations whatever.

But then it should be minded, the mission of his own son from heaven, into our
world to become incarnate, that he might by being obedient to death, make
atonement for the sins of men, and by his exaltation, in consequence of this
obedient submission, at the right hand of God to finish the work, he had begun
on earth, are the grand means by which this stupenduous benevolence of the
Deity, in the business of salvation, is carried into effect. Only, it should be
carefully observed, that neither the incarnation of the blessed Jesus, nor any
thing he ever did, or suffered, or may be now doing in heaven, are to be
considered as the original motive to the plan of redemption. For the
intervening mediation of Jesus Christ was posterior to, and consequent upon,
this good will of God, and one of the glorious effects of it. The scripture
always views it in this point of light. Some may have expressed themselves, so
as to lead one to think, that the blood of Christ was was shed to pacify the
resentments of God, and to produce in him a willingness to become reconcilable
to sinful man. But such a mode of conception is highly injurious to the father
of mercies, and utterly subversive of that benevolence in God, to which even
the appointment of Christ to be the Savior was originally owing. So far was the
blood of Christ from being intended to work upon the heart of God, and stir up
compassion in him, that i^ was love, and because he delighted in mercy, that he
"spared him not, but delivered him up for us all."

The incarnation, obedience, sufferings, and death of Christ are therefore to
be considered as the way, or method, in which the wisdom of God thought fit to
bring into event the redemption of man. And a most wisely concerted method it
is. In this way, mankind are obviously led into just sentiments of the vile
nature, and destructive desert of sin; as also of that sacred regard, which God
will forever show to the honor of his own governing authority: Nor could they,
in any way, have been more powerfully engaged to turn from their iniquities,
and submit to the government of heaven, as preparatives without which they can
have no reasonable hope of being happy. Perhaps, there is nothing more
powerfully suited to work on the human mind, impressing it with an holy awe and
reverence of the Divine Majesty, hatred of sin and resolutions to forsake it,
than a serious turn of thought to the sorrows and sufferings of Jesus Christ,
appointed by the wisdom of an infinitely benevolent God, as the only way, in
which he has judged it expedient to admit his offending creatures to the
benefit of a pardon. What horrible ideas must that man entertain of sin, what
adorable apprehensions of the authority, the righteousness, and holiness of the
great Govern^r of the world, who considers, in a believing, realising,
affecting manner, what the blessed Jesus did, and suffered, in his state of
humiliation, as the only method conformably to which the alwise God, though
infinitely good, has thought fit to make the grant of forgiving mercy?

Though this method of our redemption by Jesus Christ appears to be a wisely
concerted one for the display of the Divine benevolence, on account of the
reasons we have mentioned; yet we may, at present, be ignorant of other reasons
which concur to make it so. We must indeed be acquainted with the whole affair
of redemption, that is, with the whole effect that would have been consequent
upon sin, and the whole effect of deliverance from it, and this throughout our
whole existence; and we must also be acquainted with all the ways, in which
there may be a connection between the mediating work of Christ, and salvation,
before we may, with any face of propriety, pretend perfectly to see into the
wisdom of this method of God's manifesting his benevolence. It may be a mean
most wisely connected with its proposed end in ways unthought of by us at
present. Nor is this an objection of any weight against its fitness as a mean
well adapted to accomplish its end. For it is a certain truth; that moral means
often look forward to distant futurity, and the wisdom of their connection,
with the end to be effected by them, is not discerned, at least in perfection,
till the end and the means can be compared with each other. The state of
things, for instance, under the Mosaic dispensation, was, according to the
new testament representation, a moral mean in order to some future, distant
end; and its fitness, as such, was little understood till the dispensation of
the Messiah: Nor is it yet so clearly and fully perceived, as perhaps it may
be, even in this world, in the coming days of greater light and knowledge, and
certainly will be in that world, where we shall "know even as we are known."
And this is undoubtedly the case, with reference to the method of our salvation
by Jesus Christ. It was contrived by God, in order to his wisely displaying his
benevolence toward sinners. And the scripture has said enough to satisfy us
for the present, that it is a wise and fit method, particularly in those ways
wherein we have shown it to be so: But there is no need of supposing, that it
has fully revealed the whole of what may be known in another world, tending to
illustrate the wisdom of it; what I mean is, that revelation may not have
explained in direct, and positively clear and full terms, wherein "the
obedience of Christ to death" has virtue and efficacy in the affair of man's
redemption, as a wise, fit, and benevolent mean in order to this end. And,
perhaps, it might not be convenient it should, had it been possible.

But some may say, this method of salvation, through the mediatory doings and
sufferings of Jesus Christ, instead of magnifying the benevolence of the Deity,
is rather a dimination of it, if not an inconsistency with it. And so it really
would be, if God had wanted pity, and the design of the mediation of Christ had
been to excite it in him; but this was no part of the intention of his
undertaking for sinners. For it was God who sent him upon this work; and he was
moved to it from his own bowels of mercy. His own infinite benevolence of heart
put him upon it: Nor should we ever have heard of Christ, or of the way of
redemption through him, if the motive hereto had not been within the breast of
God. This is the account the scripture always gives of the matter. Says our
Savior himself, "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believes in him should not perish but have everlasting life."
Every word in this text is emphatically expressive of the truth we are upon."
God so loved the world," so greatly, so inconceivably; was so moved by the
original, essential, and eternal goodness of his nature, that "he gave," that
is, of mere mercy and free favor; without any thing obliging, or constraining
him hereto; he gave "his only begotten son," and for this most benevolent end,
that "whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life."
You observe, the gift of Christ, through which we have redemption, sprang
originally from the love of God. His own merciful nature put him upon the
bestowment of this gift, and upon no less a design than the saving of men from
destruction, and opening a way for their admission to life and immortality in
heaven. The same account is frequently to be met with elsewhere in the
new testament books. Says the apostle Paul, "God commends his love toward
us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us." You perceive at
once, that God's love is here represented as that which gave rise even to
Christ's dying for us. To the like purpose is that declaration of the apostle
John, "In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent
his only begotten son into the world, that we might live through him." And the
same thing is either expressed, or implied in many other passages in scripture,
which it would be needless to mention. And wherein could the Deity have more
illustriously displayed the greatness of his benevolence, than by the
constitution of his own son to be the medium through whom salvation should be
communicated to us?

It may perhaps be said, Had God, by one single act of free, sovereign grace,
without any intervening means, proclaimed his readiness to pardon sinners, and
admit them to his favorable notice, would he not have manifested more goodness,
have more, conspicuously displayed the riches of his grace, than he could have
done in any other way?

It would, no doubt, have been evidential of goodness, if God had thus made an
absolute sovereign grant of pardoning, saving mercy to the sinful sons of men;
but there would in this way, have been a far less manifestation of it, than in
the method the gospel reveals. Had the work of preserving providence been
effected by a single act of almighty power, though it would have argued
goodness it would not have done it, as has been shown, with such conspicuous
variety, and enlargedness, as by the intervention of means, and instrumental
causes. The same may be said, with like truth, of the work of redemption. As it
is carried into effect, not by an absolute sovereign grant from God, but in a
mediate way, his benevolence is more gloriously illustrated than it otherwise
would, or could, have been. For it is as true, with respect to redeeming grace,
as preserving goodness, that it is inhanced by every intervening step by which
it is carried on, and in proportion to the number and important worth of these
steps. It argues benevolence in God, that he should find within himself an
heart to entertain a thought of saving sinful man; his benevolence is greater,
in that he should be willing to send his own Son, from heaven into our world,
in order to accomplish this purpose of his heart; the benevolence is still
heightened, in sending him, though "in the form of God," to take upon him "the
fashion of a man;" and it rises beyond all conception, when we behold this Son
of his love, after he had assumed human nature, "becoming obedient to death,
the death of the cross," hereby making way for the bestowment of pardoning,
saving mercy, so as that the bestowment of it should be honorary to his
perfections, and the authority of his government as Ruler of the world. Surely,
the goodness, as well as wisdom of God, are displayed much more illustriously
in this mediate way, than if it had been effected by one mere sovereign act of
grace! Yea, so fear as we are able to judge, m^re benevolence is manifested in
this method of our redemption, than in all the other works of God's providence;
and we have abundant reason given us, upon this occasion, to admire and
exclaim, "Herein is love, not that we have loved God, but that he has loved us,
and sent his son to be the propitiation for our sins! O the breadth, and
length, and depth, and height of the love of God! It passes all understanding."

PART III. Answering the principal objections which have been urged against the
benevolence of the Deity.
THE traces of goodness are so visible, in every part of the creation we know
any thing about, particularly in this world of our's, and in the formation of
man, his implanted faculties, and the methods by which, according to
established laws, under the government of providence, they may be improved to
his being as perfect and happy as can reasonably be desired, that it is strange
any should call in question the Creator's benevolence: And yet, no one of his
attributes have been more violently attacked. The great difficulty objected, is
the evil there is in the world. This world of our's, and mankind in particular,
its noblest inhabitants, which are represented as monuments of the Deity's
goodness, are mentioned as proofs of a deficiency in this very point.

Say these objectors, if an infinitely benevolent Being is the Supreme Creator,
and Ruler, whence came those imperfections, and positive evils, which abound in
the world, and which all ranks of creatures are subjected to? How shall we
account for the miseries, in innumerable kinds, which men in particular lie
groaning under? What shall we say of the many diseases, accompanied with
torment of body, and anguish of mind, to which they are liable, and which
finally put an end to their present state of existence? And could these things
be accounted for, who can reconcile that moral irregularity, which has been
introduced into the world, and its direful effects, with the super-intending
agency and government of a being absolutely holy and good?

This, in general, is the difficulty pleaded. And a very great one it is; but a
difficulty, it may be worth remarking, as we pass along, not levelled against
Christians only, or the religion they profess, but against all religion,
natural as well as revealed: Insomuch, that let men's religion be what it may,
whether they are Jews or Heathens, Deists or Christians, they are equally
embarrassed with it. For it being a sure fact, that sin and misery are in the
world, if they believe that a wise and good God made and governs it, they are
all under like obligations to do what they can to reconcile these two things,
which have such an appearance of inconsistency with each other. And this
accordingly has been the endeavor of persons of all different religions, in all
parts of the world. Whence came evil? has indeed, in all ages, been a
perplexing question; and no one, it may be, has more puzzled the greatest
pretenders to reason, as well as religion.

It was this that gave rise to the scheme of two independent opposite
principles in the universe; the one good, from wh^m is derived every thing that
is good; the other evil, from whom is derived every thing that is evil, whether
natural or moral. It is observable, even this Manichean notion, however
ridiculous, is yet founded on the supposition of such evidences of goodness in
the creation, as are too glaring to be denied. The fault therefore of the
system is, not so much that it disputes the existence of a benevolent cause, as
that it weakly imagines the existence of another opposite one, equally powerful
and independent; the supposition of which two coordinate Deities looks too
much like an arbitrary contrivance, invented only for the sake of removing away
the difficulty arising from the appearance of evil. To be sure, it is an
opinion so far from being founded on solid proof, that it cannot be supported
by any argument fetched from the principles of true reason. It is indeed a
scheme utterly destructive of itself. For these two opposite principles being,
by supposition, perfectly equal, it is impossible there should have been,
either good or evil, unless by their mutual consent in operation; and it is
impossible also there should have been this consent, upon any other plan than
that, of the production of good and evil in equal proportions. And is this the
truth of fact? So far from it, that, in the whole circle of existence, there is
no appearance of such equality. The truth is, the uniform, invariable tendency
of nature, with respect to all the creatures we know any thing of, is their
perfection and happiness within their proper sphere: Nor can it be truly said
of any species of creatures that they do not actually attain to the enjoyment
of good, much out-weighing the evil they are obliged to suffer; which could not
have been the case, if there was existing an evil power of operation equal to
the good one. Some of the creatures, upon this hypothesis, must have carried
the marks of the evil principles that produced them, in the tendency of their
constitution to misery, balancing the tendency of it to good: Otherwise, there
would not be an equality in the exertions of these opposite equal powers. --
But I need not enlarge in the refutation of so palpable an absurdity. However,
the difficulty, which occasioned it, deserves to be seriously and thoroughly
debated. A^ this will be more clearly and intelligibly done, by going over its
several parts, and treating them distinctly as so many objections.

Only, it may be fit to make one previous general remark, which I esteem an
important one, and desire may be kept in mind through the whole that may
follow. It is this; that no objection ought to be esteemed sufficient to set
aside the positive proof, that has been given of the Deity's benevolence,
which, when thoroughly examined, will be found finally to terminate in
IGNORANCE. What I mean is, that no appearance in nature, capable of being
alleged, ought to be looked upon as conclusively arguing an inconsistency with
goodness, MERELY or ONLY because we may not be able particularly and fully to
point out their consistency with each other: I say, merely or only for this
reason, because there is an evident difference between our not particularly
discerning wherein the consistency of two things lies, and clearly perceiving
that there is a real inconsistency between them. And could any appearance be
alleged, between which and infinite goodness, the human mind clearly perceives
a real inconsistency, it is readily confessed, it would be a sufficient
restraint, in true reason, from attributing this perfection to the Deity. But
the case is quite otherwise, where the amount of all that can be said
concerning any appearance is only this, that it surpasses our ability
particularly to trace the ways, wherein it may tend to good. And shall it be
thought strange that there should be, in nature appearances of this sort? It is
no more than might reasonably be expected, considering the imperfection of our
faculties, and incapacity therefrom to view the works of God as connected with,
and dependant on, each other, in the Divine plan of operation. No eye but God's
can take in the whole scheme of creation and providence. And therefore it is
probable, the highest order of created beings are incapable of seeing perfectly
into the reasons of the Divine conduct. Much less may it be thought, that this
should be the privilege of such comparatively low, weak creatures as we are. So
far are we from comprehending the connection of the universe in its various
parts, their mutual dependence on, and subordination to, each other, that our
knowledge is confined to a few beings and things in it, and to a very small
part of the scheme of God, even with respect to these. And shall it then be
counted an objection of any weight against the goodness of God's works, that we
are not able, in every instance, to see wherein they are connected with good?
Ought it not rather, to be concluded, as to such instances, that the defect
lies, not in the tendency of God's works, but in our incapacity to connect them
together, and view them in the reference they bear to each other? This is
certainly no more than a fit expression of humility and modesty in such
short-sighted creatures as we are. And it were to be wished, that our inquiries
into the measures of the Divine conduct were more generally made under the
habitual influence of these principles. I would not be misunderstood in what I
now say. I have no intention to restrain mankind, imperfect as they are, from
reasoning with all freedom upon the present, or any other subject, wherein the
Deity is concerned: Much less have I it in view to stop the mouths of
objectors, only by bidding them be humble and modest, because God is above
them, and his ways and thoughts high above their's as the heavens are high
above the earth. I am sensible, that humility duly regulated by reason and
religion, as it ought always to be, is no enemy to the freest debates not those
which relate even to the proceedings, of God. It is the pretense of humility,
not the principle itself, that makes an outcry against such inquiries. And to
this false humility, at least in part, it may be owing, that so many
absurdities, horribly reproachful to the nature and government of God, have
been embraced in the world. It has doubtless too often betrayed men into
superstition and bigotry, giving them a mean, abject cast of mind, whereby
their intellectual faculties have been very much unfitted for the right
discharge of their proper office. This, in truth, is the rock which multitudes
have split upon; not considering that submission even to the Deity ought always
to be exercised under the conduct of reason and good sense. And if thus
exercised, though it will be an effectual restraint from pride and arrogance,
keeping men within the sphere of their powers, and making them modest and
cautious, especially in regard of the things which they are able to consider
not in their entire connection but singly and as separate parts of some great
whole: Yet, it will, at the same time, put them upon due care and pains, in the
use of their faculties, that they kn^w the truth; it will dispose them freely
and fairly to hear and examine whatever may be decently offered on both sides
of a question, that they may be rationally prepared to make a wise and
impartial judgment in the case; in a word, it will influence them to form their
sentiments, not according to the authoritative decisions of men, or the
opinions generally prevailing in the places where they live, but according to
the truth of things so far as they are able, under the advantages they are
favored with, be they more or less.

It will not be supposed after saying this, that the present remark is made
with a view to take shelter under the pretense of that humility and modesty,
which become creatures, especially such imperfect ones as men are, toward the
great Creato^. It is freely confessed, there are many things, possible to
conception, which are absolutely inconsistent, in tr^e reason with infinite
benevolence. And it is as readily conceded, that we are endowed with faculties,
enabling us clearly and certainly to discern this inconsistency: Insomuch that
no solid reason can be assigned, why we should call in question the truth of
our perceptions in this case, any more than in others. And should we do it,
instead of humility and submission, I see not but we should discover downright
contempt of our implanted powers. And, in truth, could any appearances, in all
nature, be produced between which and infinite goodness the human mind could,
clearly perceive a real, positive inconsistency, it could, acting rationally,
assent to it as true that there was existing an infinitely benevolent first
cause. Here therefore is full scope allowed for the objectors in the present
dispute. And if they are able to produce, in the whole compass of being, any
appearances that will excite in the minds of rational agents the idea of a
real, undoubted inconsistency with goodness, it is granted their end is
answered, they have argued conclusively. But then, it ought to be acknowledged,
on the other hand, that if these appearances, in their last result, center in
ignorance, and only prove that our capacities are scanty, and not formed to
take in the whole of what is proper to be considered in the case; and that
good, the greatest good, may be the production of these appearances, in the
end, for all that we know, or can prove, to the contrary; I say, in this view
of the matter, it ought to be ingenuously confessed, that such appearances, in
strict reasoning, conclude nothing against the benevolence of the Deity. For
this is certainly the truth of the case. And all the reproach that is reflected
on the Divine goodness by this kind of arguing can reasonably be looked upon as
no other than the effect of ignorance; not to say pride and arrogant
presumption, in taking upon us to judge and determine in matters so evidently
beyond the reach of our powers.

This general observation, which I believe no one will deny to be just, I
esteem fully sufficient to answer the general objection against the benevolence
of the Deity, which has been brought from the appearances of evil in the
creation. However, I shall not content myself with this general reply, but
proceed to a distinct consideration of the particular objections contained in
the general one abovementioned. And they may be reduced to these three, the
imperfect powers of so many of the creatures who are capable of happiness; the
moral disorders which have taken place in the world; and the natural evils
which are so numerous, and turn so much to the disadvantage, especially of man.

1. The first objection against the infinite benevolence of the Deity is taken
from the imperfection of so many of the creatures on this earth of our's. What
a diminutive creature, comparatively speaking, is even man, the most perfect of
them all? How small his capacity for happiness? And how much smaller still the
capacities of the inferior perceiving beings, through their several ranks, in
the descending scale, of subordination? And could it be thus, if God was
infinitely good? Could not an infinitely benevolent Creator have communicated
nobler capacities for happiness? And if he could, how can his not doing it be
reconciled with the idea of him as an infinitely benevolent Being?

In answer to this difficulty, it may be said, the bringing into existence an
absolutely perfect creature is not within the reach of infinite goodness, aided
by almighty power. The very idea of a creature is essentially connected with
comparative imperfection; as it derives its being from another, is dependent on
that other for its continuance in being, and is necessarily finite in its
nature and powers. To suppose a created being infinite, would be to suppose it
equal with its Creator; which is too absurd to be admitted. Absolute perfection
therefore is an incommunicable glory of the only true God. And should there be
a creation, comparative imperfection must exist in it, otherwise it could not
exist at all. Consequently, if such imperfection is an evil, it is such an one
as must take place, or there could be no display of the Divine benevolence. --
But the truth is, mere imperfection is no evil, to be sure no positive one: Nor
may God, with the least propriety, be considered as the author of it. This
matter has been set in a clear and strong point of light by Archdeacon Law, in
his 32d. Note on Archbishop King's "origin of evil." His words are these, "God
is the cause of perfection only, not of defect, which so far forth as it is
natural to created beings has no cause at all, but is merely a negation, or
nonentity. For every created thing was a negation or nonentity, before it had
a positive being, and it had only so much of its primitive negation taken away
from it, as it had positive being conferred on it; and therefore, so far forth
as it is, its being is to be attributed to the sovereign cause that produced
it: But so far forth as it is not, its not being is to be attributed to the
original nonentity out of which it was produced. For that which was once
nothing would still have been nothing, had it not been for the cause that gave
being to it; and therefore, that it is so far nothing still, that is, limited
and defective, is only to be attributed to its own primitive nothingness. As
for instance, if I give a poor man a hundred pounds, that he is worth so much
money is wholly owing to me, but that he is not worth an hundred more is owing
wholly to his own poverty. And just so, that I have such and such perfections
of being is wholly owing to God, who produced me out of nothing; but that I
have such and such defects of being is only owing to that nonentity out of
which he produced me."

It will probably be said here, we see in the creation innumerable beings with
implanted faculties, making them the capable percipients of happiness in
indefinitely various degrees, some in an higher, others in a lower, till we
have got down to the lowest we can conceive of. Can this be the work of an
infinitely benevolent Being? Would he have made so many creatures so imperfect,
as to be capable of happiness in such low degrees only? If it was his pleasure
to bring beings into existence, from nonentity, would he not if infinitely
good, have endowed them with higher and more noble capacities for happiness?
The obvious answer is this, if in a creation, in which there are beings
inconceivably various in their capacities for happiness, there may be the
communication of MORE GOOD, than could otherwise have been communicated, it is
so far from being an objection against the Divine benevolence, that these
beings of lower capacities for the enjoyment of happiness were brought into
existence, that it is at once an illustration, and strong proof of it. It is
readily owned, if the whole result of communicated good was nothing more than
the production of such imperfect beings, as are capable of happiness in a low
measure only, it might be thought the Deity, if infinite in benevolence, had
been wanting in the manifestation of it. But, if there are other beings
gradually rising, in the scale of existence, to an inconceivable height in
their capacities for the enjoyment of happiness, and of the most superior kind
too, why should it be thought strange, that there should be imperfect ones
also, in the like gradually descending scale? Especially, if they are all
considered as parts of some GREAT WHOLE, severally concurring to make one
universal, gloriously connected system, capable of yielding as much good, as
the infinitely benevolent Being, guided in his exertions by unerring wisdom,
has thought fit to communicate.

In this view of the matter, it is not necessary, that every system making the
universal one, or that every creature in each system, should be equally
perfect. For, though, with respect to particular systems, and beings, compared
with one another, there should be ever so great a diversity; yet this ought
not, in reason, to be esteemed an objection against the Divine benevolence, if,
upon the whole, there is the display of as much good as infinite wisdom has
thought proper: Nay, upon supposition there may, in this way, be the
communication of more good, than in any other, it would be an objection against
infinite benevolence, if it was not in this way displayed. The creation is, in
fact, a diversified one. It therefore lies upon the objectors against the
benevolence of the Deity to make it appear, that less good is capable of being
communicated upon this plan, than might have been upon some other. Until this
is done, which never will be, as it has never yet been, no complaint can
reasonably be made against the Deity, as having been wanting in his
benevolence, on account of bringing into existence a creation, diversified in
the manner we see this is in which we hold our beings.

There are only two ways in general, in which an infinitely benevolent cause is
supposed capable of exerting itself in the communication of good. One is, by
displays ad ultimum posse, that is, to the utmost in all instances whatever;
the effect of which displays would be one order only of beings, the most
perfect there can be. But this supposition is, perhaps, an impossible one, as
it carries with it that which looks very like a contradiction. That which is
infinite is unlimited, and not to be restrained within any bounds. To suppose
therefore a ne plus of exertion in an infinite being, is to suppose that this
being is restrained within certain limits; which seems to contradict his being
infinite. If the Deity is infinitely benevolent, his exertions in manifesting
the glory of this attribute can never be exhausted. To suppose otherwise, would
be to suppose that he was not thus infinite, strictly and properly speaking,
the word utmost, or any other word of similar signification, cannot be applied
to an infinite being, with respect to any of his communications. He ought
rather to be conceived of, as having within himself an ability to go on
communicating to eternity. Communications to the utmost, so far as we are able
to conceive of the matter, are incompatible with the idea of an infinite
ability to communicate. Besides, should the benevolence of the Deity (was this
possible) be displayed in all instances to the utmost, this attribute of his
would appear more like a natural instinct, mechanically and blindly urging him
on to the communication of happiness, than a moral disposition, immutably
guided in all its exertions by unerring wisdom, and in consistency with
unspotted rectitude. -- The other way of the Deity's communicating good, may be
by limited displays of it, in particular instances; the consequence of which
might be the production of creatures indefinitely diversified in their powers;
some capable of happiness in one degree, others in another, and so on, in a
gradual ascension, without discontinuity, to the highest conceivable
perfection. This, I say, may be the effect of limited exertions of benevolence,
in an infinitely productive cause, with respect to the particular parts of some
great and good whole. And the reason is obvious at first view. For if any one
conceivable degree of imperfection will argue a defect in the exertions of an
infinitely benevolent Being, another will argue the same thing with equal
truth, and no stop can be made till we have got to the highest created
perfection. If a low reptile, for instance, cannot be the production of an
infinitely benevolent cause, because less perfect than a man; a man, for the
same reason, could not have had existence, because less perfect than an angel;
and an angel, for the same reason still, could not have been made, because less
perfect than some being of a yet superior order; and so on, till there are no
creatures but of the highest, and most perfect class in the creation. So that,
if there can be any limited exertions of Divine benevolence, there are no
creatures, be their capacities for happiness as low as any in nature, but may
have existence in a scale of beings, which shall gradually ascend to as high
perfection as infinite benevolence, guided by infinite wisdom, shall think fit
to create.

The only inquiry then is, which of these sorts of exertion are capable of
yielding, upon the whole, the most good. And it will not be denied, that the
presumption is strong in favor of the latter; as they actually take place in a
world, that will readily be owned to be the effect of infinite benevolence,
conducted by unerring wisdom, if it be possible, that more good should be the
result of such exertions, than of any other within the reach of our ability to
point out. And that this is not only possible, but highly probable, if not
certain, I shall endeavor to evince by the following reasons, which appear to
me strongly conclusive, especially if considered in one conjunct view.

The first, I would offer, may be set in the following light. We see, in fact,
that the various species of creatures, living on our earth, are so constituted,
as that the existence of one of them is no hindrance to the existence of
another; but they are all well enough capable of existing together, as the
extent of the world gives a sufficiency of room for it. The existence of man,
the top-creature in this system, is no bar to the existence of any other class
of creatures, in the descending scale, quite down to the lowest perceiving
animal: But there is as real a sufficiency of space for their existence, as if
he had not been made; and as like a sufficiency for him, as if they had not
been in being. And the same may be said, with equal truth, of all the other
orders of beings, with respect to the existence of one another, in this part of
the creation. -- And should we extend our thoughts to other worlds, and the
various classes of beings in them, there is the same reason still to think,
that the existence of one of them does not interfere with the existence of
another. Angels, and any superior order of beings, may as easily be made
capable of existing, at the same time, as if one only of these orders had been
created. And as to all the other classes of beings, in all worlds, they are
doubtless so made, as to be all of them capable of existing, as truly as if
only one class of them had been brought into existence.

Upon the truth now of these premises, it plainly follows, that the capacity
for happiness, in the universe, is enlarged by means of the diversity of beings
that have existence in it. And if the capacity is enlarged, it is, from hence,
demonstrably certain, that the quantum of good may be greater than it could
have been, if, instead of this diversity, fewer orders of beings, or a single
one only, had been made.

It is, indeed, from this diversity of beings, duly subordinated to each other,
that the plenitude of nature arises. A few orders of beings only would not have
served to this purpose. The creation is filled up, by that admirably nice and
curious variety in the classes of creatures, whereby they are fitted to be
proper links in the chain of existence; all concurring, as so many well
adjusted parts, to constitute one whole without void or chasm. Thus we are
naturally led to think, from what falls within the reach of our observation, in
this system to which we belong. For, it is evident, that, if the order of men
only had been created, the room, that is now filled with the inferior ranks of
creatures, would have been a vast chasm. Men would have multiplied no faster
than they do, if there were no brutes: Nor would they have been better
accommodated. One of the brutal species does not hinder the existence, or
increase, or support, of another; but there is both room and suitable provision
for them all. And should any other classes of the creatures be pitched upon,
they are so constituted as that there would be room still for all the other
orders. And the same reasoning will hold good if extended to all other systems.
There are various ranks of creatures in them: And, perhaps, otherwise, they
would not have been so full of being as they might have been.

The truth is, This world of our's is so contrived, as that we can no where
discern in it any void. It appears, on the contrary, by means of the various
ranks of creatures, gradually rising in perfection to men, the highest order of
them, to be perfectly filled with being. And, if there is no chasm in this
system, of which we are a main part, why should we suppose one, in the other
systems constituting the universe? It is far more reasonable, from the analogy
of nature, to think, that the gradation still goes on rising, in other worlds,
beyond the bounds of our most enlarged imagination.

And what though, in this vast diversity, there should be orders of beings
formed for happiness (at least in the first stages of their possible existence)
in an imperfect, low degree only? Is it not sufficient to answer, that no
capacity for happiness, however small, should be excluded the creation, so long
as it is not an hindrance to the existence of other gradually rising
capacities, till we have exceeded all conception: Especially, if it be added,
that the leaving out any capacity for happiness, however diminutive, in this
chain of beings, will proportionably substract from the sum total of general
happiness; which, in this case, would not be so great as it might have been.

The short of the case is, the creation of God, by means of this diversity of
beings, gradually and regularly rising in perfection, even to the highest
possible degree, becomes a most perfect and contiguous whole; demonstrating the
riches and glory of the Creator's goodness, far beyond what it could have done,
if the continuity had been broken, by the nonexistence of any of the ranks of
creatures, which now make it an absolutely full and well-connected universe.

It may add both light and force to the present argument, if I just subjoin,
That the various ranks of creatures are so far from being an obstruction to the
existence of one another, that their existence in this multiform bestowment of
it, is a greater blessing than it would have been, if they had existed singly
and alone. This is certainly the truth, in fact, with respect to the order of
man. The existence of the other classes of beings below him is so far from
being a disservice to him, that, if they had not been created, he must have
enjoyed existence without many of the advantages, tending to the comfort of it,
which he now possesses. And this is most probably the truth, with respect to
all the other species of creatures. They are placed in such a degree of
subordination, as to be fitted to be useful to one another: Insomuch that every
class of beings, by reason of this subservient diversity, enjoys existence
under more desirable circumstances than it could otherwise have done. And this
may be the real truth of the case, throughout the whole compass of percipient
existence.

Another consideration, not improper to be mentioned, in proof of the point we
are upon, is, its being plainly impossible, that any single order of beings
could be formed capable of all the good, which many orders, variously endowed
with faculties, may be fitted for the enjoyment of. It is indisputable, that
every being, of whatever rank, whether high or low, must have its own proper
nature. This, we at once perceive to be necessary, in regard of beings that
have material bodies. They are indeed ranked into different classes, on account
of their different bodily make. And a difference in bodily structure can no
more exist in the same bodies, at once, than they can occupy different places,
at the same time. And, as different organizations of parts, in perceiving
beings that have bodies, are intended, among other uses, to form different
capacities, in kind sometimes, as well as degree; it is plain, that beings thus
differently organized can no more be capable of just the same good, than they
can partake of the same bodily structure. And the same is as true of
incorporeal beings. They must, in all their different classes, have different
mental powers: Otherwise, they could not be ranked into different orders. And
there is no reason to think, but that different mental powers, as well as
bodily ones, should form different capacities for happiness, and such, many
times, as cannot exist in the same minds, at the same time: The consequence
from all which is obviously this; -- That should the most perfect order of
beings be created that could be, it must be an order of some certain nature and
constitution, which nature could not be capable of all the different powers of
innumerably various natures, some of which, at least, are absolutely
incompatible with each other. And if no single order of beings could be endowed
with the various faculties of all natures, it is impossible they should be the
subjects of all the various degrees and kinds of happiness, which these natures
may be severally fitted for, and capable of.

Perhaps, it will be objected here, though no single order of beings could be
capable of just the same happiness, which various orders might be capable of;
yet one order possibly might be so formed as to be qualified for greater
happiness of another and more perfect kind.

In reply whereto, it ought to be considered, that the first link, in the chain
of diversified beings we have supposed, is the most perfect order that can be.
And it is certain, if all the happiness of all the subordinate ranks of beings
be added to the happiness of this highest order, the sum-total will be greater,
than if the happiness of this highest order only is taken into the account. And
the strength of this reasoning will still increase, if it be remembered,
agreeably to what has been, already observed, that the existence of none of the
subordinate ranks of beings is any obstruction to the existence of the highest,
but that they may all exist together, and as free from interference, as if only
one of them had been brought into existence.

Another argument still, to the purpose we are upon, is this; that the
infinitely benevolent Being ought always to be supposed to exist himself in
producing good, with intelligence, wise design, and according to some method
discovering exquisite skill and contrivance. A mysterious something, capable of
happiness without faculties fitted for such an end; or actually enjoying it,
without regard to any stated method adapted to the purpose, is a supposition if
not impossible in itself, yet entirely dissonant from the idea we entertain of
good wisely communicated. In order to this, there must be faculties previously
created and contrived for the perception of this good; and more than this, it
must be the effect of the exercise of these faculties upon their proper
objects, according to some well-established constitution. And in a diversified
creation, one filled with different ranks of beings, all variously endowed with
capacities fitted to make them happy, according to stated laws, in a certain
degree; I say, in such a creation as this, there may be manifestation of more
art and contrivance in dispensing good, than in a creation in which one order
only of beings should have existence, though the skill herein displayed should
be as great as it could be. For it is indeed impossible, that all the methods
of wise contrivance should be discovered in the make of any single order of
beings whatever. And of this we have as good proof as we can desire; because it
is evident from what we see, in fact, that some of these methods are of such a
nature as to be incompatible with any one class of beings that can possibly be
made. It is a contradiction that any order of beings should have a mental
structure only, and yet, at the same time, possess bodies with various organs
admirably contrived for the conveyance of sensations of such a kind. And unless
the same beings could have bodies, and not have them, at the same time, it is
impossible that the whole of that contrivance, which is actually discovered in
the creation, could be manifested in the make and circumstances of any one
order of beings that could be created. So that, had the goodness of the Deity
been displayed toward one rank of beings only, however perfect, and not to
numberless orders of them, variously endowed and situated, there could not have
been those amazing discoveries of exquisitely wise contrivance and art, which
are now visible in all parts of the creation; Vid. Tailor, p. 48, of his Key.
obliging us to own the pertinency of those words of admiration, How manifold
are thy works, O Lord! In wisdom have thou made them all.

Should any object here, Though just the same traces of wisdom which are
discernable in the creation, according to its present plan, could not have
taken place, if one order of beings only had been made; yet this is no reason
why an order could not have been made, that might have discovered greater skill
and wiser contrivance, though of another kind. It may be sufficient to return a
like answer to one we had occasion to give before, viz. That this very order of
beings may be the highest in the ascending scale of existence, and complete the
manifestation of the riches of Divine wisdom, in the manner of communicating
good.

But besides what has been hitherto said, it may be worth while to enquire,
whether much of the most valuable kind of good could have been communicated,
had not the creation been a diversified one, like to that which really exists.
It will not be denied, that intelligent moral beings are the most noble, and
formed with capacities for the highest good, in kind as well as degree. And
perhaps, upon examination, it will be found, that a great part of the good they
are capable of is so essentially connected with a diversified constitution of
beings and things, as that they could not possess it but upon this plan. It is
certain, in point of fact, that the intelligent moral beings, in our system,
do, from this diversity, receive, according to established laws, those
numberless ideas, which are the source of all those acquirements in knowledge,
which give them their whole intellectual pleasure. And it is from the same
diversity that those various relations and dependencies arise, which are the
foundation of their moral dispositions, and give occasion for the exercise of
them, in infinitely various fit ways, to the production of all the happiness
they are capable of. And there is reason to think, that this is the truth of
fact, among all intelligent moral beings, in all worlds. I do not mean, that
their ideas, the spring of their intellectual delight, are conveyed into their
minds in just the same way that ideas are let into our's; or, that the
relations subsisting among them, giving occasion for moral exertments,
accompanied or followed with high pleasure, are precisely the same that take
place among us: But what I intend is, that they all come by their ideas, the
foundation of their intellectual happiness, according to some constitution,
wisely contrived and adapted to such a purpose; and that they are also so
endowed, and situated with respect to one another, as that ther^ may be fit
occasions for the exercise of their moral powers, in order to their perceiving
the pleasure that is proper to moral agents. And it seems as though they could
not otherwise, in a rational, wise way, enjoy the happiness that is suited to
such kind of beings. It is true, if the happiness of intelligent moral
creatures might be supposed to consist in indolent ease, or a mere inactive
enjoyment of existence, there would be no room for dispute upon the matter: But
such an Epicurean sort of happiness ought not to be ascribed to an infinitely
wise agent as its cause, however benevolent; for it is not worthy of a
communication from him. Happiness, in respect of intelligent moral beings,
ought always to be conceived of as the result of intelligent moral powers,
regularly exerted, according to established laws, wisely adjusted to the nature
of such beings. They ought to be considered, as receiving their ideas, not by
immediate infusion, but in conformity to some stated order, manifesting wise
design and contrivance: They ought to be considered, as making a regular use of
their intellectual faculties in the management of their ideas, in order to
their perception of intellectual delight: And they ought also to be considered,
as so situated with respect to other beings, as to have proper occasions for
the exercise of their moral powers, in various fit ways, so as to enjoy
pleasure herefrom.

And now, in a diversified constitution, there is room for the conveyance of
all possible ideas into all various minds, not by mere impression, but in
certain ways, and according to stated laws, manifesting the greatest wisdom and
design: And there is likewise all the scope that can be desired for all
possible relations and dependences, from whence, according to the abstract
reason of things, may arise a fitness and propriety in infinitely various
exertments of moral dispositions; making the beings possessed of them wisely
and rationally as happy as they can be: Whereas, in a creation of one order of
beings only, be their perfection as great as possible, it is not conceivable,
how they should be capable of that happiness which may naturally and wisely
result from the contrary plan.

There is certainly one sort of happiness, which I esteem a consideration
sufficient of itself to bear the whole weight of the present cause: I say,
there is one sort of happiness (perhaps the noblest, and most God-like) which
could not have place in the creation, but upon supposition of its being, in
some measure, a diversified one. What I mean is, that if there had been one
order only of beings, equal in perfection and happiness, there could not have
been the pleasure that is the result of the communication of good. For it is
only upon the plan of diversity in beings, that one creature can be the object
of another's beneficence. Reduce the creation to a perfect equality, and all
participation of that part of the Creator's happiness, the communication of
good, is, at once, necessarily destroyed. For where the same perfection and
happiness, both in kind and degree, is, at all times, equally possessed by all
beings, it is evident, that good cannot possibly be communicated from one to
another. And can it be imagined that the Deity would pitch upon a plan for the
communication of good, which would render it impracticable for any of his
creatures, either to resemble him in that which is his greatest glory, or to
partake, in any measure, of that which is his greatest pleasure? There is no
truly benevolent mind, but will readily be reconciled to a diversity in beings,
rather than the pleasure of communicating good should be excluded the creation:
And excluded it must be, if there is not some diversity. Upon any other
supposition, not one being, in the creation could be the object of another's
beneficence; and consequently, the noblest and most truly divine pleasure, that
which arises from doing good, could not have place in the whole circle of
existing creatures. So that it is evident, a diversity of beings is so far from
being an objection against infinite benevolence, that it really flows from it
as its proper cause. There could not have been the manifestation of so much
goodness, if there had not been some difference between the creatures brought
into existence. And the least attention will obviously lead any one to
determine, that if goodness may be the cause of any diversity at all, no stop
can be made, without continuing it down, through all variety of orders, so long
as the balance shall turn in favor of happiness, or, in other words, so long as
existence can be called a good, and pronounced better than not to be.

I shall only subjoin, upon the whole, that we know not but those beings, who
are the percipients of happiness, in the lowest and most imperfect degrees, may
be designed for a much higher state of existence. This may be possible to the
power and wisdom of the infinitely benevolent Creator; and that he has not
actually made provision for it, in the plan upon which he intends to operate
for the general good, is more than any one can pretend to determine. It is
highly probable from reason only, and certain from revelation, that man,
though, at present, one of the lowest intellectual moral beings, is yet
designed for exalted perfection and happiness. He is now in an infant state,
compared with what this may be introductory to. And, for all that can be proved
to the contrary, he may go on in intellectual and moral seize, till he
has reached as great perfection, and is possessed of as great happiness, as, at
present, comes to the share of any of the ranks of created beings: Though they
also may be supposed to be gradually rising in perfection and happiness, in
proportion to their greater original capacities; so that the distance will
still be preserved among the various orders of creatures, and go on to be so,
forever.

II. I now proceed to the second objection, taken from those moral disorders,
which, it is pleaded, could not have existence in the creation, if it was
produced and governed by an infinitely holy and benevolent being. Such a Maker
and Ruler of the universe, it is said, must have taken effectual care for the
prevention of moral evil, and the unhappiness arising therefrom. It cannot be
supposed, that a being infinitely averse from moral impurity would have
suffered the works of his hands to be defiled with it. It cannot be imagined,
that an infinitely benevolent Being would have left creatures of his own
forming to such immoral conduct as would reflect dishonor on his goodness, by
bringing unhappiness and misery into a world of his contriving and making? It
is not possible that such a being as the Deity is represented to be, should
place his creatures in circumstances, wherein they might pervert their powers,
and involve themselves in ruin. These things cannot be. They are not worthy of
an infinitely holy and good God: Especially, if it be considered, that the
existence of moral evil cannot be conceived of without permission, at least,
from the Deity: Nay, it cannot be supposed, but that he must have foreseen, not
only the possibility, but the high probability, of its taking place in the
world; and yet he suffered it to do so: Yea, so far was he from preventing it,
that it seems as though some of the most important measures of his conduct were
formed, upon the supposition of its actual being in the universe.

This is the objection urged at large, and, I think, in its full force, against
the creation and government of an infinitely holy and benevolent Being. And it
is far from being a trifling one. Had it so been, such numbers of philosophers
and divines, in all parts of the world, would not have employed so much of
their time and pains in order to remove it. And it is, perhaps, a difficulty
that cannot be perfectly removed, in the present state of human faculties. But
this is no proof that it cannot be done. It ought to be remembered, that we men
are but a low order of intelligent creatures; and what wonder is it, if that
should be a difficulty, and an insuperable one, to us, which may be none at all
to a superior order of beings. It is a certain fact that moral evil exists in
our world; and it is as certain a truth, that God is infinitely benevolent. And
should we find ourselves unable to point out so clearly and fully, as we might
desire, the consistency between this fact, and this truth, we may,
notwithstanding, keeping within the reach of our faculties, go so far as to
say, and upon rational grounds, that which may be sufficient, if not to silence
all objection, yet to satisfy ourselves, that moral evil may exist, and the
Deity at the same time be infinitely benevolent. Let it then be observed,

Though the being of moral evil, in our world, is not denied; it may have been
exaggerated. A great deal of this kind of disorder, it is readily owned, we are
acquainted with; but not so much as has been pretended. If we may believe the
representations of some, this world, by reason of the vices, of all kinds,
which are almost universally committed in it, is little better than hell
itself. But it is not fair, in making an estimate of the corrupt state of the
world, to enumerate all the horrid immoralities which have been perpetrated, at
the same time overlooking the many shining virtues which have adorned the
character of multitudes. The greatest vices can be matched with as great
virtues. If some have sunk their moral powers so as to become capable of the
basest and vilest actions; others have improved them so as to exhibit a truly
God-like temper and conduct. And, it may be, notwithstanding the outcry that
is made of the wickedness of the world, if a just comparison could be made, it
would be found, that it is far more than balanced with the good that is in it
of the moral kind. But however this is, it is not disowned that there are moral
disorders in the world, and many of them too, and of various sorts: Nor is it
pretended, that this has not been the case in all ages; though it is very
evident, that in some they have not prevailed to so great a degree as in others.

And now, that I may, in as clear a manner as I possibly can, offer what may be
proper in order to account for this appearance, and reconcile it with perfect
wisdom and goodness in the great Creator and Governor of the universe, it may
be necessary to observe, that the evil specified in the objection, and called
moral, includes in it two things, irregularity in the beings chargeable with
it, and consequent unhappiness as the fruit thereof, either by the constitution
of nature* or positive infliction from the Deity. And I shall, accordingly, be
distinct in speaking to each of them.

As to the first; -- The very supposition of moral irregularity, as
distinguished from natural, and meaning the same thing with vice or wickedness,
is essentially connected with free agency, in the beings upon whom this guilt
is fastened. Its nature indeed consists in wrong determinations, and disorderly
conduct, which yet are voluntary, and argue a wilful misapplication of moral
and rational powers. And as this is the true notion of moral irregularity, in
contradistinction to mere weakness and imperfection in causes that are
incapable of blame: I say, this being the true idea of this first part of moral
evil, free agents themselves, and not the Deity, are the sole and proper
authors of it. It takes rise entirely from them, and would not have been but
for their corrupt choices, and voluntary perversion of faculties, which they
might have employed to wise and good purposes. Vid. A thought in Hutcheson on
vice being the dege^racy of powers designed for good.
And shall the Deity be charged with want of goodness, for that which is not
the work of his hands, but a production wholly owing to the creatures;
insomuch, that it could not have existed, had not they abused the powers he was
pleased to endow them with, perverting their design and tendency, and by this
means bringing unhappiness upon themselves, and confusion into the world.

But could not the Deity, it will be here said, have prevented this abuse of
liberty, and perversion of moral powers? And if he could have prevented this
mischief, how comes it to pass that he did not? And how can his not taking this
care be reconciled with his character as infinitely holy and benevolent? In
answer whereto, I see not, I confess, but the Deity, if infinitely holy and
benevolent, must have pervented this moral disorder, if he could have done it.
Only, let it be remembered, when I say, if he could have done it, I speak not
so much of a natural, as moral ability; an ability invariably guided, in all
its exertions, by perfect wisdom, and in exact conformity to the abstract
reason and fitness of things. And it should seem, as though, in this sense, it
was not within the power of the infinitely benevolent Cause of all things, to
have prevented moral defection. If it was, what imaginable reason can be
assigned, why it was not actually done? And, in what possible way, can the
non-prevention of it be reconciled with that goodness, which is attributed to
the Deity as an essential character? Whereas, if he could not prevent it, in
consistency with wise and fit conduct, it is a good reason why he did not do
it; and he may notwithstanding be fairly and justly acknowledged as an
infinitely benevolent being. And that this is the real truth of the matter, it
shall now be my business to show. In order whereto, let it be observed,

If the Deity could have prevented the abuse of moral liberty, it must have
been in one of these three ways, either by not giving free agents a place in
the scale of beings; or by making them so perfect as to be incapable of any
wrong conduct; or by interposing, at all times, as occasion might require, to
hinder the misuse of moral powers, in beings that possess them, either in a
higher or lower degree. These are the only conceivable ways, in which the Deity
can be supposed to have it in his power to prevent moral disorder in the
creation. And will any say, that he must, if infinitely benevolent, in one or
other of these ways, have certainly prevented it? So far is this from being
capable of proof, that there is good reason, on the contrary, to think, it was
naturally, or morally impossible, that he should, in either of them, have done
it.

As to the first; -- The not giving free agents a place in the scale of beings
would have been a gross reflection upon the benevolence of the Deity, instead
of making way for its brighter display. For the quantum of good, capable of
being communicated, would, upon this supposition, have been greatly lessened,
and indeed reduced to a very pitt^nce, comparatively speaking: And the good
enjoyed would have been of the lowest and most imperfect kind too. For there is
no pleasure like that which is intellectual and moral; none so noble and divine
in its nature, none so satisfying to the subjects of it. Besides, if there were
no moral agents existing, there could be no way for the Deity to manifest his
moral glory, which is his greatest. He might, it is true, by creating and
governing an unintelligent world, or creatures in it endowed with intelligence
in so low a degree as to be incapable of moral conduct, display, in a measure,
both power, and contrivance, as well as goodness; but he could make no
manifestation of holiness or justice, or those modifications even of goodness,
mercy, forbearance, long-suffering, forgiveness. If there was no free agency,
there could be no virtue, nor any of that sublime happiness, which may be the
result of it. There could not, in one word, be any such thing as moral
government, without which the richest displays of the most amiable perfection
could have no place in the creation. And would it now have been for the honor
of the Deity to have withheld the blessing of moral liberty, by not giving
existence to free agents? Can it be thought fit, that such an intelligent moral
agent, as God is, should create beings, but with such constituted powers, as
that in the whole circle of existence, there should be no living images of
himself, no creatures made capable of that intelligent moral conduct, or of
that rational moral happiness, which complete his character as a most glorious
and blessed Being? Is it reasonable that the high privilege of moral
intelligence should be excluded the creation? That no being should be made
capable of virtue, and that truest kind of happiness which is the result of it?
Will any say, it is better there should be no free agency, than that beings
should be liable to abuse it? This cannot justly be pleaded; for if free agents
are liable to abuse their liberty, they are also capable of making a good use
of it, to their consequent, unspeakable happiness. And can it be thought right,
that so glorious a capacity for happiness as free agency, should be totally
withheld from all beings, because it might possibly have been perverted in its
tendency? What though some should abuse it, might not others make a wise
improvement of it? And why should this be prevented? Why put out of their
power, by the non-bestowment of freedom of choice?

It is true, if the gift of liberty was likely, upon the whole, to produce more
moral evil than good, it would be a sufficient reason why it should be
withheld. But there is no solid ground on which to build such a supposition. It
may be justly questioned, whether this is the case, even in this world of
our's, where moral freedom is enjoyed but in a low and imperfect degree: Much
less may it be thought to be so, in other words, among superior orders of
intelligent moral beings. Perhaps, taking into consideration all the ranks of
this kind of beings, in all parts of the creation, but a few, comparatively,
have misused their moral freedom. To be sure, it is not known to be otherwise*
and therefore, for all the proof that can be given to the contrary, the effect
of moral and intellectual endowment may have been the happiness of the
creation, inconceivably beyond what it could have been, if these endowments had
not been bestowed. And should this be the truth of fact, as it may be, can it
be thought fit, that so much happiness should never have been, by not giving
existence to free agents at all, because some have foolishly misimproved their
moral liberty to their own disadvantage? It cannot, with any reason, be
pretended.

But, it will be said, could not the Deity have made all free agents so perfect
as to be incapable of wrong conduct? This is the second way, in which it is
imagined, that he might have prevented moral evil, and would have done it, if
he had been infinitely benevolent. To which it may be replied as follows.

That, if all free agents had been made with such perfect moral powers, as is
here supposed, it must have been an unavoidable bar to that diversity in the
creation, which, as has been already proved, is so far from lessening the
quantity of communicable good, that it really makes way for a richer and fuller
communication of it, upon the whole, than would otherwise have been possible.
And, was there no other reason, this must have been effectual to restrain the
infinitely benevolent Deity, from making all beings so nearly equal in their
rational and moral powers.

But, letting this pass for nothing, it may be justly questioned, whether the
creation of intelligent beings so perfect as to be incapable of misconduct, is
not an impossibility in the nature of things. For, should we suppose creatures
as perfect as they can be, they would yet be finite: And how intelligent moral
beings that are finite should be wholly incapable of becoming faulty, in any
kind, or degree, is beyond all conception. It is certainly more reasonable to
think, that the infinitely perfect Being is the only one that can be absolutely
impeccable. For he only can see, at once, all the possible connections of
ideas, and unerringly know what is right and fit in all cases whatever: And he
only is immutably and everlastingly disposed to choose and act according to the
truth and reason of things.

But, should it be supposed naturally possible for free agents to be at once
created so perfect as that it could not be that they should err in choice or
behavior, it will still remain a question, whether it be morally possible, i.
e. possible in consistency with wise and fit conduct in the Deity? And,
perhaps, thus morally speaking, it is not possible. This, it is probable, may
seem a paradox to some; but there are reasons for its support, which are justly
conclusive; though they should not amount to strict demonstration.

So far as our knowledge extends, it is certain, in point of fact, that
intelligent moral beings are not when they first come into existence, either so
perfect or happy as they may be, and indeed cannot but be, if the tendency of
their faculties is not obstructed. They are so formed, some of them at least,
as to be capable of progress, both in perfection and happiness, to a very high
degree: Which progress is very much dependant on themselves, the use they make
of their implanted powers, and the pains they are at to cultivate and improve
them. Thus it is with man, the highest intelligent moral agent we are
particularly acquainted with. His faculties, at first, are feeble, and not to
be exercised but in a low degree: Yet they are so made as to be gradually
capable of enlargement, even beyond what could have been imagined, if it had
not been for experience. And this enlargement is, in a great measure, though
not wholly, dependent on himself: insomuch, that he will be m^re or less
perfect and happy, both as an intelligent and moral being, in proportion to the
use he makes of his faculties. Neither the perfecti^n, n^r happiness, he is
capable of, is communicated to him independent of his own choice and conduct,
but in connection therewith, or in consequence thereof, and as a reward
therefore. If he makes a wise and good improvement of the powers he is endowed
with, he will reap the advantage of his pains in corresponding seize in
perfection and happiness: Whereas, if he takes no care to cultivate his
faculties, the effect will be, their remaining in a low, imperfect state: Nay,
such is the constitution of his nature, as we may see afterward, that, by
misimproving them, he may not only check their growth, but bring them into a
declining condition, so as that they may become gradually unfit to yield him
any fruit but that of unhappiness and misery.

This is the truth of fact, respecting the highest, if not the only, order of
intelligent moral beings, in this world. And the fact, so far as we are able to
judge, is perfectly agreeable to what is wise and fit in the reason of things.
As the beings, we are speaking of, are made capable of happiness, in
consequence of their own choice and conduct, and in proportion to the
regularity therein discovered, what more just than its dependence thereon? In
what more proper way could wise, though infinite, benevolence communicate
happiness to them? What unsuitableness is there in making happiness their own
acquisition, the fruit of their own industry? What reasonable beings would not
choose existence upon these terms? And who will say, that they would make an
unwise choice? It is certain, this method of communicating happiness may be the
wisest and best; and that glorious intelligent Being, who perfectly sees the
fitness of things, in all possible connection, may know it to be so: And should
this be the case, as cannot be disproved, it was not possible for him, acting
morally, or, in other words, as an intelligent wise agent, to have communicated
it any other way.

And this reasoning, if extended to the other ranks of free agents, in other
worlds, will equally hold good. It is fit and right, in true reason, that they
also should be so constituted, as that their perfection and happiness should
not be communicated with their beings, but made to depend, in some suitable
measure, on the wise and regular exercise of their powers: The consequence of
which must be their liableness, in common with mankind, though in various
degrees, according to their various capacities and circumstances, to a
voluntary perversion of their faculties. This, I say, appears to an attentive
mind the fittest method of communicating good to reasonable moral beings: And
the Deity perceiving it to be so, may have all along observed this rule, in the
bestowment of it. Nor is there a known fact to the contrary, in the whole
creation: Though, if we may give credit to the writings called sacred, there is
a fact, relating to some of the intelligent beings, in other worlds, which
perfectly coincides with this method of dispensing happiness. For we there read
of the 'angels which sinned,' and of the 'angels which kept not their first
estate; which account of these moral intelligences does not consist with their
being created happy, independent of their own virtuous conduct, but supposes
the contrary: Obviously leading to the thought, that they were made, as men
are, capable of happiness, but yet liable to a voluntary self-corruption. And
all the ranks of moral beings might be created in like circumstances: And, I
will add, must have been so created, if this was most wise, and fit, as we have
seen there is reason to think it was, and no proof can be given to the contrary.

Not but that there are free agents, who may, before this time, have got beyond
any probable danger of moral defection. And this may be the case, even of men,
in some other state; though so inferior an order of intelligent beings. But
then, this freedom from danger ought to be considered, as owing, not to the
perfection of their faculties, as, at first, communicated to them; but partly
to the strong, habitual turn that has been given them, by wise and regular
exercise; and partly, though principally, to the superintending influence of
the Deity, who may think it fit and wise, after suitable trial and improvement,
to preserve them from all faulty conduct, so far, at least, as that they shall
never fall from the perfection and happiness of their present state.

But, before intelligent moral beings have gone through some state of trial,
wherein they have made the happiness proper to their natures, their own choice,
and have so conducted themselves as to be worthy of it, and to have fitted
themselves, by a course of suitable exercise, for the enjoyment of it: I say,
before this, it does not seem meet and fit, that it should be conferred on
them; much less in such a way as that it could not be but they must be happy.
It is certainly consonant to the notions we most readily and naturally form of
right and fit, that such kind of beings should come to the enjoyment of
happiness, in conformity to some method wisely adjusted to their proper
natures: And what more suitable one can be imagined than this, which makes
happiness, not the unavoidable privilege of their creation, but the effect of
their own moral freedom? Which bestows it, not absolutely, but in consequence
of their own virtuous conduct, or, in other words, as the result herefrom,
according to settled laws, under the notion of a motive hereto, or a suitable
reward therefore? This, to be sure, as has been observed, may be the fittest way
of communicating happiness to all moral beings, without distinction; and might
appear to be so to the infinite and supreme Mind: And, if this was the real
truth, as we cannot say it was not, it could not be within the moral power of
the Deity, to have created free agents, and put them at once, without previous
trial or improvement, in a state of full perfection, and confirmed happiness.
And if so, they could not have been made impeccable, as it is pleaded they
might have been, and must have been, if their Maker had been an infinitely
benevolent Being.

There is yet another way, in which it is thought the Deity might have
prevented moral evil; and this is, by interposing, at all times, as occasion
should require, to keep free agents from misusing their liberty. If by this
interposition be meant (and it must mean, if to the purpose for which it is
introduced) such a presidency of the Deity over free agents as is accompanied,
at all times with such exertions as shall be certainly effectual to restrain
them from perverting their faculties, it may be answered, as under the former
head, that it looks like a moral impossibility, or, in other words, a method of
conducting toward free agents which is unfit, in the reason of things; as not
being suited to the nature of such kind of beings. The exertions of the Deity
ought always to be conceived of as directed by perfect wisdom: And if, as the
effect of such exertions, free agents are brought into existence, the same
wisdom that created them, requires such a method of conduct toward them, as is
consistent with the powers bestowed on them. And can it be justly said, that
such a method would be taken, if, by any extrinsic power, their faculties were
unavoidably put into exercise in one certain way only? If all conjunctures of
circumstances should constantly be prevented, in which their moral freedom
could possibly be abused; or, if motives should, in all cases, be set in such a
strong and powerful light, as that no wrong choice could be made; or if, by
immediate impression from the Deity, free agents should be kept, in all times
of temptation, from all hazard of being drawn aside: I say, if, in any of these
ways, the Deity should exert himself to the prevention of moral irregularity,
how would such a method of operation consist with the proper powers of free
agents! It does not appear to the human mind a thing fit, that they should be
thus irresistibly guided, by any extrinsic power, though it were even Divine.
This method of government is well suited to the unintelligent part of the
creation; which, being possessed of no self-directing principle, must be
absolutely conducted by the power of the Supreme Will. But the influence of the
Deity on free agents must needs be of a different kind: Otherwise, it would not
harmonize with the essential powers of their nature. And why indeed should
there be any beings at all endowed with moral liberty, if they are not left to
the free use of their faculties? What room would there be, upon supposition of
some foreign overruling influence, either for their choosing or acting
virtuously? What foundation for the moral government of them? And, in a word,
what distinction would there be, in reality of consequence, between them and
mere inanimate beings, as to the Deity's exercising rule over them? It is true,
being endowed with the faculty of perception, they would be capable of
happiness; but this could have no connection with, or dependence on, any proper
choice of their own. It would be an unavoidable communication of good; good
dispensed, not as the effect of the regular exercise of a self-directing
principle, not in consequence of any real determining power of their own, but
by the irresistible will of the Deity, in his government of them. And will any
call this a fit method of dealing with free agents? It cannot be so pronounced,
unless by those, who have no idea of good, but as communicated to the utmost,
without regard to the natures of essentially different beings, and that wise
conduct which ought always to be used with reference to them.

But, after all that has been offered, some will say, should it be allowed to
be fit, that an order of moral agents, such as men are, might be brought into
existence, and that it would consist with the benevolence we attribute to the
Deity, to place them in a state, wherein their virtue should be put to a trial;
why need this trial have been so dangerous an one? Why should there have been
the implantation of these appetites, propensities, affections, and passions, in
their nature, with a variety of external objects so suited to give them
pleasure, as almost unavoidably to entice them to will, and to act, in
contradiction to the rules of virtue, and so as to make themselves unhappy?
Would a kind and good Creator have put them to a trial so difficult and
hazardous? Yea rather could he have done it, if he had been infinitely
benevolent?

In answer to this, which, perhaps, is an objection to the Divine benevolence,
the most difficult of any entirely to remove, it may be observed as follows.

In a creation inconceivably diversified, it may be proper there should be as
great a variety of moral beings, as of merely animal ones; and that there
should be a similar gradation from the highest to the lowest order of them: The
consequence from which is, that the capacities of these moral beings must be
various, and their attainment to a confirmed, virtuous temper proportionably
more or less difficult. The class of men, I suppose, may justly be reckoned the
lowest of the moral kind; for which reason, their conducting in life so as to
deserve the character of virtuous may be most difficult. But this
notwithstanding, it may be fit there should be such a class of moral
intelligences, in order to complete that variety in existence, which the
infinitely wise Deity might judge expedient for a full manifestation of his
benevolence. As many orders, of beings, as might be thought proper, not united
to matter of any kind, may have been brought into existence, the lowest of
which may surpass in glory the highest of those who are embodied; among whom
also there may be as great a variety in the mode and degree of their
perfection: In which view of the matter, it is no other than might be expected,
that there should be, such a creature as man, whatever comparative imperfection
may attend his make, and whatever difficulties may lie in the way of his
attaining to that virtue and happiness, he is formed capable of: Especially, if
it should be found, that, for a being compounded as he is, there is nothing in
his constitution but what is wisely and kindly adapted to promote his good,
with respect to both parts of his composition.

Has he animal appetites and propensities? These, as planted in him by his
Maker, were intended, and are wisely adapted, to guard him against
inconveniences; and not only so, but to give him pleasure. And he is,
accordingly, surrounded with objects purposely suited, by the benevolent
Creator, to yield him this pleasure: Nor can he reasonably be charged with
acting below his character, as a man, if, within proper limits, be gratifies
these natural appetites. They are therefore a wise contrivance to increase, not
to diminish, his happiness.

Has he implanted in him a variety of affections and passions? They are all
designed to promote his good, not his hurt. Was he destitute of self-love, how
feeble and languid would be his endeavors, if he endeavored at all, to preserve
life, or render it so comfortable as it might be? Had he no fear, how often
would he run into danger, and expose himself to numberless disasters? Had he no
resentment, how would he invite injuries, and suffer abuses of every kind in
such a world as this? Had he no ambition, what a powerful stimulus would be
wanting in his constitution to excite his endeavors to excel in this or the
other art and science, or in any thing laudable and praiseworthy? And the same
may be said of every other affection and passion. They all tend to good, and we
should enjoy less of it without them than with them. It is true, they are
capable of abuse; and so must have been, or we could not have been free agents,
placed in a state of trial. And should we abuse that to our hurt, which ou^
Maker designed, and wisely adapted, to promote our good, would it not be highly
unreasonable to bring such an abuse, as a complaint against his benevolence?
And yet, this is the real purport of the objected difficulty, put into plain
English: Unless it should be said, that the Deity would have manifested more
kindness to us men, if he had not planted these appetites and passions in our
nature, than he has done by planting them; as the danger of our falling from
virtue and becoming miserable, by means of them, is so great as scarcely to be
avoided. But will any one of found understanding calmly and deliberately say,
(to speak in the words of a very sensible and judicious writer) "That the
Creator, if he would have approved himself wisely benevolent to mankind, should
have precluded all from the pleasure they taste in eating and drinking, because
otherwise some will prove intemperate: That he should have appointed marriage,
and the care of children, to be unattended with any sensible pleasure, because
otherwise some persons would be lewd and unjust; that we should receive no
pleasure from beauty of any kind but moral, lest some should foolishly and
wickedly prefer the beauties and pleasures of sense and imagination, before the
beauty of virtue: That none should naturally love themselves, and be strongly
excited to take care of their own welfare, lest some should be tempted to
gratify this passion with the injury of others: That we should have been formed
indifferent to oppression, injustice, and wickedness, and have felt no
resentment at the view of those, to prevent any person's being angry, even when
they are not injured: That there should have been naturally no satisfaction
attending a just self-approbation, that men might not be inclined to value
themselves without reason; and no desire to recommend ourselves to the esteem
of others, by excellent qualities and benevolent actions, lest some should
endeavor to gain the favorable opinion of others by foolish, or wicked actions:
That men should have been without the passion of shame, to restrain them from
what is base, and deserving infamy, lest some be ashamed of what is virtuous
and honorable: That there should have been no attraction in liberty, lest some
should be tempted to licentiousness; and nothing appear desirable in a power to
do great good, that none might strive for a power of doing great mischief: And
that no noble emulation should have been felt in the human bosom, lest envy
should creep in, and make self-tormentors, and mischievous to their neighbors.
Would this have been a better constitution, than the present? What wise and
considerate person can think it?" The plain truth is, there is no appetite,
affection, or passion, as planted in our nature by the God who made us, but
what was intended, and wisely adapted, to answer some valuable purpose or
other; insomuch, that it would have been greatly disadvantageous to us, had we
not been furnished with them. And should they, by not being kept under due
government, prove the occasion of sin, and consequent misery, could the
Creator, in consistency with reason, be charged with not having been
benevolent? Especially, if it be considered, that these very appetites and
passions, might have been a means, wisely improved, of promoting that virtue in
us, which would yield the full happiness proper to such beings as we are.

Some will still plead, if appetites and passions, in such a constitution as
our's, should be supposed to be proper, why need they have been heightened to
such a degree of strength? Or if even this should have been expedient, why were
not our intellectual and moral powers proportionably exalted, that the undue
influence of appetite and passion might the more easily be controuled? Would it
not have been more kind in our Creator, and have argued greater benevolence, if
he had given us stronger rational abilities, and weaker animal propensities?
Especially, as it is principally owing to the strong impetus of our bodily
inclinations, that we are so generally, led aside into the path of vice and
folly, to our own great disadvantage. The answer I would return to this
obection, which, far from being a trifling one, deserves a serious
consideration, is as follows.

If our appetites and passions, in their natural state, and as implanted in us
by our Creator, had been lowered in their strength, they might have been
insufficient to answer the good ends of their original implantation. In like
manner, had our intellectual powers been heightened, they might have unfitted
us to live in such a world as this is. The contrivance of the Deity in man's
constitution, and the adjustment of its various parts, both animal and mental,
is perfect, and will admit, other things remaining as they were, of no
amendment. One power is so closely connected with, and nearly related to
another, and that other to another still, and the whole to such a world as we
are placed in, that no alteration could be made in one part, but what would
^ffect another, and that other still a^ (...), and so on, till there must be a
total alteration, not only in man, but the world he lives in; the absurdity of
which will be explained, and the pertinency of this whole paragraph justified,
in its proper place hereafter.

It may also be worthy of notice, that a variety in the trial of various
classes of intelligent moral beings, in point of difficulty and hazard, may be
a wise contrivance of the Creator for the more illustrious display of his
goodness, in harmony with his other moral attributes. It is certain, with
respect to us men, that our trial, as individuals, is, for wise and good ends,
admirably various in point of difficulty and danger; and why might ^t not, for
like good ends, be a more difficult one, should we be considered as a class, of
beings, than has been allotted to other classes of a superior order? There is
an analogy in this with the whole conduct of God, which has been various, both
in making and governing all the creatures he has given existence to. And, it
may be, his benevolence, by means of this variety, is more wisely, and fully
displayed, than it would have been by any other. And one class of beings would
have no more reason to complain, should the difficulty of their trial, in
consequence of this expedient variety, be greater, and attended with more
hazard, than the trial of another class; I say, they would have no more reason
for complaint, than they have because they were not made that other class of
^atures.

It ought to be considered still further, that men's appetites and passions, by
being indulged beyond what is fit and right, may be heightened in their
impetus, and quite altered from their natural state. And when this is the case,
as we all know it too commonly is, by not keeping them within those restraints
we both might, and ought to have done, we ourselves, and not our Creator, are
to blame, if disorders are introduced into our frame, and our trial, by this
means, is made more difficult and dangerous, than it otherwise would have been;
and, instead of reflecting on the Deity for not having been so benevolent, as
we fondly imagine he might have been, we should condemn ourselves, and throw
the blame wholly of our own wickedness and folly; for to this it ought, in all
reason, to be ascribed.

It is acknowledged, that the natural state of the appetites and passions may
be altered, and often is so, and much for the worse, even where the subjects of
this alteration are not the blamable causes of it. By propagation, a
disadvantageous bodily temperature may be conveyed, subjecting the descendants
from parents to a greatly heightened force of animal propensity. And by the
neglect also of these to wh^ the care of children has been committed, in
restraining their inclinations and passion, or by purposely allowing them to
take an unbounded latitude, they may increase is strength* so as to be, with
great difficulty, kept under government of reason. In which cases, the trial of
these persons will be attended with much more danger, than the trial of others
of the same species. But this is to be accounted for, and may justly be so, by
duly considering, that the state these persons are in is the effect of general
laws, wisely contrived, and powerfully adapted, to promote the good of the
system, of which they are parts; Nor could the difficulties, they are subjected
to, have been prevented without the extraordinary interposition of the Deity,
the inconveniences of which have already been mentioned; or without an
alteration in these laws, that is, without altering the plan upon which this
world, and the creatures that are in it, were formed, which would be to
substitute another world in the room of this, which may be as suitable an one,
in that variety which constitutes the universe, as wisdom has thought proper.
What has been suggested here will be enlarged upon, and set in a clear light,
when we come to answer the objection from natural evil.

In fine, it may tend to break the force of the objection we are upon to bear
in mind, ^t the difficulty of attaining to a virtuous temper and conduct,
however great, is not unsurmountable; as it may be counter-acted by a wise
improvement of that reason, conscience, moral discernment, and other powers,
which our Maker has implanted in our constitution, on purpose to check (...)
^ndue influence of our appetites and passions, and to keep them within their
proper sphere; especially, as, in addition hereto, we may, upon just grounds,
hope for the smiles of heaven upon our careful endeavors, in the use of the
means, helps, and advantages, we are favored with, to get delivered from the
dominion of sin and lust, and to become possessed of that noblest of all moral
powers, a freedom, without hindrance or control, to do that which is right and
good. And let it be remembered, the greater the difficulty we are put to in
order to this, the greater our virtue will be; laying a just foundation for a
proportionably higher reward, in self approbation here, and pleasure
forevermore in the future world. Besides all which, it may be depended on as a
sure truth, the good God will make all reasonable allowances for whatever
disadvantages our state of trial may be attended with; conducting toward us,
conformably to that eternal rule of, equity, "according to what a man has, and
not according to what he has not, shall be given to him." And this same rule,
adapting it to all other classes of beings, in all worlds, is that by which the
Supreme Ruler and Judge will measure his conduct toward them: In consequence
of which, they will all, in regard of just and fair treatment, be brought to an
exact equality. Less will be required of those beings, whose powers were small,
and their difficulties great; and proportionably more of those, whose powers
were greater, and their difficulties less. So that, however low the capacities
of us men are, and whatever difficulties our state of trial may be attended
with, the Supreme King and Judge will be equally impartial and just in his
dealings toward us, as with respect to any of the beings that are above us, in
the scale of existence.

The sum of what has been said, in order to reconcile moral irregularity with
benevolence in the Deity is, that it ought not to be attributed to him, as its
productive cause; but to the creatures that were made free agents: That the
making of free agents was necessary in order to the communication of the
highest good in kind; because, if they had not been made, this kind of good
would have been wanting in the creation: That, if free agents were at all
brought into existence, it must have been with powers so far imperfect, as to
import a possibility of their erring, without interpositions of the Deity to
prevent it: That their could not have been such interpositions, in consistency
with wise and fit conduct; because they would, in true construction, destroy
the very notion of free agency, and together with it all foundation for any
distinction between moral right and wrong: And finally, that however low a
class of moral agents we men are, and however difficult our trial, by means of
implanted appetites and passions, may be, such an order of beings might be fit,
in that variety of existences the wisdom of God might judge proper, in order to
a full display of his perfections in general, and his benevolence in
particular: From which premises, if true, as we have seen good reason to think
them to be, and no proof can be given to the contrary, it follows, that the
actual defection of free agents is not to be imputed to any deficiency of
goodness in the Deity; and therefore that there can be no real inconsistency
between the existence of this moral depravity and infinite benevolence,
whatever there may be in appearance.

I would only observe, before I proceed, it is all along supposed, in the above
reasoning, that the entrance of moral disorder into the creation would have
been irreconcilable with pure and unbounded goodness, unless every thing had
been ^one, which, in true reason, was fit and proper to be done, to have
prevented it. And could it be proved, in respect of any class of intelligent
moral beings, or in respect of any individual in this class, that the Deity had
been wanting in what was reasonably necessary, on his part, that there might
not have been a defection, I see not but it would be an invincible objection
against the infinite benevolence of his nature. For it is not supposable, but
that a being supremely and absolutely good should desire the happiness of his
whole creation; especially of intelligent moral creatures, in all their various
ranks, and numberless individuals: And that he should operate, in all wise and
reasonable methods, to promote it. And it would certainly argue a deficiency in
his goodness, if he could see them act wrong, and not exert himself so far as
he might do, in consistency with reason and wisdom, to hinder it. It is indeed
impossible, if we may say any thing is so, not only that infinite benevolence
should put innocent moral agents into circumstances, wherein their seduction
would be unavoidable; but that it should withhold its cooperation, in any
proper ways, agreeable to their natures, to advance the perfection and felicity
they are made capable of. To us men, it may possibly seem, as though more might
have been done for the human species, some of them at least, to have secured
their attachment to virtue: But are we sure of this? Are we able to exhibit
clear and full proof, that the Deity has been wanting in any thing, proper on
his part, to keep mankind from debasing their natures? It is true, we were not
placed in the highest class of moral beings: But can we say, that the order of
the creation, and the wise and good ends for which it was made, would not
allow, that a rank of beings, constituted and endowed as we are, should be in
it? Or will we take upon us to show, that the conduct of the Deity, toward us,
has not been so wisely and fitly adjusted to the design of making us happy, as
it might reasonably have been? Can it be proved, that the only good God expects
more from us, than he ought to do, in true equity? Or that he has neglected any
suitable method of operation to guard us against error, either in choice or
practice? Are we not conscious to ourselves, when we do wrong, that we do it
freely, and as furnished with all the preservatives against such conduct, which
we could reasonably expect, or desire, as moral agents, and which might have
been effectual to our restraint, if we had carefully used them, in the due
exercise of understanding and attention? And if this is the real truth, as we
are conscious to ourselves that it is, shall we reflect upon the Deity, as not
having exerted himself, in all proper ways, to prevent our misconduct? We
cannot pretend, without the highest arrogance, to say, much less to prove that
he has not done all that he could wisely do to preserve us innocent: And more
than this would have been inconsistent with his own absolute perfection. So
that he may be infinitely good, notwithstanding the degeneracy of mankind,
which we know most about, and complain most of.

I now proceed to consider, in the second place, the unhappiness arising from
immoral conduct. For by the evil complained of, in the objection, is meant, not
only the irregularity of free agents, but the misery connected herewith, or
consequent hereupon, either by the constitution of nature, or infliction from
the Deity. If wrong determinations, and unreasonable pursuits, were not
accompanied nor followed with unhappiness, either to the faulty agents
themselves or others by their means, the objectors against infinite goodness
would not, it may be, be so strenuous in urging this difficulty: But as the
fact is, they are bitter in their complaints, thinking it extremely hard, that
creatures, for only misusing their liberty, should be subjected to consequent
punishment, natural or penal; and that others likewise should be made such
great sufferers by their vices and follies. How, say they, could the Deity, if
infinitely benevolent, not only permit creatures of his own forming to corrupt
themselves, but connect misery with their so doing; constituting things so as
to make their wrong doing an occasion of unhappiness, in infinitely various
kinds, not only to themselves, but to others also? What a wide door has hereby
been opened for the entrance of misery into the creation? Who can compute the
immense sum of pain and torment, of one sort or another, this constitution has
paved the way for? And can it be attributed to an infinitely benevolent Cause?
Could such a state of things have ever been, if a good God had been at the head
of it, as its supreme directing Cause?

It is answered, in the first place, by freely owning, that moral irregularity
is unavoidably connected with unhappiness; insomuch, that by far the greater
part of those evils which abound in the creation are the natural or penal
effect hereof: Nay, it is readily granted, that the constitution of things is
such, that moral intelligent beings are capable of so corrupting their
implanted powers, as that misery must be the consequence, both to themselves
and others also, in certain degrees, while they continue in this state of
degeneracy. Nay, I deny not, but the constitution of things is such, as that
unhappiness must be the fruit of abused moral freedom, in another period of
existence, so long, and in such proportion, as the wisdom of the Supreme
Creator and Governor may think requisite.

But then I add, in the next place, that this is so far from arguing want of
goodness in the Deity, that it very conspicuously illustrates the benevolence
of his nature. It will probably seem strange, to those who have not exercised
their thoughts upon this subject, to hear it said, that unhappiness may be the
fruit of benevolence, and an argument in pro^f of it, rather than an objection
against it. And yet, this is the real truth; and I doubt not but that may be
said upon the matter, which will make it clearly and fully appear to be so.

Only, let it be previously remembered, that the possibility of moral
irregularity has been already accounted for, and the actual being of it, in the
creation, reconciled with infinite goodness: Which being supposed, in this part
of the argument, I proceed to show,

Wherein the unhappiness that is connected, in nature, or by positive
infliction from the Deity, with the misuse of moral powers, is subservient to
the general good of the rational creation, which is hereby more effectually
promoted than it would have been, if free agents might have acted wrong with
impunity.

And it is very obvious, in the first place, that a great part of the
unhappiness following upon voluntary misconduct is of the medicinal kind, and
strongly tends to the cure of its patients. The uneasy sensations occasioned by
vicious practice, together with those various other pains, which are naturally
consequent thereupon, what are they but so many motives to repentance, and a
due care to make a wiser use of moral powers? What better adapted means could
have been contrived to rouse the faulty agents to attention, bring them to
consideration, and put them upon endeavors to prevent their own ruin? If they
found no inconvenience in an irregular course, what should stop their progress,
having entered on it? What probable prospect would there be, in this case, of
their ever coming to themselves, and recovering a right mind? And is it not for
their good, that their vicious conduct should be attended with suffering, while
this suffering is considered under the notion of a means powerfully fitted, in
a reasonable way of operation, to check their folly, and reduce them to virtue?
Does not pain, in this view of it, cease to be an evil, and become a real good?
And ought not the Deity, who has thus constituted things, to be looked upon as
a physician and friend, designing their interest, and not as an enemy, who is
doing them harm? And the case is just the same in respect of punishments more
positively inflicted. They are a means wisely adapted to promote the welfare of
those who suffer them, and are so intended by the all-merciful Governor of the
universe, so long as they are capable of amendment by any means whatever. And
if, after this, they should be continued in suffering circumstances, even such
a method of conduct would be perfectly consistent with infinite goodness, for
some other reasons we may have occasion to mention afterward.

It is very evident, in the next place, that the evils connected with immoral
action, in the Divine government, are for the good of others, as well as the
faulty agents themselves. They are indeed, at least in this lower world, with
which we are best acquainted, a general discouragement to vicious practice, a
standing, perpetual means provided by the Deity to secure the virtue, and by
consequence the greatest happiness, of the human species, it may be, the only
rational moral agents here existing. It is highly probable, if not certain,
that mankind, considering their various propensions, though all suited to their
condition, and subjected to the guidance of their reason, would not be
restrained within any tolerable bounds of decency, if it was seen that no
disadvantage followed, when any of their rank perverted the order of their
faculties, and pursued an irregular course of action. The unhappiness,
inseparably conjoined with voluntary, continued misconduct, by the known,
established laws of the Divine administration, is one of the grand restraints
provided for their security: And were this to be taken off, they would, without
all doubt, notwithstanding all the remonstrances of reason against inclination,
be soon lost to all sense of virtue, and trample upon the sacred obligations to
the practice of it. And if it is for the good of mankind that this should be
prevented, so far as may be, in all suitable ways, it is equally for their
good, that vice should be connected with misery; because a powerful, and yet
well adapted means, to this end. And it should seem indeed as though this
connection was a necessary provision, in the government of the whole
intellectual system, to preserve it from confusion, and accomplish, by a
regular and consistent method of operation, the great thing intended and
pursued by the Deity, viz. its greatest good. It may, perhaps, be thought more
noble for rational creatures, especially the higher order of them, to be
influenced to right conduct solely from the fitness of the thing in itself
considered: But, it may be, there are no created intelligences above the need
of other motives. It is certain, an aversion from misery must be looked upon as
a leading principle in all their natures, from the highest to the lowest of
them: And if so, what a powerful guard must it be to their innocence, to see
the loss of it, in other beings like themselves, attended, in fact, with
vexation and sorrow? How strongly must it tend to secure their adherence to the
rule of right, to behold a deviation from it, in this and the other instance,
accompanied with misery, by the Divine constitution? It is reasonable to think,
it may be owing, in part, to this connection, that the whole moral creation is
preserved, under the superintendency of the Supreme Governor, in a regular,
orderly state. It must be confessed, it is true, that some ranks of rational
beings have probably never acted below the dignity of their character, and
consequently that they know not, from what have seen among themselves, what
unhappiness means: But who can say, that the sad effects of immoral conduct, in
one system of intelligent beings, may not, in the Divine administration, be so
related to others, as to be useful to them also? What is there unreasonable in
supposing, that the evils suffered, by means of abused faculties, in this world
of our's, may, in ways, surpassing our comprehension, be capable of promoting,
in a measure, the good of moral beings, in other parts of the creation? It is
certain, in the system of material nature, that other globes, and some of them
vastly distant too, are useful to this earth, as that also in return may be, in
some degree, useful to them: And it is by this mutual usefulness, to each
other, that they become one harmonious good whole. The like may be said of the
intellectual general system; -- It may be constituted the best whole, by the
mutual subserviency of the various ranks of rational beings to each other, and
their jointly conspiring, according to some settled order, to advance the
general good. And, among the ways, wherein the wisdom of the infinitely
benevolent first Cause may have made the several classes of intelligent agents
capable of being thus useful, this we are considering may be one. The misery,
which the individuals of one order, of moral beings, may, by their disorderly
pursuits, bring upon themselves, may be designed, in the divine plan, and
adapted, to promote the good, not only of that particular order, but of other
orders likewise, by exhibiting a most powerful motive to discourage the like
misconduct, and secure an attachment to the law of reason and right.

But, if any should think this is carrying the matter too far, and upon
conjecture only, it cannot however be denied, that the unhappiness accruing to
some of the individuals of any species of moral beings, in consequence of their
having chosen and acted perversely, may be of service to the rest of the same
species, by ministering to them seasonable and proper warning. And it may, upon
the whole, be a kindness to this order of beings, and an argument of the
Deity's benevolence toward them, that he has thus connected vice and
unhappiness together. For it is one of the most powerful restraints from
irregular action, and as strong an inducement to the choice and practice of
virtue. And so far as they are preserved in due order, this, without all doubt,
is one of the great means by which it is accomplished.

And should we pursue this reasoning, and examine its force as applied to a
future state, and the punishments there is reason to think will be there
inflicted on wicked men, we shall find it a sufficient vindication of them. For
if they are considered, as the present argument requires they should be, under
the notion of a needful moral mean intended and calculated to promote, upon the
whole, more good in the intelligent creation, than might otherwise be
reasonably expected, they are so far from being the effect of ill will, that
they really spring from benevolence, and are a proof of it. It carries the
appearance, I own, of hardship and severity, for creatures to exist in
suffering circumstances: But if their sufferings, whether in this or another
state, are the fruit of their own mis-doings, and it is for the real benefit of
the moral creation, upon the whole, (as we have seen that it is) that such
sufferings should be the consequent effect of such conduct, why should the
goodness of the Deity be called in question? It is true, the sufferers in a
future state, if supposed to be past amendment, can reap no advantage
themselves from their sufferings: But then, it is to be considered, these
sufferings were originally intended for their good, by being presented, in the
forebodings of their own minds, as a powerful motive, not only to restrain them
from those courses which would end in these sufferings, but to urge them on to
those virtuous pursuits which would be followed with all the happiness they
were made capable of. And if, notwithstanding so powerful a means used with
them for their good, they have gone on debasing their natures, till they have
rendered them incurable by any of the means the wisdom of God has seen fit to
use with them, why should it be thought a dishonor to infinite goodness to
subject them to that misery they have thus exposed themselves to by their own
wickedness, that they might be a warning to others, and serve as public
examples for general good, so long as the wisdom of God shall know it to be
best: Is it not better that some individuals should be in suffering
circumstances if they will not, by any of the methods of God's dealing with
them, be brought back to the choice and practice of virtue; I say, is it not
better, that some individuals should be made miserable, in consequence of an
established connection between vice and misery, than that the virtue of the
moral creation, together with all the happiness dependant thereon, should be
endangered, through want of such a provision for their security? The plain
truth is, the benevolence of the Deity, is not confined to particular beings,
or orders of beings, but is absolutely universal; and ought therefore to be
conceived of as exerting itself in those ways which are best adapted to advance
the general good of the creation. And if, by connecting misery with moral
irregularity, this end is, in the most effectual manner, promoted, as we have
seen reason to think it is, the establishment of such a connection,
notwithstanding what may eventually happen to particular individuals, must be
an argument of goodness, rather than of inconsistency with it.

There is yet another way wherein it may be for the good of the intelligent
creation, that wickedness should be connected, in the manner it is, with
misery. What I intend is, that by this connection occasion is given for such
manifestations of the Divine glory, as are rationally and powerfully suited to
promote the virtue, and consequent happiness, of moral beings; which
manifestations there would have been no room for, or, at least, not in so great
a degree, had it not been for this connection. It is evidently from hence, that
most of the moral attributes of the Deity become capable of a more illustrious
display, than would otherwise have been possible: And it may be, some of them
could not have been manifested at all, had not this given the opportunity
therefore. The holiness of the Divine Being would not have appeared so
conspicuous, if moral agents might have behaved ill, and not found it to their
disadvantage: Neither would his justice have shone with such a distinguishing
luster; as he could not, so fully and impartially, have rendered to them
according to their deserts. And, as to the various modifications of goodness,
such as mercy, forbearance, patience, long-suffering, forgiveness, it does not
appear, how these perfections of the Deity could have been at all displayed,
had it not been for these evils that are the consequent fruit of voluntary
misconduct. The idea of pity, and mercy, and pardon, as Divine attributes,
exercised toward moral agents, is essentially connected with their actual
suffering, or, at least, liableness to it, on account of their ill-doings:
insomuch, that, were it not for the unhappiness we become obnoxious to, upon
being faulty in their behavior, they could have had no notion of these amiable,
Divine glories. And it is from hence that those mavelous displays of
goodness, in these modes of exercise, have taken rise, which tend, not only to
the eternal honor of the Deity, but the best and greatest good likewise of
moral and intelligent beings. Nor is it difficult to conceive how the display
of these attributes of the Supreme Creator should operate to this end. For it
is obvious, upon the slightest attention, that riches of forbearance,
long-suffering and forgiveness, are naturally adapted to work powerfully upon
intelligent minds, if they have been faulty, to lead them to repentance, and
bring them back to the practice of virtue, the only way to true happiness. And,
perhaps, so long as there are any remains of ingenuity, nothing is more
rationally suited to produce this effect. And where any, under the influence of
these Divine displays, have been recovered to a virtuous disposition, there are
no motives better fitted to strengthen and establish it, than those which may
be selected from that pity and mercy, which the Deity has exercised toward
them. Besides, there will be the excitement of pious affections in their minds
toward the Divine Being, accompanied with high pleasure; which pleasure they
could never have perceived, but in this method of conduct. And, I may add, this
same goodness of the Deity, appearing in his lenity, and patience, and mercy,
toward guilty moral agents, is as naturally fitted to produce, in other
intelligent beings, who are not the immediate objects of it, such sentiments
and affections, attended with corresponding delight, which they could not
otherwise have been the subjects of; whereby both the virtue and happiness of
the rational and moral creation is better provided for, than it could have been
in a different state of things.

It will not from hence follow, it is owned, that moral irregularity ought to
have been permitted: Nor was the above reasoning intended to justify such a
permission; this having been before accounted for upon other considerations.
The only inquiry here in debate is, whether the connection of unhappiness with
this moral irregularity is reconcilable with goodness? And the argument we are
upon, is, I think, sufficient for the proof of the affirmation; as it has
particularly pointed out the way wherein the good of intelligent beings is
better provided for by this expedient, than it could otherwise have been. For
by means of the evils that accompany ill-doing, occasion, we have seen, has
been offered for such a display of the Divine moral perfections as is the
greatest encouragement to virtue, not only to the agents who may have acted
wrong, but to others also; besides that it lays a foundation for such pleasing
perception as could not have been enjoyed in any other method.

In fine, whereas it is complained, that wickedness is made an occasion of
suffering, not only to the guilty agents themselves, but to others likewise, in
various ways, so as to render life very uncomfortable; -- The answer is, that
this unavoidably arises from the constitution of nature, at least, in respect
of the human species. It is impossible, up^ supposition of the existence of
such an order of beings as men are, but that they should suffer more or less by
the vices and follies of one another. According to the proverbs as old as
Solomon, a foolish son is the heaviness of his mother; and again a foolish son
is a grief to his father. And the consequences of oppression, rapine and
violence, whether public or private, must be felt and groaned under, in a
world, where creatures are so nearly allied to, and dependant on, each other.
Nay, the penal evils, which the Deity may, in kindness, inflict to stop the
progress of wickedness, must, many times, touch the innocent as well as guilty,
while they live mixed together, as in the present state: Nor could it be
otherwise without an inversion of the course of nature. So that, if this
objection proves any thing, it is that such an order of beings ought not to
have been created. But we have already seen, that the Deity was not obliged to
make only the most perfect beings; yea, that the communication of the greatest
good required the creation of all ranks of beings, in the descending line, so
long as the enjoyment of existence could be called an happiness. Nor may such
creatures as we are, who have so narrow a view of the works of God, and the
whole system of the universe, take upon us to say, that an order of beings
constituted as we are, could not, in consistency with wisdom and goodness, have
a place in the creation; or that such creatures, with all the evils to which
they are subjected, would not make a beautiful, necessary part, in the Divine
plan, contrived to form a scene wherein the perfections of the Deity might be
most admirably displayed in producing, upon the whole, the greatest possible
good.

Besides, it ought to be considered, that these evils, which wicked men bring
upon others by their vices, are supposed to bear hard upon the benevolence of
the Creator and Governor of the universe, chiefly on the presumption, that the
present is an entire independent state, not having relation to, or connection
with, any future existence: Upon which supposition, it is owned, the difficulty
objected would be an unsurmountable one. But will any pretend to demonstrate,
that there is no future state, that death puts a total end to the being of man,
and all further capacity of enjoyment? And if this cannot be demonstrated,
which must be confessed to be the truth of the matter, it is possible, that the
evils which any suffer in this may be made up to them in another state: Nay, it
is possible, that these evils which they suffer may be intended as a means to
prepare and qualify them for greater happiness, in some future period of
existence, than they could otherwise have enjoyed. And this leads to another
remark of great importance in the present argument, which is,

That the evils suffered by some, through the faulty conduct of others, are so
overruled, in the all-wise, gracious government of the Deity, as to give
occasion for the exercise and improvement of such virtues as tend to promote
their greater happiness. Vice, it is true, has introduced into the world a
great many trials, grievous to bear: But it is as true, that they are capable
of being improved to advantage. And what though any should suffer through the
caprice, the pride, the hatred, the malice, and other ungoverned passions and
lusts of wicked men, if they may hereby be gainers in the end? And this is made
possible as the Deity has constituted things. For these very distresses, which
are caused by the prevalence of sin and folly, are so many opportunities
offered, in providence, for the exercise of meekness, patience, forgiveness,
and the like virtues; which, being often, by this means, thrown out into
action, become settled moral dispositions, not only forming a most beautiful
character, but together with it a capacity for happiness, which could not
otherwise have been enjoyed. It is certain, that the exertment of the mind, in
one particular way, is the method, according to the established laws of nature,
by which it contracts a faculty in this way of exertion, and becomes possessed
of what we call habits, in any kind. And it is as certain, that opportunities
offered, in the course of providence, for the frequent repetition of these
exertments, are the occasion by which the mind receives that corresponding
bent, or turn, to which we give the name, habit or disposition. From whence it
follows, that the evils suffered through the fault of others, as they give
opportunity for acts of meekness, and forbearance, and forgiveness, are
properly adapted to form the virtuous dispositions answering to these acts. And
accordingly it is seen, in fact, that none among men are possessed of these
excellent virtues, in so confirmed a degree, as those who have taken occasion,
from the evils they have suffered, to be much in the exercise of acts of
patience, contentment, and resignation. They have, by this means, got formed in
them, and greatly strengthened, the dispositions to these virtues. Nor is this
all: But their capacity for moral rational happiness is thereby proportionably
enlarged. These virtues, when called forth into exercise, are, at present,
rewarded with pleasure, and such pleasure as none know the value of but those
who have felt what it is, Besides which, there is no reason to think but that,
in some other and future state, they shall further reap the fruit of their
moral improvements, in answerable measures of rational satisfaction and
delight. To be sure, it cannot be proved, that this may not; yea, that it will
not, be the case. And upon this supposition, it is easy to conceive, how the
evils which good men have suffered, through the wickedness of their fellow
creatures, may finally turn out to their benefit. What special use there may
be, in another state, for those dispositions which have been formed in this,
and particularly suited to trials from the perverse behavior of others, we
know not: But thus much we may be sure of, that virtuous habits, by what means
soever they have been formed, improved, and strengthened, do enlarge the
general capacity for rational moral happiness; insomuch, that, if there is
anothere is another state, the subjects of them, on this account, must be the
more happy in proportionable returns of true and solid pleasure.

The sum of the whole argument is this, that the connection of unhappiness with
moral irregularity is a means wisely adapted to operate powerfully upon
rational moral agents, to reduce them to a right conduct, if they have been
faulty, and to preserve them inviolable in their attachment to virtue, if they
have been innocent: Insomuch, that it may be owing to this connection, there is
so much order and happiness in the intelligent creation; of both which, had not
this connection been constituted, there would undoubtedly have been much less
than there now is, and has all along been. The consequence wherefrom is, that
this provision, fitted for the production of so much good, is so far from being
inconsistent with benevolence, that it is a strong indication of it. And
whereas the sufferings of the virtuous, by the wickedness of the vicious, are
great and trying, these also, upon supposition of another state (which cannot
be proved to be an unreasonable, much less an impossible one) may be, in the
end, for their advantage; as they are capable of being improved so as that the
fruit, upon the whole, shall be more happiness, than if these sufferings had
not been endured: And if they may possibly be a means to produce greater good,
they cannot prove a deficiency in the benevolence of the Deity, but are rather
an argument in proof that he is endowed with this attribute.

I have now offered what I had to say in illustration of the consistency
between infinite benevolence, and moral irregularity, together with all its
consequent unhappiness. And I see not, upon the review, but the reasoning
employed to this purpose is strictly conclusive. God having created free
agents, it appears, from what has been discoursed, that they are the proper and
sole causes of all the moral disorder that is complained of, and not the Deity;
who has done every thing that he could, in consistency with reason and wisdom,
not only ^o prevent their abuse of their faculties, but to promote their
improvement of them so as to attain to the highest perfection and happiness:
And further, that the very evils, he has connected with their voluntary
misconduct, are kindly intended, and wisely adapted, to bring about their best
good, and will certainly do it, if it is not their own fault. So that, upon the
whole, it cannot be conceived, what the Deity could have done more, in a wise
and rational method of operation, to have made intelligent moral beings, in all
their various orders, as happy as their original capacities would allow of:
Which is as much as can be expected, even from benevolence that is infinite.

It now remains to consider the third and last objection to the infinite
benevolence of the Deity. And this is taken from the natural evils, common to
all perceiving beings, in this world of our's, in all their classes, from the
highest to the lowest; such as pains, diseases, and disasters, in various
kinds, and degrees; and, at last, death, mostly accompanied with distress, and
sometimes with aggravated circumstances of misery and torment. And the
complaint upon this head is, that these evils are not only permitted by the
Deity, but were, in a sense, appointed; as being the effect of that
constitution of things, which he contrived, and established, and has all along
upheld: Nay, it is urged, with respect to some of these evils, as to their
kind, if not degree, that the Deity intended they should take place, and
originally endowed the creatures with such natures, as that a liableness to
them was absolutely necessary. And would an infinitely benevolent Being, say
the movers of this objection, have brought creatures into existence under such
circumstances, subjected, by the very laws of their nature, to pain and misery?
Does this look like the doing of supremely perfect goodness? Can it be
supposed, that such a state of things could have been, if originally planned,
and all along conducted by a Being essentially, and infinitely kind and good?

I answer by acknowledging, that the perceiving beings of all orders, in this
lower world, are liable to pain, and death; and that they were made thus liable
by the God, who gave them existence under such circumstances, as that these
evils could not be avoided. Only, let it be remembered, and considered, before
I come to a particular resolution of this difficulty,

That even these natural evils, so far as mankind are concerned in them, are
all of them increased in their malignity, by means of that moral disorder,
which they have introduced into the world. And to this same cause, and not to
the Author of our beings it is owing also, that the kinds of natural evils are
become more numerous. Had it not been for the lusts of men, we should never
have heard of many tormenting diseases, which multitudes now lie groaning
under. And as to those which were unavoidable, in consequence of the
established laws of nature, they would have been comparatively few, and
attended with only tolerable degrees of pain. An intemperate, luxurious,
debauched course of living, through the prevalence of ungoverned appetite, and
sensual inclination, in opposition to the dictates of reason, and the
remonstrances of conscience, is that which has aggravated, as well as
multiplied, the evils of the world. It is therefore very unfair to take
occasion, from the vexations and sorrows of human life, in its present
degenerate state, to reflect dishonor on the goodness of the Deity. The only
just way of forming an impartial judgment, in the case, is, to consider these
evils, not as multiplied and aggravated, through men's perverting their powers,
and acting counter to the rules prescribed for the government of them; but as
it may reasonably be supposed, they would have taken place, according to the
course of nature, not hindered in its regular operation. The miseries that
infect the human species, in the former view, are the sole fruit of their own
folly, not an effect of God's producing, for which men themselves, and not God,
are answerable: Though I may add here, his goodness is such, that he has done
every thing fit and proper, that even these evils of men's own bringing upon
themselves may turn out, in the end, to their final good, as we have already
seen. In the latter view only of the evils of life is discovered the proper
effect of those laws of nature, which the Deity has establishlished, and which
we are, at present, called to consider, in order to vindicate his supreme
benevolence.

And here it may be again proper, before I proceed to the particular evils
complained of as inconsistences with the Divine goodness, to observe in
general, that they are the effects of established laws, the design and tendency
of which are greatly beneficial. And though they may be, in some instances,
more especially at certain times, the occasion of evil, they are
notwithstanding eventually productive of a vast overbalance of good. The air we
breath in may, in consequence of the laws of nature, be sometimes subjected to
those heterogeneous mixtures, which will, until it is purified, make it of such
an ill temperature, as to occasion hurt both to man and beast; but yet, life
itself in all animals, without which there could be no enjoyment, is absolutely
dependant on it, and preserved by means of it. Fire, conformably to the laws of
nature, may unhappily be the occasion of extensively ruinous desolation; while
yet, it is one of the most useful creatures of God. Storms and tempests,
thunder and lightning, may sometimes be the causes of no small hurt, by
destroying the lives, or substance, of numbers of individuals; bu^ by clearing
the air, and disengaging it from those noxious exhalations that were blended
with it, it fits it for respiration, and in this way does good, beyond all
comparison for surpassing the evil it ever brings into event. The same may be
said of earthquakes, inundations, famines, and pestilences, they are the
effects of laws, which are not only, in that general tendency, good, but
actually produce more and greater good, than they ever do evil In short, the
laws of nature are all of the beneficial kind, and we feel that they are so, by
the enjoyment of innumerable good things, which are the effects of their
operation; and the evils they may, at any time, be the occasion of, are not
worthy of being mentioned, they are so much over-balanced with good.

And it may be, upon the whole, best, in this world of our's, that general laws
should be so established, as that evils should sometimes be occasioned by them.
The final cause of such an establishment might be the good, particularly of
mankind. A world, in which there is a mixture of evil with good, may be most
suitable for such creatures as we are. Were the laws of nature such as to leave
no room for those occasions of sorrow, fear, and suffering, we are now
subjected to, this earth might have been a place altogether unadapted for
training us up for the enjoyment of God, the supreme good. It was, perhaps,
highly expedient, if not absolutely necessary, that we should live in a world
of discipline, a world that would, in the natural course of things, be the
occasion of difficulties, inconveniences, and trials, by means of which we
might be formed to a meetness for another world, in which we should be totally
freed from them. An uninterrupted state of ease and pleasure, would, morally
speaking, be the ruin of mankind. We need a mixture of evil with good to check
our pride, to restrain our sensual appetites; to take off our affections from
the things of the earth; and to excite in us a just sense of our dependence on
God. And we need also, every now and then, to be alarmed by this or that
dispensation, which shall speak with a voice more loud and awful, than is
common and ordinary. The inhabitants of the world in general, and those of this
or the other place, in special, are sometimes sunk into a state of such
carelessness and stupidity, have so little faith in God, and are so given up to
commit all iniquity with greediness, that, humanly speaking, there is no room
left to expect their reformation and amendment, but by such manifestations of
the power, the greatness, and majesty of God, as even force a faith in him, and
a serious attention to his character as the moral Governor of the world. The
course of nature is, accordingly, wisely and mercifully adapted to both these
ends; giving occasion, at all times, for disciplinary trials; and bringing on
also, at certain intervals, such tremendous events as are powerfully suited to
alarm their fears, and engage them to betake themselves to a better course of
conduct. And it is highly probable, the all-wise good God has so adjusted the
laws of nature, as that they shall operate, in all ages, and in all places, so
as may best answer his benevolent designs in the moral government of his
intelligent creatures. What I mean is, he may have settled such laws, with
respect to natural causes, may have so proportioned their force, sphere of
action, degree and manner of operation, as that, under his all-powerful and
all-wise concurring influence, they shall conspire together to produce those
effects, at such times, and in such places, which may be suited to their moral
state, and serve for warning, or correction, or ruin, as he should judge most
expedient. It is from these laws of nature, that tempests, famines,
pestilences, earthquakes, and the like evils, take their rise. And they may
reasonably be viewed as the great instruments of providence. It is by these, at
least in part, that God keeps this degenerate world within restraint. Were it
not for the displays he makes, at proper times, and in proper places, of his
being, perfections, and governing providence, in these ways of terror, mankind
might, at length, forget there was a God, or live as though there was none.

But it will, perhaps, be said here, why should beings be made so imperfect as
to need a constitution of things, in consequence of which there would
unavoidably be these evils? Could not the Deity have make mankind, in
particular, more perfect, and placed them in a world, in which, conformably to
established laws, they might have enjoyed good without any mixture of evil? And
if he could, would he not have done it, if infinitely benevolent? These
questions, and all other of a similar kind, are only so many vague, unsupported
suggestions, importing, that a world, so constituted as our's is, could not,
upon the supposition of infinite benevolence, have been brought into existence.
But this is so far from being a truth, that, had not the Deity created such a
world as this in which we live, he would not have manifested so much
benevolence, as he might have done, and actually has done. It has been already
said, and largely proved, that there may be the communication of more good by
the creation of a diversity of beings, variously capable of happiness, from the
greatest conceivable height, quite down to the lowest. It is therefore no
objection against infinite benevolence, that all beings are not alike perfect,
but rather a proof of it; because the less perfect, in all their gradations, so
long as they are at all capable of enjoyment, instead of diminishing, increase
the s^m total of good. Why then should they be excluded the creation? Why
should not our world, imperfect as it is in comparison with other worlds, have
been brought into existence, with all its inhabitants, animal and rational,
however low some of them may be in their capacities for the perception of
happiness? They are all, according to their several ranks, capable of pleasure,
and actually enjoy it, and an over-balance of it, notwithstanding all the evils
they are liable to. If therefore they had not been made, nor the world in which
they live, because so constituted as sometimes to be the occasion of evil, the
place they now sustain in the creation would have a vast void. And what a
mighty chasm in nature would this have been the means of? How much lessened
must have been that good, which might have been communicated? None of that
happiness would have been possible, which is now enjoyed, has been, and may
hereafter be enjoyed, by innumerable beings which have existed, and may in
future time exist, on this earth. And is it not more for the honor of the
benevolent Deity, that this happiness should have been communicated, than that
he should have withheld it? In a diversified creation, there must be a
diversity in the displays of goodness, should they proceed even from an
infinitely benevolent being. If the displays of goodness, therefore, in the
constitution of our world, and the innumerably various creatures in it, are
less than in the constitution of other worlds, and the creatures in them, it is
no other than might reasonably be looked for. There is, beyond all controversy,
more benevolence discovered in making such a world as our's, than if the place
it occupies in the creation had been a blank? And what is more, for aught any
man living can prove to the contrary, or pretend without arrogance to prove, it
may be a fit link in that chain of existence, which God may have intended for
as full a manifestation of his benevolence, as, in his infinite wisdom, he has
judged proper. -- But, instead of enlarging any further here, I shall rather
proceed

To a more direct answer to the objection against the infinite benevolence of
the Deity, as fetched from those natural evils, which all the percipient beings
in our world, and mankind in special, are, from their very make, and the laws
of nature, subjected to. And here I shall be particular in enumerating the
principal of these evils, and endeavor to account for them, in consistency with
goodness, should it be supposed to be infinite, but guided, at the same time,
by unerring wisdom.

The first evil complained of is pain. This indeed is nearly connected with
most of the other evils, and constitutes so great a part of them, that it might
be considered in general, and the answer to it, if just, esteemed a full reply
to them all. But I choose rather to speak to it distinctly, and particularly, as
one of the evils objected to. It is supposed in the objection, that it is in
itself an evil, and such an one as there was no occasion for, and could not
have had existence from an infinitely benevolent Being. But this may be a great
mistake. Pain, in a relative view, and as introduced into such a world as
our's, may lose its nature as an absolute evil, and be rather worthy of being
called a real good.

Some have endeavored to account for pain, so as to make it consist with
goodness, by saying, that it gives a quicker and stronger relish for pleasure;
and that pleasure could not have been felt, at least in many cases, and with so
high a gust, had it not been for preceding experience of the thing meant by
the sensation of pain. But it is evident, beyond all reasonable dispute, that
there may be the perception of pleasure without any previous perception of
pain; because this is the real truth with respect to him, who is God over all
blessed forever more. It will not be pretended, that the perfectly and
infinitely happy Being ever knew what pain was, from any experience he ever
had, or could have, of it within himself. And it is possible, I might rather
say highly probable, that there are created beings of a superior order to the
noblest in our world, who never felt pain; having never had occasion, or reason
for such perception.

Others, in vindication of the Divine benevolence, have supposed, that the
constitution, particularly, of man, is so exquisitely nice, that a touch upon
his nervous system will occasion pleasure, or pain, according to the degree and
manner in which it is done; and that the bodily mechanism is such, that it
could not have been otherwise. But this, perhaps, is going too far beyond the
ken of human understanding. We know not, nor is it possible we should know, the
height, or depth, of that contriving skill which is a glory peculiar to the
Infinite Mind.

The true and proper answer to the objected difficulty we are considering is
this, that all the perceiving beings in our world, whether rational or
irrational, of an higher or lower order, were subjected to the sensation of
pain, not for its own sake, but in wisdom and kindness, that it might be an
excitement to their care in providing for the support and comfort of life, and
that it might also keep them upon their guard against whatever might be hurtful
to them. We men, though the first order of beings on this earth, are,
comparatively speaking, but low creatures, perhaps the lowest among all the
moral existences in the creation of God; and as we are such imperfect
creatures, and live in a world wherein we are surrounded with dangers, and
liable to innumerable disasters, and attacks upon our health and life, pain
appears to be a wise and benevolent provision of the God of nature for our
holding existence with any tolerable degree of safety. This has been already
illustrated, Part II. to which I shall only add, the sphere of our
understanding is so limited, and such the danger of our being exposed, in
thousands of cases, to the loss of health, limbs, and life itself, that our
greatest security is this sensation of pain. It supplies the deficiencies in
our make, and assists our feeble powers, by being a constant, alarming monitor,
calling upon us in time to provide for our well-being, and to guard ourselves
against wounds, bruises, distempers, and whatever might be disadvantageous, or
destructive to us.

It may be said here, what need of so troublesome a sensation as this of pain
to guard us against dangers, and disorders? Might not this have been done in a
more easy way, and yet as effectual an one? And if it might, how comes it to
pass that it was not? Would not an infinitely benevolent Being have been thus
kind to his creatures?

The answer is obvious. The making such an order of imperfect beings as we are,
has been already accounted for, and shown to be consistent with infinitely wise
benevolence. This being so, a more kind expedient could not have been
contrived, forsuch creatures as we are, so far as we are able to judge, than
the sensation of pain, for our security from danger, and hurt, and to promote
our real welfare. Most certainly, no one is able to point out a better, or to
make it evident there could have been a better. Was it not for this expedient,
mankind, notwithstanding the utmost efforts of their reason, wisdom, and
foresight, would, in innumerable instances, run into danger, and expose
themselves to thousands of difficulties, and inconveniences, they are, by this
contrivance of the Divine skill and goodness, in a great measure freed from. It
is indeed so useful, I might more justly say so necessary, an ingredient in the
human constitution, that it would be scarce possible life should be preserved
without it. To be sure, it could not with that comfort and safety it may now be.

Besides all which, it ought to be considered, that we men are moral, and not
merely animal, beings; and it might be in the view of our benevolent Creator,
by means of this sensation of pain, he has made us capable of, to restain us
from luxury, intemperance, lewdness, and debauchery, an indulgence to which
would be hurtful to our souls as well as bodies, debasing our nature, and
bringing us down to a level with the very brutes; than which nothing would be
more dishonorary to the God who made us, or greater reproach to ourselves as
moral and intelligent agents. By this expedient also, so useful in so many
other respects, occasion is offered, especially in certain cases, and at
certain times, for the formation and improvement of the virtues, patience,
meekness, contentment, and resignation to the all-wise, righteous, and holy
Governor of the world, which may be greatly serviceable to us here, and
abundantly more so in some future state of existence. -- To go on to other
evils complained of.

Such are hunger and thirst, toil and labor, to all which we are subjected. But
these, if considered as they ought to be, are so far from being designed evils,
that they were purposely contrived for good, tend to good, nor could such
imperfect creatures as we are have possessed existence so well without, as with
them.

The way in which the wisdom of God has thought fit to manifest his goodness in
preserving the lives he has bestowed on us, is by the use of food. Our bodies
are so constituted as that, even, their solids are daily upon the waste, and
their fluids in a perpetual flux; insomuch that new accessions of matter are
necessary to supply what falls off, and wears away. Death must otherwise soon,
and unavoidably, be the affect. Now this supply is made by eating and drinking;
and to this we are urged, partly by the satisfaction we naturally take in what
we eat and drink, but principally by that hunger and thirst, which, though,
sometimes heightened to a degree that may be greatly troublesome, are yet
necessary, and bring far more pleasure, than pain along with them. Was it not
for the implantation of this expedient in our nature, we should be in danger of
dying before our time, through negligence in providing, or throwing in, the
recruits that are continually necessary for the support of our bodily system.
Hunger and thirst are what nature has made, and intended to give us warning of
this danger, and to push us on to a due care, to prevent, in time, those
inconveniences that would befall our bodies, if not supplied with food and
drink to strengthen and uphold them.

But it will be said, what need of labor in order to procure the things needful
for the body? Could not the earth, without the toil of man, have yielded a
sufficiency for his bodily support? And would not this have been the
constitution of nature, if an infinitely benevolent Cause had been at its head,
as its Supreme Director? I answer, Had the constitution of nature been thus
altered, there must have been an analogous alteration in the make of man;
otherwise greater inconveniences would have taken place, than those that are
now complained of, that is, the Deity would not have manifested so much
benevolence, as he has now done. Had the earth been so made as that it should
spontaneously have yielded its produce, and man's labor by this means, have
been rendered needless, what would have been the consequence but indolent in
activity? And what the consequence of that, but the loss of health, the want
vigor and spirit, and a general tediousness accompanying life? And what is
more, the bringing on death much sooner, and with more distressing anxiety and
pain, than would otherwise have been the case. Inaction, and no exercise,
naturally and powerfully tend to relax the solid parts of the body, to weaken
the circulation of the fluids, and so to disorder the secretions intended for
the smaller vessels, as that, instead of affording them a proper supply, they
would fill them with obstructions, which, if not removed, would effect a
dissolution of the bodily machine, either suddenly, or in a more slow and
lingering way. With respect, therefore, to beings constituted as we are, labor
is highly expedient; and it is a proof of benevolence, rather than an objection
against it, that we are subjected to it. Mr. Addison has set this in a
beautiful, as well as clear and strong point of light. His words, which none
will think unworthy of transcribing, are these. -- "I consider the body as a
system of tubes and glands, or to use a more rustic phrase, a bundle of pipes
and strainers, fitted to one another, after so wonderful a manner, a^ as to
make a proper engine to work with. This description does not only comprehend
the bowels, bones, tendons, veins, nerves, and arteries, but every muscle, and
every ligature, which is a composition of fibers that are so many imperceptible
tubes or pipes, interwoven on all sides with invisible glands or strainers.
This general idea of a human body, without considering it in the niceties of
anatomy, lets us see how absolutely necessary labor is for the right
preservation of it. There must be frequent motions and agitations to mix,
digest, and separate the jucies contained in it, as well as to clear and
cleanse that infinitude of pipes and strainers of which it is composed, and to
give their solid parts a more firm and lasting tone. Labor, or exercise
ferments the humors, casts them into their proper channels, throws off
redundances, and helps nature in those secret distributions, without which the
body cannot subsist in its vigor, no^ the soul act with cheerfulness. I might
here mention the effect which this has upon all the faculties of the mind, by
keeping the understanding clear, the imagination untroubled, and refining those
spirit^ that are necessary for the proper exertion of our intellectual
faculties, during the present laws of union between soul and body. It is to a
neglect in this particular that we must ascribe the spleen, which is so
frequent in men of studious and sedentary tempers, as well as the vapors to
which those of the other sex are so often subject. Had not exercise been
absolutely necessary for our well-being, nature would not have made the body so
proper for it, by giving such an activity to the limbs, and such a pliancy to
every part as necessarily produces those compressions, extensions, contortions,
dilatations, and all other kinds of motions that are necessary for the
preservation of such a system of tubes and glands as has been before mentioned.
And that we might not want inducements to engage us in such an exercise of the
body as is proper for its welfare; it is so ordered that nothing valuable can
be procured without it. Not to mention riches and honor, even food and raiment
are not to be come at without the toil of the hands, and sweat of the brows.
Providence furnishes materials, but expects that we should work them up
ourselves. The earth must be labored before it gives its increase, and when it
is forced into its several products, how many hand^ must they pass through
before they are fit for use? Manufactures, trade, and agriculture, naturally
employ more than nineteen parts of the species in twenty; and as for those who
are not obliged to labor, by the condition in which they are born, they are
more miserable than the rest of mankind, unless they indulge themselves in that
voluntary labor, which goes by the name of exercise." -- I shall add here, if
it was fit such an order of creatures as we men should have had a place in a
scale of beings indefinitely diverse from each other, which no one, without
high arrogance, will pretend to say, no reasonable complaint can be made on
account of that labor we are called to. It was indeed, for a species of beings
constituted as we are, nearly and necessarily connected with the welfare both
of our souls and bodies. If we may pay any regard to the sacred books of
revelations, Adam, even in paradise was obliged to labor; for he was put into
the "garden of Eden to dress it." The exercise he was called to might be
different, in kind and degree, from that which falls to our share, as it is our
lot to live on the earth since it was doomed to "bring forth thorns and
thistles," that it might be an occasion of that toil and "sweat of face,"
without which we cannot earn the bread we eat. And, as the moral state of the
world has been, from the time of the lapse of the first of our race, it may be
best it should be thus, more conducive to the honor of God, and our own good,
than otherwise it would have been.

It may properly be subjoined still further, had it not been for the
contrivance of labor, this earth would have been a rude wilderness: Nor should
we have seen those curious productions of art, which are so beautiful, and, at
the same time beneficial, and delightsome. How could we, without labor, have
had houses accommodated to the convenience and comfort of life, and other
structures both ornamental and serviceable? The world indeed is filled with a
variety of works, innumerable in their kinds, adapted to gratify the senses,
and answer many valuable purposes, which could not have been brought into
effect without labor of body or mind, or both. And in vain, comparatively
speaking, were we formed with hands, and eyes, and various mechanical turns,
had not the Creator intended we should labor: Nor would he have intended this,
if a variety of wise and benevolent ends might not have been answered hereby;
some of which we have pointed out, and might easily have mentioned many more.

There are yet other evils complained of; among which are bodily disorders in
innumerable kinds, especially those in consequence of which some are idiots,
and others distracted, and by this means not only objects of pity, but the
occasion of no small trouble to their relations, and sometimes to the
communities in which they live as individuals.

The existence of these evils, in our world, in its present state, is not
denied. But it may be justly questioned, whether they would have been either so
multiplied, or heightened in their malignity, had it not been for the
prevalence of folly and vice, which is chargeable on us as its author, and not
on God. Such indeed is our constitution, and such the established laws of
nature, that, aside from the wrong conduct of mankind, there might have been
some of these evils; but, without all doubt, they would have been far less in
number, and far lighter in degree, in comparison with what they now are. But be
this as it may; as they are the effects of established natural laws, intended
for good, and productive of it in innumerable instances, they ought not to be
complained of; especially, if it be remembered, that pre-established general
laws, for such a world as our's, are preferable to immediate, unrelated
exertions of the Divine agency; and inconveniences may have been lessened,
rather than increased thereby. Were there no general laws; but every thing was
effected by immediate, unrelated acts of Divine power, the bad consequences
arising herefrom would be at once obvious. "There would be no arts and
sciences, no skill or industry; no regular methods of providing for our bodies,
or improving our minds in the knowledge of things; all which evidently
pre-suppose, and are entirely founded on some settled, certain laws of the
universe discoverable by us." The reader, if he pleases, may turn to Part II,
where he will find this point largely considered.

It may be further said here, as mankind are brought into existence, not by
immediate exertions of Divine power, but in consequence of the general law of
propagation, they are, in virtue of this law, subjected to evils, which would
not have been prevented, but by an extraordinary interposition of heaven,
which, if common, might be followed with more inconveniences, for aught we can
say to the contrary, than it would guard against. By a variety of ways, and
means, this law of nature may be so obstructed in its operation, or such a turn
given to it, as that children may come into the world with a bodily machine,
unfitted for the soul to work by; in consequence of which some might be idiots,
and some naturally turn wild. These cases, indeed, are comparatively rare. It
is more common for children to derive from predecessors, and as the effect of
their vices too* bodily constitutions subjecting them to infirmities, and
diseases, various in kind, and sometimes greatly afflictive in degree. And,
perhaps, most of the disorders mankind groan under, especially as to the
malignant degree of them, are owing to this cause. But these inconveniences
notwithstanding, it is better, beyond all comparison better, this law should
have been established, than otherwise. For it is by succession, and not a
continued existence of the same individuals, that the human species is
preserved in being. And as this is not done by a constantly created supply of
individuals, how could it have been better effected, than by this law of
propagation? Especially, if it be considered, that it has made way for the
manifestation of riches of wisdom, as well as goodness, in the formation of
different sexes, in the adjustment of a different bodily organization, and the
contrivance of natural propensions, all which are admirably fitted to bring
into event the intention of this law. And it is so closely connected with other
laws, good in themselves, and productive of good; such as the law of love,
particularly, between the sexes, which gives occasion for many reciprocal
services greatly beneficial, of which we could otherwise have had no idea; and
the law of growth from infancy and childhood, to a state of maturity with
respect to both mind and body, which makes way for thousands of kind offices in
parents toward children, as also for the trial and improvement of many
important virtues: Such, I say, is the connection between the law of
propagation, and other laws of nature, that the present system must, in many
respects, have been altered, if this had not been established; that is, in
other words, this world must have been another world, and not the world it now
is: While yet, such a world as this is must have been brought into existence,
or the Divine benevolence would not have been so amply manifested, as, by this
means, it might be, and really has been.

There are two other evils still particularly complained of; the shortness of
life, and the unavoidable necessity of death.

As to the first, the brevity of life; it might be enough to say, in general,
it was ordered by unerring wisdom, and, at the same time, argues benevolence;
as life, short as it is, is much preferable to nonexistence. -- But we shall
be more particular in considering this complaint.

It is readily allowed, the general limitation of life, with respect either to
the human species, or any of the classes of inferior creatures, cannot be
accounted for upon philosophical principles; but must finally be resolved by
repairing to the all-wise pleasure of Him, who is infinite in understanding, as
well as goodness. All the species of percipient beings, in our world, are
subjected to the same general laws of nature; and yet, the time of the duration
of their existence is, notwithstanding, greatly various. Some of the brutal
kind are confined within the period of twenty or thirty years; others seldom
reach beyond fifteen or twenty; others still are quite old at about ten or
twelve. The like difference there is between the continuance of being in the
animals of more inferior classes. A single year completes the time of existence
as to some of them; a few months as to others; and life may be much shorter,
with respect to many of those species which are visible to us, only by the help
of glasses. This variety in the duration of life is, no doubt, effected by the
operation of general laws, but then it must be by the operation of those laws,
conformably to a peculiar difference of constitution in these different species
of creatures; and this, as allotted to them by God, and not to be accounted for,
but by recurring to his all-wise good pleasure.

This is eminently true, with respect to man. Notwithstanding the general laws
of nature, and their tendency to bring on a dissolution of our bodily
structure, no good philosophical reason can be given, why this dissolution
should be effected within such a general, limited time. If we may give credit
to the Mosaic history, the Anti-Deluvian patriarchs lived, some of them at
least, till they were six, seven, eight, nine hundred years old: and it is
particularly remarked of Methuselah, that "his days were nine hundred and sixty
nine years:" Whereas, the life of man, from the time of the flood, has been
confined within much narrower limits. About "seventy years," according to the
computation of king David, was the general period of life in his days; and so
it has been ever since.

Some have attempted to assign the philosophical reason of this difference in
the period of human life. And, in order hereto, they have recurred to the
natural firmness and vigor of the human constitution, which, at first, was
propagated without those contracted weaknesses and decays, which have been
gradually increasing ever since, and descending from parents to children. And,
together with the original strength of the human structure, they have taken
into consideration the peculiar aptitude of the productions of nature to afford
nutriment; which, they suppose, were in their greatest perfection at first, but
have been continually upon the decline. And, adding to these reasons, the kind
of food, the first generations of men lived upon, which, they imagine, was not
flesh, but the fruit of the earth; they think it not strange, that their lives
should be protracted to a period so much longer, than the common term of life
at present.

But however plausible this account may appear to any, it is far from being
satisfactory; and insuperable objections might easily be made to it, if it
would not occasion too great, and, what some may think, a needless degression.
The truth is; after all that has been said by learned men to solve this
difficulty, it still remains a mystery in reason and philosophy. Nor can any
thing be offered, with reference to its solution, that may more reasonably be
acquiesced in than this, So it pleased the sovereign good God; who, as he is
the Creator of man, and of all the orders of inferior beings in our world, may
assign to him, and to them, what time of existence he shall judge fit. And the
periods of life, however various in the various orders of creatures, were
doubtless ordered in goodness, as well as wisdom. There is evidently an analogy
between this diversity, and the diversity that takes place in the several
classes of beings; and it might be as fit there should be both these
diversities, as either of them, in order to a wise and benevolent constitution
of the links in the chain of existence. Nor may any one, unless endowed with a
larger share of understanding than belongs to the order of men, presume,
without vanity, to assert, much less to prove, that it was not better things
should have been thus, than otherwise.

There are, most certainly, good reasons, with respect to us men, why our years
should not be lengthened beyond the general period of seventy or eighty. Our
present life, as we are intelligent moral beings, ought, in agreement with
philosophy as well as divinity, to be looked upon, not as intended for the
enjoyment of the greatest happiness, we are made capable of, but rather as a
probation-season that will finally issue in it, in consequence of an acquired
meetness for it. This is the light, in which it is reasonable we should view
our life here on earth; and if the period, assigned for its continuance, is a
duration sufficiently long for the attainment of that perfection and happiness,
which is the grand design of God, it is, in true reason long enough: Nor would
it be desirable it should be protracted to a greater length. In short, our
existence, and continuance in it, in this world, were designed by our all-wise
benevolent Creator for a quite different purpose from what we are too commonly
apt to imagine. He intended both, not so much for the enjoyment of our highest
happiness here, as to prepare us for it in a better state. This is the true and
proper idea of life. And the limitation of its continuance is admirably well
adjusted to this notion of it: Those who are formed to a preparedness, by a
wise and right improvement of their time, and talents, for an admission to the
joys of God's presence, will not complain of the shortness of life. And as to
others, who chiefly employ themselves to the purposes of this, and not the
coming world; who make no provision for another state, but walk in the way of
their hearts, and in the sight of their eyes, fulfilling the desires of the
flesh and mind, the period of life is full long enough for their continuance
here: Nor would it answer any valuable end, if it were of a still greater
length. In all probability, they would grow more bold and daring in iniquity,
more hardened in vice, and more ripe for inhanced degrees of the Divine
vengeance. Besides, the present term of life is, one would think, a space full
long enough for such persons to be continued nusances to the world. And it is
really a kindness to mankind in general, that they are limited, by the law of
their nature, to threescore or fourscore years.

The other evil, I mentioned as complained of, and the last I shall mention, is
the unavoidable necessity of death. And this is common to all the percipient
beings in our world, from the highest to the lowest class of them. And their
subjection to death, in consequence of the operation of the laws of nature, is
a wiser and better contrivance for the production of good, and a stronger proof
of the benevolence of the Deity, than an establishment the reverse of this.

As to the creatures inferior to man, in all their degrees of subordination, it
is obvious, upon the slightest attention, that more benevolence may be
manifested by their succeeding one another in life, than by their continuance
in being without death. In the former of these ways of communicating life,
there may be inconceivably more of it, and consequently more enjoyment of good,
so far as life is at all a basis for such enjoyment, than in the latter. There
can be no reasonable room for doubt as to this. Should as many species of
percipient beings, and as many individuals in each of these species, be brought
into existence, as this world of our's could contain, without unavoidable
inconvenience; if there was no death to make way for a succession in life,
there would be but a very small pittance of life, in comparison with what there
might be, conformably to the method in which heaven has contrived to
communicate it. Upon the supposition of no death, in the case proposed, there
could be no multiplication of life. It would always continue precisely the same
with respect to the numbers that enjoyed it: Whereas, upon the present plan,
there may be the continuance of every species, with a like number of
individuals, in thousands of successions. And should a calculation be made of
life multiplied in this way, it would amount to a sum inconceivably greater,
than it could otherwise have been. Millions of animals, in every class, are
capable, in this way, of being brought into life, and made percipients of
enjoyment, which must have remained in nonentity, had it not been for this
contrivance of death, and its being made an establishment of nature. In short,
by means of the present scheme of God, there has been, and may yet be, as much
more life, and enjoyment, among the inferior ranks of animals, than there would
have been, without the introduction of death, as there already have been, and
may still be, successions in their life; for, in every succession, there may be
as much life, and enjoyment, as in the first class that had existence.

It ought to be considered yet further here, that, had it not been for death,
the law of propagation still continuing in force, there would not have been,
long before the present day, room in our world for a millionth part of the
animals that might be brought into existence; yea, the increase of a very few
of the classes of these animals would have so filled the earth, that the rest
must have been shut out.

And what has been thus said of the inferior animals is equally true, should it
be applied to us men. Was it not for death, there must have been, beyond
conception, less life, and consequently enjoyment, than there has been, and
still may be, upon the present plan of nature. If we take into consideration
only those of our race, who, in successive generations, have had existence,
there would not have been room on this earth for a thousandth part of them, at
one and the same time; much less would there have been a possibility of this,
if all that have died, before their arrival to a capacity of increasing their
kind, should be taken into the number and they had all gone on multiplying to
this day, conformably to the law of propagation. Perhaps, an hundred worlds, as
large as this, would not have been sufficiently extensive for their existence,
and comfortable support, in the way they are now provided for. Instead
therefore of objecting against the benevolence of the Deity for the
introduction of death into the world, we have reason rather to admire and adore
that wisdom of his, which has contrived and established this effectual way for
the fuller illustration of that infinite goodness, which is so amiable an
attribute of his nature.

Some, that they might keep at the utmost distance from reflecting dishonor on
the Divine benevolence, on account of the law of death, have supposed it was in
itself a matter of necessity, and could not have been otherwise; as the bodies
of all animals, from the lowest to the highest class of them, being compounded
of heterogeneous parts, are naturally corruptible, and must unavoidably, in
time, undergo that dissolution, which is the thing meant, by death. Whether it
be true, or not, that animal bodies must have been subjected to SUCH
corruptibility, as that a dissolution could not have been guarded against, and
prevented, I shall not dispute at present. But thus much is unquestionably
true, that the time of existence, without the coming on of a dissolution, is
different in different classes of the inferior animals; which cannot be
accounted for, by the operation of any of the laws of nature, without recurring
to that wisdom of God, which so formed the bodily constitution of all animals,
and so differenced it with respect to the different classes of them, that the
laws of nature should be unable, unless by accidental interferance, to effect a
dissolution in any of them, but in conformity to that special difference, as to
the general time, that had been previously allotted for their continuance in
being.

And with respect to the race of men, in particular, so far as we may receive
for truth what Moses has related, the time of their bodily dissolution, the
same general laws of nature still subsisting, and in operation, has been
greatly varied. Men live now, generally speaking, but seventy, or eighty years:
Whereas, in the Anti-Diluvian ages, they lived some hundreds of years; and they
might, had God so pleased, have gone on living as many thousands: Yea, their
special constitution might have been such, for aught any one can prove to the
contrary, as that they should not have seen corruption. According to the
new testament writings, there will be no death, among the true servants of
Jesus Christ, in the resurrection-world. They will have bodies there, as they
have here. Their bodies may be there more refined, and with greater skill
organized, so as to be fitter machines for the soul to act by; but they will be
bodies still, and yet not subject to mortality. Hence that emphatically strong
declaration of the apostle Paul, "This corruptible must put on incorruption,
and this mortal must put on immortality. So, when this corruptible shall have
put on incorruption, and this mortal has put on immortality, then shall be
brought to pass the saying that is written, "death is swallowed up in victory."
It is from hence evident, that material bodies may, by the skill of the
all-wise and all-powerful Architect, be so formed, as that, under his
overruling guidance and protection, they may continue in existence without
death forever. According to the same writings also it is evident, that mankind
would not have been subjected to death, had it not been for the lapse of the
f^st man, Adam. But it is evident likewise, that it could not have been the
intention of God, that Adam, together with all that might proceed from him,
should have lived on this earth at one and the same time; and for this very
good reason, because it was plainly impossible that they should. This world
could not have contained and subsisted them; unless their bodies, and the
manner of supporting them, had been quite different from what they now are. If
therefore they had not died, some other way must have been provided to make
room for those who would have been brought into being. Perhaps, in certain
periods, numbers of those who had been fitted therefore, might have been
translated to some other place of abode, to enjoy happiness there, in some
superior mode of existence. But be this as it may, this non-subjection to death
was not owing to a created natural incorruptibility, but to a special promise
from Almighty God, that, while innocent, they should be so protected, and
preserved, as not to see corruption. But, innocence being lost, the promise of
immortality became vacated, and death of course too^ place: Only, it was left
with God to fix the general period of life; which he has done with wisdom that
discovers great goodness.
But, in the plan of God, it has been ordered otherwise. He has so constituted
our bodily structure, that it shall, within such a general period, naturally
fall to pieces. And this general period he has fixed, not from any necessity
there was for it by reason of the corruptibility of the materials of which it
is formed; but by so contriving the continuance of one generation, as that the
succession of another should be admirably adapted to manifest both wisdom and
goodness in providing for the existence of mere life, and consequent enjoyment,
than there would otherwise have been on this earth.

It might also be with a view to promote morally good purposes, that the law of
death, especially as to its general time, has been established by God. It is
not easy to conceive of any motive more strikingly adapted to excite to
consideration, and such a behavior in life as may lay a just foundation for
calmness and serenity of mind, when the time comes that we must depart out of
this into another state. And it is, most certainly, a very powerful restraint
from vicious practices, especially in those kinds, and degrees, which naturally
tend to hasten death, and bring it on before its proper time. It is indeed one
of the wisest and best contrivances for the government of men, and to keep them
within the restraints of reason and virtue. As Dr. Sherlock, in his excellent
treatise on death, expresses it, "Mortality and death are necessary to the good
government of the world. Nothing else can give a check to some men's
wickedness, but either the fear of death, or execution of it. Some men are so
outrageously wicked, that nothing can put a stop to them, and prevent the
mischief they do in the world, but to cut them off. This is the reason of
capital punishments among men, to remove those out of the world who will be a
plague to mankind kind while they live in it. For this reason God destroyed the
whole race of mankind by a deluge of water, excepting Noah, and his family,
because they were incurably wicked. For this reason he sends plagues, and
famine, and sword, to correct the exorbitant growth of wickedness, to lessen
the number of sinners, and to lay restraints on them. And if the world be such
a bedlam as it is under all these restraints, what would it be were it filled
with immortal sinners!"

Upon the whole that has been said, in relation to natural evil, it appears
either that it could not have been prevented in such a world as our's; or, that
it is miscalled evil, being rather the contrivance of wisdom in order to the
production of more good, than there otherwise would have been. It is conceded,
a better world than this, more perfect, and more powerfully adapted to make
happy, might be created by the Deity; but then it ought to be remembered, such
a better world may be already one of the links in the diversified chain of
existence. The only proper question therefore is, whether the making such a
world as this, is not a proof of more benevolence, than a chasm would be in
that part of the creation, which it now occupies? If so, imperfect as it is,
comparatively speaking, it is better it should be, than not be. And, for such
an imperfect world as this ought (...) be, in an indefinitely variegated
creation, in order to its being a proper part in the chain of existence, no
alteration, it may be, notwithstanding all the complaints that have been made
of deficiences, redundances, deformities, and evils, could be made without
damage to the system. If in some things, absolutely viewed, an alteration for
the better might be supposed, yet this very alteration, considered, as it ought
to be, in its relation to other parts, which, as truly as these, go to the
constitution of the whole, it might turn out greatly to its disadvantage. Arch
Deacon Law, in his 42 Note, on Arch Bishop King's "origin of evil," has well
expressed himself upon this head. Says he, "we may safely conclude, that there
could have been no partial alteration of this system, but for the worse, as far
as we know, at least not for the better. They who hold that there might have
been a total one, that the whole scheme of things might possibly have been
altered, or reversed, and that either the direct contrary, or a quite different
one, would have been equally, or more worthy of God; the men, I say, that hold
this, are obliged to show the possibility of conceiving of it, and to explain
the manner of how it may be, before we are obliged to believe them. -- And when
they have done this, and completed their system, and made a total alteration
of things, a^ they imagine, for the better, they are at last got only to the
absurdity of putting this system into an higher class; whereas, all the
different classes, in every conceivable degree of perfection, were supposed to
be entirely filled at the first. We must therefore take things as they are, and
argue only from the present nature of them, collectively. In which view, we
shall find no possible alteration of any thing, but what would produce greater
inconveniences, either in itself, or others, to which it bears a strict
relation." He goes on, taking occasion to borrow a section from Mr. Maxwell's
general remarks on Cumberland, in these words. "The nature of things, in the
natural world, is so exactly fitted to the natural faculties and dispositions
of mankind, that were any thing in it otherwise than it is, even in degree,
mankind would be less happy, than they now are, Thus the dependence of all
natural effects upon a few simple principles, is wonderfully advantageous in
many respects. The degrees of all the sensible pleasures are exactly suited to
the use of each; so that if we enjoyed any of them in a greater degree we
should be less happy: For our appetites of those pleasures would, by that
means, be too strong for our reason; and, as we are framed, tempt us to an
immoderate enjoyment of them, so as to prejudice our bodies. And, where we
enjoy some of them in so high a degree, as that, it is, in many cases, very
difficult for the strongest to regulate and moderate the appetites of those
pleasures, it is in such instances where it was necessary to counterpoize some
disadvantages, which are the consequences of the pursuit of those pleasures.
Thus the pleasing ideas, which accompany the love of the sexes, are necessary
to be possessed in so high a degree, (...) balance the cares of matrimony, and
also the (...) of childbearing in the female sex. The (...) may be said of our
intellectual pleasures. (...) did we receive a greater pleasure from be^lence,
sloth would be encouraged by an ^oderate bounty. And were the pleasures ^r
inquiries into the truth greater, we should be ^o speculative, and less active.
It seems also probable, that the degree of our intellectual capacity is very
well suited to our objects of knowledge, and that had we a greater degree
thereof, we should be less happy. Moreover, it is probably so adapted to the
inward frame of our bodies, that it could not be greater, without either an
alteration in the laws of nature, or in the laws of union between the soul and
body. Farther; were it much greater than it is, our thoughts and pursuits would
be so spiritual and refined, that we should be taken too much off from sensible
pleasures. We should probably be conscious of some defects or wants in our
bodily organs, and would be sensible that they were unequal to so great a
capacity, which would necessarily be followed by uneasiness of mind. And this
seems to hold in the br^te-creation. For, methinks, it would be for the
disadvantage of a h^rse to be endowed with the understanding of a man: Such an
unequal union must be attended with continual disquietudes, and discontents. As
for our pains, they are all either warnings against bodily disorders, or are
such as, had we wanted them, the laws of nature remaining as they are, we
should either have wanted some pleasures we now enjoy, or have possessed them
in a less degree. Those things in nature which we cannot reconcile to the
foregoing opinion, as being ignorant of their use, we have good reason, from
analogy, to believe are really advantageous, and adapted to the happiness of
intelligent beings of the system; though we have not so full and complete a
knowledge of the entire system, as to be able to point out their
particularities. From these observations we may conclude, that all the various
parts of our system are so admirably suited to one another, and the whole
contrived with such exquisite wisdom, that were any thing, in any part thereof,
in the least otherwise than it is, without an alteration in the whole, there
would be a less sum of happiness in the system than there now is."

I have now said all that I intended to say in illustration of the supremely
perfect benevolence of the Deity, as also in solving the objections which have
been made against this attribute of his from the known appearances in nature.
How far what I have offered, may be worthy of notice, must be left with those
into whose hands it may fall, to judge. If any should think the arguing is
inconclusive, finding themselves, at the same time, unable to reconcile the
manifestations of Divine goodness with the character of God, as infinitely
benevolent, let them not, on this account, question in their hearts whether he
is endowed with this most amiable perfection. For there is no way of reasoning,
by which we can prove that he possesses any perfection, but it may in the same
way be proved, that he is supremely benevolent. Nor would it be any thing
strange should we, who are so low an order in the scale of intelligent beings,
be unable to remove away these difficulties that may attend, in some instances,
the display of this Divine attribute. Instead therefore of perplexing our own
minds, or the minds of others, with seeming inconsistencies in God's
manifestations of his goodness, let us adore before him as a Being infinitely
benevolent; patiently waiting for the coming day of revelation, when it shall
be made to appear with a meridian lostre, that nothing was ever done in the
conduct of God toward our world but in harmony with wise goodness, accurate
justice, and the most perfect consistency with all those moral qualities, which
constitute the blessed God an infinitely amiable Being.

FINIS.

