THOUGHTS ON TAXATION, IN A LETTER TO A FRIEND. WITH OBSERVATIONS and
REFLECTIONS on the consequences resulting from the proposed Plan, humbly
submitted to the good People of the State of NEW YORK.

NEW YORK; Printed by WEBSTER and M'LEAN, No. 32, Maiden-Lane. M, DCC, LXXXIV.

22d December, 1783. DEAR SIR,
FROM the various conversations that we have had on the subject of taxation,
and still more from the absurd notions that many of your neighbors have
entertained on this matter, in imagining that the income of their farms would
scarcely be sufficient to defray the certain annual demand to pay the principal
and interest of the foreign foederal and internal debt, as well as the absolute
and necessary expense of government, I am induced to offer a Scheme whereby it
will appear, that a sum far exceeding whatever possibly could be imagined would
be required, might be raised without oppressing the inhabitants of Town or
Country; and that too, in so simple and intelligible a manner, that every
person, even of the meanest capacity, may comprehend and digest the whole: but
as the sum specified can never be wanted nor required by the State, one quarter
part of this proposed tax is here, by specimen, submitted to the consideration
of yourself and friends; and if you should think it worthy of being given to
the Public at large, I have no objection; as I should be infinitely happy in
contributing my small mite toward the general good and prosperity of this
flourishing and Independent State.

I am with great regard, Dear Sir, Your most obedient Servant,...

To S -- S --, Esquire -- County.
A SCHEME
TO raise One Million of Pounds annually, within the State of New York, without
taxing arable, wood land, or meadows; neither horses, nor cattle of any kind;
much less silver plate, watches, etc. Also to remove the pernicious custom of
false oaths, and smuggling, by a just and equitable Taxation; which would
render this State the most happy of the Thirteen; since it would neither pay a
land tax, nor customs, excise, or assessment on goods imported from any part of
the world.

IN the year 1776, the Province of New York, was said to contain two hundred
and fifty thousand inhabitants, amongst which there must have been at least
sixty thousand sencible men: let us suppose that on a medium in seven years,
two thirds of this number had children annually; and that in the said period
two hundred thousand had died, including such as fell in battle, expired in
jail, or were early taken away: likewise, that the number of emigrants, who had
come from different parts of Europe, with their offspring, after having been
residents in this State, amounted to twenty thousand; then the State of
New York, (the latter end of this year 1783,) ought to contain three hundred
and fifty thousand souls, which, according to the usual way of reckoning, would
require fifty thousand houses to hold them. Whereof let us suppose four
thousand two hundred in New York, as they stood computed in the year aforesaid,
although greatly diminished since; and those taxed from ten That is to say on
houses that rent from forty to two hundred pounds
to fifty pounds each in proportion to the annual rent, classed in nine or ten
different classes, they would produce at a medium the annual revenue of L.
126,000 Wharfs, warehouses, etc. to be rated in a like proportion of income,
would yield at least. 19,200 Five thousand eight hundred houses in Albany, and
the various Towns along the North River, as well as throughout Long Island, and
West-Chester, taxed at forty shillings to ten pounds each, they would produce
on a medium. 34,800 Forty thousand houses in the Country, throughout all the
Counties in the State, and on farms of various value and extent, proportioned
in some degree to the supposed worth of the farm; or rather, to prevent
disputes by comparison, to be divided into twelve or thirteen classes: they
might be taxed from twenty shillings to twenty-five pounds each, and on a
medium would produce a revenue of 520 Carried over L. 700,000 Brought over L.
700,000 Duties on goods and all manner of luxuries, reckoning at twenty
shillings per head, and deducting one seventh part of the number, for infants
at the breast, and the poor who are unable to pay, would produce 300,000 L.
1,000,000

BUT in order to prevent smuggling, which might greatly lessen the amount of
duties, let us suppose the above sum of L. 300,000, was to be levied on the
individuals by a tax, called the Equivalent of Duties, in much the same
proportion as houses are taxed; that is to say, from one shilling to forty
shillings each person, according to the respective ability of the inhabitant;
and let all duties, imposts, and every other rate be done away: so that the
country shall be free and open to receive goods from the whole world, without
payment of any custom, toll, or assessment whatever.

SINCE nothing can be more destructive to the morals of a people, than the
encouragement which seems to be given to perjury by the common forms of a
Custom-House, and even with that infamous clog, it would be impossible to
prevent smuggling on so extensive a shore, unless such a number of Costom-House
Officers were employed as might become dangerous to the constitution, as well
as disgusting and oppressive to the inhabitants, no good man could have, nor
ought to make any reasonable resistance to this mode of levying the duties.

BESIDES a tax of this kind might be made exceedingly useful, in as much as on
any emergency it could be even doubled without being greatly felt; whereas that
upon houses would be oppressive if it greatly exceeded what is here proposed.

ON the contrary, as soon as the internal and federal State debt was paid, the
tax on houses in the Country, Towns and Cities, ought to be reduced in
proportion to the terms stated, and the wants of the State.

AND whereas the number of houses that might be erected yearly, from
henceforward, would greatly increase the revenue, the same should be regulated
in such a manner, that the surplus be proportionably deducted from next year's
tax on houses, or appropriated toward the establishment of a sinking fund,
which might be made the basis of a solid State Bank and Loan Office, whose
profits arising from moneys lent on lands, and bills or notes discounted, would
in a few years be altogether sufficient for the support of our civil
government, and be the means of abrogating and doing away all taxes, as well as
duties whatsoever.

IF it should be objected to the proposed plan, that the calculations would be
found fallacious, in as much as the number of inhabitants, said to be in the
State, is exaggerated; let us deduct one fifth part, or ten thousand houses in
the Country, which we shall suppose is over-rated; and these containing seventy
thousand souls, according to our method of computation, would still leave two
hundred and eighty thousand; a number that we think may be depended and safely
calculated on: the proportion of tax that will fall short of the aforementioned
on houses, will amount to L. 130,000 And for equivalent of duties on sixty
thousand souls less, in the same ratio, 60,000 Charge of collecting eight
hundred thousand pounds, including all salaries, wages, etc. to the persons
employed for that purpose, two and a half percent, 20,000 L. 210,000 So that
there would still result a clear revenue per annum, of 790,000 L. 1,000,000

BUT if one quarter part of the said seven hundred and ninety thousand pounds
only should be required, Taxes collected for the amount in the mode and manner
here before described, (provided the number of souls in the State was found to
correspond even with this last supposition of two hundred and eighty thousand)
would prove a mere bagatelle, and scarcely be felt by the community: to evince
which, I subjoin a specimen of the mode to raise two hundred thousand pounds,
or five hundred thousand Spanish dollars, allowing thirteen classes in the
Country, and that each householder holder must contribute according to the
number of the class wherein he is ranked, viz.

L. s d L. s d No. I. To pay for House tax per annum, 0 5 0 For Equivalent of
duties, supposing seven souls at threepence each, 0 1 9 0 6 9 II. House tax
per annum, 0 15 0 Equivalent ditto, 7, at 1 s each, 0 7 0 1 2 III. House tax
per annum, 1 5 0 Equivalent ditto, 7, at 1 s 9 d 0 12 3 1 17 IV. House tax per
annum, 1 15 0 Equivalent ditto, 7, at 2 s 6 d 17 6 2 12 6 V. House tax per
annum, 2 5 0 Equivalent ditto, 7, at 3 s 4 d 1 3 4 3 8 4 VI. House tax, per
annum, 2 15 0 Equivalent ditto, 7, at 4 s 2 d 1 9 2 4 4 2 VII. House tax per
annum, 3 5 0 Equivalent ditto, 7, at 5 s 1 15 0 5 0 0 VIII. House tax per
annum, 3 15 0 Equivalent ditto, 7, at 5 s 10 d 2 0 10 5 15 10 Carried over L.
24 6 7 Brought over L. 24 6 -- No. IX. House tax per annum, 4 5 0 Equivalent
ditto, 7, at 6 s 8 d 2 6 8 6 11 8 X. House tax per annum, 4 15 0 Equivalent
ditto, 7, at 7 s 6 d 2 12 6 7 7 6 XI. House tax per annum, 5 5 0 Equivalent
ditto, 7, at 8 s 4 d 2 18 4 8 3 4 XII. House tax per annum, 5 15 0 Equivalent
ditto, 7, at 9 s 2 d 3 4 2 8 19 2 XIII. House tax per annum, 6 5 0 Equivalent
ditto, 7, at 10 s 3 10 0 9 15 0 L. 65 3 3

NOW thirteen houses, at the medium of three pounds five shillings each, will
produce L. 42 5 0 AND ninety-one souls contained or supposed to live therein,
at five shillings each, 22 15 0 L. 65 0 0

THEREFORE the foregoing is the most exact computation that could be made
without introducing fractional parts of a penny, which has been purposely
avoided: and it is to be observed also, that merely to form a calculation, each
family has been reckoned to consist of seven souls, that is to say the master,
mistress, and five children, or servants; but let the number be more or less,
the householder has only to pay the equivalent tax in proportion to that of
which his family consists.

NO one can doubt but that those who have hitherto had the direction of
assessing for a County and Poor rate, are capable to make a proper
distribution, or arrange the different classes here proposed: for it is only
required to divide the number of householders by thirteen, and let all who
formerly paid the least, amounting in number to one thirteenth part of the
whole, come into No. I. or the lowest class; and those who contributed the most
or greatest sum, into No. XIII. or the highest class: the medium and different
gradations can therefore be easily ascertained, a due respect being had to the
supposed worth of a man's real or personal estate in the country, and to the
rent at which the house lets in the City and Towns.

OBSERVATIONS AND REFLECTIONS ON THE FOREGOING PLAN OF TAXATION, HUMBLY
SUBMITTED TO THE GOOD PEOPLE OF THIS STATE OF NEW YORK.
THE simplicity of the Tax is perhaps one of the principal points of view in
which it can be recommended to public notice: it cannot be difficult for the
Assessors appointed by government, or chose by the unanimous voice of the
people, to arrange the inhabitants of each County, District, or Town, into the
proposed or a greater number of classes, without giving the least disgust or
showing any partiality in the manner; and when that is done, every member of
the community will exactly know the quota assigned to him, and cheerfully
submit to share in the public burden: whilst it may prevent altercation in
respect to one man's farm or estate being rated beyond what the due proportion
will bear to another, the natural desire of being placed in a better light than
perhaps a nice scrutiny into his situation would admit, will cause a laudable
emulation of every householder to prefer a higher rather than a lower class,
and make every one pleased with that which may be allotted him.

IT is well known that the most disagreeable part of all taxes, is the anxious
uncertainty in which it leaves the minds of the taxed; therefore it must be a
consolation to every citizen, to know and be able to calculate for himself, the
sum he owes to his country, as soon as he is made acquainted with the general
demand of the State, and that his share thereof will not depend on the
erroneous judgment of an Assessor. The burden of such a tax, if it may be
called by that name, becomes much lighter in consequence of its simplicity, and
every citizen of the State may be truly said to be his own Assessor; an
advantage hitherto unknown to be enjoyed either in Europe or America.

THE unity and ease of collecting the tax is so obvious, that a preference must
be given to it in opposition to the intricate and uncertain methods practiced
in a neighboring State, as well as in Europe: It is required only to know the
proposed medium in order to assign the lowest and highest tax, and proportion
with mathematical exactness, the sum that each intermediate class must pay: and
what enhances the value of the mode is, that the tax may be raised or
diminished without trouble, without alteration in the fundamental principle,
and without an addition to the number of officers or collectors appointed to
receive the same.

THIS mode of taxation will unite the greatest and most valuable advantages; a
precise and impartial equity in its distribution; an inconsiderable weight on
each individual founded on that very precision; and it will convey to each
master of a house the clear knowledge of what he has to pay: this most useful
knowledge will consequently banish from his mind all dread, and in short become
to the most uninformed citizen, a source of perpetual tranquillity and peace of
mind on that delicate head. If then this tax in all its variations, can be
lessened or raised without its being scarcely felt, and with an expense so
trifling and well ascertained; it must be confessed that those advantages will
undoubtedly be derived from the unity in the plan, as well as from the extreme
simplicity in the execution.

THE burden chiefly, it may be said, will fall on the middle classes of the
people; but who more able to bear it? Will they repine at the small sum
allotted in the specimen to each man's share, when they perceive that the very
poor indeed pay such a trifle? Surely no?

THE richest citizen of New York, will only have to contribute sixteen pounds
per annum, for his house and equivalent tax, whilst a person inhabiting a house
of forty pounds yearly rent, pays two pounds eleven shillings and nine-pence, a
gentleman of the largest landed estate in the country, nine pounds fifteen
shillings, and the poorest householder no more than six shillings and
nine-pence, as has been fully shown; the principal person in Albany, and the
various Towns throughout the State, six pounds, and the poorest mechanic in
them, eleven shillings and nine-pence only.

WHO can therefore complain of the burden or heavy load of taxes, when it is
considered that the duties which might be laid on wines and other luxuries,
would amount, on the consumption of the rich, to perhaps as much as he is taxed
on the whole?

AS it has been before observed, that the chief burden might be thought to
fall on the middle classes of the people, it becomes necessary to remark, that
the middle classes are by far the most numerous, the most-thriving, and those
on whose labor principally depends the strength, the aggrandizement, and in
short the population of the State: far happier in that as well as in many other
instances are we than the Europeans, whose government hardly admits but of two
extremes, and know not that respectable class we here denominate middling! That
class of true American freeholders, equally removed from the danger of
possessing riches and the meaness of poverty; who, independent and free, till
the soil which belongs to them, embellish the earth, convert the hideous swamp
into pleasing meadows; and in the purity of their manners as well as in their
unbiassed, unprejudiced turn of mind, become and are in fact the nursery of our
most valuable class of citizens industrious and neat at home, brave in the
field, sagacious and proper to fill the different municipal stations of
government which may be confered on them.

WE have only to add that the expense of collecting the proposed tax, is
trifling in comparison to any other mode that can be devised: For let us
suppose that the assessors would cheerfully undertake to make the arrangement
without fee or reward, will not any man be glad to collect, in his particular
town or district, the whole tax for two and a half per cent. on the whole
amount? Which of course would bring in so much clear money to government, free
from every other charge.

SINCE therefore it is evident that a sufficiency for the exigencies of the
State may in this manner be raised without taxing the land; will it not be of
infinite service to the community in general to adopt the plan? Will it not be
the means of drawing from all parts of Europe the most valuable subjects and
citizens for an infant State, men of industry, acquainted with agriculture and
the arts, and who, having groaned under oppression in their own country, would
taste in a superior degree the sweets of liberty in this? And who, from a
desire to obtain the luxuries as well as the necessaries of life, would be
pressed on, by natural impulse, to the utmost exertions of skill in their
various professions.

WILL not the lands within this State being excused from paying any tax, prove
equal, if not superior to a bounty granted on the exportation of grain, which
in another country has produced so wonderful an effect? And in a State occupied
chiefly by farmers or improvers of the land, would put it on a much more
excellent footing than its neighbors; and enable the merchant to export the
produce on such reasonable terms as might greatly affect the imports both in
price and quantity, to the no small emolument and advantage of every individual
of the community.

LET us on the other hand consider the high and distinguished character which
this State will thereby obtain among the nations in Europe, or wherever it
shall be known throughout the world, that the arable, woodland and meadows, are
exempt from taxes; that the manufactures and various productions of the
universe may be admitted into it, without payment of any duties; and that the
inhabitants liberally provide for their own internal demands without burthening
the foreigner. What idea then must foreigners conceive of such a country, where
besides all those advantages, they are protected both in their civil and
religious rights? We are lost in contemplation, and ready, to declare, that no
one who is unacquainted with freedom, and that liberality of mind which
naturally accompanies it, can conceive or understand so excellent a
constitution!

ANOTHER very important matter for the consideration of the good people of this
State is, that were the mode of taxation, here proposed, to take place, the
value of land throughout the whole, would certainly increase, and be enhanced
by the free enjoyment of it, without burden or load on the cultivator; whilst
at the same time the tax itself would most certainly gradually diminish,
according to the number of houses that might be erected and raised by the new
comers, as well as the former possessors; whose progeny, being chiefly brought
up in the same line and manner of life, would require of course ^^^arate
habitations as they grew up: far from repining at such (...) tax, the farmer
will on the contrary rejoice in the consideration that if his dwelling pays so
much a year toward the support of a just and mild government, that very house
is his castle, the sacred asylum wherein resides his family, unexposed to the
prying eye of an Exciseman, and freed from all obtrusion inconsistent with
civil liberty; that the produce of his fields may circulate free from all
imposts until shipped for foreign markets, and that his lands, vast and fertile
as they may be, will owe nothing to any Potentate, King, or Lord on earth, save
only gratitude to the Lord God of all lands.

IT is well known by those who have traveled in Europe, that it is not so much
the real burden of the tax which oppresses, as the mode of collecting it, the
amazing expense attending the collection, and the particular objects on which
taxes are laid: these are the great evils which kill young industry, bring on
despair and discouragement, open wide the pernicious door of contraband, which
leads to an infinity of false oaths and frauds an evil which finally ruins the
morals of the people.

ON the contrary, this simple tax leaving every effort of the human genius
uncontrouled and free, (an object of the utmost importance in this young
country) damping no schemes whatever, either rural or commercial, but offering
to man's industry an unrestrained career, could be truly said to operate as no
taxes ever operated before, and that it would abundantly enable government to
act with becoming dignity, without exhausting any of the vital juices of
society, impeding any branch of commerce, or discouraging any advantageous
scheme whatever.

IN the City, the inhabitants whether Merchants or Mechanics (...), no matter
what goods I import, what channel of trade I pursue; no matter what is my
craft, or the industry of my hands, I may trade on and work, find out new
openings in commerce, invent new powers in mechanism; Government like an
indulgent parent, will not lay a burden on this or that article, this or that
branch of industry; it will not establish monopolies which enrich some, whilst
they condemn others to dearth and penury: my hands, my genius, my faculties, my
experience, all, all is free.

WHILST ploughing his furrow, the honest husbandman will say, praise and long
duration to that government which marks my dwelling place only, for a just,
equal, and unavoidable tax, and leaves at the same time my lands, my meadows,
my cattle, my crops, unincumbered and free: ought not I to purchase by some
consideration the undisturbed sweet repose which this very house affords me and
mine! It has been the place of my nativity, the substantial and neat shelter
which my father erected against the severities of winter, and the scorching
heats of the summer; it is the roof under which dwells all that is dear to me;
it is that which gives me a rank amongst men, and makes me to be called an
inhabitant of such a district: blessed be that mode of taxation, which insures
us a new branch of civil happiness! Since it produces the necessary supplies;
since it is either lessened or raised by the single stroke of a pen; since
every citizen pays but in a due proportion to what he possesses; since no part
of it goes to feed rich and unfeeling Financiers, and a numerous train of
Officers, who in so many parts of the world consume a quarter part of the taxes
raised, and fatten with impunity on the very blood of the people.

IF then the Merchant, the Mechanic, the Artificer, the Farmer find in this
mode of taxation nothing which can require any extraordinary exertions of
industry to pay the sum demanded, there will be no dread or apprehension of the
hour of assessment, nor in that of the collection.

AND since the different classes in which the citizens of this State may be
divided, can equally partake of the obvious advantages here proposed, resulting
from this new mode of taxation, as well from the simplicity of its execution,
as the precision of its distribution, let not the novelty of the scheme create
prejudice or prevent its being adopted; for although such be the unhappy
effects of the first appearance of things altogether new and striking, yet the
many and great good consequences arising, it is to be hoped, will banish from
the mind every pre-conceived opinion on the subject, and procure the
attentively reading as well as maturely weighing so important a matter before
the good people of this State gives it a negative: let not the plan be
disregarded and looked on as chimerical, or romantic, before their minds have
given it that due share of attention and serious consideration, which so
interesting a subject requires: let it be said for the first time, and perhaps
the only instance in the world, that in this State of New York, we have LANDS
WITHOUT TAXES, AND CITIES WITHOUT CUSTOM-HOUSES.

WHAT a train of complicated and perhaps envious thoughts will not this short
phrase raise, not only in the minds of our neighbors but even in that of the
Europeans who are attentively attending to our new polity: this is the
important moment, when our Legislators, the new Fathers of this new State, must
in all the extent of their understandings, in the multiplicity of ideas already
known, search for the simplest and least burdensome manner of taxing ^s.

LET then the City Merchant, the Mechanic, and the honest Husbandman, seriously
revolve in his mind the different observations herein contained: if the pomp of
eloquence and the beauties of style be banished from this small pamphlet, it is
because the few simple truths on which the scheme is built, and here proposed
for the inspection of the Public, should, in being less adorned, become more
striking and convincing.

SHOULD this plan succeed or give birth to any other as simple and as easy to
be executed for the public good, the Writer will have reason to bless the hour
which brought first the idea to his mind, and gave him an opportunity to show
his good will toward contributing his poor mite to the general welfare and
happiness of a State, wherein he has the honor to be

A CITIZEN.
2d February, 1784.
ERRATUM -- In page 6, last Line, in place of L. 520 -- read L. 520,000.


