THE LIVES AND DYING CONFESSIONS OF RICHARD BARRICK, AND JOHN SULLIVAN,
HIGHWAY ROBBERS. TOGETHER WITH THE LAST WORDS OF ALEXANDER WHITE, MURDERER and
PIRATE, Who were Executed at CAMBRIDGE, on THURSDAY, November 18, 1784.

PRINTED and Sold at WORCESTER. Sold also by EDWARD HOUGHTON, POST-RIDER.

The LIFE of RICHARD BARRICK.
I RIHCARD BARRICK, was born in Ireland, in the month of February, in the year
1763, and brought up at the Foundling-Hospital: I never could read nor write.
At ten years of age I went as an Apprentice to James Saunders, a Silk-weaver in
Spittlefield Parish, lived with my master about three years, but he starved and
froze me almost to death, for which I left him, and roved through the streets,
and frequently stole small things from shop-windows.

I went to Saltpeter Bank, and joined a gang of thieves. We stole from many
people for the space of a year; when I was taken up for stealing a
handkerchief, and carried before the Lord Mayor of London, who sent me to Gaol;
I was tried and found not innocent; was complimented with thirteen stripes,
which is continental colors, signifying, that I should be honored in America
with the Hibernian coat of arms, that is, two sticks rampant, one couchant, a
string pendant, and an Irishman at the end of it.

I joined my old gang again, and continued picking pockets for a year, and then
was taken up and committed to Gaol, and lay there eleven weeks for trial; then
I was tried and found guilty. They told me they would pardon me if I would
enter on board one of his Majesty's ships; this I consented to, but made my
escape before I got to the ship. I returned back to Saltpeter Bank, where I
joined my old companions in iniquity; went on picking pockets for six months,
and was apprehended on suspicion of Robbery, and was sent on board a vessel, in
which I came to New York.

Then I deserted and went to Long Island, and lived with Mr. Volentine
Williams; I left him and lived with Mr. Kirk fifteen months, intending to learn
the Paper-making business. During this time, I was as honest as the times would
allow. I left Mr. Kirk, and went to Horse-Neck, intending to go to the place
from whence I came, and follow my old trade of Basket Making.

Soon after this I and my comrades went to Long Island, with an intent to rob
James Ulits; but the weather being very severe, we turned back. On our return
we met with a British vessel which we boarded and carried her into Stanford. We
then went back to Mr. Ulits, in the night, and told him he must get up, for his
brother's child was very sick. -- He supposing us to be robbers, called for his
firelock: We then forced in at the windows, and demanded his money. He said he
had none; but his wife asked us how much we wanted? I answered one hundred
pounds, Mr. Ulit went down cellar with a light in his hand, and we followed
him; he took a horn from under a hogshead, which contained one hundred and
ninety odd guineas. He then attempted to count out our hundred pounds which we
demanded; but we told him as he made some resistance at first, we would take
all he had. He then gave us another horn, which contained about forty guineas:
Then he gave us a number of dollars. We went out of the house, but soon
concluded that if he had so many guineas, it was more than probable he had some
other sort of gold; therefore we went back and demanded the remainder. -- Then
he gave us another horn containing thirty two half-Joes. we also took his plate
and clothing, to the Value of four hundred dollars.

Soon after this, I was taken and put under guard on Long Island.

The Colonel ordered me from Long Island to New York goal for trial; where I
remained three weeks, and then broke goal.

I returned to Greenwich, and was there re-taken for the same crime, and
carried back to New York.

I broke out the second time and returned to Greenwich.

Then I went to Philadelphia and there I was taken up and committed to goal for
Burglary, and tried for my life; but was acquitted. I was taken back to goal
and had another trial and found guilty of theft. Then I was sent back to the
workhouse, to pick oakum for a month and pay fifteen pounds fine. (It may be
noted here, that I had been confined in the dungeon in Philadelphia six weeks
before.) I tarried in the workhouse one fortnight, and then run away and came
to New York, there I stole a dozen silver spoons, out of a goldsmiths case.
Then went to New Haven, and broke open a shop, and stole goods to the amount of
one hundred dollars: And from thence to New London, and met with one of my old
friends; he and I broke open a house and stole some clothing. Then went to
Providence, and there I stole a watch out of a man's pocket, but was taken; I
gave the man five dollars and his watch, and he said no more about it. I then
went to Boston, and got in company with one Poor; and one John Sullivan (the
latter is now under sentence of death with me) we went to Winter's-Hill, and
there robbed one Mr. Baldwin, for which crime Sullivan and myself are to suffer
Death, as being the just reward of our demerits.

RICHARD BARRICK.

The LIFE of ALEXANDER WHITE, a PIRATE.
THIS is to give satisfaction to all enquiring friends, that I ALEXANDER WHITE,
was born in Ireland, in the County of Tryone, in the year of our Lord one
thousand seven hundred and sixty-two, and was brought up in the said place, and
got what education my parents thought necessary. After I grew up my mind being
inclined to visit strange Countries against my parent's will. I took my
departure from Ireland, and went to England, and bound myself apprentice to
learn the Mariners art, and served my Master faithfully, until it pleased him
to give up my indentures.

I still followed the occupation of a Mariner, and improved my education until
I thought fit to take the command of a vessel. I have been through many scenes
of life, and always endeavored to support the character of an honest man, and
believe that I was harmless to any body but myself. It is needless for me to
give an account how I spent my life; for I have been in many parts of the
world, but never did any thing that would cause me to blush, or be ashamed,
before I transacted this horrid crime that I am to suffer for.

If you desire to know what this temptation did arise from; with shame I will
endeavor to inform you: At first when I met with Capt. White it was in
Philadelphia. My money being almost spent, I agreed to go to Nova Scotia with
him. Accordingly we pursued our intended voyage as far as New York, and there
we took on board our cargo, and came to a place called Cow-Harber, in
Long Island, and there tarried some days, and took on board the passenger John
Vail, and sailed quickly from thence.

My mind being very uneasy on account of a young lady whom I proposed to marry,
only the want of money prevented our being joined in the bands of Hymen. Being
below her degree, and being ashamed to own my necessity, prolonged our being
joined in wedlock. But love began to burn my poor and wounded heart; and being
resolved to go through any difficulty that might impede us, I intended to take
the life of my fellow creature; one evening seeing a good opportunity, I took
up an axe, and with it I struck Captain White overboard, and attempted to
murder the passenger also; but when I found I could not accomplish my purpose
surrendered myself a prisoner.

I was confined for some time. Toward morning we fell in with a vessel, which
carried me into Plymouth as a prisoner, and remained for a considerable time,
which I spent in anguish, imploring mercy of God, for the crime I had
committed. I was then sent to Cambridge, and condemned to die by my own
confession: And, agreeable to my inclination (choosing rather to die than
live.) Time would fail me to give a particular account of this affair; but this
is the truth that I have set forth, which I declare as a dying man.

ALEXANDER WHITE.

The LIFE of JOHN SULLIVAN.
I JOHN SULLIVAN, was born in Ireland in the town of Limrick; was eighteen
years old last April.

I inlisted as a solder in the British service in the year 1777, and took 5
pounds bounty; the Captain's name was Thomas, in the 36th regiment. Went to
Bristol, in order to join the army but deserted.

I then went to Wales with an intent to inlist the second time, but altered my
mind, and entered on board the Ceres frigate, in the king's service, bound to
New York: I staid on board near three weeks, and then deserted. I went to
Long Island, and there was pressed on board a Vessel, staid on board eleven
weeks, and then deserted.

I entered on board a sloop bound to New York* but hauled in at Loyd's-Neck:
When I landed I was discovered and pursued, by the Doctor of my former vessel;
he was on horseback, and drove me into the water, but I was oblidged to come
on shore and surrender; I then received thirty-nine lashes.

The same night I deserted and swam to another vessel, commanded by one Kelley:
the master and I combined together, and stole the vessel, carried her into
Stonington and sold her: I received about three hundred dollars for my share.

From Stonington I went to New London, and entered on board a privateer John
Buckley commander: I tarried on board three months; we took some prizes. I then
entered on board another privateer, commanded by James Woodworth; after a
month's cruise was taken by the British, and carried into New York, and put on
board the Guard-ship, where I remained three days, and then was put on board
the Lesophe, where I remained eleven weeks: She came to Staten-Island, where I
deserted. I went from thence to Ma^inock, where I was hailed by a small party,
and ordered to (...): I had a firelock with me, and fired on them, but they
took me prisoner, and carried me to Horse-Neck, where Col. Camfield commanded;
the Col. examined me and gave me a pass to go to Stanford, where I became
acquainted with Barrick, who is condemned to die with me.

In August one thousand seven hundred and eighty two I happened to fall in
company with a lad; he and I laid down to rest. After he got to sleep I
searched his pockets, and stole one guinea and a crown. After this I entered on
board a whale-boat with the person I stole from, we went a cruize and came into
Stonington, where I was accused of stealing the guinea and crown, but denied
it: They searched me and found the money tied up in the tail of my shirt; they
cut off my shirt-tail and left me. I went to Col. Daverport and he gave me a
pass to New London. I there entered on board a privateer commanded by Isaac
Warner. We went about eight days cruise, and by distress of weather got
dismasted: Our vessel being a wreck, and enable to defend ourselves, we were
taken by a British vessel and carried to Burmudas. I then engaged with the
Captain who took me prisoner, to go to sea with him. I took twenty dollars
bounty. I never went on board after I received the money and clothes, but rode
off on my ten toes and left them.

I went about seven miles to a piece called Cole-Lane, and engaged to go on
board a privateer, took twenty-four dollars from the Captain and then bid them
good night. I next went to St. George's; there I entered on board another
privateer, Captain Hall commander, and took twenty-four dollars bounty, we went
five weeks cruise and then returned to Burmudas. Being destitute of every
thing, I endeavored to help myself to that which Solomon says will answer all
things; and knowing that one Gutherege kept a store there, I took a partner
with me and broke it open, where we found a barrel of dollars; we took our
pockets and hats full, then went to a place called Salt Kettles, and changed
the silver for gold.

Three weeks after this I entered on board Captpunc; Vezey, bound to St.
Thomas's: -- Peace being proclaimed, I went to North Carloina. I went from
thence to Portsmouth, where I went to work three weeks: then I and my partner
broke open a store in the day time, and took out twenty-four half-joes and some
silver; my comrade was taken up on suspicion and carried before a Justice, but
made his escape; and as I was not suspected, was sent to catch him; I followed
on until I overtook him, and he and I contrived the matter between us, that he
gave me his shoes and buckels to carry and tell the injured people that I
pursued him so close that he was obliged to drop his shoes and buckels, and for
this piece of villainy they rewarded (what they falsely called) my fidelity
with two dollars.

I then went to Baltimore and entered myself on board a pilot boat, a^^ went to
Philadelphia: I then entered myself on board a transport bound to Scotland. I
suspected there was money on board, nor was my suspicion groundless, for I and
one more found a chest, and breaking it open, took out 40 pounds, then made our
escape to New York.

Soon after this I got a new comrade, and we broke open a shop, and took out
the value of 100 pounds in money and watches. I then went to Newbury-Port,
where I entered on board Capt Wheelwright, bound to the West Indies. When I
arrived there, I went into a trader's shop and took to the value of 40 pounds
in goods. Soon after this I took another comrade, and walking out we met: a man
in the road: We told him we wanted some money and some we would have; he gave
us three crowns. I then returned to Boston.

On Friday night before Commencement, Barrick and I went to Roxbury with an
intent to rob any person, but we were disappointed. The next Monday night we
went upon the old errand, but no booty. Soon after this we went to
Winter's-Hill, and there we fell in with one Mr. Baldwin, and robbed him of his
watch and money. I took the watch out of Mr. Baldwin's pocket, but Poor (the
fellow who turned States Evidence) was the man that abused and gave him heavy
blows. For this last crime I am to suffer death. -- These are the most capital
crimes I have committed, and I sincerely wish that others may avoid the rocks
on which I have split.

JOHN SULLIVAN.


