AN HISTORICAL NARRATIVE AND TOPOGRAPHICAL DESCRIPTION OF LOUISIANA, AND
WEST-FLORIDA, COMPREHENDING THE RIVER MISSISSIPPI WITH. ITS PRINCIPAL BRANCHES
AND SETTLEMENTS, AND THE RIVERS PEARL, PASCAGOULA, MOBILLE, PERDIDO, ESCAMBIA,
CHACTA-HATCHA, etc.

THE CLIMATE, SOIL, AND PRODUCE WHETHER ANIMAL, VEGETABLE, OR MINERAL; WITH
Directions for Sailing into all the Bays, Lakes, Harbors and Rivers on the
North Side of the Gulf of Mexico, and for Navigating between the Islands
situated along that Coast, and ascending the Mississippi River.

BY THOMAS HUTCHINS, GEOGRAPHER TO THE UNITED STATES.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, AND SOLD BY ROBERT AITKEN, NEAR THE
COFFEE-HOUSE, IN MARKET-STREET.

M.DCC.LXXXIV.

THE PREFACE
SEVERAL years residence in the Province of WestFlorida, during which I entered
into a minute examination of its coasts, harbors, lakes, and rivers, having
made me perfectly acquainted with their sit^^tion, bearings, soundings, d every
particular requisite to be known by Navigators, for their benefit I am induced
to make my observations public. The expense and trouble at which this knowledge
has been acquired, are far from inconsiderable; however, if the accurate
surveys and descriptions I am thereby enabled to give, prove instructive and
beneficial to my country, I shall esteem myself amply repaid.

It may be proper to observe that I have had the assistance of the remarks and
surveys, so far as relates to the mouths of the Mississippi and the coast and
soundings of West-Florida, of the late ingenious Mr. George Gauld, a Gentleman
who was employed by the Lords of the British Admiralty for the express purpose
of making an accurate chart of the abovementioned places.

I have also had recourse, in describing some parts of the Mississippi, to the
publication of Captain Pitman, who resided many years on that river, and was
well acquainted with the country through which it flows.

A particular detail of the advantages that may in time accrue to the
possessors of West-Florida, with a complete description of the country and its
productions, would not make an improper addition to the following work; but as
the more immediate purpose of it is to point out the dangers of its coasts to
the approaching mariner, I shall confine the cursory remarks I make on those
heads, to such particulars only as are most deserving of notice.

Before I enter on the prosecution of my design, I would just observe, that I
shall be more solicitous to make the result of my investigations useful than
amusing, I shall endeavor rather to be clear and intelligible than study to
deliver myself in florid language.

AN HISTORICAL AND TOPOGRAPHICAL DESCRIPTION, etc.
A DESCRIPTION of the river Mississippi and the country through which it flows,
called Louisiana, would have been the first objects submitted to the reader's
attention; were it not humbly presumed that a short account of the discovery of
the river Mississippi, and a view of the different States to which its banks
have been subjected are judged necessary, before their description is attempted.

Discovery of the Mississippi.
The merit of first discovering the river Mississippi, (or in the language of
the natives, Meschasipi, for the general appellation of the former is a
corruption of the latter) according to Lewis Hennepin's account published in
London School, is due to the Sieur la Salle, who discovered that river in 1682.
It seems that father Hennepin forgot that this river was previously discovered
by Ferdinand de Soto in 1541, also by Col. Wood in 1654, and by Captain Bolt in
1670. Monsieur de la Salle was the first who traversed that river. Arrival and
murder of la Salle.
In the spring of the same year 1682, he passed down to the mouths of the
Mississippi; he afterward remounted that river, and returned to Canada in the
month of October following, from whence he took his passage to France, where he
gave so flattering an account of the advantages that would certainly accrue
from the settling a colony in those parts, that a company was formed for
carrying those designs into execution, with a squadron consisting of four
vessels; having on board a sufficient number of persons, and all kinds of goods
and provisions, necessary for the service of the new colony, which he proposed
to fix at or near the mouth of the Mississippi. But having sailed beyond the
mouth of the river, he attempted to fix a colony at the bay of St. Bernard,
where he arrived the 18th of February 1684, about 100 leagues westward of the
Mississippi. There his men underwent such hardships that most of them perished
miserably. The leader, animated with an ardent desire of extending his
discoveries, made various excursions with such of them who were able to travel;
but on the 19th of March 1687, two of his men villainously murdered him, when
exploring the interior parts of the country, in search of mines, and of the
tract which led to those of St. Barbe in New Mexico.

Ibberville's Arrival.
About seven years after, Mons. Ibberville, a respectable officer in the French
navy, undertook to execute whatever La Salle had promised; and his reputation
being established already, the court entrusted him with the conduct of the
project. He carried his people very safely to the mouth of the great river, and
there laid the foundation of the first colony the French ever had in the
Mississippi. He took care to provide them with every thing necessary for their
subsistence, and obliged them to erect a fort, for their defense against the
Indians. This being done, he returned to France in order to obtain supplies.

The success of his voyage made him extremely welcome at court, and he was soon
in a condition to put to sea again. His second voyage was as fortunate as the
first; but very unluckily for his colony, he died whilst he was preparing for
the third. The design might have been abandoned, had not Crozat, a private man
of an immense fortune, undertaken its support at his own expense. Louisiana
granted to Crozat.
In 1712, the King gave him Louisiana. Thus Lewis imitated the Pope, who
divided between the kings of Spain and Portugal the territories of America,
where the holy see had not one inch of ground.

Bounds of Louisiana.
In this grant the bounds are fixed by the Illinois river and the lake of that
name on the North; by Carolina on the East, the gulf of Mexico on the South,
and New Mexico on the West. As to Canada, or New France, the French court would
scarcely admit it had any other northern boundary than the Pole. The avidity of
Great Britain was equal, but France having been unfortunate in the war of 1710,
the northern boundary of Limits of Louisiana and Canada by the treaty of
Utrecht.
Canada was fixed by the treaty of Utrecht in 1713. It assigns New Britain and
Hudson's Bay, on the North of Canada, to Great Britain; and commissioners
afterward on both sides ascertained the limits by an imaginary line, running
from a cape or promontory in New Britain to the Atlantic ocean, in 58 degrees
30 minutes North latitude, thence Southwest to the lake Misgosink or Mistasim;
from thence farther South-west directly to the latitude of 49 degrees. All the
lands to the North of the imaginary line, being assigned to Great Britain; and
all southward of that line, as far as the river of St. Laurence, to the French.
These were at that time, the true limits of Louisiana and Canada, Crozat's
grant not subsisting long after the death of Lewis XIV.

Crozat's grant vacated.
In order to have some plausible pretense for setting on foot a project for
changing the face of public affairs in France, this settlement was thought the
most convenient; and therefore all imaginable pains were taken to represent it
as a paradise, and place from whence inexhaustible riches might be derived,
provided due encouragement could be obtained from government. For this purpose
it was thought requisite that a new company should be erected, to make way for
which Mr. Crozat was to resign his grant; which he did accordingly.

This occasioned the noise that was made about the Mississippi, not in France
only, but throughout all Europe, which was filled with romantic stories of the
vast fruitfulness of the banks of this great river, and the incredible wealth
that was likely to flow from thence; and those accounts, though true in part,
in the end proved ruinous to many.

Bounds of Louisiana before the peace of 1762.
Before the treaty of peace in 1762, Louisiana, or the southern part of New
France, extended in the French maps from the gulf of Mexico, in about 29
degrees, to near 45 degrees of North latitude, on the West of the Mississippi,
and to near 39 degrees on its eastern bank. Its boundaries were Canada on the
North; New York, Pennsylvania, Maryland, Virginia, North and South Carolina,
Georgia, and the North-west part of the easternmost peninsula of Florida, on
the East; the Gulf of Mexico on the South; and lastly the kingdom of New Mexico
on the West.

Absurd claims.
The European states having observed that kings and republics claimed the
sovereignty of every tract which had been seen, and were pretended to have been
discovered by navigators sailing under their flags, their geographers were not
permitted to publish maps which might have contradicted such wild claims. This
was the absurdity of former days. But political circumstances often emboldened
pretenders to urge their chimerical rights; and their no less chimerical
opponents then yielded what the had no better right to cede. But the absurd
reco^^ion of such absurd pretensions is but a temporary compliance. It ever did
and ever will sow the seeds of implacable animosities and contentions, until
pre-occupancy and cultivation, the true rests of lawful possession, shall have
remedied the former invalidity of the claim.

Both sides of the Mississippi continued under the dominion of his most
Christian Majesty till the peace of 1762, when the eastern side was ceded to
the king of Great Britain by the 7th article of the definitive treaty, in the
following words. "In order to re-establish peace on solid and durable
foundations, Division line between the French and English in 1762.
and to remove for ever all subject of dispute with regard to the limits of the
British and French territories on the continent of America, it is agreed, that
for the future, the confines between the dominions of his Britannic Majesty, in
that part of the world, shall be fixed irrevocably by a line drawn along the
middle of the river Mississippi, from its source to the river Ibberville, and
from thence, by a line drawn along the middle of this river, and the Lakes
Maurepas and Ponchartrain, to the sea; and for this purpose the most Christian
King cedes in full right, and guaranties to his Britannic Majesty, the river
and port of the Mobille, and every thing which he possesses, or ought to
possess, on the left side of the river Mississippi, except the town of New
Orleans, and the island in which it is situated, which shall remain to France;
provided that the navigation of the river Mississippi shall be equally free, as
well to the subjects of Great Britain, as to those of France, in its whole
length, from its source to the sea, and expressly that part which is between the
said island of New Orleans, and the right bank of that river, as well as the
passage both in and out of its mouth: it is further stipulated that the vessels
belonging to the subjects of either nation, shall not be stopped, visited, or
subjected to the payment of any duty whatsoever. The stipulations inserted in
the 4th article, in favor of the inhabitants of Canada, shall also take place
with regard to the inhabitants of the countries ceded by this article."

The cession of his Christian Majesty to Spain.
In the year 1762, and the day before the preliminary articles to the peace
were signed, his Christian Majesty ceded to Spain all his territories on the
western side of the Mississippi, together with the town of New Orleans, and the
peninsula in which it is situated on the eastern bank. But the inhabitants of
Louisiana were ignorant of this cession before the year 1764, when Mr.
D'Abbadie, then governor, published the king's letter to him on that subject,
mentioning the date of the cession, and containing a declaration that he had
stipulated with Spain that the French laws and usages should not be altered.

Bounds by the Definitive Treaty of 1783.
The definitive treaty, between Great Britain and the United States of America,
signed at Paris the 3d day of September 1783, runs as follows:

ARTICLE 1. His Britannic Majesty acknowledges the said United States, viz.
New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island and Providence Plantations,
Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia,
NorthCarolina, South Carolina, and Georgia, to be free, sovereign, and
independent states; that he treats with them as such, and for himself, his
heirs and successors, relinquishes all claims to the government, property, and
territorial rights of the same, and every part thereof.

ART. 2. And that all disputes which might arise in future, on the subject of
the boundaries of the said United States, may be prevented, it is hereby agreed
and declared, that the following are and shall be their boundaries, viz. From
the North-west angle of Nova Scotia, viz. that angle which is formed by a line
drawn due North from the source of St. Croix river to the Highlands, along the
said Highlands, which divide those rivers that empty themselves into the river
St. Laurence from those which fall into the Atlantic ocean, to the
North-westermost head of Connecticut river; thence down along the middle of
that river to the forty-fifth degree of North latitude; from thence by a line
due West on said latitude, until it strikes the river Irriquois or Cataraqui;
thence along the middle of the said river into Lake Ontario; through the middle
of the said lake until it strikes the communication by water between that lake
and Lake Erie; thence along the middle of said communication into Lake Erie,
through the middle of said lake, until it arrives at the water communication
between that lake and Lake Huron, thence through the middle of said lake to the
water communication between that lake and Lake Superior; thence through Lake
Superior, northward of the Isles Royal and Phelipeaux to the Long Lake; thence
through the middle of said Long Lake and the water communication between it and
the Lake of the Woods, to the said Lake of the Woods, thence through the said
Lake to the most North-western point thereof, and from thence on a due West
course to the river Mississippi; thence by a line to be drawn along the middle
of the said river Mississippi; thence by a line to be drawn along the middle of
the said river Mississippi; until it shall intersect the northernmost part of
the thirty-first degree of North latitude. South, by a line to be drawn due
East from the determination of the line last mentioned in the, latitude of
thirty-one degrees North of the Equator, to the middle of the river
Apalachicola or Catanouche: thence along the middle thereof to its junction
with the Flint-River: thence straight to the head of St. Mary's River: and
thence down along the middle of St. Mary's River to the Atlantic ocean: East,
by a line to be drawn along the middle of the River St. Croix, from its mouth
in the Bay of Fundy to its source, and from its source directly North to the
aforesaid Highlands which divide the rivers that fall into the Atlantic ocean
from those which fall into the River St. Laurence, comprehending all islands
within twenty leagues of any part of the shores of the United States, and lying
between lines to be drawn due East from the points where the aforesaid
boundaries between Nova Scotia on the one part, and East-Florida on the other,
shall respectively touch the Bay of Fundy and the Atlantic ocean, excepting
such islands as now are or heretofore have been within the limits of the said
province of Nova Scotia.

ART. 8. The navigation of the river Mississippi, from its source to the ocean,
shall for ever remain free and open to the subjects of Great Britain, and the
citizens of the United States.

Having mentioned all the boundaries that were at different periods assigned ^^
Louisiana, the conduct of the Spaniards on possessing themselves of that
colony, is to be considered next in course.

Arrival of Don Ulloa at New Orleans with soldiers.
Don Antonio Ulloa arrived at New Orleans about the middle of the year 1766,
but deferred to take possession of the government of the colony in his Catholic
Majesty's name, until he had received special orders to that effect.

In the beginning of the year 1767, two thousand Spanish soldiers were sent
from the Havanna, but he did not then take possession of the country. He sent
however about sixty of these troops to erect two forts, one opposite to the
British fort, named Bute, on the mouth of the Ibberville, and the other on the
western side of the Mississippi, a little below the Natchez, where a detachment
of British troops had taken post; another party was sent in the autumn of 1767
to build a fort at the mouth of the river Missouri; but the commandant had
positive orders not to interfere with the civil government of the Illinois
country, where Mons. de Saint Ange the French commandant continued to command
with about twenty French soldiers. Don Antonio Ulloa, without taking possession
in his Catholic Majesty's name, and consequently without authority from France
or Spain, established monopolies, restricted commerce, and committed several
abuses, which rendered him odious to the colonists. Spaniards obliged to depart
from Louisiana.
At last, on the 29th of October 1768, the council issued a decree to oblige
him and the principal Spanish officers to leave the province in November
following, notwithstanding M. Aubry's remonstrances, and the protest he made
against the edict of the council.

Don Ulloa obnoxions to the people.
Don Ulloa's conduct had rendered him the more obnoxious, as, from the letter
written by the king of France, acquainting Mr. D'Abbadie with the cession he
had made to Spain, it appeared that the two kings had agreed, that Louisiana
should retain her laws, privileges and customs. The French, nay the Spaniards
themselves, all blamed Mr. Aubry's acquiesence; for every one was sensible that
the king of France never would have directed him to treat Don Ulloa with an
obsequiousness which degraded royal authority and the French nation; and that
his instructions could, at most, authorize Mr. Aubry to follow that officer's
advice, until the government of Louisiana should be delivered to Spain.
Whatever entreaties had been used to persuade Don Ulloa to take possession, and
by that measure render the exercise of his authority lawful, he evaded, but did
not cease to oppress; so that he lost the esteem which he had acquired by the
publication of his voyages; and the colonists having been informed of the
severity with which he had governed the city of Quito in Peru, he was only
considered as a tyrant, whose sole merit was to be learned in the mathematics.

Threatened with a prosecution.
The superior council, guided by the Intendant and the Attorney General, having
threatened him with a prosecution, he declared that, at the Balize, Mr. Aubry
had privately delivered to him the command of the colony. As none could
conceive that a clandestine possession ought to authorize the public exercise
of sovereign power, Ulloa's declaration was judged an artifice of the grossest
texture; and Mr. Aubry, who affirmed the declaration to be true, was not
believed. It made him fall into contempt, and emboldened the leaders of the
party which opposed him. Doubts of the public respecting his conduct.
These increased the doubts of the public relative to the cession, and served
to convince every one, that the Spaniards did not seriously intend taking
possession: -- "The cession," said they, ""was made in 1762, the day before the
preliminary articles of peace were signed: near two years elapsed before it was
first known by the king's letter to Mr. D'Abbadie: more than another year
passed before the arrival of Don Ulloa, who has been above two years in the
country and did not yet take possession." If the reflections occasioned by
these circumstances put together; if the conjectures scattered in the English
newspapers, or by the English who came into the country, led the inhabitants
to think that the cession was fictitious, and a state manaeuvre, their fears
were at the same time quieted, since they did not apprehend those evils which
the change of sovereignty makes almost unavoidable, even when the new
government is milder and more favorable. On the other hand, their indignation
was the greater against Don Ulloa, who abused the reasons of state that were
supposed to be the cause of his having been sent to Louisiana; who availed
himself of Mr. Aubry's imbecility, to establish a species of despotism, the
more intolerant, as it shocked the manners of the French nation.

Their want of circumspection.
To put a stop to this tyranny, it would have been sufficient to commence, with
circumspection, a juridical prosecution against him, and inform the ministry of
the proceedings. But the council began by issuing a decree for expelling him
and the Spaniards. To reduce the people to the necessity of supporting that
violence, the leaders excited them to offend the king of Spain, from whom they
had received no injury, and who doubtless would have punished his officer, had
the council proceeded with respect, and used lawful means to transmit to him
their grievances. Indignities, etc. offered.
But, indignities were offered to the Spanish flag; a step which rendered the
insult personal to the king of Spain, and made him overlook his envoy's
misdemeanors. This is not all: the council and the inhabitants sent deputies to
France, Deputies sent to France --
charged them to represent the grievances of the colony to their sovereign, and
supplicate him to retain the province. Their prayers were accompanied with
protestations of devotion and loyalty. But before the departure of these
deputies, the leaders of the faction seduced some members of the council,
secretly sent another deputation to Pensacola; and, without the people's
knowledge, offered Louisiana to Great Britain!

The dread of being called to account, with which the crafty Don Ulloa had
often threatened the Intendant and the Attorney General, that he might obstruct
their prosecutions, and silence them, relatively to his own conduct, was
doubtless the sole cause of that desperate step, the authors of which might
have foreseen the unsuccessful issue, had they not been bereft of their senses.
It is true that there has been no public inquiry on that head; and therefore,
the public has no juridical proof of this fact; but the characteristics of such
inquiry as was made, its terrifying apparatus, its result, and the concerted
silence of those by whom it was directed, sufficiently confirm not only what is
openly said among the English, but what the inhabitants of Louisiana whisper to
each other, when complaining of their miseries with which the perfidiousness of
their leaders had loaded them, though not accomplices of their crimes. It is
also said, that the governor of West-Florida was unwilling to countenance the
treason and revolt of the subjects of a prince then in peace with Great
Britain: it is affirmed that he sent to Mr. Aubry the original offers he had
received, and that Don Ulloa, who had not yet sailed, carried them with him to
Europe for his justification. Why then did not Mr. Aubry produce that paper to
confound the conspirators? They would have been looked upon with execration by
the people whom they had betrayed, and the disturbances would have immediately
subsided. Can it be believed, that the governor of Florida insisted on secrecy,
as it is intimated by some persons who would be glad to apologize for Mr.
Aubry's conduct respecting this matter? Had the intestine divisions, which then
rent the British colonies of North America, induced the British governor to
discover the conspiracy in order to prevent the fatal consequences of so
dangerous an example, would not secrecy have deprived him of the only fruit he
could expect from his policy?

-- Never heard of.
Monsieur de Sacier, one of the council, with two other Gentlemen of the
colony, who were sent to France with the edict of the superior council, and to
implore the protection of the king, as before mentioned, were imprisoned on
their arrival, and have never been heard of since.

During six months, which elapsed before news could be received from Europe,
the unhappy colonists vainly flattered themselves with hopes of being justified
for the steps they had taken by the court of France. Genesis O'Riley's arrival at
the Balize.
On the 23rd of July 1769, news was brought to New Orleans of the arrival of
General O'Riley at the Balize, with eighteen transports, followed by ten more
from the Havanna, having four thousand five hundred troops on board, and loaded
with stores and ammunition. This intelligence threw the town into the greatest
consternation and perp^exity, as but a few days before, letters had arrived
from Europe signifying that the colony was restored to France.

Inhabitants determined to oppose him.
In the general distraction that took place, the inhabitants of the town and
the adjacent plantations determined to oppose the landing of the Spaniards, and
sent couriers requiring the Germans and Acadian Neutrals to join them. On the
24th an express arrived from General O'Riley, which was read by Monsieur Aubry
to the people in church, by this they were informed that he was sent by his
Catholic Majesty to take possession of the colony, but not to distress the
inhabitants; and that when he should be in possession, he would publish the
remaining part of the orders he had in charge from the king his master; and
should any attempt be made to oppose his landing, he was resolved not to depart
until he could put his majesty's commands in execution.

Deputies sent to meet him.
The people, dissatisfied with this ambiguous message, came to a resolution of
sending three deputies to General O'Riley, viz. Messieurs Grandmaison
town-major, La Friniere attorney general, and De Mazant formerly captain in the
colony's troops, and a man of very considerable property; these gentlemen
acquainted him, that the inhabitants had come to a resolution of abandoning the
province, and demanded no other favor than that he would grant them two years
to remove themselves and effects. The general received the deputies with great
politeness, but did not enter into the merits of their embassy, farther than
assuring them, that he would comply with every reasonable request of the
colonists; that he had the interest of their country much at heart, and nothing
on his part should be wanting to promote it; that all part tran^actions should
be buried in oblivion, and all who had offended should be forgiven: to this he
added every thing that he imagined could flatter the expectations of the
people. On the first of August the deputies returned, and made public the kind
reception the general had given them, and the fair promises he had made. The
minds of the people were now greatly tranquilized, and those who had before
determined suddenly to quit their plantations now resolved to remain until
their crops were off the ground.

His arrival and disembarking of the troops at New orleans.
On the 16th of August 1769, General O'Riley with the frigate, transports and
troops on board arrived opposite to New Orleans. On the 18th the troops
disembarked, and the general took possession in form, of New Orleans and the
province of Louisiana, in the name of his Catholic Majesty, as quietly as a
French governor would have done in the happiest times; and on the 25th,
Attorney General and others arrested.
ordered the attorney general and twelve others amongst the principal
inhabitants to be arrested.

Of these thirteen, no more than one was released: this was the printer, who
produced the positive orders which the intendant had given him, for printing
the decree issued against Don Ulloa, and several other writings. A few days
before the proceedings began, a young gentleman nearly related to the attorney
general, and one of the prisoners, feigned a design of forcibly rescuing
himself from the soldiers who guarded him. He received several wounds, which
give him that death which he sought. The proceedings against the eleven others,
were conducted in a military manner by Genesis O'Riley, and the members of the
court were mostly Spanish officers. Sentence of the Council War.
The council of war pronounced their sentence on those proceedings. In vain did
the attorney general and the other prisoners demand to be tried by the French
laws. These would not have proved favorable to their accusers. General O'Riley
was so unjust as to refuse that reasonable request. The attorney general and
four others, who were shot with him, died with for^itude. Had they really
deserved that fate, their condemnation is not the less criminal, in the eyes of
those who are not stupid enough to reverence authority when trampling upon the
laws. The sentence of the court martial dishonours the authors and tools of
that injustice; it dishonours no others.

The six other state prisoners were sent to fort Moro in the island of Cuba,
whence they were released after one year's confinement. The estates of the
eleven persons, who were condemned by the court martial, were confiscated,
according to the practice of most countries; a practice as impolitic as it is
unjust. It reflects disgrace on princes, occasions the impunity of the greatest
crimes, and often multiplies the number of criminals. Many might be virtuous
enough not to skreen a guilty kinsman from justice; but few have sufficient
magnanimity to see with indifference the estate of that kinsman pass into the
prince's coffers, or those of his ministers. How many has not this sole reason
seduced to engage in conspiracies or rebellions, which they would otherwise
have wished to destroy: in such cases it frequently happens that the prince,
whom consiscations cause to behold as an enemy, is deservedly opposed for his
rapaciousness or inattention to his own interest.

The French behold, with horror, their countrymen given up to foreigners.
The French behold, with horror, their countrymen given up to foreigners,
privately tried and arbitrarily punished, for crimes of which they were accused
in a country subject to France. The indignity offered to Spain was the
ostensible cause of their condemnation; but whatever their crime might have
been, France alone ought to have had cognizance of it. If the accused were
guilty of nothing else; or if, for state reasons, it was thought proper to
mention that offense only, the king of Spain would have caused his name to be
for ever blessed in the colony, had he, a judge in his own cause, generously
forgiven. The measures that have been adopted, have produced a very different
effect. They are nearly the same as those of the Portuguese government, which
contrived Father Malagrida's being burnt by the inquisition, on the pretense of
his having boasted that he had sometimes conversed with the Holy Virgin; but
whose real crime was an attempt against his sovereign's life, in order to make
another family ascend the throne. Crimes like these, openly perpetrated by the
administration against the laws, common sense and public safety; can no where
be palliated with the pretense of necessity. Whatever those who advise them may
think on the subject, they betray their country and their sovereign himself. In
free states, where the personal safety of the meanest individual is as
interesting to the whole nation as that of the greatest, crimes of this kind
are never seen. They can be committed in such countries only, where despotism
is established; where a few, favored slaves, reduce the rest secretly to wish
for the annihilation of those whom they seemingly adore.

The same disordered brains which projected the illegal prosecutions carried on
against the factious leaders of Louisiana, have doubtless fancied, that they
would deserve immortality for a masterly stroke of policy, Abolition of the
laws of Louisiana.
when they procured the abolition of the laws, privileges, and superior council
of Louisiana, under the pretense of a decree issued against Don Ulloa. Have
they really thought that people could be deceived by names which were to
represent nothing? The shadow of a tribunal was established under the name of
Cabildo government, that is civil government, but the governor and his assessor
are in fact the only judges. Since the judgments given by them jointly have the
same virtue as those of that Cabildo government, few are so unskilful as to
apply to this tribunal. Nay, who would dare to do it except in trifling
matters? Was it likewise believed that, for the governor and his assessor's
convenience, the substituting of the Spanish language to the French, in all the
juridical proceedings of Louisiana, where the inhabitants understand the French
language only; the impartial dispen^^^on, of justice, which is the true glory
of the state, would thence be effectually promoted? Things will certainly go
well, as long as governors and their assessors shall have all the qualincations
that perfect judges ought to have, and whilst the parties can procure faithful
interpreters: but it is as true that, wise as these regulations are boasted to
be, they depopulate the colony.

Genesis O'Riley confirms the decrees of the Superior Council.
General O'Riley confirmed all the decrees of the superior council, except that
which had been issued against Don Ulloa. This was solemnly approving the
seditious nomination of the members of Mr. Foucault's and the
Attorney-General's making; it was therefore arrogantly annulling the protest
which Mr. Aubry had entered in behalf of the king of France and the public,
against that nomination, and all the decrees issued out of that tribunal during
the anarchy; it was depriving those who had been oppressed from the hopes of
obtaining redress in the colony. For, the council being abolished; how could
any one take the benefit of the French laws, (since trials by peers or juries
are disused) or think despotic rulers would allow of applying to sovereign
courts for obtaining new trials of the causes, which they themselves may have
tried illegally, or against evidence? But, to f^atter the Spaniards, Genesis
O'Riley had determined that they alone should be judges; and military men of
that nation could not, with the least plausibility, pretend that they were
acquainted with the French laws; he, therefore, had rather cut off than unite.
The disposition of tyrants.
Such is the disposition of tyrants of every rank and denomination: Alexander
cutting the Gordian Knot is, perhaps, of all the fables that are confounded
with history, that which more truly characterises despotism. Men who led by
avarice and ambition obtain admittance to that order, disregarding the people
to whose preservation they seem to have professedly devoted themselves, but who
are determined on making their fortunes, are never disturbed in the least about
the means which can promote their grand design. Their eyes being fixed on all
those who have a share in the dispensation of wealth and honors, they see them
only. Their mercenary zeal prompts them to wish for their being entrusted with
iniquitous and inhuman orders, which they alone are fit to execute. Strangers
to nature, they are deaf to the voice of justice and the cries of humanity;
and, unable to rise by noble and generous actions, they glory in displaying
their zeal for the prince, by wholly loading themselves with that public
execration which attends the execution of sanguinary orders. It is not from
such abject souls that a prince, inebriated with power, can ever learn that
there are moments, not numerous indeed, but yet frequent enough to comfort the
oppressed and chastise the oppressor -- moments, when, after having made
himself odious to his subjects; after having weakened and degraded them, he may
regret their attachment, the courage which despotism has endeavored to
enervate, and the patriotism which it has attempted to destroy.

Galvez takes possession of the British posts.
After this General Galvez Governor of New Orleans, in the year 1779, possessed
himself of the British posts at the Ibberville and Baton Rouge. By
capitulation, the post at the Natchez was evacuated, and the garrison permitted
to join the troops at Pensacola. The Spaniards likewise reduced the forts of
Mobille and Pensacola; the former in the year 1730, and the latter in 1781. The
above conquests not only subjected the eastern side of the Mississippi, but the
whole province of West-Florida to the dominion of Spain.

Having brie^ly touched on the principal revolutions which have happened in
Louisiana, I shall now proceed with a short account of the Mississippi.

The safety and commercial prosperity which may be secured to the Commercial
advantages from the treaty of peace.
United States by the definitive treaty of peace, will chiefly depend upon the
share of the navigation of the Mississippi which shall be allowed to them. Is
it not amazing, true as it is, that few amongst us know this to be the key to
the northern part of the western continent? Account of the Mississippi.
It is the only channel through which that extensive region, bathed by its
waters, and enriched by the many streams it receives, communicates with the
sea. And here let us further observe, that the Mississippi river may truly be
considered as the great passage made by the hand of nature for a variety of
valuable purposes, but principally to promote the happiness and benefit of
mankind; amongst which, the conveyance of the produce of that immense and
fertile country, lying westward of the United States, down its stream to the
Gulf of Mexico, is not the least. To expect the free navigation of the
Mississippi is absurd, whilst the Spaniards are in possession of New Orleans,
which commands the entrance to the western country abovementioned; this is an
idea calculated to impose only upon the weak. The Spaniards have forts on the
Mississippi, and whenever they may think it consistent with their interest,
they will make use of them to prevent our navigating on it. Treaties are not
always to be depended on; the most solemn have been broken Notwithstanding the
free navigation of the Mississippi allowed by the treaty of 1762, General
O'Riley, in the year 1769, sent a party of soldiers to cut the hawsers of a
British vessel called the Sea Flower, that had made fast to the bank of the
river above the town of New Orleans; the order was obeyed, and the vessel
narrowly escaped being lost.
: therefore we learn that no one should put much faith in the princes of any
country: for he that trusts to any thing but the operation of their interest,
is a poor politician; and he that complains of deceit, where there is an
interest to deceived, will ever be considered as deficient in understanding.

The great length and uncommon depth of that river, and the excessive muddiness
and salubrious quality of its waters, after its junction with the Messouri, are
very singular In a half pint tumbler of this water has been found a sediment of
two inches of slime. It is, notwithstanding, extremely wholesome and well
tasted, and very cool in the hottest seasons of the year; the rowers who are
then employed drink of it when they are in the strongest perspiration, and
never receive any bad effects from it. The inhabitants of New Orleans use no
other water than that of the river, which by keeping in jars becomes perfectly
clear.
. The direction of the channel is so crooked, that from New Orleans to the
mouth of the Ohio, a distance which does not exceed 460 miles in a straight
line, is about 856 by water. It may be shortened at least 250 miles, by cutting
across eight or ten necks of land, some of which are not 30 yards wide.
Charlevoix relates that in the year 1722, at Point Coupee or Cut Point, the
river made a great turn, and some Canadians, by deepening the channel of a
small brook, diverted the waters of the river into it. The impetuosity of the
stream was so violent and the soil of so rich and loose a quality that, in a
short time, the point was entirely cut through, and travelers saved 14 leagues
of their voyage. The old bed has no water in it, the times of the periodical
overflowings only excepted. The new channel has been since sounded with a line
of thirty fathoms, without finding bottom.

In the spring floods the Mississippi is very high, and the current so strong
that with difficulty it can be ascended; but that disadvantage is compensated
by eddies or counter-currents, which always run in the bends close to the banks
of the river with nearly equal velocity against the stream, and assist the
ascending boats. The current at this season descends at the rate of about five
miles an hour. In autumn, when the waters are low, it does not run faster than
two miles, but it is rapid in such parts of the river, which have clusters of
islands, shoals and sand-banks. The circumference of many of these shoals being
several miles, the voyage is longer and in some parts more dangerous than in
the spring. The merchandise necessary for the commerce of the upper settlements
on or near the Mississippi, is conveyed in the spring and autumn in batteaux
rowed by 18 or 20 men, and carrying about 40 tons. From New Orleans to the
Illinois, the voyage is commonly performed in eight or ten weeks. A prodigious
number of islands, some of which are of great' extent, intersperse that mighty
river. Its depth increases as you ascend it. Its waters, after overflowing its
banks below the river Ibberville, never return within them again. These
singularities distinguish it from every other known river in the world. Below
New Orleans the land begins to be very low on both sides of the river across
the country, and gradually declines as it approaches nearer to the sea. This
point of land which in the treaty of peace in 1762, is mistaken for an island,
is to all appearance of no long date; for in digging ever so little below the
surface, you find water and great quantities of trees. The many beaches and
breakers, as well as inlets, which arose out of the channel within the last
half century, at the several mouths of the river, are convincing proofs that
this peninsula was wholly formed in the same manner. And it is certain that
when La Salle sailed down the Mississippi to the sea, the opening of that river
was very different from what it is at present.

The nearer you approach to the sea, this truth becomes more striking. The bars
that cross most of these small channels, opened by the current, have been
multiplied by means of the trees carried down with the streams; one of which
stopped by its roots or branches, in a shallow part, is sufficient to obstruct
the passage of thousands more, and to fix them at the same place. Such
collections of trees are daily seen between the Balize and the Missouri, which
singly would supply the largest city in Europe, with fuel for several years. No
human force being sufficient for removing them, the mud carried down by the
river serves to bind and cement them together. They are gradually covered, and
every inundation not only extends their length and breadth, but adds another
layer to their height. In less than ten years time, canes and shrubs grow on
them, and form points and islands, which forcibly shift the bed of the river.

Nothing can be asserted, with certainty, respecting its length. Its source is
not known, but supposed to be upwards of 3000 miles from the sea as the river
runs. We only know that, from St. Anthony's falls, it glides with a pleasant
clear stream, and becomes comparatively narrow before its junction with the
Missouri, the muddy waters of which immediately discolor the lower part of the
river to the sea. Its rapidity, breadth, and other peculiarities then begin to
give it the majestic appearance of the Missouri which affords a more extensive
navigation, and is a longer, broader and deeper river than the Mississippi. It
has been ascended by French traders about twelve or thirteen hundred miles, and
from the depth of water, and breadth of the river at that distance, it appeared
to be navigable many miles further.

From the Missouri river to nearly opposite the Ohio, the western bank of the
Mississippi is (some few places excepted) higher than the eastern. From Mine au
fer to the Ibberville, the eastern bank is higher than the western, on which
there is not a single discernable rising or eminence, the distance of 750
miles. From the Ibberville to the sea, there are no eminences on either side,
though the eastern bank appears rather the higher of the two, as far as the
English turn. Thence the banks gradually diminish in height to the mouths of
the river, where they are not two or three feet higher than the common surface
of the water.

Comparison with the Nile.
The slime which the annual floods of the river Mississippi leaves on the
surface of the adjacent shores, may be compared with that of the Nile, which
deposits a similar manure, and for many centuries past has insured the
fertility of Egypt. When its banks shall have been cultivated as the excellency
of its soil and temperature of the climate deserve, its population will equal
that, or any other part of the world. The trade, wealth and power of America
will at some future period, depend and perhaps center upon the Mississippi.
This also resembles the Nile in the number of its mouths, all issuing into a
sea that may be compared to the Mediterranean, which is bounded on the North
and South by the two continents of Europe and Africa, as the Mexican bay is by
North and South America. The smaller mouths of this river might be easily
stopped up, by means of those floating trees with which the river during the
floods is always covered. Probability of deepening the channel.
The whole force of the channel being united, the only opening then left would
probably grow deep as well as the bar.

Produce of Louisiana.
To judge of the produce to be expected from the soil of Louisiana, let us turn
our eyes to Egypt, Arabia Felix, Persia, India, China, and Japan, all lying in
correspondent latitudes. Of these China alone has a tolerable government; and
yet it must be acknowledged they all are, or have been, famous for their riches
and fertility. When our wandering imagination soars to regions of wealth and
terrestrial bliss, it delights in resting on those countries we have just
mentioned.

Its pleasant climate.
Louisiana is agreeably situated between the extremes of heat and cold. Its
climate varies as it extends toward the North. The southern parts, lying
within the reach of the refreshing breezes from the sea, are not scorched like
those under the same latitudes in Africa; and its northern regions are colder
than those of Europe under the same parallels, with a wholesome serene air,
very similar to the South of France and Lisbon. New Orleans, situated in 30d. 2
m. which nearly answers to the northern coasts of Barbary and Egypt, enjoys the
same temperature of climate with Marseilles. Not quite two degrees higher in
the country of the Natchez, the climate is much more uniform and temperate than
at New Orleans. And in the country of the Illinois, which lies about 37
degrees, the summer season is nearly the same as at Paris in France.

Objections to the navigation of the Mississippi removed.
An objection has been often made by misinformed men, otherwise of great
abilities, who too credulously believed that the navigation of the Mississippi
river, on account of its rapid current, was more difficult than it is in
reality. It appears from the calculation made by several skilful and
experienced travelers, that in the autumn when the waters are low, the current
descends at the rate of about one and a half or two miles in an hour; and that
the waters are in this state more than one half of the year. In the spring when
the freshes are up, or at their greatest height, the current runs at the rate
of five or six miles. It is true that the navigation would be difficult at that
season, to those who sail or row up against the stream; but there is no example
of such folly. When the waters of this river are high, the commodities and
produce of the interior country are gathered and prepared for exportation with
the descending current. And when the waters are low, the produce of the
interior country is growing to maturity. This is the time for the navigator's
importation. Great advantages are likewise taken then from eddy currents. At
present there are few builders skilful enough to construct vessels better
calculated for that navigation, than those already mentioned. Time and
experience will doubtless produce improvements, and render the navigation of
this river nearly as cheap as any other. But that the Mississippi can answer
every purpose of trade and commerce, Its advantages for trade and commerce.
is proved to a demonstration, by the rapid progress the French, German, and
Acadian inhabitants on that river, have made. They have attained a state of
opulence never before so soon acquired in any new country. And this was
effected under all the discouragements of an indolent and rapacious government.
It may be further asserted, that no country in North America, Equal to any
country in North America.
or perhaps in the universe, exceeds the neighborhood of the Mississippi in
fertility of soil and temperature of climate. Both sides of this river are
truly remarkable for the very great diversity and luxur^ancy of their
productions. They might probably be brought, from the favourableness of the
climate, to produce two annual crops of Indian corn as well as rice, and with
little cultivation would furnish grain of every kind in the greatest abundance.
But this value is not con^ined to the fertility and immensity of champaign
lands; their timber is as fine as any in the world, and the quantities of live
and other oak, ash, mulberry, walnut, cherry, cypress, and cedar, are
astonishing. The neighborhood of the Mississippi, besides, furnishes the
richest fruits in great variety, particularly grapes, oranges, and lemons in
the highest perfection. It produces silk, cotton, sassafrass, saffron and
rhubarb; is peculiarly adapted for hemp and flax, and in goodness of tobacco
equals the Brazils; and indigo is at this present a staple commodity, which
commonly yields the planter from three to four cuttings. In a word, whatever is
rich or rare in the most desirable climates in Europe, seems natural to such a
degree on the Mississippi; that France, though the sent few or no emigrants
into Louisiana but decayed soldiers, or persons in indigent circumstances, (and
these very poorly supplied with the implements of husbandry) soon began to
dread a rival in her colony, particularly in the cultivation of vines, from
which she prohibited the colonists under a very heavy penalty; Soil and
situation triumph over political restraints.
yet soil and situation triumphed over all political restraints, and the
adventurers, at the end of the war in 1762, were very little inferior to the
most ancient settlements of America in all the modern refinements of luxury.

River mississippi furnishes fish.
The Mississippi furnishes in great plenty several sorts of fish, particularly
perch, pike, sturgeon, eel, and calts of a monstrous size. Craw-fish abound in
this country; they are in every part of the earth, and when the inhabitants
choose a dish of them, they send to their gardens where they have a small pond
dug for that purpose, and are sure of getting as many as they have occasion
for. A dish of shrimps is as easily procured: by hanging a small canvas bag
with a bit of meat in it to the bank of the river, and letting it drop a little
below the surface of the water, in a few hours a sufficient quantity will have
got into the bag. Shrimps are found in the Mississippi as far as the Natchez,
348 miles from the sea.

Description of the coast and islands about the mouths of the Mississippi.
Having glanced at the many andvantages that will result from the cultivation
and improvement of the lands in the neighborhood of the Mississippi, we now
proceed with a description of the coasts and islands about the mouths of that
river with directions to mariners.

The coast here is very low and marshy, and it would be difficult to find the
entrances of that river, were it not for the houses at the old and new Balize,
and the flag staff at the former, which appear some distance at sea. The white
clayey color of the river water remaining unmixed on the surface, is another
indication that the Mississippi is not far distant; and though it may be
alarming to strangers, as it was to myself when I first beheld it, as it has
the appearance of a shoal, yet the soundings are much deeper off the
Mississippi than any where else on the coast.

It is an observation said to be founded onexperience, that where the water of
the Mississippi incorporates with, and apparently loses itself in the bay of
Mexico, the current divides, and generally sets north-easterly and
south-westerly, but out of soundings the currents are in a great measure
governed by the winds; and if they are not attended to, vessels may be driven
south-westward beyond the Balize into the bay of St. Bernard, which is reported
to be full of shoals, and consequently a very dangerous navigation.

Directions to Mariners.
To come to an anchor off the Balize, vessels approaching the land ought to
bring the old Balize to bear about W by S, and the new Balize nearly W N W;
they will then be about two miles distant from, and opposite to the East pass,
or mouth, in 13 or 14 fathom wather: and the strong N E and S E winds always
occasion great swells off the Balize, yet when anchored as above directed they
may ride in safety; except a S E wind, which is the most dangerous, as it blows
directly on shore, should come on so violent as to part them from their
anchors, and prevent their carrying sail; in which case, if care has not been
taken to obtain a good offing, they will drift either on the mud banks into the
pass ala Loutre, which has only eight feet water, or into the bay Briton, where
they will be in a critical situation, on account of the shoal water for which
that bay is remarkable.

Precautions.
The best precaution against the consequences of a south-east wind will be to
get under way before the strength of the gale comes on, and to steer about N by
W half W for the island called Grand Gosier distant 7 leagues. In sailing round
the south westermost part of which, care should be taken to steer clear of a
shoal that runs out from it W S W about two miles, which being passed, vessels
should luff up, until the S W end of the island bears nearly S E two miles;
there is then good anchoring in three and an half fathoms soft bottom.

There is another safe anchoring place in 2 fathom water, just within the S W
point of the Isle au Briton; from the S W end of which a shoal runs out nearly
half a mile. This island is about a league to the westward of the Grand Gosier,
and there is good anchoring between them in 3 and 4 fathoms.

If a south-east gale should happen at night, it would be impossible to see the
way between the above islands. In that case, a N N E course from the mouths of
the Mississippi will clear the chandelures, situated about 3 leagues to the
northward of the Isle au Grand Gosier, which are better than 9 leagues in
length. As all the above islands are low and have no trees growing on them,
they cannot be seen at any distance. On that account it will be necessary when
sailing toward them, to keep a good look out. There is drift wood on these
islands, and fresh water may be got by digging. The water between the
chandelures and the peninsula of Orleans is full of shoals, and the navigation
fit only for small craft.

Mouths of the Mississippi how formed.
The river Mississippi discharges itself into the gulf of Mexico by several
mouths of different depths of water: in the year 1772, that called the
south-east in latitude 29 d 10 m North, and longitude 89 d 10 m West from
London afforded 12 feet; the East mouth, which before the above period
furnished 15 feet, had then no more than 10 and an half feet; and the
north-east only 9 and an half feet on the bar of it. The latter now affords 12
feet, and S W has sixteen feet. The bars are subject to shift; but immediately
after entering the river, there is from 3 to 7, 8 and 10 fathoms as far as the
south-west pass, and from thence 12, 15, 20 and 30 fathoms is the general depth
for 1142 computed miles to the Missouri river.

The shoals about the Mississippi are formed from the trees, mud, leaves, and a
variety of other matter continually brought down by the waters of the river,
which being forced along by the current, until repelled by the tides, then
subside, and occasion what are commonly called the bars: their distance from
the entrances of the river, which is generally about 2 miles, depend much on
the winds being accidentally with or against the tides: when these bars
accumulate sufficiently to resist the tides and the current of the river, they
form numerous small islands, which by constantly increasing, join to each other
and at last reach the continent.

All the land bordering the mouths of the Mississippi has been made in this
manner. It is more than probable that the whole of the country on both sides of
the river as far as the Ibberville, a distance of 204 miles, has been produced
in a succession of ages by the vast quantities of mud, trees, leaves etc.
brought down by the annual floods which overflow the banks of the Mississippi;
the large trunks or bodies of trees which have been frequently found in digging
in the above distance, seems to confirm this opinion; and it may reasonably be
supposed, that the lakes on each side of this river are parts of the sea not
yet filled up: thus the land is annually raised and constantly gains on the
sea. The old Balize, a small port erected by the French on a little island, was
in the year 1734, at the mouth of the river, it is now two miles above it. In
the year 1766, Don Antonio D'Ulloa erected some barracks on a small island, the
new Balize, (to which he gave the name of St. Carlos) for the convenience of
pilots, and other purposes, being near the south-east entrance of the river,
and a more dry a higher situation than any there abouts. There was not the
least appearance of this island 30 years ago Whatever doubts may arise
respecting the above account, there are not instances wanting to prove that
some other parts of the earth have been formed in a similar manner, as will
appear by the following facts.

Havre de Grace is situated in the Pays de Caux, about 18 leagues from Rouen,
and as much from Dicppe, on the point of a large valley at the mouth of the
river Seine, in the latitude of 49 degrees 30 minutes North. It stands upon a
plain spot of ground, full of water, which contribute not a little to its
security. This ground was originally gained out of the sea, and formed from the
large quantities of sand, gravel, and mud, which the force of the tide and the
river conveyed to that place in a long course of time and by insensible
degrees. And as it was formed, so it seems to be daily increased by the same
means: for we are assured by a late author Piganiol de la Force, Nouvelle
description de la France, tom. ix. page 593.
that about 70 or 80 years ago, the sea, at high water, came very near that
gate of the city which is next the harbor; whereas now the high water mark is
nearly half a mile distant from it. So that it appears, the sea has gradually
given way, and, as it were, retired to leave the earth at liberty to enlarge
and extend itsels. Nor ought we to be surprised at this. The ground on which
the city of Tire is built, though now united to the continent, being formerly
part of an island. Venice would have had the same fate long ago, had it not
been for the great pains the inhabitants have taken to prevent it: the sea
formerly washed the walls of Ravenna, which is now a league distant from it;
nor are other instances of this kind wanting, even in the same kingdown of
France, particularly Frejus and Narbonne, a few centuries ago, were on the
shore of the Mediterranean; but now the one is a league, and the other almost
two, distant from it. -- Description de ^ Haute Normandy, tom. i. p. 193.


.

Old and New Balize.
The old and new Balize were formerly very inconsiderable posts, with 3 or 4
cannon in each, and garrisoned by a subaltern's command. Such are their
situations that they neither defend the Mississippi, nor the deepest channel
into it, and appear to have been established only for the purposes of assisting
vessels coming into the river, and forwarding intelligence or dispatches to New
Orleans.

In ascending the Mississippi.
In ascending the Mississippi there are extensive natural meadows, with a
prospect of the sea, on both sides, most part of the distance to the Detour aux
Plaquemines, which is 32 miles: from thence to the settlements 20 miles
further, the whole is a continued tract of low and marshy grounds, generally
overflowed, and covered with thick wood, Plametto bushes, etc. which appear
almost impenetrable to either man or beast. From thence the banks of the river
are well inhabited to the Detour des Anglois, Detour les Anglois.
where the the circular direction of the river is so very considerable that
vessels cannot pass it with the same wind that conducted them to it, and must
either wait for a favorable wind, or make fast to the banks, and haul close,
there being sufficient depth of water for any vessel that can enter the river.
The two forts and batteries at this place, one of each, on both sides of the
river, are more than sufficient to stop the progress of any vessel whatever
Doctor Cox of New Jersey ascended the Mississippi to this place in the year
School, took possession, and called the country Carolina.
. The distance from hence to New Orleans is 18 miles. The Banks of the river
are settled and well cultivated, and there is a good road for carriages all the
way.

Nothing with certainty can be determined respecting the time a vessel may take
in sailing from the Balize to New Orleans, a distance of 105 miles. With
favorable winds the voyage has been performed in 3 or 4, but it generally
takes 7 or 8 days, and sometimes two or three weeks. There is always shoal
water near the low points of land covered with willows. In approaching them, a
few casts of the lead will be necessary; and in several places there are trees
fixed with one end in the bottom, and the other just below the surface of the
river, and in the same direction with the current, which by continual friction
of the water, are reduced to a point; and as there are instances of vessels
sailing with force against them being run through their bottoms, and sinking
immediately after, too much care cannot be taken to avoid them. Attention
should also be paid to keep clear of the trees floating down the river during
the floods It is imposible to anchor without being exposed to the danger of the
great trees, which frequently come down with the current, but more especially
at the time of the floods, which if any of them should come athwart hawse,
would most probably drive in the bo^s of the vessel; and there is a certainty
of losing the anchors, as the bottom of the river is very soft mud, covered
with sunk logs, this points out the impossibility for vessels to navigate upon
the Mississippi, unless they are permitted to make fast to the shore; and no
vessel can be said to enjoy the free navigation of the river, if deprived of
this necessary privilege.
.

The water is every where deep enough (except at the Willow Points) to admit
vessels close to either shore, where instead of letting go an anchor, which
would probably be lost among the logs sunk in the bottom of the river, vessels
may safely make fast to the trees on the bank; which are generally tall and in
such abundance, in some parts, that they prevent the winds from being of that
service to vessels in ascending the Mississippi, that might be expected. It
will be therefore necessary for expedition sake, to rigg as many topsails as
possible, which commonly reach above the trees and are of more use than all the
other sails together; however, care must be taken to stand by the halliards to
prevent the wind, which frequently comes in very strong puffs, from carrying
away the top-masts, sails, etc.

Town and fortifications of New Orleans.
The town of New Orleans, the metropolis of Louisiana, was regularly laid out
by the French in the year 1720, is situated on the East side of the river in 30
d 2 m North latitude, 105 miles from the Balize, as already mentioned; all the
streets are perfectly straight but too narrow, and cross each other at right
angles. There are betwixt seven and eight hundred houses in this town,
generally built with timber frames raises about eight feet from the ground,
with large galleries round them, and the cellars under the floors level with
the ground: any subteraneous buildings would be constantly full of water. Most
of the houses, have gardens. Exclusive of slaves, there are about seven
thousand inhabitants of both sexes. The fortisication is only a line of
stockades, with bastions of the same materials, on three sides, a banquet
within, and a very trifling ditch without, and is only a defense against
musquetry. The side next the river is open, and is secured from the inundation
of the river by a raised bank, generally called the Levee, which extends from
the English Turn, or the Detour des Anglois, to the upper settlements of the
Germans, a distance of more than 50 miles, with a good road all the way. It may
become a great and opulent city.
There is reason to believe the period is not very distant when New Orleans may
become a great and opulent city, if we consider the advantages of its
situation, but a few leagues from the sea, on a noble river, in a most fertile
country, under a most delightful and wholesome climate, within two weeks sail
of Mexico by sea, and still nearer the French Spanish and British islands in
the West Indies, with a moral certainty of its becoming a general receptacle
for the produce of that extensive and valuable country on the Mississippi,
Ohio, and its other branches; all which are much more than sufficient to ensure
the future wealth, power and prosperity of this city.

Easy loading and unloading vessels.
The vessels which sail up the Mississippi haul close along side the banks next
to Orleans, to which they make fast, and take in or discharge their cargoes
with the same ease as from a wharf.

From New Orleans there is a very easy communication with West-Florida, by
means of the Bayouk of St. John, a little creek which is navigable for vessels
drawing about four feet water six miles up from the lake Ponchartrain, where
there is a landing-place, at which vessels load and unload: this is about two
miles from the town. The entrance of the Bayouk of St. John is defended by a
battery of five or six cannon. There are some plantations on the Bayouk, and on
the road from thence to New Orleans.

Canes-Brule, Chapitoula, and the German settlements.
Canes-Brule, Chapitoula, and the German settlements join each other, and are a
continuation of well-cultivated plantations, of near fifty miles from New
Orleans, on each side of the river. At the German settlements, on the West side
of the river, is a church served by the Capuchins. There was formerly a small
stockaded fort in the center of the settlements on the East side of the river:
this post was originally erected as an asylum for the inhabitants who first
settled there, and were much molested by the Chactaws and Chickasaws, who in
alliance carried on a war against the settlers on the Mississippi. Their entry
into this part of the colony was very easy, as they went up a small creek,
Tigahoe, in canoes. The entrance of this creek, which is in the lake
Pontchartrain, was defended by a small redoubt, since in ruins.

Produce of the plantations, etc.
The produce of the plantations, commencing below the English Turn, and
continuing to the upper settlements of the Germans, form a very considerable
part of the commerce of this country; the different articles are indigo,
cotton, rice, beans, myrtlewax and lumber. The indigo is much esteemed for its
beautiful color and good quality; the color is brighter than that which is
fabricated at St. Domingo. The cotton formerly cultivated, though of a most
perfect white, is of a very short staple, and is therefore not in great
request. The different sorts of beans, rice, and myrtle candles, are articles
in constant demand at St. Domingo.

Sugar made with success.
In the year 1762, several of the richest planters begun the cultivation of
sugar, and erected mills to press the canes; the sugar produced was of a very
fine quality, and some of the crops were very large: but no dependence can be
had on this article, as some years the winters are too cold, and kill the canes
in the ground.

Slaves how employed in autumn.
In the autumn, the planters employ their slaves in cutting down and squaring
timber, for sawing into boards and scantling. The carriage of this timber is
very easy, for those who cut it at the back of their plantations make a ditch,
which is supplied with water from the back swamps, and by that means coduct
their timber to the river with very little labor: others send their slaves up
to the cypress swamps, of which there are a great many between New Orleans and
Point Coupee. There they make refts of the timber they cut, and float down to
New Orleans. Many of the planters have saw-mills, which are worked by the
waters of the Mississippi, in the time of the floods, and then they are kept
going night and day till the waters fall. The quantity of lumber sent from the
Mississippi to the West India islands is prodigious, and it generally goes to a
good market.

Villages of the Humas and Alibamas.
About 60 miles from New Orleans are the villages of the Humas and Alibamas.
The former were once a considerable nation of Indians, but are reduced now to
about 25 warriors; the latter consists of about 30, being part of a nation
which lived near for Toulouse, on the river Alibama, and followed the French
when they abandoned that post in the year 1762. Fourche de Chetimachas.
Three miles further up is the Fourche de Chetimachas, near which is the
village of a tribe of Indians of the same name; they reckon about 27 warriors.

It is truly surprising, that the nations who have successively possessed
Louisiana, never endeavored to obtain an exact knowledge of the sea coast
westward of the mouths of the Mississippi. The many difficulties and dangers to
which vessels are exposed in making, and getting over the shallow and shifting
bars of that river, as well as in a long and tedious navigation upwards of
thirty leagues to New Orleans, would render a harbor to the westward of the
Balize, and a water communication with the upper parts of the Mississippi of
vast importance. The nature of the narrow slip of land extending upwards of 60
leagues between that river and the sea, in a westerly course, indicates very
strongly the probability of a better and more easy communication from that
quarter, than that by the river Ibberville through the lakes Ponchartrain and
Maurepas. This opinion is fully confirmed by the information received from
Natchiabe, an intelligent chief of the Humas tribe, who inhabit the banks of a
creek known by the name of the Chetimachas fork, already mentioned, and which I
am now to describe. The Chetimachas forms one of the outlets of the Mississippi
about 30 leagues above New Orleans, and after running in a southerly direction
about 8 leagues from the river, divides into two branches, one of which runs
south-westerly and the other southeasterly, to the distance of 7 leagues, when
they both empty their waters into the Mexican Gulf.

On the Chetimachas, 6 leagues from the Mississippi, is a small settlement of a
tribe of Indians of the same name. To this settlement the Chetimachas is
uniformly about 100 yards in width, the depth from 2 to 4 fathoms, when the
water is lowest. The courses southerly, without any material winding or shoal,
except at its rise from the Mississippi, where there are large collections of
drifted logs, which have probably occasioned the sand bank formed at the same
place. This bank however extends no farther than 60 yards, and through which a
passage might easily be cleared for batteaux. The appear part of this outlet is
also obstructed, in several places, by heaps of drifted logs similar to those
just mentioned, but as the water, at all times, runs deep under them, they
could easily be cleared off. It would be as easy to prevent any further
collection of logs, or sands, at the entrance of this creek, by erecting a
spar, with piles or cassoons, a little above it, in an oblique direction with
the current of the Mississippi. That difficulty once overcome, there is no
other that can impede navigation from the river to the above mentioned
settlement of the Chetimachas village; nor, as these Indians inform, to the
Gulf. The banks on both sides of the Chetimachas, are generally higher than
those of the Mississippi, and so elevated in some places as never to be
overflowed. The ground rises gradually from its banks about 200 yards, and then
gently descends to extensive cypress swamps. The natural productions are the
same as on the Mississippi, but the soil from the extraordinary size and
compactness of the canes growing on it, is something superior. If measures were
adopted and pursued with a view to improve that communication, there would soon
be, on its banks, the most prosperous and important settlements of that colony.

Nine miles above the Chetimachas is the concession of Monsieur Paris, a
pleasant situation and good land. Large herds of cattle are generally kept
here, belonging to the inhabitants of Point Coupee.

The settlements of Acadians.
The settlements of the Acadians are on both sides of the river, and reach from
the Germans to the lbberville. These are the remainder of the families which
were sent by Genesis Lawrance from Nova Scotia to the then British southern
provinces; where, by their industry, they did and might have continued to live
very happy, but that they could not pubiicly enjoy the Roman catholic ^^^^gion,
to which they are greatly bigoted. They took the earliest opportunity, after
the peace, of transporting themselves to St. Domingo, where the climate
disagreed with them so much, that they, in a few months, lost near half their
nembers; the remainder, few only excepted, were, in the latter end of the year
1763, removed to New Orleans at the expense of the king of France. There are
about three hundred families of this unfortunate people settled in different
parts of Louisiana. They are sober and industrious; they clothe themselves in
almost every respect with the produce of their own fields, and the work of
their own hands, and are very obedient and useful subjects.

River Ibberville.
The river Ibberville is 99 miles from New Orleans, 204 miles from the Balize,
and 270 miles from Pensacola, by the way of the lakes Ponchartrain and Maurepas.

In 1765 a post was established here, and the garrison, which was a detachment
of the 34th regiment, withdrawn in the month of July in the same year. In
December 1766, this post was re-possessed, and a small stockaded fort built by
a party of the 21st regiment, and was demolished and abandoned in 1768. And in
the year 1778 it was again possessed by part of the 16th regiment, who were
made prisoners by the Spaniards in the year following.

Before the cession of Louisiana to Spain, the peltries of the British and
French shores of the Illinois have been mostly carried in the British do^^ions,
either in Canada, by the upper parts of the Mississippi through
Machillimakinak, or by the way of New Orleans at the mouth of that river.
Philadelphia and New York have also received great quantities of peltries in
return for their flour and the dry goods which they have sent to New Orleans,
for the Indian trade, or the use of the inhabitants. Pensacola received
likewise large parcels of skins and furs, which have been exported thence to
London, to South Carolina, or other parts of America. This is the reason why
the importance of the Illinois or upper Mississippi has, till now, been like
known. It is even certain, that it has been artfully concealed by many, who
availed themselves of the ignorance of the public on that head.

This would not have been the case, ha^ not the British government withdrawn in
1768, the garrison of fort Bute, which was constructed at Manchac, on are the
bank of the Mississippi, opposite to another fort which the French erected in
1767, at the distance of about 400 paces from the British fort. These forts
were situated near the place which, in the treaty of peace in 1762, is
described as the mouth of Ibberville river to the North of New Orleans island,
and the then boundary-line of the possessions of the two crowns in those parts;
but the plenipotentiaries of the two powers were misinformed; for, as we have
already observed, the city of New Orleans is not in an island, but on the
continent. Or if the tract of land on which that city is situated, can be
termed an island, that name can with propriety be applied to it during only
two, or at most three months every year, when the Mississippi overflows; an
accidental communication with lake Ponchartrain is then opened through the Gut
of Ibberville. It may be dignified, during that short period, with the title of
river, but dries up as soon as the Mississippi ceases to overflow. At any other
time the walking from English to French, now Spanish Manchac, is perfectly dry.

This place, if attended to, might be of consequence to the commerce of
West-Florida; for it may with reason be supposed, that the inhabitants and
traders who reside at Point Coupee, at Natchitoches, Attacappa, the Natchez, on
the East side of the Mississippi above and below the Natchez, at the Illinois,
and St. Vincents on the Ouabashe, would rather trade at this place than at New
Orleans, if they could have as good returns for their peltry and the Produce of
their country; for it makes a difference of ten days in their voyage, which is
no inconsiderable saving of labor, money, and time. The only difficulty which
opposes itself to this necessary establishment, is the want of a navigation
through the river Ibberville, so that vessels might carry on a constant
intercourse betwixt this place and Pensacola without going up the Mississippi,
which is a more tedious navigation. However, this difficulty is greatly
obviated by a good road made for carriages between the navigable water of the
Ibberville (a distance of ten miles) and the Mississippi; and when the latter
is high enough to run into the former, which it generally is during the months
of May, June, and July, vessels drawing from three to four feet, or more, may
then pass from one to the other.

Village of Alibama Indians.
About a mile above the Ibberville, on the East side of the Mississippi, there
is a village of Alibama Indians, consisting of twenty-five warriors.

Point Coupee settlement.
From the Ibberville to the settlements of Point Coupee is 35 miles; they
extend full 20 miles on the West side of the Mississippi, and there are some
plantations back on the side of what is generally called La Fause Riviere,
through which the Mississippi passed about 70 years ago, making the shape of a
crescent. The fort, which is a square figure with four bastions, built with
stockades, is situated on the same side of the Mississippi, about four and a
half miles above the lowest Plantation. The inhabitants of Point Coupee amount
to about 2000 of all ages and sexes, and 7000 slaves. They cultivate tobacco,
indigo, and Indian corn; raise vast quantities of poultry, which they send to
market at New Orleans, and furnish to the shipping. They square a great deal of
timber and make staves, which they convey in rafts to New Orleans. Eight miles
above the fort at Point Coupee, on the same side of the river, is a small
village of the Affagoula Indians.
Affagoula Indians. They have only about a dozen warriors.

On the East side of the river, and opposite to the upper plantations of Point
Coupee, is the village of the Village of Toni^^s.
Toni^^s, formerly a numerous nation of Indians; but their constant intercourse
with the white people, and immoderate use of spirituous liquors, have reduced
them to about twenty warriors.

Villages of Pascagoula and Biloxi Indians.
About ten miles above the Tonicas village, on the same side of the river, is a
village of Pascagoula Indians, of twenty warriors; and a little lower down, on
the opposite side, there is a village of Biloxi Indians, containing thirty
warriors.

Chafalaya upper mouth of the Mississippi.
The Chafalaya is about 30 miles above the settlement of Point Coupee, and 3
miles below the mouth of the river Rouge. It is the uppermost mouth of the
Mississippi, and after running many miles through one of the most fertile
countries in the world, falls into the Bay of St. Bernard, a considerable
distance westward of the mouths of the Mississippi.

Fifty-four miles from the Mississippi down the Chafalaya, on the eastern side,
is the place called the Portage, just above the mouth of a small rivulet. This
Portage is 18 miles from Point Coupee. Twelve miles below this Portage is a
narrow island 24 miles long. The eastern channel is choked up with logs, but
the western affords good navigation. The river Appalousa communicates with this
channel nearly opposite the middle of the island, on the West side. There are
two settlements on the Appalousa; the first is 30 miles, and the other 12 miles
further, from its mouth. ^n descending the Chafalaya it is 3 miles from the
last mentioned island to Isle au Vauche; and to the bay be Chafalaya, which is
on the eastern side of the river, it is 3 miles more. This bay is of a
triangular figure, about 6 miles in length, and something better than a mile in
width at its entrance. When the Chafalaya is not raised with freshes, there is
seldom more than 5 feet water in this bay. Fifteen miles from it on the eastern
side, is the bay of Plaquimenes. About half the distance between these bays, is
a rivulet which communicates with the former bed of the Mississippi, back of
Point Coupee, during the annual floods in that river. The country between them
is very low, swampy and full of ponds of water.

Near the source of the Chafalaya the current is very ^^^ but gradually
diminishes to the mouth, where is very gentle.

Isle au Vauche.
We will now return to the Isle au Vauche, and proceed from thence to lake de
Portage, which is 3 miles from the island. This lake is 13 miles long, and not
more than one and an half broad. It communicates at the southern end, by a
strait a quarter of a mile wide, with the grand lake of Chetimachas, which is
24 miles in length and 9 in width. The country bordering these lakes is low and
flat, and timbered principally with cypress, some live and other kinds of oak;
and on the eastern side, the land between it and the Chafalaya river, is
divided and again subdivided by innumerable small streams, which occasion as
many islands. Some of these streams are navigable.

At a little distance from the south-eastern shore of the lake Chetimachas, is
an island where persons passing that way generally halt as a resting place.
Nearly opposite this island, along the western shore, there is an opening which
leads to the sea. It is about 150 yards wide, and has 16 or 17 fathoms water.
From the lake along this opening it is 3 miles to the Tage river, which is on
the North side. Three small rivulets fall in on the same side, in the above
distance; and 3 miles below the Tage river on the western side is a large
savanna known by the name of Prairu de Jacko. From this savanna it is about 33
miles to the sea.

Tage river.
In ascending the Tage river, it is 10 leagues from its mouth to an old Indian
village, on the East side, called Mingo Luoac, which signifies Fire Chief. From
this village to the habitation of Mons. Mass, which is on the West side, it is
2 leagues. One and an half leagues further up, on the East side, is the village
de S^lien Roug^, from whence there is a portage of half a mile ^^ (...). Two
leagues further up the river, (...) the West side is the habitation of Mons.
Sorrel. From whence, to the town la Nouvelle Iberie, on the same side, it is
six leagues. The whole of this distance is tolerably well settled. From this
town about six leagues westerly across the country is situated the village de
Skunnemoke or the Tuckapas, on the Vermillion river, which runs into the bay of
St. Bernard. The river Tage, is in genera^ (...) then 100 yards wide, with a
gentle current, and a small ebb and flow of about or 10 inenes. It narrows as
you ascend it, where in some places, it is not 50 yards over. Vessels drawing
from 7 to 8 feet water may go from the sea to this town without any
obstructions. About 3 leagues above la Nouvelle Iberie is la Force Point,
formerly settled by French neutrals. It is now inhabited by creoles of the
country, Spaniards from the Canarie islands, and a few English from the eastern
side of the Mississippi. Then to la Shute branch, which passes over a fall of
about 10 feet, near to where it enters into the Tage river, it is 3 leagues,
and inhabited the whole distance. From this branch to Mons. Flemming's is 2
leagues more. A quarter of a mile back from Mr. Flemming's there is lake 3
leagues in circuit. Church Desata cappau.
From Mr. Flemming's to the church De sata cappau, which is on the West side of
the Tage, it is 1 league further, all which is inhabited. From the church to
what is called the bottom of the bite, is two leagues, and the whole distance
closely settled. From thence to the point settlement of Acadians is one league,
to league, to the plantation of Mons. RD^e is also a league, and to the point
of Mons. Dee it is half a league f^^ith r. From Mons. (...). Fuzelliere's is 5
leagues by water, but only three by land. Fuzelliere's fork, or branch, is just
below his house, and divides the districts of Attacappau and Appalouse.
Districts of Attacappau and Appalouse.
And, at the distance of about 2 leagues, this branch communicates with the
Vermillion river westerly. The river Tage still continues to the eastward. At
one and an half leagues from the fork, or branch, is the Prairie de Mons. Man,
to Mons. Man's plantation it is one and an half leagues further; from thence
upwards the river divides into little brooks, and loses itself in rich and
extensive savannahs.

Inhabitants.
All the Indians in this part of the country, consisting of several small
tribes, do not exceed 100 families. The white people are about 400 families,
and can raise 500 militia. The number of negroes are nearly equal to the whites.

Soil and Produce.
Although this country might produce all the valuable articles raised in other
parts of the globe, situated in the same latitudes, yet the inhabitants
principally cultivate indigo, rice, tobacco, indian corn and some wheat; and
they raise large stocks of black cattle, horses, mules, hogs, sneep and
poultry. The sheep is said to be the sweetest mutton in the world. The black
cattle, when fat enough for sale, which they commonly are the year round, are
driven across the country to New Orleans, where there is always a good market.

This country is principally timbered with all the different kinds of oak, but
mostly with live oak of the largest and best quality, uncommonly large cypress,
black walnut, hickory, white ash, cherry, plumb, poplar trees, and grape vines;
here is found also a great variety of shrubs and medicinal roots. The lands
bordering the rivers and lakes are generally well wooded, but at a small
distance from them are very extensive natural meadows, or savannas, of the most
luxuriant soil, composed of a black mould about one and a half feet deep, very
loose and rich, occasioned, in part, by the frequent burning of the savannas;
below the black mould, it is a stiff clay of different colors. It is said this
clay, after being exposed sometime to the sun, becomes so hard that it is
difficult either to break or bend, but when wet by a light shower of rain, it
slackens in the same manner as lime does when exposed to moisture, and becomes
loose and moulders away; after which it is found excellent for vegetation.

Climate.
This country being situated between the latitudes of 30 and 31 d. North, the
climate is of course very mild and temperate; white frosts, and sometimes thin
ice have been experienced here; but snow is very uncommon.

River Rouge.
The river Rouge, which is so called from its waters being of a reddish color,
and said to tinge those of the Mississippi at the time of the floods. Its
source is in New Mexico, and it runs about 600 miles. The river Noir empties
itself into this river about 30 miles from its confluence with the Mississippi,
which is 187 miles from New Orleans. The famous Ferdinand Soto ended his
discoveries and his life at the entrance of this river, and was buried there.
Near 70 leagues up this river the French had a very considerable post,
Natchitoches. It was a frontier on the Spanish settlements, being 20 miles from
the fort of Adays. The French fort was garrisoned by a captain's command.
There were forty families settled here, consisting mostly of discharged
soldiers and some merchants who traded with the Spaniards. A great quantity of
tobacco was cultivated at this post, and sold for a good price at New Orleans,
being held in great esteem. They sent also some peltry, which they received in
trade from the neighboring Indians.

Fort Rosalie.
From the river Rouge to fort Rosalie it is fifity-six and a quarter miles.
This fort is situated in the country known by the name of the Natchez, in 31d.
40m. North latitude, about 243 computed miles from New Orleans, and 348 from
the Balize, following the course of the river. Soil at the Natchez.
The soil, at this place, is superior to any of the lands on the borders of the
river Mississippi, for the production of many articles.

Its situation being higher, affords a greater variety of soil, and is in a
more favorable climate for the growth of wheat, rye, barley, oats, etc. than
the country lower down, and nearer to the sea. The soil also produces, in equal
abundance, Indian corn, rice, hemp, flax, indigo, cotton, pot herbs, pulse of
every kind, and pasturage; and the tobacco made here is esteemed preferable to
any cultivated in other parts of America. Hops grow wild; all kinds of European
fruits arrive to great perfection, and no part of the known world is more
favorable for the raising of every kind of stock. The climate is healthy and
temperate; the country delightful and well watered; and the prospect is
beautiful and extensive, variegated by many inequalities and fine meadows,
separated by innumerable copses, the trees of which are of different kinds, but
mostly of walnut and oak. The rising grounds, which are clothed with grass and
other herbs of the finest verdure, are properly disposed for the culture of
vines; the mulberry trees are very numerous, and the winters sufficiently
moderate for the breed of silk worms. Clay of different colors, fit for glass
works and pottery, is found here in great abundance; and also a variety of
stately timber fit for house and ship building, etc. The elevated, open, and
airy situation of this country renders it less liable to fevers and agues (the
only disorders ever known in its neighborhood) than some other parts bordering
on the Mississippi, where the want of sufficient descent to convey the waters
off occasions numbers of stagnant ponds, whose exhalations infect the air.

This country was once famous for its inhabitants, who from their great
numbers, and the state of society they lived in, were considered as the most
civilized Indians on the continent of America. They lived some years in great
friendship with the French, whom they permitted to settle on their lands, and
to whom they rendered every service in their power. Their hospitality, it
seems, was repaid in such a manner, that they determined to get rid of their
guests; for on the eve of St. Andrew 1729, Massacre of the French in 1729.
they surprised the fort, and put the whole garrison to death. At the same time
they made a massacre of the inhabitants, in which upwards of 500 were killed;
some of the women and children they made prisoners; and very few of either sex
escaped. The whole colony armed to revenge their slaughtered countrymen, and
they had several skirmishes with the Natchez, in which the success was various.
Destruction of Natchez Indians in 1730.
In 1730, Monsieur De Perrier de Salvert, brother to the governor, arrived from
France, with the rank of lieutenant general in Louisiana, and 500 regular
troops, who joined the troops and militia of the colony. This army amounting to
1500 men, went, under the command ^^ the two brothers, to attack the nation of
the Natchez; who, with their chiefs, determined to defend themselves in a fort
they had built near a lake which communicates with the Bayouk Dargent, lying
West of the Natchez, and North of the river Rouge. They invested this fort, and
the Indians made a very resolute and vigorous sally on them, but were repulsed,
after a considerable loss on both sides. The French having brought two or three
mortars, threw some shells into the fort, which making a havoc amongst their
women and children, so terrified the Indians, unused to this sort of war, that
they surrendered at discretion, and were conducted to New Orleans; except a few
who had escaped to the Chickasaws, with their hunters who were providing
provisions for their garrison. Nothing now remains of this nation but their
name, by which their country continues to be called. The district of the
Natchez, as well as all along the eastern bank of the Mississippi to the river
Ibberville, was settling very fast by daily emigrations from the northern
states, but the capture of the British troops on the Mississippi, 1779, put an
entire stop to it.

Petit Goufre.
From fort Rosalie to the Petit Goufre is thirtyone and a half miles. There is
a firm rock on the East side of the Mississippi for near a mile, which seems to
be of the nature of limestone. The land near the river is much broken and very
high, with a good soil, and several plantations on it.

Bayouk Pierre.
From the Petit Goufre to Bayouk Pierre, or Stoney Biver, is four miles and a
quart From the mouth to what is called the fork of this river, is computed to
be 21 miles. In this distance there are several quar^ies of stone, and the land
has a clay soil with gravel on the surface of the ground. On the North side of
this river the land, in general, is low and rich; that or the South side is
much higher, but broken into hills and vales; but here the low lands are not
often overflowed: both sides are shaded with a variety of useful timber. At the
fork the river parts almost at right angles, and the lands between, and on each
side of them, are said to be clay and marl soil, not so uneven as the lands on
this river lower down.

Lousa Chitto.
From the Bayouk Pierre to Lousa Chitto, or the Big Black, at the Grand Goufre,
is 10 miles. The Big Black (or Lousa Chitto) is, at the mouth, about 30 yards
wide, but within, from 30 to 50 yards, and is said to be navigable for canoes
30 or 40 leagues. About a mile and a half up this river, the high lands are
close on the right and are much broken. A mile and a half further, the high
lands appear again on the right, where there are several springs of water, but
none as yet has been discovered on the left. At about eight miles further, the
high lands are near the river, on the left, and appear to be the same range
that comes from the Yazou cliffs, which are about twelve miles up the Yazou
river. At six miles further the high lands are near the river on both sides:
and continue for two or three miles, but broken and full of springs of water.
This land on the left was chosen by General Putnam, Captain Enos, Mr. Lyman and
other New England adventurers, as a proper place for a town; and, by order of
the governor and council of West Florida in 1773, it was reserved for the
capital. The country round is very fit for settlements. For four or five miles
above this place, on both sides of the river, the land is rich, and not so much
drowned, nor so uneven, as some parts lower down. About six miles and a half
further, there is a rapid water, stones and gravel bottom 160 yards in length;
and in one place a firm rock almost across the river, and as much of it bare,
when the water is at a moderate height, as confines the stream to nearly 20
feet; and the channel is about 4 feet deep.

Yazou cliffs.
From the Big Black to the Yazou cliffs is 39 miles and three quarters. From
this cliff the high lands ly North eastward and South south eastward, bearing
off from the river, full of cane and rich soil, even on the very highest
ridges. Just at the South end of the cliffs, the bank is low, where the water
of the Mississippi, when high, flows back and runs between the bank and high
land, which ranges nearly northerly and south south easterly to the Lousa
Chitto, occasioning much wet ground, cypress swamp and stagnant ponds.

From the Cliffs, or Aux Cotes, is seven miles and a half to the river Yazou.
Yazou river.
The mouth of this river is upwards of 100 yards in width, and was found by Mr.
Gauld to be in latitude 32d. 37m. and by Mr. Purcel in 32d. 28m. North. The
water of the Mississippi, when the river is high, runs up the Yazou several
miles, and empties itself again by a number of channels, which direct their
course across the country, and fall in above the Walnut hills. The Yazou runs
from the north-east and glides through a healthy fertile and pleasant country,
greatly resembling that about the Natchez, particularly, in the luxuriancy and
diversity of its soil, variety of timber, temperature of climate and delightful
situation. It is remarkably well watered by springs and brooks; many of the
latter afford convenient seats for mills. Further up this river the canes are
less frequent and smaller in size, and at the distance of 20 miles there are
scarcely any. Here the country is clear of underwood and well watered, and the
soil very rich, which continues to the Chactaw and Chickasaw towns. The former
is situated on the eastern branch of the Yazou, an hundred miles from the mouth
of that river, and consists nearly of 140 warriors: the towns of the latter are
about 15 miles West of the north-west branch 150 miles from the Mississippi.
They can raise upwards of 500 warriors. The above branches unite 50 miles from
the Mississippi, following the course of the river; the navigation to their
junction, commonly called the fork, is practicable with very large boats in the
spring season, and with smaller ones a considerable way further, with the
interruption of but one fall, where they are obliged to make a short portage,
20 miles up the north-west branch, and 70 miles from the Mississippi. The
country in which the Chactaw and Chickasaw towns are situated, is said to be as
healthy as any part of this continent, the natives scarcely ever being sick.
Such of them as frequent the Mississippi, leave its banks as the summer
approaches, lest they might partake of the fevers that sometimes visit the low
swampy lands bordering upon that river. Wheat, it is said, yields better at the
Yazou that at the Natchez, owing probably to its more northern situation. One
very considerable advantage will attend the settlers on the river Yazou, which
those at the Natchez will be deprived of, without going to a great expense; I
mean the building with stone, there being great plenty near the Yazou, but none
has yet been discovered nearer to the Natchez than the Petit Goufre, or little
Whirlpool, a distance of 31 miles and a half. Between this place and the Balize
there is not a stone to be seen any where near the river. Though the quantity
of good land on the Mississippi and its branches, from the bay of Mexico to the
river Ohio, a distance of nearly one thousand miles, is vastly great, and the
conveniences attending it; so likewise we may esteem that in the neighborhood
of the Natchez, and of the river Yazou the flower of it all.

About a mile and a half up the Yazou river, on the North side, there is a
large creek, which communicates with the Mississippi above the river St.
Francis, about 100 leagues higher up, by the course of the river. It passes
through several lakes by the way. At the distance of twelve miles from the
mouth of the river Yazou, on the South side, are the Yazou hills. There is a
cliff of solid rock at the landing place, on which are a variety of broken
pieces of sea sh^lis, and some entire. Four miles further up is the place
called the Ball Ground, near which a church, fort St. Peter, and a French
settlement formerly stood. Destruction of the French in 1729.
They were destroyed by the Yazou Indians in 1729. That nation is now entirely
extinct.

River Arkausaw.
From the Yazou to the river Arkansaw is 158 and a quarter miles. It is so
called from a nation of Indians of the same name. Its source is nearly in the
latitude of Santa Fe in New Mexico, and it is said to be navigable for batteaux
750 miles. It runs through an immensely rich and fertile country. About ten or
twelve miles up this river from the Mississippi there was formerly a fort,
garrisoned generally by a company of Spanish soldiers, for the purpose of
defending the trade carried on between New Orleans and the several villages of
St. Genevieve, etc. and particularly for defending the commerce with the
Arkansaw Indians, consisting of about 280 warriors, who are as much attached to
the French interest, as the Chickasaws are to that of the English. No
settlements were made here, except one or two for the immediate accommodation
of the garrison. The inundation of the Mississippi, about three years ago,
occasioned the evacuation of the above post, and the establishment of another
on the northern bank of the river 36 miles higher up. This post, consisting of
a subaltern's command, six pieces of cannon and eight swivels, was attacked
about eighteen months since by a party of Chickasaws, who killed ten soldiers
of the garrison, and soon after concluded a peace with the Spaniards. There is
a hamlet close to the fort, inhabited only by merchants and traders. The
Arkansaw river discharges itself into the Mississippi by two channels, about 15
miles from each other; the uppermost is called Riviere Blanch, from its
receiving a river of that name, reported to be navigable 600 miles, and the
soil through which it runs equal in quality to any on the Mississippi.

River St. Francis.
From the Arkansaw river to the river St. Francis, which is on the West side of
the Mississippi, is 108 miles. This is a small river, and is remarkable for
nothing but the general rendezvous of the hunters from New Orleans, who winter
there, and collect salt meat, suet, and bears oil, for the supply of that city.
Formerly the French had a post at the entrance of this river, for a magazine of
stores and provisions during their wars with the Chickasaws, by whom their
Illinois convoys were constantly attacked and frequently destroyed.

From the river St. Francis to the river and hights of Margot, River Margot.
which are on the East side of the Mississippi, is 70 and a half miles. This
river is said to be navigable for batteaux a number of miles. It appears to be
a pretty little river. The high ground below its junction with the Mississippi
affords a commanding, airy, pleasant and ex^^^sive situation for settlements;
the so^ is remarkably fertile. On this ground just below the mouth of the
river, the French built a fort, called Assumptio^ Fort, when at war with the
Chickasaws, in the year 1736, but it was demolished in the year following, when
a peace with those Indians was concluded.

Chickasaw River.
From the river Margot to the Chickasaw river, which is on the East side of the
Mississippi, is 104 and a half miles. The lands here are of an excellent
quality, and covered with a variety of useful timber, canes, etc. This river
may be ascended during high floods upwards of 30 miles with boats of several
tons burden.

mine au fer.
From the Chickasaw river to Mine au fer, or the Iron Mines, on the East side
of the Mississippi, is 67 and a quarter miles. Here the land is nearly similar
in quality to that bordering the Chickasaw river, interspersed with gradual
risings or small eminences. There is a post at this place, near the South
boundary of Virginia.

Ohio River.
From Mine au fer to the Ohio river, which is the largest eastern branch of the
Mississippi, is 15 miles. This river, and its principal branches, as also the
settlements in the Illinois country, are delineated in a map, and very
particularly described in a pamphlet which I published in London, the 1st of
January 1778, and to them the reader is referred.

Having briefly touched upon all the settlements on, and principal branches of
the Mississippi, from the sea to the river Ohio; I shall now just mention the
bounds of West-Florida.

Bounds of West-Florida.
The province of West-Florida is situated on the North side of the Gulf of
Mexico, and extends from the river Appalachicola, which is the boundary between
it and East-Florida, to the Regolets at the entrance into lake Ponchartrain,
thence through the lakes Ponchartrain, and Maurepas, and along the river
Ibberville to the Mississippi, thence along the Mississippi to the northernmost
part of the 31st degrees. of North latitude, thence by a line drawn due East along
the South boundary of the state of Georgia to the river Appalachicola,
including all the islands within six leagues of the coast, between the
Appalachicola and lake Ponchartrain.

General observations relating to the coast of Florida.
I now proceed to make some general observations, which may be of service in
making the land when you arrive on the coast of Florida. This is
distinguishable many different ways; as by the latitudes, the trenching and
direction of the shore, and the soundings and quality of the bottom, to each of
which particular attention must be paid.

From cape Blaise in 29 d 41 m North latitude, to the Balize at the mouth of
the Mississippi, the coast forms a curve, inclining to the northward, for 28
leagues, as far as the East end of Rose island in 30 d 28 m North; from thence
the land gradually declines to the southward, as far as Mobille Point in 30d 17
m North about 30 leagues. Dauphin island, and the other islands, including Ship
island, stretch nearly West for the space of 20 leagues, and from the North end
of the Chandeleurs, which lies near 5 leagues to the South-east of Ship island,
the coast runs chiefly to the southward till you arrive at the entrance of the
river Mississippi.

It is likewise to be observed, that in several places there is double land to
be seen over the different bays and lagoons: as at St. Andrew's bay; which may
be known by a high white s^nd hill, near the point of a peninsula, on the left
^and going in: at St. Rose's bay; where there is a remarkable red bluff on the
East side of the entrance just opposite to the East end of Rose island; over
the greatest part of which island double land may likewise be seen from the
mast head, and at the bay of Pensacola, the entrance of which is remarkable on
account of the red cliff opposite to the West end of Role island. There is a
large lagoon, a little more than a league to the westward of this cliff, about
3 leagues in length, leaving a narrow peninsula, over which the double land may
easily be seen, with a high red bank on the North side about half way; this
seems to distinguish it from any other part of the coast. There is a double
land at the entrance of the river Perdido; but it is not easily observed at any
considerable distance. The same may also be seen over some parts of Dauphin
island, and those to the westward of it, viz. Massacre, Horn and Ship islands,
as well as between them; but it appears at so great a distance, that it cannot
be mistaken for any part of the coast to the eastward of Mobille Point.

The Chandedeleur islands.
The Chandeleurs, which were 5 in number, when I visited them in the year 1772,
extend nearly S by W 9 or 10 leagues. The Isle aux Grand Gozier lies about 10
or 11 miles to the southward of them, with breakers all the way between. The
Isle au B^iton, or rather a cluster of islands of that name, lie about 4 miles
to the westward of the Grand Goziers, or Great Pelican island: both these and
the Chandeleur islands are very low, with some bushes: and behind them, at a
considerable distance, there is a chain of low marshy islands and lagoons,
bordering the peninsula of Orleans.

A dangerous part of the coast.
This is a dangerous part of the coast to a stranger, both on account of the
lowness of the land, which cannot be seen at any distance, as there are no
trees, and likewise on account of the above mentioned shoal between the
southernmost of the Chandeleurs, and the Grand Goziers, from latitude 29d 42m
North, to 29d 32m North.

There is however very good shelter for ships, within in the North end of the
Chandeleurs, Nassau Road.
in Nassau road, which lies 5 leagues to the southward of Ship island, and is
one of the best for large vessels on the whole coast of Florida; not only as it
affords good shelter from those winds that blow on shore, but as it is, by
having no bar, of so easy an access from the sea. Care must however be taken,
not to go within three quarters of a mile of the inside of the island, it being
shoal near that distance from the shore.

Vessels may go round the North end of it from the sea, in 5 and a half and 6
fathoms, at half a mile from the shore; and afterward must keep in 4 and a
half and 5 fathoms, till the North point ^^ars N N E about 2 miles; when they
may come to an anchor in 4 fathoms good holding ground, sheltered from easterly
and southerly winds.

It would be necessary for vessels to be well acquainted with this road, as
easterly winds are frequent on the coast of Florida. There is fresh water to be
got any where on the Chandeleurs by digging; besides which it might be met with
in a kind of well, at an old hut near the North end. No wood is to be found
here but drift wood, of which there is great plenty along shore.

Nassau Road was first discovered by Dr. Daniel Cox of New Jersey, about the
time of King William the 3d, who gave it the name of Nassau, in honor of that
prince. Doctor Cox had likewise given the name of the Myrtle islands to those
which are still so denominated, before the French called them the Chandeleurs;
and they were so named by both, from the candles made of the myrtle wax with
which these islands abound.

River Ibberville.
From the West side of the The river Ibberville was very little known by the
English at the treaty of peace in 1762; for notwithstanding the crown has
expended some thousands of pounds in clearing the Ibberville, it is not now
navigable from the Mississippi toward ^ake Ma^^^pas, even for a canoe; and
when I viewed it on the 10th of October 1766, the surface of the water of the
Mississippi was then 24 feet below the ^ed or bottom of the Ibberville. The
Mississippi is the source of the Ibberville, when raised high enough to run
into it, and occasions what is erroneously called the island of Orleans to be
then an island in fact, but at any other time it is not environed with ^ater;
therefore, with that degree of propriety can the Ibberville be termed a river,
or the town of New orleans said to be situated on an island?
isthmus of the peninsula of Orleans to the junction of the Ibberville with
lake Maurepas, it is 60 computed miles, following the course of the river,
which for the first 10 miles is not navigable above four months in the year;
but there is at all times from two to six feet for three miles further, and
between two and four fathoms is the depth the remaining part of the way to the
lake.

River Amit.
The river Amit falls into the Ibberville on the North side, about 21 miles
from the junction of the Ibberville with the Mississippi. The water of the Amit
is clear, with a gravelly bottom. It may be ascended with vessels drawing five
of six feet water, about half a dozen miles, and with batteaux 100 miles
further. Seventeen miles from the Ibberville this river forks; the western
branch, called the Commit, has its source near the country of the Natchez; and
the eastern branch, which is the most considerable, ^^^es near the Pearl river:
both these branches run through a very fertile country, in some parts hilly,
which, as well as the low lands, is covered with canes, oaks, ash, mulberry,
hickory, poplar, cedar and cypress. The banks in general are high, yet in some
parts they are subject to be overflowed. There were a number of inhabitants
settled on the Amit and Commit, who had slaves, and who raised indigo, cotton,
rice, hemp, tobacco, and Indian corn, in great abundance, and all excellent in
their kind. They had plenty of horses, cows, hogs, poultry, etc. and the river
abounds with a variety of fish.

From the Amit to lake Maurepas is 39 miles, following the Ibberville. The
quality of the land and timber on this river is similar to that on the Amit,
with this difference, its banks in general are lower and the country less
hilly, and there is a greater proportion of rice land, and also cypress and
live oak; the latter is of an extraordinary quality for ship building. There
were several inhabitants on this river who raised indigo, Indian corn, rice,
etc. and were in a very thriving way.

Lake Maurepas.
Lake Maurepas is about 10 miles in length and 7 in width, with 10 or 12 feet
water in it. The country round it is low, and covered with cypress, live oak,
myrtle, etc. Two creeks fall into this lake; one from the North side, called
Nattabanie, the other from the peninsula of Orleans.

Passage between Lake Ponchartrain and Maurepas.
^^om the Ibberville across the lake, it is 7 miles to the passage leading to
Ponchartrain. The length of this passage is 7 miles, and only 300 yards in
width, w^^^h is divided into two branches by an island that extends from
Maurepas to about the distance of a mile from Ponchartrain. The South channel
is the deepest and shortest.

Lake Ponchartrain.
Lake Ponchartrain. The greatest length of this lake is about 40 miles, breadth
24 miles, and depth 18 feet. The following creeks fall in on the North side,
Tangipaho and Le Comble, 4 feet deep; Chefuncta, 7; and Bonfouca 6; and from
the peninsula of Orleans, Tigahoc, at the mouth of which was a small post. The
Bayouk of St. John, which also communicates on the same side, has been already
mentioned. The French inhabitants, who formerly resided on the North side of
this lake, chiefly employed themselves in making pitch, ^ar, and turpentine,
and raising stock, for which the country is very favorable.

The distance from lake Ponchartrain through the Regolets is 10 miles, and
between 3 and 400 yards broad, and lined with marshes on each side.

Passage into Lake Borgne.
On the South side of the Regolets, and near to the entrance from the sea,
there is a large passage into the lake Borgne, or Blind lake, and, by some
creeks that fall into it, small craft may go as far as the plantations on the
Mississippi; and there is a passage between the lakes Passage through the
Regolets.
Borgne and Ponchartrain: but either by this, or that of the Rigolets, six, and
sometimes seven feet, is the deepest water through.

Pearl River.
Near the entrance at the East end of the Regolets, and on the North side, are
the principal mouths of Pearl river, which rises in the Chactaw nation, and is
navigable upwards of 150 miles. There is 7 feet going into it, and deep water
afterward. In the year 1769, there were some settlements on this river, where
they raised tobacco, indigo, cotton, rice, Indian corn, Produce of the country
on the banks of Pearl River.
and all sorts of vegetables. The land produces a variety of timber fit for
pipe and hogshead staves, masts, yards, and all kinds of plank for ship
building.

St. Louis Day.
From the Regolets to the bay of St. Louis is about 18 miles. This is a small
beautiful compact bay with about 7 feet water in it: the land near it is of a
light soil, and good for pasture. There were several settlers formerly on it,
but in the year 1767, the Chactaw Indians killed their cattle and obliged them
to remove.

Bay of Biloxi.
From this bay to the bay of Biloxi, is 26 miles. Just opposite to Ship island,
on the main land, is situated old Biloxi, Old Biloxi.
in a small bay of the same name, behind L'Isle an Chevereuil, or Buck or Deer
island. This is the place where the French made their first establishment in
Louisiana: but they did not continue there long, finding it in every respect an
improper situation for the capital. There are still a few inhabitants at
Biloxi, some of whom are the offspring of the original settlers. Their chief
employment is raising of cattle and stock, and making pitch and tar: but the
native are very troublesome to them.

Pascagoula River.
From the Biloxi to the Pascagouli river is about 13 miles. This river empties
itself by several mouths; between the eastermost and westermost of which, there
is a space of between 3 and 4 miles, that is nearly one continued bed of oyster
shells, with very shoal water. The only channel is at the westermost entrance,
where there are 4 feet. This large river about 20 miles above its entrance is
divided into two branches, which continue their course to the sea, generally
about 5 or 6 miles asunder. The intermediate space, for several miles above its
mouth, is nothing but marshes intersected by lagoons. After getting into either
of the branches, there is from 3 to 6 fathoms, and the river is said to be
navigable for more than 150 miles.

Soil on the River.
The soil on this river, like all other rivers on the coast of West Florida,
grows better the higher up you go; but even near the entrance it is far from
being bad. There are some good plantations on the East side, but here, as well
as all the was to the westward, the inhabitants are much molested by the
natives, especially by the Chactaws who kill their cattle, etc.

Pass au Heron.
From the pascagoula river to the Pass au Heron at the bay of Mobille is 18
miles. This pass has 4 feet water; and from thence to the point, which is on
the East side of the bay of Mobille, in latitude 30 d 17 m North, ^^ nearly 6
miles.

Before describing this bay, I shall take notice of the following islands
situated along the coast, between the bay of St. Louis and the point of Mobille.

Cat Island, and the adjacent parts.
Cat island lies about 8 miles eastward of the bay of St. Louis, and 7 miles
from the coast: it is 6 miles in length, very narrow, and of an irregular
shape, with a large shoal from the East end of it, extending within two miles
of Ship island. The soil is poor, producing nothing but pine, some live oak and
grass, and its shore is almost every where covered, or bordered with an
immensity of shells.

The marshy islands near the peninsula of Orleans, are distant about 3 miles
South of Cat island; and between them there is a channel of 9 feet, which
continues to the Regolets through a number of shoals.

Ship island.
Ship island is situated between 7 and 8 miles East of Cat island, and about 10
miles South of the bay of Biloxi. This island is 9 miles in length and 2 miles
in width where broadest. It produces pine trees and grass, and there is a well
of tolerable water on it. The western part of this island is very narrow, and
for better than three miles there is not a tree on it. A shoal runs out due
South, about a mile from the West end. The channel is better than a mile wide
with from 4 to 5 and 6 fathoms, but the bar has only 21 feet. In going over it
from the sea the course to be steered is due North, keeping the above shoal
near half a mile to the eastward, and after fairly passing the end of the
island, from the inner part of which lies a shoal, the course proceeds N E
until the broadest part of the point of the island bears due South about one
mile and a half, where there is between 4 and 5 fathoms. Directions for
anchoring.
This is a good place to anchor in the summer time; but is very much exposed in
winter, when the northerly winds prevail; and is a very convenient place for
shipping the produce of the rivers Pearl, Ibberville and Amit, and the lakes
Maurepas and Ponchartrain.

Horn island.
From Ship island to Horn island is between 5 and 6 miles, with a small key
called Dog island between, about two thirds of the way, and with a shoal all
the way from the former to about a quarter of a mile of the latter, where there
is 2 channel of 5 fathoms. The above shoal extends South of the channel nearly
2 miles, where there is a bar of 15 feet; in crossing of which it behooves the
mariner to keep about half a mile from the shore, and to steer for the end of
the island, and on approaching it to give it a birth of about a cables length,
to avoid a shoal on the left; after passing of which he ought to keep a little
to the westward, on account of a shoal that runs from the inside of the island,
then to haul round to the eastward, where there is better than 15 feet water, a
little more than a mile from the island.

Its description.
Horn island is nearly 17 miles in length, and about half a mile in width.
There are more trees on the middle of the island than in any other part of it;
and for about 3 miles from the East end there are no trees at all, but there
are a number of sandy hillocks.

Round island.
Round island lies about 5 miles North from oppofite the middle of Horn island,
and is w^ll timbered.

Island of Massacre.
The island of Massacre is upwards of 2 miles to the eastward of Horn island,
from which a shoal extends better than a mile and a half between the^, leaving
a channel of about 11 feet round the West end of Massacre island; but within
the island there is between 3 and 4 fathoms.

Massacre is nearly 9 miles long and very narrow, it is remarkable for a grove
of trees in the middle, which is the more particular as there is not a tree any
where else on the island.

The distance between Massacre island and the main, is about 10 miles, from 2
to 3 fathoms all the way across; except one large shoal called la Grand Bature,
which stretches out from the main land about a league, with 2 or 3 feet water
on it, and in some places not so much. Behind it, there is a large bay called
L'ance de la Grand Bature, 8 miles East of Pascagoula bluff.

The land here and to the eastward, as far as the bay of Mobille, is swampy
toward the sea, with a clay bottom for 2 or 3 miles back; but afterward it is
covered chiefly with pines, live oak and hickory, and the soil is sandy or
gravelly for several miles, before it becomes truly fit for culture;
notwithstanding which it is good for pasture.

Dauphin island.
From Massacre to Dauphin island is 5 miles, with a shoal all the way between
them. These are supposed formerly to have been but one, which went by the
general name of Massacre, so called by Mons. d'Ibberville, from a large heap of
human bones found thereon at his first landing; but it was afterward called
Dauphin island, in honor of the Dauphin of France, and to take off the
disagreeable idea excited by the other name.

Dauphin island is about 10 miles long, and in the broadest part not qui^e 2
miles. The West end for between 3 and 4 miles, is a narrow slip of land with
some dead trees; the rest is covered with thick pines, which come close to the
waters edge on the East side, forming a large bluff. There is the remains of an
old French post on the South side of the island; about two miles from that
bluff are a few old houses on the North side opposite to it, near which are
large hillocks of oyster shells, now covered with dwarf cedar and ^^ve oak.
There are many such vestiges of the ancient inhabitants in several bays and
other places on the coast. and as these are always found on high banks, the
usual places where the natives encamp, it cannot well be supposed they were
left there by the sea, though many are of that opinion.

Gillori island.
Gillori island is divided from Dauphin island on the North side by a narrow
channel, through which a boat may pass with some difficulty; and between
Gillori and the main land, on the West side of Mobille bay, there is a chain of
small islands, and oyster shells, through which there is a passage of four
feet, called Pass an Heron, where small craft may go from Mobille bay to the
westward within the islands. There is likewise a passage for small boats and
canoes from the West side of the bay of Mobille, through what the French call
Riviere aux Poules, which falls in opposite to the West end of Dauphin island,
and cuts off a considerable space of ground.

Great Pelican island.
Just opposite the old fort, on the South side of Dauphin island, distant one
mile, lies Great Pelican island, which is about a mile in length, and very
narrow. It stretches to the S E in form of a half moon, the concave side being
toward the East end of Dauphin island. There are neither trees nor bushes on
it, but here and there large tufts of grass like small reeds, on the sandy
parts near the sea (...).

Hawk's Bay.
Hawk's bay is between Pelican and Dauphin islands. There is a broad channel of
11 and 12 feet, afterward safe anchorage in four fathoms good holding ground,
and well sheltered from most winds; on which account it is very convenient for
small vessels.

Little Pelican Island.
There is a small sand key called Little Pelican island, about a league S E
from Great Pelican island, forming a curve to the eastward, and there it meets
a large shoal extending from Mobille Point.

Directions for (...) Mobille Bay.
The deepest water on the bar of Mobille, or rather of Mobille bay, (for there
is another bar at the entrance of the river near the town) is only 15 or 16
feet. The mark for going over it in the deepest channel, is to bring Little
Pelican island well on with the bluff on the East end of Dauphin island,
bearing about N N W 3-4 W, and then to steer in for the key in that direction.
The Point of Mobille bears from the bar nearly due North four miles, and the
key is more than a mile and a half within it. Both the East and West r^^fs, as
well as the bar itself, are steep toward the sea, there being from three to
seven and eight fathoms immediately without; this occasions a ce^^^^nt swell
with a heavy sea when it blows from the southward: and therefore in rough
weather, it would be imprudent to go over it in a vessel that draws above 10 or
11 feet water. Within the bar it deepens gradually toward Little Pelican
island, between which and the East reef, the channel is not more than a quarter
of a mile broad, with six or seven fathoms water. This depth continues all the
way round Mobille Point, where is tolerable good anchorage in four or five
fathoms, but it is at best an open road-stead, the bay being too large to
afford much shelter.

Directions for entering Mobille Bay.
From Mobille Point to the town the distance is about 11 leagues nearly due
North, and the breadth of the bay in general is about three or four leagues. At
the lower part of it is a deep bight that runs about six leagues to the
eastward of the point, having a narrow peninsula between it and the sea. The
river Bon S^cour falls into the bottom of this bay or bight, and Fish river
with that of La Sant on the North side of it; on all of which there are several
habitations.

La Riviere aux Poules, and Dog River.
On the West side of the bay of Mobille there are likewise some small rivers,
but none considerable, besides La Riviere aux Poules, by which there is a small
island communication to the westward, and Dog river. which falls into the bay
about nine miles below Mobille. The former has five or six feet in the
entrance, and is navigable for a boat several miles back into the country. With
regard to the general depth of the water in the bay, there is from two to three
fathoms two-thirds of the way from Mobille Point toward the town, and the
deepest water to be depended on in the upper part of the bay is only 10 or 12
feet, and in many places not so much; but there is no danger, as the bottom is
soft mud. Large vessels cannot go within seven miles of the town.

T^^n of Mobille.
Notwithstanding all these inconveniences in point of navigation, Mobille
having been the frontiers of the French dominions in Louisiana, always was, and
now is a very considerable place. It has a small regular fort, built with
brick, and a neat square of barracks for the officers and soldiers. The town is
pretty regular of an oblong figure, on the West bank of the river, where it
enters the bay.

There is a considerable Indian trade carried on here. Mobille, when in
possession of his Britannic Majesty, sent yearly to London, skins and furs
amounting from 12 to 15,000 pounds sterling: it was then the only staple
commodity in this part of the province. The British garrison at Mobille
surrendered to the arms of his Catholic Majesty in the year 1780.

The bay of Mobille terminates a little to the northeastward of the town, in a
number of marshes, and lagoons: which subject the people to fevers and agues in
the hot season.

Mobille River.
The river of Mobille is divided into two principal branches about 40 miles
above the town: one of which is called the Tansa, falls into the East part of
the bay; the other empties itself close by the town, where it has a bar of 7
feet; but there is a branch a little to the eastward of this, called Spanish
river, where there is a channel of 9 or 10 feet, when the water is high, but
this joins Mobille river about two leagues above the town.

Alibama River.
Two or three leagues above the Tansa branch, the Alibama river falls into
Mobille river, after running from the N E a course of about 130 miles; that is
from Alibama fort, situated at the confluence of the Coussa, and Talpouse, both
very considerable rivers; on which and their branches are the chief settlements
of the upper Creek Indians.

The French fort at Alibama was evacuated 1763, and has not since been
garrisoned. Above the confluence of Alibama and Mobille, the latter is called
the Tombecbe river, Tombecbe River.
from the fort of Tombecbe situated on the West side of it, about 96 leagues
above the town of Mobille. The source of this river, is reckoned to be about 40
leagues higher up, in the country of the Chickasaws. The fort of Tombecbe was
taken possession of the English, but abandoned again in 1767, by order of the
commandant of Pensacola. The river is navigable for sloops and schooners about
35 leagues above the town of Mobille. The banks, where low, are partly
overflowed in the rainy seasons, which adds greatly to the soil, and adapts it
particularly to the cultivation of rice. The sides of the river are covered in
many places with large canes, so thick that they are almost impenetrable; there
is also plenty of remarkable large red and white cedar, cypress, elm, ash,
hickory and various kinds of oak. Several people have settled on this river,
who find the soil to answer beyond expectation.

The lands near the mouth of the Mobille river are generally low: as you
proceed upwards, the land grows higher, and may with great propriety be divided
into three stages. First, low rice lands on or near the banks of the river, of
a most excellent quality. Secondly, what are called by the people of the
country second low grounds, or level flat cane lands about 4 or 5 feet higher
than the low ricelands. And, thirdly the high upland or open country. The first
or low lands extend about an half or 3 quarters of a mile from the river, and
may almost every where be easily drained and turned into most excellent rice
fields, and are capable of being laid under water at almost all seasons of the
year. They are a deep black mud or slime, which have in a succession of time
been accumulated, or formed by the overflowing of the river.

The second low grounds being, in general, formed by a regular rising of about
4 or 5 feet higher than the low lands, appears to have been originally the edge
of the river. This second class or kind of land is in general extremely rich
and covered with large timber and thick strong canes, extending in width upon
an average three quarters of a mile, and in general a perfect level. It is
excellent for all kinds of grain, and well calculated for the culture of
indigo, hemp, flax or tobacco.

At the extremity of these second grounds, you come to what is called the high
or upland, which is covered with pine, oak, and hickory, and other kinds of
large timber. The soil is of a good quality, but much inferior to the second or
low land. It answers well for raising Indian corn, potatoes, and every thing
else that delights in a dry light soil. Further out in the country again, on
the West side of this river, you come to a pine barren, with extensive reed
swamps and natural meadows or savannahs which afford excellent ranges of
innumerable herds of cattle.

On the East of the river Mobille, toward the river Alabama, is one entire
extended rich cane country, not inferior perhaps to any in America.

Whenever portages are made between the Mobille and Cherokee river, or their
branches, which are probably but a few miles apart, the Mobille will be the
first river for commerce, (the Mississippi excepted) in this part of the world,
as it affords the shortest and most direct communication to the sea.

Sea coast between Mobille and Pen^acola.
The land to the eastward of Mobille Point, for about three leagues on the
peninsula, is remarkable for alternate spaces of thick and thin trees. The
Point is covered with a grove of thick but not very tall ones. There is a small
lagoon about four leagues to the eastward of the Point, with hardly water at
the entrance for a boat, the trees about which are very tall and thick. There
are several hillocks to the eastward along shore, all the way from thence to
the river Perdido, except at one place, about two-thirds of the way; where
double lands may be seen over a lagoon which stretches to the westward of that
river.

River and bay o^ Perdido.
The river Perdido empties itself into the sea about ^^ leagues to the eastward
of Mobille Point, and four leagues to the westward of the bar of Pensacola. The
entrance is narrow, with a bar of six feet; but afterward it widens
considerably, stretching first to the N E upwards of a league, where it goes
within a mile of the head of the great lagoon West of the entrance of Pensacola
harbor. From this the Perdido turns to the westward for three or four miles,
where is forms a large bay. This river was formerly the boundary between
Florida and Louisiana, dividing the French and Spanish dominions.

Coast to Pensacola Bay.
There is nothing remarkable between the river Perdido and the bar of
Pensacola, except the grand lagoon, which reaches near to the Perdido, with
some straggling trees on the peninsula, and the high red bank on the North side
of it before mentioned. The soundings between the bars of Mobille and Pensacola
are pretty regular, except near the bars, where there is deep water along
shore, as they stretch out. It is necessary in nearing them, to keep a good
offing till their respective marks are on for going over in the deepest
channel. Immediately without them there is very deep water, from 7 to 12 and 13
fathoms, oozy bottom, and good holding ground. At the same distance from the
shore between them, there is only six or eight fathoms; the bottom in general
is fine white sand with black specks and broken shells: in some places a
coarser bottom, and in others oozy sand.

Pensacola Harbor.
The West end of the Island of St. Rosa stretches athwart the mouth of the
harbor, and defends it from the sea. It would be difficult to ascertain the
entrance, were it not for a remarkable red cliff which not only distinguishes
the place, but is a mark for going over the bar in the deepest wate^.

Bar.
The bar of Pensacola is of a semicircular form, with the unequal side to the
sea, and lies at a considerable distance from the land, occasioned, no doubt,
by the conflict between the sea and the bay. The bar runs in a curve from the
West breakers all the way to the eastward of the fort, or Signal House on Rose
island, the outer end of it extending about a mile without the breakers; it is
a flat, hard sand, but the bottom on both sides is soft, oozy ground. After
entering on the bar in the deepest channel, the old fort on Rose island bears N
E 1-4 N two and a half miles; the middle or highest red cliff, N 1-2 W three
and a half miles. In coming from the eastward or westward it is best to keep in
six or seven fathoms, till the West declivity of the highest part of the red
cliff bears about N 1-2 W^ as above; and then to continue that direction. The
water shoals gradually from four to three and three-fourths fathoms; on the
shoalest part it is 21 feet, then it regularly deepens and the bottom grows
softer.

The latitude of the bar of Pensacola is 30d 22m North, and longitude 87d 40m
West from London, the variation of the compass near 5d East.

Directions for passing through the Bay.
When over the bar in five or six fathoms, it is necessary to incline a little
toward the western reef, which has deep water close to it, in order to avoid
the 10 feet bank that there extends about half a mile S W from the point of
Rose island. As the line of direction for the deepest water over the bar leads
just over the West point of this bank, therefore it is proper to keep within
one and a half or two cables length of the breakers (on the North end of which
there are two dry sandy keys) till the West point of Rose island is open with
the straggling trees to the southward of Deer Point, at the entrance of St.
Rosa channel, when one must haul up to the eastward between them clear of the
10 feet bank. There is a narrow channel of 13 feet between this bank and the
point of Rose island. There is also a shoal stretching in a sweep from the red
cliff toward the above mentioned sandy key, therefore care must be taken not
to shut in Tartar Point with Deer Point; but as the soundings are regular,
there is no fear, unless there be little wind, with the tide of ebb, which sets
directly on this shoal, and in that case it is necessary to anchor in time.

Within Tartar Point the bay is about five or six miles broad, stretching to
the North-east toward the town; which is situated on the main land, about
eight miles from Rose island. From thence the bay turns more to the eastward,
and is divided into two large branches or arms; one of which continues to the
eastward about 18 miles from Pensacola, and the other to the northward nearly
the same distance, from three to five mile broad.

Between Tartar Point and Pensacola there are two large lagoons, the
southermost of which runs behind the red cliff.

All the West side of the bay, which forms a sweep toward the town, is shoal
for upwards of half a mile off shore, but the soundings are regular to it.
There is no danger in the bay between Pensacola and Rose island, except a shoal
that runs from Deer Point, which ought to be attended to in working up or down
the harbor. It is the more dangerous, as there is no warning given by the
soundings; for from six fathoms, in a few casts of the lead, you have but as
many feet. It runs more than half a mile to the westward from the point. The
governor's house in the fort bears from the extremity of it N 1-2 E three and a
half miles, and English Point N N E 1-4 E five miles. The best anchorage for
large vessels is just abreast of the town, in four fathoms, about onethird of
a mile off shore; taking care not to bring the governor's house more to the
westward than N W 1-4 W, on account of a shoal that runs off from Indian Point
at the East end of the town. As the tides in that offing run nearly East and
West, ships should be moored accordingly.

Discovery of Pensacola.
The bay of Pensacola, was first discovered by Pamphilio de Narvaez in 1525 But
the Florida coast was previously discovered by Sebastian Cabot in 1497, and by
John Po^ce de Leon in 1512
. After him, several other Spanish adventurers visited it, who gave it
different names; as Porta da Anchuse, Bahia de St. Maria, etc. But Pensacola
was the proper name of it among the Indians, which it will henceforth probably
retain. The first establishment the Spaniards made here was in 1696; when Don
Andrea de Arrivola was appointed governor of this province, which then
comprehended a very large tract of land, on the gulf of Mexico. He built a
small stockado, which he called fort St. Charles, with a church, etc. just by
the red cliff at the entrance of the harbor.

This place was taken in the year 1719, by the French from Mobille. Pensacola
fell at that time an easy prey, having only about 150 men to defend it. Shortly
afterward it was retaken by the Spaniards, who were again dispossessed by the
French in the same year.

The second time the French made themselves masters of it, they kept possession
till the year 1722, when it was restored to the crown of Spain by treaty. The
Spaniards in the interim removed to St. Joseph's bay. About the year 1726, they
built a small town on the West side of Rose island, near the present fort, or
signal house, which was originally constructed by them, but greatly improved by
General Haldimand. The settlement remained there till about the year 1754; but
being then partly overflowed in a gale of wind, the town was removed to the
place where it now stands. After this country was ceded to the English by the
peace of 1762, many places were pointed out as conveniently situated for the
purpose of building a town; but on due examination, the present situation was
generally preferred, and the present town regularly laid out in the beginning
of the year 1765

Description of the Town of Pensacola.
The town of Pensacola is of an oblong form, and lies almost parallel to the
beach. It is about a mile in length, and a quarter of a mile in breadth, but
contracts at both ends. At the West end is a fine rivulet, from which vessels
are supplied with water. The present fort was built by the writer of this
narrative in 1775, with cedar pickets, with 4 block houses at proper ^istances,
which defend or flank the works. It takes up a large space of ground just in
the middle of the town, which it divides in a manner into two separate towns,
and can be of no great service toward the defense of the place, in case an
attack be made on it, either by the natives or a civilized enemy.

The town of Pensacola is surrounded by two pretty large brooks of water, which
take their rise under Gage hill, a small mount behind the town, and discharge
themselves into the bay, one at each extremity of the town.

The town and fort of Pensacola, surrendered to the arms of his Catholic
Majesty, in the year 1781, and with them the whole province of West Florida
became subject to the king of Spain, as before mentioned.

The hopes of a Spanish trade induced many people to settle here, at a great
expense, but it did not answer their expectation. The principal objects ought
to be the Indian trade, indigo, cotton, rice, hemp, tobacco and lumber, these
being the natural produce of the country. Though Pensacola stands in a very sandy
situation, yet with pains the gardens produce great plenty of vegetables. Fruit
trees, such as orange, fig, and peach trees are here in perfection. And the bay
abounds with a variety of fine fish.

About a mile to the eastward of Pensacola, between it and the English ponit,
is the East lagoon, which after turning to the N W 4 or 5 miles, receives the
Six Mile Brook. This is a pretty little winding stream, on the East side of
which is an iron mine, where a large natural magnet was found. There is a fine
mineral spring of the Chalybeate kind, near the mouth of the lagoon, of which
there are several others in this country.

Campble Town.
From English point, the bay stretches to the northward. On the West side, near
the mouth of the river Escambia, lies Campble Town, a settlement of French
protestants, about 10 miles from Pensacola by land, and 13 by water. The spot
on which it stands is high, and a very light soil; but its situation being near
to the marshes, it is thereby rendered unhealthy, and has been the means of
carrying off many of the inhabitants who were sent out in 1766, and were for
sometime supported by government, in order to manufacture silk; but either for
want of proper management, or other reasons, nothing of that kind was
attempted, and the place is since abandoned and the town destroyed.

River Escambia.
The river Escambia, the most considerable that falls into the bay of
Pensacola, empties itself near the head of the North branch, about 12 or 15
miles from Pensacola, through several marshes, and channels, which have a
number of islands between them, that are overflowed when the water is high.
There is a shoal near the entrance, and vessels that draw more than 5 or 6 feet
cannot be carried into it, even through the deepest channel; but there is from
2 to 4 fathoms afterward, I ascended it with a boat upwards of ^0 miles, where
from the depth of water it appeared to be navigable for pettiaugers many miles
further. It is uncertain where the source of this river is; but supposed to be
at a considerable distance, and is very winding in its course.

The lands in general on each side of the river, Remarks on the lands upon the
Escambia, and near Pensacola in West Florida.
are rich low or swamp, admirably adapted for the culture of rice or corn, as
may suit the planter best; and what give these low lands of superiority over
many others, is the great number of rivulets that fall into this river from the
high circumjacent country, which may easily be led over any part of, or almost
all the rice lands, at any season of the year whatever. Near the mouth of this
river are a great number of islands, some of very considerable extent, and not
inferior for rice to any in America. The settlements made by Messieurs Tait and
Mitchell, Captain Johnson, Mr. M'Kinnon and some others, are very evident
proofs of this assertion, who, in the course of two years from their first
settlement, had nearly cleared all the expenses they had been at in making very
considerable establishments; and I am well assured would entirely have done it
in another year had not the Spaniards taken possession of the country.

Further up the river, we meet with other islands, having much higher banks
than those below, very fit for raising Indian corn, or pulse of all kinds, with
a sufficient proportion of rice land on them also. The large island on which
Mr. Marshall made his settlement, nearly opposite the old stockaded fort, about
28 miles from Pensacola by land and 40 by water, is the uppermost island of any
note in the river Escambia, and is, without doubt, in point of fertility of
soil, equal to any thing to be met with in the country. The westerly part of
this last mentioned island is high, and not subject to be overflown, unless in
remarkable high freshes, and then only some particular low parts of it, the
rest is high and well secured against floods; the eastern part of it is low and
liable to be overflowed at some times of the year; the high land extends from
about a mile, to a mile and a half from the westermost branch of the river that
surrounds i^, and is equal to any on the Mississippi, Amit, or Commit. A more
advantageous p^ace for small settlements than this, is not to be met with any
where near Pensacola.

The country on each side of the river above this island is higher, and as the
water is confined in one channel, forms a most beautiful river, with great
plenty of good low lands on each side of it for many miles up. The low lands
generally extend from a mile and a half to two miles from the banks of the
river, and some places more, when we come to a fine high pine country,
intermixed with oak and hickory land. There are, on both sides of this river, a
number of rising grounds or bluffs, which afford delightful prospects on the
river, and would be elegant situations for gentlemen's seats. The low lands and
islands abound with great quantities of white and red oak for staves, which
answer well for the West India market, and an inexhaustible quantity of cypress
for lumber and shingles, together with plenty of red and white cedar for
building. The open country, or high lands bordering on these low rich lands are
generally pine, but of a quality superior to most other pine countries, having
generally a good soil for five or six inches deep, and well adapted for raising
corn, beans, peace, turnips, potatoes, etc.

Perhaps there is no country more beautifully diver(...) with hills and dales,
nor more plentifully supplied with fine streams, than that which borders on the
low lands upon this river. But what, in a very particular manner, recommends
this part of West-Florida, is the fine and extensive ranges for cattle which
are so frequently to be met with here; it being very common for an ordinary
planter to have 200 heads and some 1000 heads, within the vicinity of
Pensacola. There is scarcely a stream in these parts but what has water
sufficient for sawmills, and the country abounds with excellent timber for
planks or lumber of all kinds.

The air is pure and healthy, and the planters and negroes enjoy a good state
of health the year round. The Indians emphatically call it, on account of the
fine streams of water every where to be met with, the sweet water country.
Great plenty of fish is to be found in this river, and all kinds of wild game
are to be met with in great abundance.

With regard to the face of the country between the Escambia and Pensacola, it
is varied with valleys and rising grounds. At about 20 miles from Pensacola the
soil grows better than it is at the town; the valleys are covered with grass or
canes, interspersed with thickets of laurel, myrtle, and casina. There is
generally a rivulet running through each of them, either toward the Perdido or
Escambia. The rising grounds are chiefly covered with pines, oak, and hickory.

The North branch of the bay of Pensacola is only navigable for small vessels.
It was formerly well settled on each side. The middle land between the North
bay and the Ouyavalana, or Yellow Water, a branch of the East bay, abounds with
large tall pines sit for masts, yards, etc.

Middle River.
The Yellow Water, or Middle river, enters the East branch of the bay at the N
E corner, and after going about five or six leagues up the country, the eastern
branch ends in a basin or lake at the bottom of a rising ground, but the
western branch I have ascended some leagues further. There are several small
islands near the entrance of this river, which produce cypress and small
cedars, but the soil is indifferent.

East River.
The East river empties into the bottom of the East branch, about six miles
from the Middle river. It is about a quarter of a mile broad for 2 leagues, and
then contracts to the breadth of 30 or 40 feet. This river comes from the
eastward, running nearly parallel to St. R^ses channel, and its source is about
16 miles from its entrance into the bay.

The peninsula between the bay of Pensacola and St. Roses channel, which is
from 1 to 3 or 4 miles broad, is in general very poor sandy soil. It produces,
in some places, large pines and live oak.

Rose Island.
Rose island extends along the coast, for the space of near 50 miles, and is no
where above half a mile broad. It is very remarkable for its white sandy
hummocks, and straggling trees here and there. There is a clump of 4 tall trees
close together, which, at a distance, appears like one, about 18 miles from the
West end, and another of the same kind about a league further to the east^ard.
There are likewise, several hummocks, more easy to remark than describe, but an
attentive person, after once or twice sailing along, can be at no loss to know
what part of the coast the falls in with.

The peculiarity of the appearance of Rose island from the sea, and the deep
soundings all along it, are of great service to know the coast: there are 9 or
10 fathoms in some places, within a mile or two of the shore; and, when a
frigate is within 16 or 17 fathoms, the tops of the trees on the main land may
be descried from the quarter deck. The bottom is generally fine white sand,
with broken shells, and black specks, but in one place off the East end of Rose
island, out of sight of land, the bottom is of a coarse gravel, mixed with
coral. This ought particularly to be attended to, as it is the only spot with
that kind of soundings on the coast: it is of a considerable extent, and there
are from 20 to 30 and 40 fathoms on it, or more. There is indeed a coral bottom
off the bay of Esperito Sancto, and some other parts on the coast o^ East
Florida, but these generally begin in 7 or 8 fathoms, within sight of land;
from which and the difference of latitude, one cannot be mistaken for the other.

Bay of St. Rosa.
This is a very extensive bay, stretching about 30 miles to the north-east, and
is from 4 to 6 miles broad. There is a bar before it with only 7 or 8 feet
where deepest. But afterward there is 16 or 17 feet, as far as the red bluff
on the main land. The channel between this bluff and the East part of Rose
island is but narrow, and a little further on, toward the bay, it is choked
up with a large shoal in some places dry, the deepest water on it is only 4 or
5 feet; so that nothing but very small vessels can enter this bay from the sea,
and the channel between Rose island and the main, is just sufficient for boats
or pettiaugers.

On the North side of St. Rose's bay, almost opposite to the entrance from the
sea, there are three pretty large branches, which stretch several miles: the
westermost, which is the largest, is again subdivided into smaller branches,
all which have deep water. The other two receive each a considerable rivulet of
clear water with a rapid stream. On the banks there is plenty of cedar, etc.

Chacta-hatcha River.
The largest river that falls into St. Rose's bay is the Chacta-hatcha or Pea
river, which runs from the N E, and enters the bottom of the bay through
several mouths, but so shoal that only a small boat or canoe can pass them. I
ascended this river about 25 leagues, where there is settled a small party of
the Coussac Indians. The banks of this river, in point of soil and timber,
resembles very much those of the river Escambia.

Coast between the bays of St Rosa and St. Andrews.
Between the bays of St. Rosa, and St. Andrews, the coast runs E S E, and S E
by E, for the space of 52 miles, the soundings much the same as off Rose
island; it is to be observed that the trees are thick, and come pretty close to
the shore. There are likewise some red hummocks as well as white, which with
the trenching of the land may be of service to know that part of the coast.

St. Andrew's Bay.
The entrance of St. Andrew's bay is between a small island on the right hand,
and a narrow peninsula on the left. There is a high white sand hill, which is a
remarkable object from the sea: it lies in latitude 30d 06m North, and about 10
leagues to the North-west of Cape Blaise. From the point of the peninsula,
there is a large shoal extending for more than two thirds of the way toward
the island; which is 2 miles distant, leaving a channel of 17 or 18 feet, but
it has a small bar of 13 feet.

There is anchorage just within St. Andrew's island in 3 fathoms and an half,
but it is more commodious within the point of the peninsula in 5 fathoms, with
the advantage of fresh water, which is easily got by digging.

St. Andrew's bay runs first to the N W, nearly parallel to the sea shore, for
3 leagues; then it turns to the eastward for about a league, when a large
branch breaks off to the S E. The main body continues to the northward for 2
leagues, when it is divided into two large branches, one going to the N E, and
the other to the westward. This last, which is the least, reaches within a few
miles of St. Rosa's bay. The country between them is low and marshy, and full
of fresh water ponds.

St. Andrew's bay is navigable for any vessels that can go over the bar. There
is a large shoal with only 3 or 4 feet, about half way up the first reach, but
there is a deep channel on the West side of it, and afterward there is from 3
to 7 fathoms all over the bay. There are no rivers of any consequence, nor can
the soil immediately on the bay be much commended; there is however great
plenty of large pines, live oak, and cedar.

Coast from St. Andrew's island to the bay of St. Joseph.
From St. Andrew's island to the bay of St. Joseph's, the middle of the coast
between them runs about E S E near 15 miles, with a shoal all the way between
them near the shore, which easily appears, it being of a whiteish color. There
is from 12 to 18 feet on the greatest part of it, except toward the mouth of
St. Joseph's bay, where there is a bank near the middle, between St. Joseph's
point and the main land, with only 7 or 8 feet, and 4 fathoms just within; but
there is a very good channel with 3 fathoms on the bar, between that bank and
St. Joseph's point, on the right hand going in.

St. Joseph's Bay.
In going into St. Joseph's bay it is requisite to keep within a cable and a
half or two cables length of the peninsula, in five or four and a half fathoms,
as it shoals regularly toward the point, from which a spit of sand runs out a
little way; and when in three fathoms to haul round gradually, still keeping
near two cables length off shore. The bar is narrow, and immediately within it
there is from four to six and a half fathoms soft ground. The end of the
peninsula forms two or three points, from each of which a small spit runs off
for a little distance, which may be known by the discolored water on them.
This is an excellent harbor; in which the best place for anchoring is just
within the peninsula, opposite to some ruins that still remain of the village
of St. Joseph. There the Spaniards had a post, which they abandoned about the
year 1700, but they took possession of it again in 1719. There is very good
water to the got here by digging, and on the North side of the bay are two or
three small fresh water brooks, opposite to which are three or four fathoms
close to the shore. In the year 1717, the French erected a fort which they
called Croevcoeur, a mile to the northward of a brook in St. Joseph's bay,
opposite to the point of the peninsula, but abandoned in the next year, on the
representation of the governor of Pensacola that it belonged to his Catholic
Majesty. The bay is nearly of the figure of a horse-shoe, being about twelve
miles in length, and seven across where broadest. Toward the bottom of it are
a few small islands, and the water is so shoal that a boat can hardly go near
the shore.

The soil on the North side of the bay is very sandy, but there are some spots
near the ruins of St. Joseph's that are covered with a kind of verdure, and
produce plenty of grapes, some of which are large, of a purple color, and
pretty good to the taste: they were probably planted there by the Spaniards.
There are here likewise some small cabbage trees, of which there are great
numbers on St. George's islands beyond Cape Blaise, and on all the coast to the
eastward. These cabbage trees do not grow above the height of 20 feet; the bud,
or unformed leaves in the heart being boiled has somewhat the taste of cabbage,
but is more delicious.

A very good establishment might be made here for a fishery, as the settlers
might make salt on the spot to cure the bass, rock, cod, grouper, red mullet,
and other kinds of fish, which are here in great abundance; and, when well
cured, are little if at all inferior to those brought from the northward.

Peninsula between St. Joseph's and Cape Blaise.
The peninsula between St. Joseph's and Cape Blaise is a narrow slip of land,
in some places not above a quarter of a mile broad. The gaps here and there
upon it, and the water in the bay appearing through them from the mast-head,
together with the trenching of the land about NNW, and SSE, for near four
leagues, make it easily known. The trees about Cape Blaise are very thick, and
there is a remarkable single tree, like a bush, that stands without the others
toward the point. In case of an easterly wind, there is safe anchorage
opposite the thickest trees in six or seven fathoms, about one or two miles off
shore; and there is a large pond of fresh water near the beach, about three or
four miles to the eastward of Cape Blaise. There is also a remarkable gap among
the trees between the sea and the bottom of St. Joseph's bay, where is a narrow
ifthmus not above 5 or 600 yards broad.

Cape Blaise.
Cape Blaise, where it ends in a low point near two miles from the trees, in
latitude 29d 40m N, is not only remarkable from the aforesaid circumstances,
but likewise on account of the irregular soundings that are found a great way
out at sea from it. There is a spit of land that runs about two miles from the
point in a SSE direction; and there are several banks of three or four fathoms,
at the distance of six or seven miles, with deep water from seven to ten
fathoms between them. There are even some banks of five and six fathoms almost
out of sight of land from the mast-head; but though they may alarm a stranger,
there is no danger in going near enough to make the land plain.

Cape St. George's.
There is another cape or point of land about six leagues to the eastward of
Cape Blaise, being an elbow of the largest of St. George's islands, nearly
opposite to the river Apalachicola. This point lies in 29d 38m N. There is a
large shoal running out from it a considerable way, but how far has not yet
been ascertained. The coast between it and Cape Blaise forms a kind of hollow
bay, with deep soundings and a soft bottom. There are two islands to the
North-west of St. George's cape; that nearest to it is small, and remarkable
for a clump of straggling trees on the middle of it; the other is a pretty
large island of a triangular form, and reaches within three leagues of Cape
Blaise, having a passage at each end of it for small craft into the bay,
between these islands and the river Apalachicola: but this bay is full of
shoals and oyster banks, and not above two or three feet water at most in any
of the branches of that river.

General Observations.
Having thus given an account of the seacoast of West-Florida, I shall
conclude with a few general observations on the seasons, winds, tides, etc. As
most of the bars lie a considerable way without the entrance of the bays and
rivers, the water seldom rises or falls on them above a foot; but in the bays
or channels it rises two or three feet. The tides are irregular, and seem to be
governed in a great measure by the winds; but not always by that wind which
blows directly on the spot. Though there is generally about 12 hours flood and
12 hours ebb, yet it often happens that there are two tides of each in the
space of 24 hours; and sometimes the tide will run one way for the space of 18
hours together, and only five or six hours the contrary, so that nothing can be
said with certainty on this subject. By reason of the trade winds blowing in
the Atlantic ocean, and continuing into the bay of Mexico, it is natural to
suppose that the water, being there hemmed in, will of course force a passage
out where it finds the least resistance; which is through the gulf of Florida.
From this general principle it should follow, that on the coast of West-Florida
it ought to run from West to East, which in some measure would account for the
shoals being found at the East end of all the islands on this coast, and deep
water on the West ends; but in a large bay or Mediterranean sea like that of
Mexico, where there are so many rivers, bays, etc. the general course of the
current must be greatly disturbed. From this proceeds that irregularity which
is observable on the North side of the bay of Mexico, where the tide of ebb
always sets to the eastward near the shore, and the flood from the southward or
S E: what it may do in the offing has not yet been examined, nor will it be
easily determined.

To the eastward of Cape Blaise, the general observations concerning the deep
water at the West end of the islands and peninsulas, and vice versa, do not
seem always to hold good. Indeed, as far as has been examined of the West part
of East-Florida, it is a shoala considerable way from the land, (and therefore
ought to be known only to be avoided) except the bay of Esperitu Sancto The bay
of Espiritu Sancto is situated on the West coast of the province of
East-Florida in 27 degrees. of North latitude. It has a good harbor, but the land
all about that coast is very low, and cannot be seen from ^ ship's deck when in
seven fathoms water. Several low sandy islands and marshes, covered with
mangrove ^ushe^ lie before the main land. Here is the greatest quantity of fish
in the summer time imaginable, which may be catched with a seine, enough to
load a ship, if the climate would admit o^ curing them, even in a few days.

Here is stone proper for buildings, on this coast. Also great plenty of deer,
and some wild cattle. But the main land near the coast is in general sandy and
barren, and is intermixed in many places with valli^s capable of improvement
for stock of all sorts. The bay and islands before the main land abound with
fish and various sorts of wild fowl.


, at the entrance of which, in the latitude 27d 8m, there is four fathoms and
safe anchorage.

From the winds that prevail in general on this coast during the months of
April, May, and to the middle of June, the weather is mild. The sea and land
breezes are pretty regular, and they generally continue so all the summer. In
July, August, and most of September, there are frequent squalls, with much
rain, thunder, and lightning; and sometimes gales of wind from the South and
South-west for several days together. From the middle of October to the end of
March, the northerly winds prevail, which at times blow very hard during that
season; when the wind changes to the eastward or southward of that point, it is
commonly attended with close, hazy, or foggy weather.

It ought to be observed in sailing in the Gulf of Mexico, to be very careful
of logs or driftwood in the night time; for when the waters of the Mississippi
are high, that river disgorges an immense number of large logs, or trees, which
being driven by the winds and currents all over the gulf, may do considerable
damage to vessels under full sail.

I SHALL here subjoin some Remarks on the Tortugas, etc. as heretofore
published by George Gauld, Esquire.

AS a competent knowledge of the situation of the Dry Tortugas is absolutely
necessary for the navigation to and from the North side of the bay of Mexico,
and from the West Indies through the Gulf of Florida, a few general remarks
concerning them may not be unacceptable to the public at this time.

They consist of ten small islands, or keys, extending ENE and WSW for ten or
eleven miles, at the distance of about thirty leagues from the nearest part of
the coast of Florida, forty from the island of Cuba; and fourteen leagues from
the westermost of the Florida keys. They are all very low, but some of them
covered with mangrove bushes, and may be seen at four leagues distance. The
southwestermost keys, which, in going from Pensacola, Mobille, or the
Mississippi, is the corner to be turned, and coming from Cape Antonio the point
to be avoided, lies in 24d 32m North latitude, and about 83d 50m West
longitude, from the Royal Observatory at Greenwich; the variation of the
compass, by a medium of several observations, is seven degrees East. A reef of
coral rocks runs about a quarter of a mile S W from these keys, the water on
which is discolored; and in general, wherever there is danger it may easily be
seen from the mast-head in the day time. There is a large bank of brown coral
rocks, intermixed with white patches of sand, about five or six miles to the
westward of the Tortugas, with very irregular soundings from six to twelve
fathoms; the bottom appears very plainly, and though it may be alarming to
strangers, yet there is no danger. You will find from thirteen to seventeen
fathoms between this bank and the Tortugas.

If you are bound to the eastward, and meet with a strong easterly gale, which
is frequent there in the summer season, you may safely come to an anchor in
five or six fathoms, under the lee of the long sandy island to the northward of
the S W key, about a quarter of a mile off shore. The bank of soundings extends
only about five or six leagues to the southward of the Tortugas, but much
farther to the westward, and all the way to the northward along the Florida
shore. This is a lucky circumstance for the safety of ^^vigation in those
parts, as caution in soundings may prevent any danger in the night time; for
the soundings are extremely regular all along this bank to the northward,
almost to Cape Blaise, in latitude 29d 41m: so that by the latitude and depth
of water, we generally know how far we are to the eastward or westward. There
is a space of several leagues together, from twenty to fifty fathoms, but from
fifty or sixty it deepens fast to seventy, eighty, and soon after no ground.

From the bar of Pensacola to the Dry Tortugas the true course is S 30d E 134
leagues, and therefore SE by S by the compass will carry you clear of them to
the westward; but it will be both prudent and necessary to sound frequently
when you get into the latitude of 26d and 25m, and never stand in to less than
thirty fathoms in the night time, till you are past the latitude of 24d 30m,
when you may haul up S E by E or E S E, which will carry you near to the
Havanna.

There is a broad channel over the bank to the eastward of the Tortugas, of ten
to seventeen fathoms, which, in going to and from the coast of West-Florida,
etc. might occasionally cut off a great ^^al of the distance; but that passage
is by no means to be attempted, unless you can see the Tortugas distinctly, and
keep within two or three leagues of the eastermost of them, as there is a coral
bank of only twelve feet at the distance of five leagues, and farther on
toward Cayo Marquis, the westermost of the Florida keys, there is a very
dangerous and extensive bank of quicksand, on many parts of which there are no
more than four or five feet of water. It is of a remarkable white color, and
may be easily seen and avoided in the day time.

HAVING now finished my intended narrative, I shall close it with the following
observations upon the probable consequences that will arise to the United
States of America, from the possession of so extensive a country, abounding
with such a variety of climate, soil, and productions; referring my reader for
his further information upon the subject, to the Philosophical Essays published
in London in 1772, concerning the state of the British empire on this continent.

There is some amusement at least in reflecting upon the vast consequences,
which some-time or other must infallibly attend the settling of America. If we
consider the progress of the empires which have hitherto existed in the world,
we shall find the short duration of their most glorious periods, owing to
causes which will not operate against that of North America. Those empires were
formed by conquest; a great many nations different in character, language and
ideas, were by force jumbled into one heterogeneous power: it is most
surprising that such diss^nant parts should hold together so long. But when the
band of union was weakened, they returned to their original and natural
separation: language and national character formed many sovereignties out of
the former connected varieties. This, however, will be very different with
North America. The habitable parts of which, including the dominions of Britain
and of Spain, North of latitude 30d, contain above 3,500,000 square miles. It
would be unnecessary to remark, that this includes what at present does not
belong to our North America. If we want it, I warrant it will soon be ours.
This extent of territory is much greater than that of any empire that ever
existed, as will appear by the following table.

Square Miles. The Persian empire under Darius contained 1,650,000 The Roman
empire in its utmost extent 1,610,000 The Chinese empire, 1,749,000 The Great
Mogul's, 1,116,000

The Russian empire, including all Tartary, is larger than any of these. But I
might as well throw into the American scale the countries about the Hudson's
bay, for the one is as likely to be peopled as the other; whereas all I have
taken in will assuredly be so. Besides, North America is actually peopling very
fast, which is far enough from being the case with the Russian deserts. Now the
habitable part of what was once the British dominions alone in North America,
contains above 1,200,000 square miles, or almost equal to any of the above. But
the whole, as I before observed, is 3,500,000, or more than the Persian and
Roman empires together. In respect, therefore, to extent, and the means of
maintaining numbers of people, it is superior to all. But then comes the
advantage which is decisive of its duration. This immense continent will be
peopled by persons whose language and national character must be the same.
Foreigners who may resort to us, will be confounded by the general population,
and the whole people, physically speaking, one: so that those seeds of decay,
sown in the very foundation of the ancient empires, will have no existence
here. Further, the peopling of this vast tract from a nation renowned in trade,
navigation and naval power, has occasioned all the ideas of the original to be
transplanted into the copy. And these advantages having been so long enjoyed,
with the amazing and unparalleled situation for commerce between Europe, Asia,
and the great southern continent; and America at the same time possessing,
above other countries, the means of building, sitting out, and maintaining a
great navy; the inhabitants of this potent empire, so far from being in the
least danger from the attacks of any other quarter of the globe, will have it
in their power to engross the whole commerce of it, and to reign, not only
lords of America, but to possess, in the utmost security, the dominion of sea
throughout the world, which their ancestors enjoyed before them. None of the
ancient empires, therefore, which fell a prey to the Tartars, nor the present
one of China, can be compared to this of North America, which, as surely as the
land is now in being, will hereafter be trod by the first people the world ever
know.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 6, line 24, instead of in read on the Mississipi.

Page 10, line 36, instead of on read in said latitude.

Page 29, line 19, instead of this read their value.

Page 31, line 16, instead of the read though strong.

Page 33, line 27, instead of port read post.

Page 47, line 22, instead of lake read a lake.

TABLE OF DISTANCES.
Miles From the Balize or the Mouths of the Mississippi to the Detour aux
Plaquemines, is 32 to beginning of the settlements 20 to the Detour des Anglois
35 to New Orleans 18 to the villages of the Humas and Alibama Indians 60 to the
Fourche de Chetimachas and Indian village of the same name 3 to the Concession
of Mons. Paris 9 to the Ibberville 27 to Baton Rouge 18 to the settlement of
Point Coupee 17 to upper end of this settlement where there is a village of
Tunica Indians on the East side 20 to the Chafalaya, the uppermost mouth of the
Mississippi 30 to the River Rouge 3 to Fort Rosalie at the Natchez 56 to the
Petit Goufre 31 to the Grand Goufre 14 to the Yazou Cliffs 39 to the River
Yazou 7 to the River Arkansaw 158 to the River St. Francis 108 to the River and
Heights of Margot 70 to the Chickasaw River 104 to Mine au^fer 67 to the River
Ohio 15 Total, 964


