Mr. Hemmenway's ELECTION SERMON, DELIVERED

TWENTY-SIXTH of MAY

1784.

A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE HIS EXCELLENCY JOHN HANCOCK, Esquire; GOVERNOR; HIS
HONOR THOMAS CUSHING, Esquire; LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR; THE HONORABLE THE COUNCIL, AND
THE HONORABLE THE SENATE, AND HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES, OF THE Commonwealth of
MASSACHUSETTS, MAY 26, 1784.

BEING THE DAY OF GENERAL ELECTION.

By Moses Hemmenway, A. M.

Some Parts of this Discourse, which were shortened in preaching, are here
published at Large.

BOSTON (Commonwealth of Massachusetts) PRINTED BY BENJAMIN EDES AND SONS, No.
42 CORNHILL.

M,DCC,LXXXIV.

Commonwealth of MASSACHUSETTS. In the HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES, May 26, 1784.
ORDERED, THAT Mr. Smith, Mr. Bragdon, and Mr. Hill, be a Committee to wait on
the Reverend Mr. MOSES HEMMENWAY, and thank him, in Behalf of this House, for
the Sermon delivered by him, this Day, before His Excellency the Governor, the
Council, and the two Branches of the General Court; and to request a Copy of
the same for the Press.

SAMUEL A. OTIS, Speaker.

AN ELECTION SERMON.
Vth Chap. to the GALATIONS, 13 Ver. "For brethren ye have been called unto
liberty; only use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love serve
one another."
WHEN Moses, being called by God from an obscure state of life, to stand before
a court, and deliver the message of Heaven to them, would have excused himself,
alleging that "He was not eloquent," his false modesty was frowned upon; his
pleas were all overruled; and he was animated to his great work, with a
promise of special assistance from God: "I will be with thy mouth, and teach
thee what thou shall say."

THIS instance may, I think, encourage us to hope for divine assistance,
whenever we are by the providence of God called to undertake services for which
we may seem too unequal. It is this hope emboldens me now to appear in this
place: and it is also hoped that the present attempt, undertaken in obedience
to authority, may be favorably accepted, or at least excused.

ON this occasion, it will not, I presume, be expected, or desired, that I
should attempt to go beyond my own line, or affect to discourse as a
connoisseur in politics; but that I assist as a CHRISTIAN MINISTER at the
solemn acts of religious worship which are this day publicly offered by a
CHRISTIAN STATE to the supreme King of nations, whose ordinance civil
government is; from whom all the authority of rulers and all the rights of
subjects are originally derived; to whom the mutual duties of all orders of men
are to be ultimately referred; and by whose blessing alone, communities, as
well as individuals, can be happy.

THE knowledge of ourselves is confessedly a capital and fundamental point of
true wisdom. "The proper knowledge of mankind is man." And of this there is no
branch which more deserves the attention of every one, than to understand our
duty on the one hand, and our rights and privileges on the other. For want of
clear and just apprehensions of these things, some have been ready to imagine
that there is a kind of opposition between duty and right; or in other words,
that the bonds of duty are a restraint and abridgment of liberty; and that
liberty is a license to do whatever we please. -- Hence different men have
inclined to different extremes. Some by urging the obligations of duty in such
a manner as tends to beget and cherish a spirit of bondage, and by laying heavy
burdens on the consciences of men in things where God has left them free, have
entrenched on the rights and liberties of mankind. Others, in their unguarded
zeal for liberty, have relaxed the bonds of duty, and have given and taken too
much encouragement to licenciousness, "using liberty for an occasion to the
flesh."

BUT our duties, and our rights or privileges, if rightly stated, are so far
from interfering, or being inconsistent, that they mutually infer, establish,
and support each other.

THE apostle, in the words now read, appears to have had both the mentioned
extremes distinctly in his view. As there were some who, by endeavoring to
impose the observance of the abrogated ordinances of the Jewish law, incroached
on the rights and liberty of christians, St. Paul asserts these their rights,
reminds his christian brethren that Christ had made them free, and exhorts them
to stand fast in their liberty to which they were called, and not be entangled
with a yoke of bondage. At the same time he cautions them against the opposite
extreme, of abusing liberty for an occasion to the flesh; or of indulging
themselves in a carnal licentious life; and then directs them "by love to serve
one another," and not think such mutual subjection to be any way unsuitable the
honor they were called to, of being the Lord's free men.

BUT whatever may be the special occasion of the words, and however we may
expound them in reference to that occasion, we may, I think, be allowed to
consider them as applicable to all those liberties which belong to us either as
men, or as citizens, or as christians. GOD has called us to liberty in all
these different respects; and the gospel furnishes us with a good warrant to
assert and claim these our rights. And though the main design of the sacred
writers be to instruct us in the great concernments of our eternal salvation;
yet they have also given us to understand, that liberty, in a more general
sense, is our indefeasible right. Christianity is indeed alike favorable to the
liberty of subjects, and the rightful authority of rulers; and is the best
security and support of both in their proper consistency with each other. And
we are more beholden to the oracles of GOD than to the schools of philosophy,
for just and generous notions of the rights of mankind. -- A christian, besides
his peculiar spiritual privileges, holds his natural and civil liberty by a
stronger handle than any other, and can maintain it to better advantage. He has
by the gospel, a new covenant right to the common privileges of humanity, as
well as to those special ones he is entitled to as a child and heir of GOD.
That state of liberty to which he is called, and which he is authorized to
claim and maintain, comprehends those natural and civil rights which belong to
him as a man, or as a member of the commonwealth, as well as those special
privileges which appertain to him as a subject of the kingdom of heaven. If I
should therefore take occasion to offer some considerations on LIBERTY in this
general view, the argument would, I conceive, be not foreign to my text, nor
unsuitable to the present solemnity, nor unworthy of the attention of this
grave and respectable audience.

HERE are three points which require to be distinctly considered, as the time
will allow: and I shall take them in the same order in which they lie before us
in our text.

FIRST. That GOD has called us to liberty. SECONDLY. Liberty ought not to be
used for an occasion to the flesh, or a pretense for carnal and licentious
indulgencies. THIRDLY. It is our duty, and no infringement of our rights and
privileges, to serve one another in love.
FIRST. GOD has called us to liberty. --

IT is his declared will, that mankind should be free. The cause of liberty is
the cause of GOD; which he approves, favors, and befriends. The law and light
of nature make it evident that liberty is the right of all mankind. But the
scriptures make it yet more evident that the people of GOD, the subjects of his
heavenly kingdom, are entitled to, and invested with, this invaluable
privilege, of which they have in the gospel an authentic charter, ratified,
sealed, and ^worn by GOD himself.

BUT it seems necessary that we here examine what we are to understand by that
LIBERTY which we claim as our right, by virtue of a Divine grant. For though we
are generally forward to profess ourselves to be its friends and advocates, and
the love of it is said to be natural to us; yet there are many who do not well
understand what they say, or whereof they affirm, in their flourishes on this
subject. Indeed, if the matter be duly considered, we shall have reason to
think that none but persons of real virtue are heartily friendly to true
liberty, or desire the enjoyment of it either for themselves or others,
whatever flattering encomiums they may bestow upon it.

WHEN we speak of liberty as our right or privilege, we must be supposed to
mean something valuable, dignifying, and desirable; something which our nature
and state are capable of; something which is consistent with our moral agency,
and our being under the obligations of law, and duty to our maker and our
fellow creatures.

HENCE it follows clearly, that human liberty cannot consist in lawless
licentiousness, or in being independent, and not subject to any authority; or
in being allowed to invade the rights of others; to act unreasonably, and make
ourselves and our fellow creatures miserable. Far be it from any of us to
imagine that the state of liberty, to which God has called us, dissolves the
bonds of our duty, or confounds the essential differences of right and wrong:
or to entertain so absurd a thought as that any one can possibly have a right
to do wrong: or to conceive that an exemption from the obligations of morality,
and from subjection to rightful authority, would be any desirable privilege. --
A lawless person is the basest, most odious and contemptible creature in the
world.

EVERY man is necessarily subject to the authority of GOD. This is indeed an
argument of our imperfection and dependent state. But we are so far from having
any reason to be uneasy at it, that it is matter of joy and glorying to us that
the Lord is our king. And his authority over us is so far from depriving us of
any desirable liberty, that it is indeed the basis, guard and security of it.
We therefore claim it as our right to be free from every yoke of bondage which
can justly be accounted any grievance, because we are the servants of God, who
allows none to tyrannize or usurp authority over any, and forbids our
submitting to such unauthorised claims. And though we are required to be
subject to our lawful superiors in families, in church and state, yet God
requires us to yield this obedience not with a slavish, but a free and liberal
spirit -- we are to be subject to the higher powers in the Lord, and for the
Lord's sake, whose ordinance they are. And while we obey their lawful commands,
it is our right and duty to disown them for our absolute masters. For we are
not the servants of men, but of God alone.

IF I should attempt a definition or description of liberty in general,
considered as a right or privilege claimable by mankind, I would say that it
consists in a person's being allowed to hold, use and enjoy all his faculties,
advantages, and rights, according to his own judgment and pleasure, in such
ways as are consistent with the rights of others, and the duty we owe to our
maker and our fellow creatures. Liberty must never be used but within the
bounds of right and duty. God allows us not to hold, use, or enjoy any thing to
the injury of any one. A license to do wrong and encroach on the rights of
others, is no part of that liberty which God has granted us; nor is it any
restraint of our true freedom for us to be restrained by laws from wicked,
unreasonable and injurious actions.

BUT that we may understand more distinctly the nature and extent of our
liberty under the government of God, we may consider ourselves in three
different states -- 1st. As individual persons in what is called the state of
nature, that is previous to such confederation as forms a civil community. --
2dly. As united and incorporated into a political society. -- 3dly. As members
of the church of God. -- Answerably to these several states or capacities, we
may consider that liberty which we claim as our right as coming under a
threefold distinction and denomination: supposing any one to be in a state of
nature, he has then a right to NATURAL LIBERTY: if we consider him as a member
of a civil body, he has a right to CIVIL LIBERTY; and if a member of the
christian church, he is entitled to CHRISTIAN LIBERTY.

NATURAL LIBERTY does not consist in an exemption from the obligations of
morality, and the duties of truth, righteousness and kindness to our fellow
men; nor does it give any one a right to seize by force or fraud whatever he
may have a mind for, how much soever it may be to the damage of others; as some
have most absurdly taught. The obligation of the law of God, which we are all
under, and which requires us to love our neighbor, and do as we would be done
unto, does not take its force from human compacts. Our natural rights are
bounded and determined by the law of nature, which binds us to be subject to
the will and authority of God, to love and worship him; to be just and
benevolent to our fellow creatures, doing them all the good in our power, and
offering no injury or abuse to any one. It is therefore no violation of our
natural liberty and rights for us not to be allowed to do wrong, and to be
restrained by force and punishments, from invading the right and property of
others.

BUT in a state of natural liberty, every one has a right to be exempt from
subjection to the authority of any man. There is also a right to think, speak,
and act freely, without compulsion or restraint; and to use our faculties and
property as we please, provided that none are thereby injured, nor the
obligations of morality infringed. Liberty of conscience is also the natural
and unalienable right of every one: A right of which no man can be justly
deprived; which can never be forfeited, never given up to any one upon earth.
Our Supreme Lord allows us not to subject our consciences to the authority of
any but himself alone. If therefore any one should consent to give up this
previous branch of liberty, and acknowledge any man as the Lord of his
conscience, such an unwarrantable act would be null and void. -- In a state of
natural liberty, men have also a right to form such associations with others,
and enter into such confederations, and submit to such laws and constitutions,
as shall be for the general good. In other words, they have a right to form
into a civil society, and authorize fit persons to exercise the powers of
government necessary to effectuate the good ends for which the social union is
formed.

BUT it is to be carefully remembered, that no man has ever any rightful
liberty to consent to any constitution or compact inconsistent with his own
safety and welfare, and that of his fellow men: for instance, to authorize any
to govern unrighteously and oppressively. -- The establishing a pernicious
tyranny is a great injury to mankind, and so is beyond the limits of our
natural rights. No human laws or covenants can give any authority or validity
to an act which God disallows: and if any people have been so imprudent and
blameable as to consent to, and put themselves under a tyrannical government,
they are so far from being bound in honor or conscience to support it, that it
is their duty to overthrow and abolish it as soon as they can -- As individual
persons in a state of natural liberty have no right or leave from God to make
themselves miserable, or to injure and oppress others; so they have no right or
leave to join and concur with others in any measures inconsistent with the
interest of mankind. -- And as no society has a right to oppress any of its
members, it cannot convey to any one a rightful authority to oppress. All
tyrannical government is therefore an unauthorized invasion of the rights of
mankind, and no obedience is due to it.

A JUST apprehension of our natural rights is very useful and necessary in
order to our conceiving aright the nature and extent of CIVIL LIBERTY, which is
next to come under our consideration. And we are now to view mankind as united
together in political societies or states, that so the united wisdom and
strength of a community may be employed to advantage for the good of the whole,
and of the several individual members, in a consistency with the public
interest.

THAT the human species were formed and designed for civil union, appears from
the rational faculties, and social affections which God has given them. It
appears also from their moral character, and state, and the need they stand in
of mutual assistance, in order that their rights and properties may be better
secured, and enjoyed to greater advantage. The state of nature, though attended
with some peculiar privileges, is yet very unsafe, and subject to great and
manifold difficulties and disadvantages. Civil polity is evidently for the
interest of mankind: and in a well constituted and regulated state, subjection
to civil government is no way prejudicial to true liberty. For though some of
our natural rights and property are, as it were, put into a common stock, under
the management of the community; yet this is supposed to be done by our own
free consent, and in the prudent exercise of our natural liberty. And as each
one continually receives his share of the vast profits thence accruing to the
community, and has his most important rights so secured and improved as to be
much more valuable; he is, upon the whole, a great gainer by all the expense he
is at for the public service, and enjoys more liberty for the restraints he
submits to.

NAY, further: since civil polity is evidently for the good of mankind, and
since no individual ought to hold his natural right of independence, if it
stands in opposition to the general interest -- it would seem that men's
entering into civil society was a matter of duty as well as right; and that
they may be justly compelled to it, when the general interest so requires. --

Now, in every civil body there must be a governing authority and power, to be
exercised on the behalf of the community, over the several members -- ordering
matters of common concernment for the good of the whole: and the rightful
authority of those who are entrusted with powers of government, is the
ordinance of God. They are not only the trustees of the state, but the
ministers of GOD, who ratifies their commission, requiring every soul to be
subject to them, and not resist them on their peril, in the due exercise of
their authority.

FROM the brief account here given of a state of civil polity, it is plain that
civil liberty divides into two branches, which will require some distinct
notice. It includes the freedom of the state considered as a system or
collective body. It includes also the freedom of the several parts or members
of which the community is composed.

THE FORMER BRANCH of civil liberty is possessed by a people, when they hold
and are allowed freely to exercise the rights, powers, and prerogatives of FREE
AND INDEPENDENT STATES. These are much the same with those of an individual in
the state of natural liberty and independence; of which we have given some
account: and are alike limited by the law of nature and of GOD, who is the
sovereign of nations as well as of particular persons. But it is to be
observed, that free states have also right to rule their own members: whereas
individuals have no natural right which properly answers to this.

NOTWITHSTANDING what has been so boldly pretended by some, of the transcendent
authority, and omnipotency of the supreme civil power, and of those who are
entrusted with the administration of government, it is plain that the whole
authority of a state over its members is limited. The liberty and authority of
a free commonwealth to enact and execute laws and ordinances for the public
good, must be always understood with this limitation, viz. -- that the sacred
rules of righteousness are not to be violated at any rate. The liberty and
sovereignty of a state implies no right or authority to serve its own interest
by unjust or immoral measures; even though such measures should be thought for
the public advantage. It has no rightful liberty, under any such pretense, to
violate the laws of GOD, or the rights of any of its members, to oppress or
injure any of its neighbors, or falsify the public faith. That common maxim,
"that the safety and welfare of the people is the supreme law," how much soever
it has been applauded, is, therefore, unsound morality, unless it be understood
and applied in an invariable agreement with that divine rule, "that evil is not
to be done that good may come." Every man has his private, unalienable rights,
particularly the right of conscience, which he ought to hold and use without
restraint or disturbance from any human authority. There can scarce be a worse
mistake than to think that the laws of morality must give way to serve any
interest, whether public or private; or that all personal rights in the
subjects are absolutely at the disposal of the supreme civil power.

THE liberty of a state may be violated and abridged several ways. It is so
when a foreign authority, to whom the state owes not subjection, claims and
exercises a governing and controuling power over it. This is also the case when
a part of the state, without right, seizes on the powers of government, or
hinders the free exercise of them: or, when those who are entrusted with
authority, stretch their prerogatives beyond due bounds, to the enslaving of
the people. If the whole authority of a state over its members be limited, as
has been shown, much more is the authority of rulers so, who have not the whole
authority of the state put into their hands to be used by them as they please,
but only so much of it as is judged to be needful to fit them to answer the end
of their appointment. The supreme civil authority remains always in the
community at large, whose will and order is the supreme law of the state. And
they have always a right, when their rulers are evidently unfaithful and
unworthy of their trust, to restrain them and revoke their powers. -- They have
a right to alter and reform their laws when they are found to be pernicious;
any law or compact to the contrary notwithstanding. Civil rulers are indeed to
be considered as the ordinary representatives of the state, and the laws
enacted by them as the will and law of the state, when the contrary does not
appear: but surely such laws ought not to stand in force against the manifest
will and interest of the community. -- For a people to be so enslaved, either
to their rulers, or even their own laws, as not to be able to exercise their
essential right of sovereignty for their own safety and welfare, is as
inconsistent with civil liberty, as if they were enslaved to an army, or to any
foreign power. Whatever form of government a people may choose to be under, the
supreme civil authority remains always attached to, and diffused through the
whole body: nor can they give it up without injuring and enslaving themselves,
their fellow-citizens and their posterity, which they have no natural right to
do.

IT is therefore a wise provision in our frame of government, that an orderly
way is left open, and pointed out, for the state to revise its civil
constitution (...) make such amendments as may be found necessary. Alterations
of this nature, are not, indeed, to be attempted for light reasons, since they
are always attended with inconvenience and danger. But when the safety and
interest of a people requires that such alterations be made, they have an
indefeasible right to make them.

HAVING thus far considered the first great branch of civil liberty, and then
touched a little on the rights of a free state, I will now attend to the other
branch, which includes the rights and privileges of the several members of a
political body IN THEIR INDIVIDUAL AND PERSONAL CAPACITY. -- Liberty is the
right of every member, as well as of the whole body, or system. And a person
may justly be accounted a free citizen, when he is allowed to hold and use his
natural rights and faculties, together with the civil privileges proper to his
rank in the commonwealth, according to his own judgment and pleasure, in such
ways as are consistent with his obligations to the community, and his fellow
citizens, and with the just and reasonable laws of the state.

THE order and interest of a civil society require that there should be
different ranks of men, with different civil rights and privileges annexed to
them; and subject to different restrictions. Nor is the true liberty of any
rank infringed by this subordination, but rather secured, improved and enjoyed
by all to better advantage. But though the several ranks in a political system
may rise one above another in a long scale of subordination, yet we may
conveniently distribute them all into two general classes, viz. RULERS and
SUBJECTS. Indeed in a free state the right of authority and the duty of
subjection are interwoven, and, as it were, incorporated together through the
whole system, so that they are mutually tempered by each other. They who are
vested with most authority are yet fellow subjects with their inferiors, who
are governed by them. They are not only alike subject to the law of GOD, but
also to the law and authority of the state, whose ministers they are. And the
lowest orders of men have a rightful share in that sovereignty or supreme civil
power which is lodged in and diffused through the whole community.

As the bounds of civil liberty are determined by just and reasonable civil
laws, it is plain that when RULERS are allowed freely to use the powers
committed to them for the public good, and enjoy the privileges annexed to
their rank, they then enjoy that civil liberty which is their right. But when
they are overawed and controuled in the exercise of their rightful authority,
or are not allowed the privileges they have a right to, their civil liberty is
then infringed. But as rulers have no rightful liberty to claim and exercise
powers to which they are not entitled by law, or to violate the rules of
righteousness, or to oppress the community or any of its members, by hindering
them from holding and using their just rights, their liberty is not infringed
in the least, if the state interposes its sovereign authority, when it is
necessary to restrain them from effecting unrighteous and pernicious designs;
which, whenever they attempt, they act without authority. GOD never gave them
authority for any such purpose: the people never meant to do it: they could not
do it if they would: they had no such authority to give.

AND though SUBJECTS, as such, have no rightful claim to the peculiar civil
privileges of rulers, they have yet a right to civil liberty, and to all the
privileges of citizens of their rank, unless they have forfeited them by some
high misdemeanor. And they may justly be said to enjoy this their right, when
they are allowed the free use of their natural unalienable rights, (...) most
important of which are, the rights of conscience; and also to speak and act, to
use and dispose of their property, to hold and enjoy every rightful privilege,
without disturbance or control, in such ways as are not injurious to any, or
contrary to the reasonable laws of that civil body of which they are members.
And though such laws as lay the subject under needless and burdensome
restraints may justly be accounted an abridgment of liberty, yet no one has any
reason to complain that he is denied the liberty of a free citizen, when he is
restrained by human laws and penalties, from vice and immorality, and obliged
to yield due obedience to civil authority, and observe such ordinances, and pay
such taxes; as are necessary for the support of government, and to maintain the
order, peace and welfare of the common wealth.

NATURAL and civil liberty is the right of every man and member of a civil
community. But there is yet another branch which belongs peculiarly to
christians, and which we may therefore fitly term, CHRISTIAN LIBERTY.

THE gospel does not curtail any of our natural rights, or civil privileges,
but allows and acknowledges them, and ratifies the right which christians in
common with others have to the enjoyment of them. But the new covenant contains
a grant of special privileges, and those of the highest importance. It calls us
to, and invests us with the "glorious liberty of the children of God." The
apostle seems to have had the peculiar privileges of christians most directly
in his view, when he said in our text, "Brethren ye have been called to
liberty." It seems therefore but fit that some distinct notice should be taken
of these, though the time and present occasion will not allow of enlargement.

THE liberty we are called to as christians, does not in any measure relax the
obligation we are under to be subject to the authority and laws of GOD, and
also to submit ourselves to those who, under him, have rightful authority,
whether economical, political, or ecclesiastical. But the gospel calls us to
liberty from the bonds of guilt the condemning power and curse of the divine
law, and from the obligations to punishment which sin had laid us under, which
is a most miserable bondage. We are also called to liberty from a slavish
subjection to the power of sin, and of Satan the God of this world, who rules
in the children of disobedience, and leads them captive at his will; than which
what slavery can be more wretched, abject and ignominious? We are called also
to liberty from a slavish spirit in the service of GOD, and of one another; so
that a christian is not driven on in the way of his duty against his
inclination, but acts with a cheerful, free, and ingenuous spirit. "Where the
spirit of the Lord is there is liberty." We are also discharged from subjection
to any master or dictator on earth, in matters of faith and worship; and are to
acknowledge no lawgiver to the church but Christ alone. We have liberty to use
the ordinances instituted by Christ for the edification of his church, and to
have communion with him, and his saints in them, and that without any human
inventions, or unscriptural terms of communion imposed on us. Finally, we may
think, and speak, and act, and use our spiritual privileges with all freedom,
according to the measures of wisdom and grace given to us; nor may any human
authority forbid or restrain us from it.

I HAVE taken the freedom to enlarge a little in opening the nature and stating
the extent and proper bounds of NATURAL, CIVIL, and CHRISTIAN LIBERTY; because
the right understanding hereof might, I conceive, be of great use to us: and at
this day in particular, it may seem to be a matter which needs to be considered
with some special attention. In the next place, I am to show "that we have been
called to liberty." It belongs to us by virtue of a divine grant -- we claim it
as our RIGHT; and, blessed be GOD, we hold and enjoy it as our INHERITANCE. The
expression "ye have been called to liberty," may be taken both ways, and may
signify either that GOD has given us a right to liberty, or that he has given
the possession and use of this right. In the former sense, he calls us to
liberty, by declaring to us that it is his will that we be free, and requiring
us to assert and maintain our right. In the latter sense, he calls us to
liberty, when he gives us the possession of it, and breaks those yokes of
bondage which had been imposed upon us.

THAT God has called to the RIGHT of liberty; that he allows us to claim and
maintain it, against all who would bring us into bondage; that he favors the
glorious cause, and would have us stand up for it, is evident from the light of
nature, and from the oracles of divine revelation.

THE light of our own REASON and CONSCIENCE, that "candle of the Lord" which he
has put within us, makes it plain that we have a right to be free. There is no
need of long and subtle trains of reasoning in the case. We appeal to the moral
sense, the inward feelings and resentments of every honest heart. Can it be
right that men, made in the image of God should be slaves? That fellow servants
of the same Lord should usurp and tyrannize over one another? Are not the
pretenses urged to justify such usurpation so weak, so pitiful, so unfair, that
it is a painful exercise of patience to a man of reason and virtue, and
generous feelings, to have his understanding and heart affronted, and harrowed
with them? It is true, the interests of society require subordination: but this
deprives none of liberty, but helps all to enjoy it better. In short, if
equity, requires us to do to others as we would that they should do to us; if
the plainest and surest dictates of our reason are to be believed; if the law
of nature be of force, then liberty is our right; and consequently it is the
will of God that we be free. Nor is it easy to determine, whether the injustice
of those who would put a yoke of bondage on their brethren, or the meanness of
those who would tamely stoop to take it on, be the greater reproach to human
nature.

IF we now turn our eye to the oracles of DIVINE REVELATION, we shall find
clear and manifold evidence that God approves and favors the cause of liberty,
and that tyranny is most offensive to him -- This appears in his delivering the
Israelites from a state of miserable bondage, and punishing their oppressors
with a mighty hand, and stretched-out arm. It appears in the laws and form of
government he gave them; whereby liberty and property were secured to every
one. It appears in the awful threatenings denounced by the prophets against the
enslavers and oppressors of mankind; and which have been terribly executed. It
appears in the whole strain, spirit, and tendency of the doctrine and religion
taught and inculcated throughout the scriptures; which is to promote the
practice of goodness, righteousness and truth, with all other divine and social
virtues; and to dissuade men from all acts of injustice or unkindness, where by
the rights or liberties of any might be violated. It appears further, from
express directions and exhortations to christians, that they stand fast in
their liberty* and be not entangled with a yoke of bondage; nor be the servants
of men; nor call any man master upon earth; nor exercise lordly dominion over
one another. Finally, it appears from the example of Christ, and the apostles,
prophets, and holy men, whose characters and conduct are recorded for our
imitation; who spoke and acted with the most ingenuous freedom, and most
reverse to a base servile spirit. These hints might be copiously illustrated
from the scriptures, See Mr. Stevens' election Sermon.
which might be both instructive and entertaining. But I must wave it. --

BUT this call to liberty, which we are now considering, may be understood to
import God's giving us the ACTUAL POSSESSION of, as well as a right to this
invaluable privilege. And here this divine goodness deserves our grateful
notice, that, through the kind and wonderful disposals of providence, mankind
enjoy so much liberty. For though it is a melancholy truth that there is much
tyranny and oppression in the world, and all are more or less entangled with
yokes (...) b^ndage in some kind, and are not so free (...) they ought to be;
yet it must also be acknowledged, that as every degree of liberty which men
enjoy, is the gift of God, so there are none but have a share of this sweet
blessing; and indeed the greater part enjoy considerable degrees of it. --
Notwithstanding the despotic claims of tyrants, we see that their penicious and
oppressive power is restrained by God in ways innumerable. These fierce beasts
are chained, their horns are shortened, their mouths muzzled, and they are
diverted from their purposes. By this means men often enjoy no small share of
liberty, even under those forms of government which are most unfriendly to it.

IT is, however, to be observed, that as God has a sovereign right to deal out
his own gifts in what measure and proportion he pleases, so he calls different
men to different kinds and degrees of liberty. Though the natural rights of men
may, in general, seem much alike, they being, in this respect, "all FREE and
EQUAL;" yet it is in different degrees that they are permitted to use them.
According to the differen^ civil constitutions which men are under, their civil
liberty is larger, or more restricted. -- And, indeed, under every form of
government it is necessary that some ranks and denominations of men should be
allowed more ample civil privileges than others. And as to christian liberty,
this is the peculiar right and privilege of the disciples of Christ: no others
have any lot or portion in this matter. And though all christians are fr^e
indeed, and are by the special grace of GOD, entitled and admitted to the
liberties and privileges of his heavenly kingdom; yet all do not enjoy them in
like measure: nor is the liberty of any perfect in this world; but is more or
less entangled and restrained by the power of sin and Satan, and the men and
things of the world. It will, however, gradually work itself clear of all these
clogs; and our call to the glorious liberty of the children of GOD, will, in
the heavenly state, have its full effect.

As it is a great happiness to a people when their civil constitution and laws
are favorable to civil and religious liberty; so there is perhaps no part of
the world more happy, in this respect, than these United States, or that have
been called by Divine Providence to the possession and enjoyment of such a
degree of liberty as we have been.

IF what has been offered under this first head should seem too long, abstruse,
and speculative, I will endeavor to make some atonement by being shorter,
plainer, and more practical in what remains.

OUR SECOND GENERAL POINT is, "they who are called to liberty should be careful
not to abuse it for an occasion to the flesh." They should not run wild because
they are free; or take encouragement to indulge themselves in a lawless and
licentious temper and practice.

IT is a great evidence of the weakness and folly of men that they, in general,
can no better bear that state of freedom to which they are called; and when
they have such a price in their hands, they so seldom use it wisely and
soberly, and to advantage. Their lusts and passions are ready to break out into
wild excesses when they find themselves free from outward restraints. The
apostle, well aware of this danger, has left this caution in the text, "use not
liberty for an occasion to the flesh." And St. Peter also speaks to the same
effect; "As free, but not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness." We
are pleased with the thought of being free; but how often do we show that we
have not a heart rightly to improve our privileges? When we get the helm into
our own hands, what wild courses do we often steer. When we find ourselves at
liberty to direct our steps, how prone are we to turn aside into crooked paths!

WE cannot therefore be too much on our guard against these licentious abuses:
for, besides our liableness thereto, it should be considered that they are
highly criminal. When we make an ill use of liberty, we show ourselves most
unworthy to have it, and deserve to have our talent taken from us. It is
ungrateful to GOD, and injurious and uncharitable to men. It turns our glory
into shame, and exposes to reproach that perfect law of liberty by which we
profess to be governed.

THE abuse of liberty draws after it also a train of the worst consequences. It
is, we may say, "the root of all evil." It makes our privileges become our
grievances, and turns our blessings into curses: yea, it destroys liberty
itself, and is an inlet to tyranny and slavery. True liberty is a tender thing:
it languishes and dies under licentious abuses. Rulers, by abusing their
liberty, betray their trust; and their authority degenerates into tyranny. And
when subjects abuse their privileges, and become disorderly, ungovernable,
undutiful, factious, and irreligious, their social union is greatly weakened,
and they suffer the worst effects of slavery, while they have only an empty
shadow of freedom. It is true virtue, and religion, and subjection to the laws
and ordinances of GOD, that can only preserve the liberty of any people.
Without this, declarations of rights and forms of government are vain: And I
know not whether it be not better for a licentious people to be under a
despotic government than any other. Such a people may well expect to come under
such a government, as the natural and penal effect of their vices -- Thus it
befell the Israelites as they had been forewarned: "That if they would not serve
the Lord they should serve their enemies, who would put a yoke of iron on their
necks."

No less prejudicial is the abuse of religious liberty to the spiritual
interests of the christian church. From this source an inundation of
infidelity, and manifold corruption in doctrine, discipline, worship, and
practice, with most uncharitable contentions, and schisms, have issued, which
have made terrible havoc in God's heritage. Hence -- But I must leave it to my
hearers to pursue these reflections. The evils flowing from this source are so
many, that it is impossible to give a detail of them.

For the like reason I can only suggest a few short and general hints,
respecting the several ways in which we might be in danger of abusing our
liberty; a point highly worthy of special attention, and which I had thought to
have considered more particularly: But on such a subject one would hardly know
where to stop. I shall therefore only say, we should take heed that Liberty of
thinking for ourselves, or the right of private judgment become not an occasion
of infidelity, or skepticism, or of our being carried away with unsound
doctrines, and our minds corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ.
Liberty of speaking our thoughts must not be abused to the dishonor of God, and
religion and virtue* to the encouragement of vice, or hurtful errors; to the
detriment of the commonwealth; or to the injury, grievance, or scandal of any
one. Liberty of conscience must not be abused into a pretense for neglecting
religious worship, profaning God's sabbaths and ordinances, or refusing to do
our part for the support of government and the means of religious instruction.
In a word, -- as we would avoid the abuse of liberty, let us all take heed that
we use it not irreligiously, by transgressing God's commands, or by neglecting
or profaning his worship and ordinances; nor undutifully, by refusing due
Honor and subjection to rightful authority, in families, churches or
commonwealth: nor injuriously, unkindly, and uncharitably, to the wrong, the
damage, the grief and offense of our brethren: nor inordinately, exceeding the
bounds of moderation, sobriety and expediency, even in things that are in
themselves lawful.

As a preservative from these, and all other abuses, let it be our care
thoroughly to imbibe the spirit of the gospel, "that perfect law of liberty,"
and have our sentiments, our temper, and manners, formed by its divine
doctrines and rules. Let us cherish in our hearts the fear and love of God,
with that benevolence and charity which is the fulfilling of the law, and which
only can effectually correct the inordinacy of those selfish affections which
are the malignant root of these abuses. And, to add no more, let it be our care
to understand, distinctly, the nature and extent of our liberty, and of our
duty, in their connection and consistency with each other; and that our freedom
can no otherwise be maintained and exercised, so as to be any real privilege,
than by our being the servants of God, and "by love serving one another."

THIS was the THIRD POINT contained in our text, viz. -- That it is our duty,
and no infringement of our liberty, to serve one another in love. Though God
has made us free, yet it is no disparagement to be, in a liberal sense,
servants to each other: nay, it is our honor to be so -- this gives true
dignity to men of the highest rank. It is a very honorable character given to
David, a great and excellent King, that he SERVED his generation by the will of
GOD -- And a far greater King, even David's Lord, and the heir of all things,
when he assumed our flesh, and dwelt among us, "came to minister," and "was
with us as one that serves." We ought, as the apostle directs, to "be all of
us subject one to another." Rulers, as has been observed, are all of them
FELLOW SUBJECTS with other members of the civil body, and hold their authority
under the state. They who exercise the highest ordinary powers of government do
it as the trustees and servants of the people; and it is their duty to serve
the Commonwealth faithfully, and not tyrannize over any. And it is no less the
duty of every one, whatever his rank may be, to perform the services properly
incumbent on him, with like fidelity. But as the duty of mutual subjection was
considered at large upon the last anniversary of this kind, I shall insist no
further upon it.

THERE is one thing, however, our text suggests, relative to the mutual service
required of us, which should not be passed over unnoticed: and that is the
principle by which we are therein to be moved and actuated. "BY LOVE serve one
another." Love must be the vital spring to put every member of the body in
motion, and set the whole system at work in a circulation of services, and then
they will be all free. We act most freely when we are prompted by love. If we
have a sincere and warm affection one to another, our services will not be
performed with slavish reluctance, but in the full enjoyment of liberty. A
ruler, or a subject, who is of a truly public spirit, who tenders the interest
of his fellow-citizens, and sympathizes with them in their joys and sorrows,
will rejoice in an opportunity of serving them; nor will he grudge the pains it
costs him. Love makes his services easy, pleasant and free: and he never enjoys
his liberty more to his own satisfaction, than when he is most engaged in the
service of his generation.

THE REFLECTIONS with which it is time to close this discourse must be confined
to the present occasion.

WE in this land have great reason to bow our knee before God in humble
thankfulness that he has called us to liberty. He has not only given us a right
to natural and civil liberty in common with others of our fellow men, but has
also given us the possession of this invaluable blessing, and that in such a
degree as few in the world are favored with. -- It is an happiness almost
peculiar to these United States, for an enlightened people to have the
opportunity of deliberately forming and freely choosing the plan of government
under which they are to live. And though we do not presume to say that there is
nothing amiss or defective in our civil constitution; (it is the prerogative of
God alone to have his work all perfect) yet the form of our government, and
spirit of our laws are, to speak modestly, favorable to the free enjoyment of
our natural rights, so far as can consist with our political union, and the
interest of the Commonwealth. And we should be unthankful to GOD and man, not
to be sensible of, and own the wisdom and fidelity of those who had the chief
hand in this important and arduous work. Besides the ample civil privileges
which are secured to all orders of citizens, we rejoice to find that the right
of enslaving our fellow men is absolutely disclaimed. That inhuman monster
SLAVERY, which has too long been tolerated, is at length proscribed, and is no
longer suffered to live with us. And it is devoutly wished, that the turf may
lie firm upon its grave. The rights of conscience also, in matters of religion,
are strongly guarded, and the door is happily shut and fast barred against
ecclesiastical establishments by human laws, which have done so much hurt in
the world. Every one is now fully at liberty to worship GOD in the way which he
judges to be most acceptable to him, while he demeans himself as a good
citizen. Nor should we forget our christian privileges in having the ordinances
of the gospel administered among us, which we may with all freedom attend upon
for our spiritual edification, if it be not our own fault. Add to this the
sovereignty and prerogatives of FREE AND INDEPENDENT STATES, which at length
are acknowledged and solemnly recognized as belonging to us. How much reason
have we to account ourselves happy that our lot has fallen to us in pleasant
places, and we have so goodly an heritage. Blessed are our eyes which see the
things we see, and our ears which hear the things we hear. And blessed be the
Lord who has visited and redeemed his people; who has called them to liberty,
and granted them the blessings of peace, that we, being delivered out of the
hand of our enemies, might serve him without fear, in holiness and
righteousness before him, all the days of our life.

AND is it not then our duty to stand fast in this liberty to which GOD has
called us? We should show ourselves most unworthy of our birthright, if, like
Esau, we should sell it for a contemptible price; nay, if we should sell it at
any rate. Liberty is a pearl of too great price to be bartered. We may fitly
accommodate the words of Solomon; She is more precious than the rubies; and all
the things thou can desire are not to be compared to her. Length of days are
in her right hand, and in her left are riches and honor. Her ways are ways of
pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. She is a tree of life to them that
lay hold upon her; and happy is every one that retains her. We have done
ourselves great and lasting honor by our brave, vigorous, and, by the blessing
of GOD, successful and effectual defense of our civil liberty. Though in
respect of right, we were free born, as every man is; yet it is with a great
sum that we have obtained the possession of this our inheritance, clear of the
encumbrance of being dependent on, and subject to the control of foreign
power. To secure the continued enjoyment of the prize which has been won with
so much expense of blood and treasure, is surely an object worthy of the
attention of every one. And we can do nothing better for this purpose than to
make it our most serious care to use our liberty aright, that is, piously,
equitably, charitably, and soberly; and that we abuse it not for an occasion to
the flesh.

THIS caution against the abuse of liberty ought to sink deep into our hearts;
for here seems to be our greatest danger. Our conduct, at the time when
attempts were made to wrest our privileges from us, is a witness for us, that
we were not insensible of the value and importance of them. By the blessing of
Almighty GOD our struggle is now happily terminated* and we are now unbuckling
the harness, having accomplished our warfare with desired success. WE ARE A
FREE PEOPLE. We have maintained our claim to liberty effectually against those
who disputed it; and have indeed more liberty than we at first thought of
claiming. And if we are so wise and sober as not to abuse it, we trust in God
that we shall be happy ourselves, and leave this fair inheritance to succeeding
generations. But we flatter ourselves, if we think that our having legal
securities of civil and religious liberty will insure our prosperity. Nay, if
our privileges are licentiously abused, we shall have no solid advantages of
them, but they will rather prove; as was said, intolerable grievances. The name
itself of liberty has been reproached, I had almost said blasphemed, on account
of these abuses, which have given occasion to some to call it a popular idol.
And we shall make an idol of it indeed, if it draws away our hearts from the
service of God, and emboldens us to strengthen ourselves in wickedness, and
bless ourselves in our own hearts, saying, we shall have peace though we walk
in the imagination of our hearts. That people only can be truly free and happy
who have the Lord for their God, their lawgiver, and king; and who demean
themselves as his obedient servants. O that there were such an heart in us,
that we might fear the Lord, and keep all his commandments always, that it
might be well with us, and with our children forever.

OUR honored RULERS will consider themselves, as, under God, the guardians of
this PRECIOUS DEPOSITUM, which divine providence has put into our hands. In
this light we view them, and not with an evil eye of malignant jealousy, as
those who would willingly rob the commonwealth of its crown, or steal the
jewels out of it; that is, abridge our privileges, to extend their own
prerogatives. As the places of highest authority are disposed of by the free
suffrage of the people, they are to be considered as marks of great confidence
in the wisdom and fidelity of those whom they call to fill them; and as public
testimonies to their merit. Nor will they take it amiss to be styled the
servants of the people; but will accept the title as it is meant, for a title
of distinguished honor. For it holds equally true in a free commonwealth as in
the church, that "He who is greatest, is most eminently servant of all."

WE have confidence in our civil fathers, that their upright and faithful
endeavors will not be wanting to sec^^^ and perpetuate the blessings of peace
and liber^^ which God has given us, and to promote the true interest of this
people; and that their integrity will preserve them and us. While the measures
of righteousness are faithfully observed in their administrations, we doubt not
but that they will, by the blessing of God, be crowned with good success. "Unto
the upright arises light in the darkness," to direct, cheer, and comfort them,
in their greatest difficulties and straits. It is "by righteousness that the
throne of government is established, and the nation is exalted." And indeed the
grand secret of political wisdom is to maintain a steady, thorough and
untainted integrity: a secret hidden from those serpentine politicians, who
think it necessary to turn aside into crooked paths to compass their designs.
Unfair artifices and intrigues may sometimes answer a present turn; but they do
more hurt than good: they breed worse distempers than they remedy or prevent.
Whatever designs cannot be carried by fair measures, had better not be carried
at all. God will curse that policy which sets the rules of righteousness at
defiance. If this sentiment should be ascribed to the simplicity of one who is
unexperienced in the affairs of the world, it may be confirmed by the
attestation of the great HARRINGTON, who says, That the pretended depth and
difficulty in matters of state is a mere cheat. From the beginning of the world
to this day you never found a commonwealth where the leaders having honesty
enough wanted skill enough to lead her to her true interest, at home and
abroad. And, that I may not seem to have gone beyond my own line, a yet greater
authority may be adduced; even that of the wise and inspired king SOLOMON, who
says, He that walks uprightly walks surely; and the integrity of the
upright shall guide him.

ALAS! for that people whose rulers think it can be good policy to break over
the sacred rules of justice. We hope in God that the conduct of our public
affairs will never fall into the hands of those who are given up to such an
awful infatuation. If indeed we could persuade ourselves that the world was
governed by chance, such a strict adherence to these rules might not seem
needful, or fit to be insisted on. But under the government of a righteous GOD,
we may be sure that unrighteous measures can never be for the true interest of
a people. It is the blessing of GOD that must render the means successful we
make use of to answer our ends. What madness then must be in their hearts who
imagine that GOD will annex a blessing to the presumptuous transgression of his
own laws! -- It is ordered indeed for the trial and discipline of virtue, that
it should sometimes have to struggle with great difficulties and opposition,
which might be avoided if we would let go our integrity: but the avoiding these
difficulties in this way, will, without fail, run us into much worse ones. The
advantages of unrighteousness are dearly bought. If our country, nay, if the
world can no otherwise be preserved than by violating the rules of truth and
righteousness, IN THE NAME OF ALL THAT IS SACRED LET IT SINK. But while the
throne of GOD stands unshaken, we may trust in him, and not fear that we shall
ever be losers by our fidelity and obedience to his laws.

THAT corrupt craft, and those cunning contrivances, which politicians have
often had recourse to in state affairs, when they were resolved to carry a
favorite point at any rate, have been the disgrace of policy, and the pest of
states. They who turn aside into these crooked ways, will soon find themselves
in a perfect labyrinth. Tricking will soon sink a man's credit and reputation,
and lose him the confidence of mankind, which is of the utmost importance in
order to a successful prosecution of designs of public concernment. Unfair
artifices are an insult upon the moral government of GOD, who knows how to take
the wise in their own craftiness, and turn to foolishness the counsels of the
Ahitophels, who applaud themselves most in their skill and address.

IT may well discourage wise observers from attempting to promote the public
interest by iniquity, that such attempts are constantly found to be of unhappy
and pernicious consequence. The laws by which GOD governs the world must be
quite altered, the course of nature must be reversed, before it can reasonably
be hoped that unrighteous schemes will operate for the real advantage of a
people. And it is the fervent wish of those who have the true interest of their
country most at heart, that there may be a full and fair experiment made what
effect a strictly righteous and equitable administration of government will
have upon the national interest. And they have raised expectations, that in
that case we should soon see our public affairs in a situation much to our
satisfaction and honor, and the honor of virtuous policy, which would appear in
its proper dignity after such a triumph over its intriguing rival. The eyes of
the world are turned to observe our conduct at this important period, which
will be likely to fix the stamp of honor, or the brand of infamy, on our
national character. We hope our rulers will not be less tender of the honor of
the commonwealth than of their own, or that of their families: and that they
will not give occasion to any to apply to them what has been observed by some,
That such deeds have been often done by bodies or communities of men, as most
of the individuals of which such communities consisted, acting separately,
would have been ashamed of. And it is also to be remembered (which ought much
more to move us) that the eye of the great KING OF NATIONS is upon us to
observe whether we will be obedient to his laws: and he is, as it were, saying
to us in the words of the prophet, Prove me now herewith, whether I will not
open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing.

As for those who sneer at righteous policy, integrity and public spiritedness,
and who represent all men as being alike perfectly selfish, I shall only say,
that if the picture of mankind which they give us was taken from their own
hearts, we will not dispute their skill in drawing, but will own it may be a
striking, yea, a shocking likeness of the persons who sat for it. But let them
go -- My honorable hearers know, as every honest man does, that there is such a
thing in the world as integrity, and virtue, and public spirit, and that it is
no hypocritical pretense.

As righteousness is the root and basis of liberty, I have not, I hope,
wandered from my subject in inculcating a due regard thereto in the
administration of government. And it is also hoped that the freedom of speech
which has been used on this occasion, (a freedom which the presence of those
before whom it has been taken, has no tendency to check, but rather to inspire
and animate,) will not be deemed an abuse of liberty. But if more has been said
than may be thought needful, or if any expressions should seem too warm or
bold, they will I hope, be heartily imputed to an honest zeal for public
virtue, and for the liberty, the interest, and the honor of my dear country;
and to an earnest and inexpressible desire that this vast political structure,
which to the wonder of the world has rose so suddenly as a temple of liberty in
NORTH AMERICA, the building of which has been carried on so far with such happy
success, may receive the finishing touch to the utmost adadvantage, and may
stand as a glorious and lasing MONUMENT to the honor of those by whom, under
God, it has been erected: -- a monument far more grand and magnificent than
MAUSOLEUMS, PYRAMIDS, or TRIUMPHAL ARCHES.

THE present state of our affairs is such as calls for the utmost attention of
our civil rulers, and affords them uncommon opportunities for services of the
most important kind. It is, I think, needless, and might seem presumptous, for
me to go into a detail of those objects which claim their special attention:
their own more just, penetrating, and comprehensive views, will readily suggest
the vastness of their trust, in having the care of the liberties and
properties, the religion and morals* the means of education and literary
improvement, of this people; besides such regulations as are necessary to
maintain and strengthen that connection between the several parts of this
united system of states, which is of so much importance to the welfare of the
whole. We are not insensible of the difficulties they have to struggle with, --
and sympathize with them on that account. But these should rather animate than
discourage them. THESE ARE THE TRIALS AND PROOFS OF VIRTUE, whereby it is
distinguished from counterfeit pretenses, and is found unto praise, and honor,
and glory. If they are faithful they may expect to displease some: but they
will have the applause of their own consciences, and of the best friends of
their country: their children will rise up and call them blessed, and GOD
himself will think on them for good. "The armor of light" will repel the darts
of calumny which may be thrown at them. They will only need to stand forth in
open day. The light will render them invulnerable; and their being known will
be their security. -- And GOD forbid that any of us should be backward to
support them in their faithful endeavors; or that we should cease to pray for
them, that GOD would be with them: that their hearts may be encouraged; and
their hands strengthened with a double portion of his spirit: that they may be
inspired with the wisdom, integrity, fortitude, and unfainting resolution
necessary to prosecute and accomplish their designs for the public good. We
wish them a blessing from the house of the Lord; yea, we bless them in the name
of the Lord.

THIS day may well be accounted the day of the gladness of our hearts. We
enjoy, at length, the blessings of peace and liberty: -- Blessings; -- for
which; saints, now with God, have earnestly prayed -- heroes, of glorious
memory; have fought and bled -- and patriots have worn out themselves with
care; travail and exertion. The joy of reaping the harvest which has been sown
and watered with so much tears and blood, is reserved for us. This day, UNITED
AMERICA sees the issue and fruit of her travailing throes, and is satisfied.
The sight of so sweet and lovely a birth, comforts and rejoices her, after her
agonizing labor.

THIS day, we have the happiness to see our CONGREGATION, even the legislative
assembly of the commonwealth, established before the Lord -- our NOBLES from
among ourselves -- and our GOVERNORS proceeding from the midst of us. We view
this august body as representing the whole republic, vested with its majesty
and authority; the distinct branches of which unite-and concentre in the
GOVERNOR, the common representative of the whole state. As his EXCELLENCY and
his HONOR are here present, it would seem scarce decent for us to give them
their due encomium, or to express freely how worthy we esteem them of that
pre-eminence to which they are advanced; but their continued and often repeated
election to the highest seats in the Commonwealth, speaks louder and more
significantly than words can, the peculiar esteem and confidence of the people,
and in such a way as leaves no suspicion of flattery.

WE regard his EXCELLENCY in particular, as most eminently authorized to act as
the guardian of our rights, and take care that the Republic receive no
detriment. His prerogatives and powers we consider as a wise provision for our
security against the pernicious effects of that narrow policy which may prompt
some to aim at serving their own particular connections in ways prejudicial to
the general interest, or injurious to other parts of the state -- Nor do we
wish that the due exercise of these powers and prerogatives should be cramped
or discouraged; but that they be exerted with all freedom and firmness for the
good of the people, whenever it shall be needful. It is, we doubt not, his
sincere aim to improve those talents with which GOD has distinguished him, in
promoting the true interest of the Commonwealth, and of the United States. --
May he have the sublime satisfaction of seeing the accomplishment of his
wishes, and the success of his endeavors, to serve his generation. -- And the
honorable COUNCIL will, we trust, be always ready to assist and cooperate in
these arduous and important services, with their wise, upright, and faithful
advice.

THE honorable SENATORS and REPRESENTATIVES of the Commonwealth, who sustain
and exercise so great a share of its authority, and in whom the people repose
so much confidence, will not take it amiss to be reminded of the expectations
and just claims of the State, that its interests be faithfully attended to and
pursued by them, not only in the elections of this day, but in all other
matters on which they may afterward have occasion to act. Their views will be
as extensive as the field of service they have before them; and not only the
interests of their particular constituents, but that of the whole Commonwealth,
yea, of the whole United States, will be duly regarded in their deliberations
and resolves -- liberality of sentiment, love to their country, a truly public
spirit, with untainted, unshaken integrity, will give dignity to their
proceedings, and throw light upon their paths: whether they consider themselves
as the ministers of God, or the trustees of the people, they can no other wise
support the dignity of their character, or answer the just expectations of God
and man, than by a faithful discharge of the duties of their station; nor
should it be forgotten that all mankind of what ever rank, must another day
stand before an impartial tribunal, where an account will be taken how every
talent has been improved, and a recompense will be adjudged to every one
according as his work shall be. Happy then will he be beyond expression, who
has maintained his integrity in a corrupt and ensnaring world; who has kept "a
conscience void of offense toward GOD and toward man;" who can hold up his
face before the Judge and say, Remember, O Lord, how I have walked before thee
in truth, and with a perfect heart; and who will receive from him an answer of
acquittance and approbation, Well done good and faithful servant, enter into
the joy of thy Lord.

WILL this grave and venerable audience bear with me while I add one reflection
of general concernment; -- that if we would enjoy true liberty, we must not
only maintain our civil privileges, and guard against a licentious and
malicious abuse of them, but it is above all things necessary that we be
delivered by GOD's special grace from the bondage of guilt, and the slavery and
service of sin and Satan, and that we be called effectually to the spiritual
freedom of the children of GOD. Little reason shall we have to boast of
liberty, or bless ourselves in our external privileges, if we are the
ignominious servants of corruption. This spiritual liberty, Christ has obtained
for all his true disciples: and it can no otherwise be enjoyed by any of us,
than by taking his yoke upon us, learning of him, and continuing in his word --
Then shall we know the truth, and the truth shall make us free indeed. It is
the true Christian alone who is the LORD'S FREE MAN, and a denizon of the new
Jerusalem. An honor and privilege to which we cannot maintain our claim, unless
we realize our profession of Christanity, by serving the Lord Christ with all
good fidelity, and serving one another in love. Be this the object of our
greatest care and ambition. We may then with hope and earnest expectation, wait
for the day of our complete redemption. The GRAND JUBILEE will at length be
proclaimed by the sound of the Arch-Angel's trumpet, which will call the sons
and heirs of GOD to the CONSUMMATE LIBERTY of his heavenly kingdom, and induce
them to the inheritance incorruptable, undefiled, and that fades not away,
reserved for them.

MAY this be the lot of us all, through the grace of GOD our Savior.

AMEN.

