POLITICAL SCHEMES AND CALCULATIONS, ADDRESSED TO THE CITIZENS OF MARYLAND, BY
A NATIVE CITIZEN AND SERVANT OF THE STATE.

" I am young, and ye are old, wherefore I was afraid, and durst not show you
mine opinion.
" I said, days should speak, and multitude of years should teach wisdom.
" But there is a spirit in man; and the inspiration of the Almighty gives
them understanding.
" Great men are not always wise, neither do the aged understand judgment.
"Therefore I said, hearken to me, I also will show mine opinion."
Ancient anonymous author. ANNAPOLIS, PRINTED BY F. AND S. GREEN, M.DCC.LXXXIV.

To his EXCELLENCY WILLIAM PACA,
Not on account
Of his superior wealth, high station,
Or distinguished talents,
But for the amiable qualities of his heart,
And that singular zeal, which has invariably marked
His public conduct,
The following attempt
To point out the true interests,
To promote the happiness,
And to support the honor
Of the State,
Over which he presides,
Is most respectfully inscribed
By The AUTHOR.

INTRODUCTION.
HAVING attained the main object of our wishes, by a successful termination of
the war, we must now bend our thoughts to secure the blessings of peace. We
have established our independence, and mankind have viewed our exploits with
astonishment; but, to realise those flattering prospects which presented
themselves, when we "took our rank among nations," will require more wisdom and
political virtue, than have been manifested since the earliest periods of the
contest* These United States have discovered an unhappy jealousy of congress,
and of each other; the acts of almost every legislature have uniformly tended
to disgust its citizens, and to annihilate its credit; and the natural
consequence is a want of confidence between men, a profligacy of morals, and a
drooping, disreputable, ruinous commerce. If I thought it impossible to remedy
these evils, and to obviate impending calamities, I should pant for a
favorable opportunity to abandon a country, which, at present, seems to enjoy
the greatest degree of liberty, that is consistent with society and government;
but which nothing less than an almost entire change of measures can preserve
from a miserable tyranny of one kind or another. I rejoice, that I am not
singular in these observations. A general apprehension of danger may lead to
security, as every man who perceives it, and considers the happiness of his
country as connected with his own, will think himself bound to do every thing
in his power to secure it. I should think myself deficient in every part of my
duty, if I did not, on this interesting occasion, exert my poor abilities to
the utmost. Matters of more general concern, and those, which particularly
respect other states, I shall leave to abler pens, and to those, who are
possessed of better means of information. My purpose is to point out some of
the most material errors of our own government, and to propose such measures,
as I conceive necessary to revive public credit, to establish a fair national
character, and to render government firm, respectable, and happy. In the
prosecution of such a design, it will be difficult not to offend, unless it
should please Heaven to eradicate from the hearts of men every little selfish,
grovelling passion, and, in the room thereof, to implant candor, truth, and
patriotism. I must however previously declare, that my breast harbors no
resentment against any man, and if in yielding to the strong impulse of an
honest zeal, I should do no more than confirm, or increase the number of, my
enemies, the reflection will be mortifying indeed! but I have that within me,
which never failed to administer some consolation in the most vexatious
occurrences of my life.

The AUTHOR.
Annapolis, March 10, 1784.
POLITICAL SCHEMES AND CALCULATIONS.
AT the last session of the general assembly, a committee was appointed by the
house of delegates, to prepare a bill for the relief of public creditors. The
intention of the movers for that bill was to establish an equitable rule of
discount between the state and its debtors. By particular request, the author
of these sheets undertook to frame a bill, which went somewhat further than
their first ideas on the subject; it was handed about among the members of each
house, and became a considerable topic of conversation out of doors; but
neither that bill nor any other was brought in by the committee, and only
ineffectual attempts were made to do the business partially by resolves. The
unfortunate bill was either lost or suppressed. I have recollected the heads,
and now offer them to the public with some improvements, which have suggested
themselves since the session, and with such alterations as have become
necessary by the lapse of time.

Heads of a bill, entitled, An act for the relief of public creditors.
1. That the funds appropriated for the redemption of bills of credit, or
certificates, be consolidated into one general fund, for the payment of the
principal and interest of the state debt; that all debts now due to the state
on whatever account, except for the taxes of the present year, be added to the
said general fund; that the residue of the confiscated property be sold at
auction, in convenient parcels, before the first of November 1784, on the
following terms; the purchaser to pay down, in current money, bills of credit
emitted by the state, or any kind of certificates given for specie, or he shall
enter into bond, with security, for the payment of the consideration with
interest, in the ^^are manner, on or before the first of January 1786; that
current money so paid, or bonds so passed, shall likewise constitute a part of
the said general fund; that if any purchaser of British property already sold,
who has not given bond with security, shall not do the same, agreeably to the
terms of his contract, before the first day of July 1784, the commissioners
shall take proper steps to compel the execution of the said contract, or
disannul the same, and proceed to sell the property again, at auction, before
the first of November 1784, upon the terms herein before mentioned; provided
that such first purchaser may, at any time before such se^ond sale, secure the
said property, by paying down the consideration he contracted for, with
interest, in current money, bi^ls of credit emitted by the state, or any kind
of specie certificates, or by entering into bond with security for the payment
of the principal with interest, from the time of the original contract, in the
same manner, on or before the first of January 1785; and the money so paid, or
bonds so taken, shall be added to the said general fund.

2. That the money produced by the said general fund be deposited in a chest,
and kept separate, by the treasurer of the western shore, for the purposes of
this act; that it shall be applied to the payment of the interest due on all
bills of credit and certificates, emitted and issued by the state, and to the
discharge of all orders drawn, or hereafter to be drawn, by proper authority,
for debts already due, and to the discharge of all sums already due on any
journal of accounts, or for arrearages of the five months pay, and to the
redemption of the said bills and certificates at the period (where any period
is assigned) for calling them in.

3. That any person indebted to the state, on whatever account, except for the
taxes of the present year, may discount with the treasurer all sums due to him
on any order aforesaid, or on any journal of accounts, or for any arrearages of
the five months pay; or, if he is an assignee of any sums thus due, he may
discount as aforesaid; or he may pay to the treasurer any of the said bills of
credit or certificates.

4. That no execution shall issue against any person indebted to the state for
property sold, under the act for the emission of bil^s of credit not exceeding
two hundred thousand pounds, etc. passed at May session 1781. until the first
of January 1785; provided the whole interest shall be discharged or discounted
by the first of September 1^84, in the same manner as the principal might be
under this act.

5. That after the first of January 1785, any proprietor of money, or of bills
of credit, or certificates aforesaid, may bring the same to the treasurer, and
in exchange thereof take an assignment of any bond passed o^ to be passed to
the state, for property sold under the last mentioned act, calculating the
interest due on each side; and that, after the first of January 1786, any
creditor of the fame description may, in like manner, exchange his paper for
any bond to be given for property sold under this act; and if any bond taken by
virtue of the act to secure the certain redemption of the bills of credit
emitted by this state, passed at May session 1781, shall be unpaid by the first
of January 1786, or not assigned agreeably to that act, it may thereafter be
assigned to any creditor aforesaid, upon the terms herein before mentioned; and
if any of the said debtors of the state shall not discharge their bonds by the
periods aforesaid (according as the case may be) and the said bonds shall be
assigned agreeably to this act, they shall be allowed to discharge the same to
the assignees, in current money only; provided, that no assignee shall be
entitled to an execution, before the suing out a capias ad respondendum, and
judgment obtained thereon.

6. That the treasurer shall calculate the amount of the certificates granted
by virtue of the act proposing to the citizens of this state creditors of
congress, etc. and, out of the money to be raised by the supply bill for the
present year, shall reserve a sum sufficient for the payment of one year's
interest of the said certificates; and the same shall be thrown into the chest,
and blended with the money belonging to the general fund.

7. That the treasurer shall open and keep separate books for every thing done
in his office, in parsuance of this act; and a committee of the house of
delegates shall be appointed at every meeting of the general assembly, to
inspect the same, and to report thereon to the house.

I HAVE thus endeavored to delineate an easy and simple plan, for reducing our
affairs to order and regularity, on terms the most truly advantageous to the
state; for giving its creditors of every description the best satisfaction in
our power, without imposing new burdens on the people, and, at the same time,
for affording a reasonable relief to a variety of distressed public debtors. As
the reasons, on which it is grounded, may not be obvious to every one, I shall
enter into a series of explanatory remarks, and consider every objection that
has been or may be offered to the scheme.

By a consolidation of funds, we avoid much trouble, expense and confusion. But
there is a much more substantial reason. The funds appropriated to the
redemption of red money are at least twelve times more than sufficient; for
some certificates there are funds appointed which are by no means adequate, and
for the rest there are no funds at all. Let us attend to what was done by a
nation, which has not always betrayed a want of political wisdom, in a case
somewhat similar to this. The produces of the taxes in Great Britain, not long
ago, constituted each a distinct fund, for the payment of the sums advanced on
each several tax; it was thought expedient to unice and blend them together,
and to superadd the faith of parliament, for the general security of the whole.
Some of these several funds were more than sufficient, others were inadequate,
and the aggregate fund, formed from their union, might not perhaps have been an
ample security for all the sums advanced on the several taxes. This measure,
however, excit^d little clamor, and gave no shock to public credit; because it
was provided, that no injury should thereby be done to creditors; because the
public faith had, for a long time, been inviolate; and because the people
reposed a confidence in government.

1. But the principal objection to the proposed plan of consolidation is, that
we shall violate our faith, and excite clamor and discontent, by taking from
the possessors of bills of credit the ample security they now have* I have ever
been a warm advocate for public faith, and it pleases me to observe gentlemen,
who have not always paid it a decent regard, at length become sensible of its
value; they may rest assured, that my principles are unchanged, and I
congratulate them on the happy alteration in theirs; my grand aim is to restore
public credit, and regain the confidence of the people. I am convinced, he that
will give himself the trouble to examine the state of our affairs, and
consider, without prejudice, my plan in all its parts, will perceive, that it
can have no other tendency. The objection, which appears formidable at first
sight, will vanish, when we come closely to view the subject. The bills of
credit have ceased to circulate; they are no longer a medium of commerce; they
are merely an object of speculation; and the holders of them are actuated by
views, very different from that of laying them by until the period of their
redemption; they have obtained them, for the purpose of discharging debts to
the state, or of selling them to public debtors. If they obtained them for the
first purpose, they are not at all affected, if we even take away all the
funds, provided we consent to receive them at par. If for the second, they are
not affected, provided we create the demand they had in view, and which would
stamp a value on their paper, if no funds had ever been assigned for its
redemption. That it has been purchased or kept up, for one or the other of
these purposes, may be inferred from the superior advantages of such a
speculation, which every body at this time of day is acquainted with, and from
several other circumstances. Some time ago, there was a considerable sum of the
red bills in the hands of the people; a resolve passed the legislature for
receiving them at par; the holders immediately brought them to the treasury, or
sold them to the purchasers of the property pledged for their redemption; and
not more than L. 14,000 remain in the hands of the people. There was very
little immediate use for the black, or the continental state bills; they had,
notwithstanding, attained a value not far inferior to that of specie. Is it
possible, that any circumstance respecting the funds, two or three years after
their emission, and as many before the period of calling them in by exchange,
should give them a value six times greater than they bore soon after they were
issued? A person, who has the least tincture of this kind of science, will
answer in the negative; he will tell you, that the general expectation of their
being received by the treasurer at par, created a demand, and raised them to a
greater value than the mere consideration of funds could have possibly
conferred; that where bil^s of credit are not equal to specie, by the force of
opinion, and there is no immediate demand to make them so, and, at the same
time, there is no distrust of the funds, or of the public faith, their value
can be fixed on no other principle, than that of calculating the present worth
of a sum of money payable at a future day. Whenever they attain a value
considerably superior to this, it must be owing to some immediate or expected
use. In the case of these bills, it has been generally expected, that the state
must receive them from its debtors as specie; take away this expectation, and
the proprietors of the bills will be materially affected; comply with it, and
they will care nothing about the funds. It is ridiculous to imagine, when a man
can get L. 100 specie for L. 106 paper, and when money can command from ten to
20 or 30 per cent. interest, that he will prefer the boarding his paper, and
run the hazard of specie's not being ready at the treasury, at the time for
exchanging it. On the contrary, there is every reason to conclude, if my
propositions meet with success, that a very inconsiderable sum will be left, to
redeem with gold and silver. My plan provides for bringing in a sufficient
quantity of specie for the purpose. However, the different periods for
redeeming the bills of credit are remote; one will arrive in June 1785, another
in May 1786, and the last in January 1787. We have abundant leisure to make the
experiment, and the legislature may hereafter make a further provision, if,
contrary to every reasonable calculation, a further provision should be found
requisite. I will acknowledge, that by placing all government socurities on the
same footing, the value of bills of credit will, in the beginning, be inferior
to what it has lately been; but by the natural operation of the plan, in a
short time, every species of paper, as my estimates shall hereafter tend to
demonstrate, will attain a value very little inferior to specie.

2. An objection has been thrown out, and will probably be urged, with all the
powers of eloquence, against any further sales of confiscated property. "In
pursuance of an article in the definitive treaty, congress has earnestly
recommended a restitution of all this property; and our national honor is
deeply concerned in adopting this wise, humane, equitable recommendation." The
words of it, which (by the bye) are faithfully copied from the treaty, leave
some doubt respecting the meaning of the term restitution* If it means more
than a reasonable compensation, we must alter our laws, before we can comply;
because no alien is capable of holding lands in this state, until he becomes a
citizen, under the act for naturalization. A real British subject is as much an
alien, to all intents and purposes, as a Turk, or a Chinese. This is well known
to every person acquainted with the common law of England, and the constitution
of this state, that law, with respect to aliens, containing the only rule known
to Maryland. By taking the oath, and making the declaration prescribed by the
act for naturalization, an alien may indeed acquire a capacity of holding
lands; but then he no longer must consider himself a subject to Great Britain;
because he thereby abjures all allegiance to any government, but the state of
Maryland. It cannot be conceived, that Great Britain, in taking care of the
interests of her subjects, should make such a provision, as would, in all
probability, oblige them to become citizens of America. She could not imagine,
that America, contrary to the policy of all nations, would permit aliens to
hold real property. Should we incline to adopt the recommendation, my idea is
this; the remaining confiscated property must be placed on the same footing
with that already sold, which cannot be restored; we must dispose of it to the
best advantage, and then find out some good and substantial fund for making a
compensation to every sufferer, without giving any one claimant a preference to
another. I would ever protest against throwing the most valuable property of
the state into this fund; we have much better uses for it. The measure of
confiscation had always my hearty approbation. I considered it as founded on
natural justice, upon policy, and upon necessity, as every intelligent
impartial person may be convinced, by perusing the long controversy between the
two branches of the legislature, Nothing has yet turned up to alter the nature
of things, and Great Britain has referred the cause of her unfortunate subjects
and adherents entirely to our generosity. I can commiserate the case of
individuals, reduced to deplorable circumstances, by the ambition and crime of
their nation; but I cannot admire acts of generosity, unless that virtue be
displayed, without making a sacrifice of much more important ones. When we
shall have done bare justice to the men, whose dangers, toils and sufferings,
have secured our independence; when we shall have made compensation to our own
people, who have suffered by the ravages of the enemy; when we shall have made
provision for complying with our engagements to our other friends; when we
shall have rendered government firm, respectable and happy; it will be time to
pursue the dictates of a generous, humane, merciful spirit. But, gracious
Heaven! what are the men, for whose sakes we should lay burdens on our
murmuring, discontented, injured citizens, and withhold justice from our
benefactors? Is it for parricides, for enemies, for pretended friends, or at
best men, who have viewed our struggles with a cold indifference, that we are
to do all this? It is by no means impossible, that a good citizen of these
states may pity, forgive, admire, or love some of the persons, who fall under
this description; he may associate with them; if they are indigent, he may
assist them with his private fortune; but he will never wish to sacrifice for
them the interests of his country, or the dear bought rights of his
fellow-citizens; it is unnecessary to say more than, that all the world, at
least Great Britain, fully comprehends what is meant by, what will, and what
ought to be, the effect of this stipulated recommendation.

I have proposed an early sale of confiscated property for two reasons. The
money to arise from it, whether the plan be adopted or not, is immediately
wanted; and it is evident, that such a sale would be most productive. It would
answer little purpose to demonstrate, how much the interest of the state has
suffered by not selling this property, some time ago, for every kind of
government paper. I am unwilling to examine, at this time, to whom this bad
policy is justly to be imputed; I will make the most favorable construction,
that it proceeded from a defect of judgment. Had this measure taken place
eighteen months ago, the interests of the army, as well as those of the state,
would have been much better taken care of; and speculation, that bane to
commerce, and perhaps to morals, would have been almost at an end. A blind
resentment against speculators has prevented many salutary measures, and
produced effects directly opposite to those intended. A judicious candid
speculator will, at once, ridicule the policy, show what advantages it has
given him, and how much it has injured the state, and its soldiers.

3. I come now to consider another grand objection to my bill. "It does not
distinguish between depreciation certificates in the hands of the grantees, and
those which have been, for a trifling consideration, transferred to
speculators." It would perhaps be extremely difficult to ascertain what
certificates have been transferred, and what not, a very little ingenuity
having already defeated other schemes of discrimination. Whether this objection
ought to have any weight depends on the soundness or futility of the arguments
adduced in favor of a discrimination; since the acts, under which these
certificates were issued, held out no such idea. They entitle the party to
receive a certain sum of money, and are either expressly, or by the strongest
implication, allowed to be assigned, although under certain idle restrictions.
Had not the law provided these restrictions, an assignment would have given an
equitable claim, and placed the assignee on the same footing with the soldier,
to whom the certificate was granted. By observing them, an assignment has the
sanction of the legislature, and we cannot, without a glaring violation of one
faith, create any distinction among the proprietors of the certificates,
whether assignees, or original grantees. Every act, tending to inspire a
distrust of the laws, must have pernicious consequences, as it weakens
government, and lessons private credit. In this view, a discrimination would be
impolitic; that it would be illegal, arbitrary, unconstitutional, and unjust,
there needs little further argument to demonstrate.

It is contended, that these assignments should be declared void by the
assembly, and justice done to the army. Let it be indelibly impressed on the
mind of every man, who wishes to discover the true principles of government,
that the public has no right to meddle with the contracts of individuals,
unless made in violation of a subsisting law; when that is the case, it is not
the province of the legislature to determine; it belongs only to the tribunals
of law and equity. I believe, no instance can be shown, where the legislature,
in a well regulated free government, has exercised the power, except in matters
of grand national concern, upon the fullest conviction of fraud and delusion,
and where the courts of justice were deemed incompetent. Does the case of
transferred certificates, in any respect, resemble the infamous South Sea
scheme? Is it an affair that interests the community? Has there been any cheat
or deception? Or, if there has, are our courts of justice incompetent? Whether
the measures of the British parliament on the memorable occasion just
mentioned, were not too great an infringement of the principles of their
constitution, is somewhat problematical. However, the constitution of Maryland
in this respect is more accurately defined; the spirit of it every where, and,
in some parts, the letter, is pointedly against retrospective laws; it intended
to establish a firm and perpetual barrier between the legislative and judicial
departments, and he that proposes to break it down, should do it to effect some
very salutary purpose, which at present I cannot discover.

I have heard of some men, hardy enough to declare, that transferred
certificates ought not to be redeemed at all, or only at the price they cost
the purchaser. Their method of delivering the state from a great part of its
debt would indeed be more cheap and compendious than mine, which is honestly to
pay it; the very supposition of getting rid of it otherwise should excite a
general indignation. If an assembly should be found weak enough to frame a
resolve for so base a purpose, it would in the end be rescinded; the injured
parties, having the constitution, the law, and equity, on their fides, would
never cease to remonstrate; indeed a prudent legislature would wait for no
solicitation; it would make all convenient haste to call in the certificates,
not on account of justice only, but because, so long as they exist, the state
is burdened with interest, and leaves them a^ object of speculation.

Let us for a moment suppose the legislature might discriminate without doing
wrong, and that it might, with propriety, undertake to determine what is
justice between all parties; state, soldier, and speculator. Let us suppose it
deliberating with temper on the mode of relieving the poor private, who, for a
small pittance, has renounced the hard price of his toils and suffering Shall
the state make him a compensation from the public treasury? I believe few
members would hazard a proposition, that would open ten thousand mouths against
them. No man within my knowledge has dropped the most distant hint of such a
measure; but many have declared, that the speculator ought to be compelled to
do justice; that the fair way is to pay him, with interest, the money he
advanced, and let the soldier have the residue; that is, the state shall owe
him so much, and be indebted to the soldier for the balance; the contract,
however fairly made, is to be annulled; the purchaser is to find himself duped
by a solemn act of the legislature; he is stripped of his rights, "without a
trial by jury," and without a pre-existing "law of the land." These are serious
considerations with me; but I have observed them to have little weight with
others. Let us then enquire, how far this egregious scheme is practicable; on
which of the parties will the legislature lay the burden of proving the
consideration of the sale? Must indifferent testimony be required? That we know
to be impossible, because in nine cases out of ten, there is no witness, or
writing, by which it can be ascertained. Shall we admit the oath of the
purchaser? It is very probable, if he has dealt a good deal in this way, that,
in two cases out of three, he has no memorandum, or recollection of the precise
sum, or thing, he gave; besides, we should expose him to a strong temptation to
commit a perjury, which he might construe a pious fraud to secure a remnant of
his rights. Shall we trust to the oath of the soldier? If he can be so lost to
the sentiments of honor, as to take advantage of the law, it cannot be
conceived he will entertain a proper sense of the obligation of an oath. Many
certificates have passed through a variety of hands. Suppose a man has
purchased at six for one, and sold to another at four, who has sold at three;
how shall we contrive to ascertain all these contracts, and do what may be
called justice to all the parties? The soldier or the purchaser may have died,
or left the state; some soldiers will reject the relief, and these are the only
men who are likely to become good citizens; others will accept it, and these
are the men who dissipate every thing in riot, and will hereafter prove the
bane of society. In short, this project of dispensing justice to the army will
be found, on the strictest enquiry, to be unjust, impracticable, visionary, and
absurd.

Let us now, with that candor and impartiality which is due to all men,
examine what has induced so many humane well disposed persons to advocate a
scheme, on which the idea of a discrimination between our creditors has been
founded. They have conceived, that speculators availed themselves of the
necessities of the soldiers, when they obtained certificates, at a price so far
inferior to the sum expressed. But what was the cause of this? and where does
the blame properly lie? The circumstances, under which the certificates were
issued, are well known. Congress had recommended this measure to the states, as
the only expedient that remained for keeping the army on foot. But this
salutary purpose would not have been effected; the clamours of the army would
not have been appeased; the spirit of mutiny and desertion would not have
subsided; if the poor naked soldier could not have exchanged his paper for
something, to supply his immediate wants. What was there, in the name of common
sense, to stamp a proper value upon it? That patriotism alone would be a
sufficient motive for monied or trading men to purchase it at par, was a mere
Utopian dream; the project which is founded only on the supposition, that
public spirit is to supersede the dictates of private interest, deserves not a
serious examination. There were no certain funds, or period fixed for the
redemption of this paper; there was no immediate use, and the mode of
assignment was rendered difficult and precarious; it was, notwithstanding, at
first exchanged at par for the bills of credit then in circulation, which were
limited in their duration, and had certain funds for their support. I would ask
any cool rational man, what better could have been expected? The assembly,
however, considered this traffic as a shameful imposition on a meritorious
class of men, whom Providence had not blessed with discretion to manage their
own concerns; it determined, contrary to its own recent positive engagement,
that certificates already transferred should not be received for certain lands,
that were directed to be sold, for the express purpose of redeeming army
certificates; and, by way of justifying its conduct, every opprobrious epithet
was applied to a set of men, who had long before been the objects of an
undistinguishing popular resentment. This mode of procedure produced little
benefit to the soldier; his necessities still obliged him to sell; and the
legislature had not deprived him of his power. If, under all these
discouragements, a speculator would hazard the purchase, it is not to be
wondered, that he afforded no better terms. In every other contract, he might
avail himself of the advantages of his ready money, his superior judgment, and
of other peoples wants. Very little consure has fallen on those honorable
gentlemen, who, at the race of two for one, obtained red money, which was
instantly to be received from them at par for their taxes. I aver, that many
respectable members of the legislature purchased red money at that cruel rate
from indigent persons, who had just received it as speci^ from the state. Where
is the enthusiastic lover of justice, that will propose a relief in this case?
And yet if there is a difference between this case, and that of transferred
certificates, it is by no means in favor of the latter. In both cases, the
sufferer must look to the assembly for the authors of their wrongs. But alas!
their own acts have put a redress entirely out of the question; the state
cannot make up their losses, and pay their assignees the full sum besides.

Of all the numerous objectors to my bill, those who talk most colourably on
the subject, have argued in this manner; "It is our fixed determination to
preserve public faith, and to pay our creditors of every description. It is
folly to talk of doing otherwise; but, if we cannot satisfy them all at once,
ought we for that reason to pay none at all? The path is plain; we will pay as
far as we can, and give the preference, where it is justly due." With all
proper respect for high names and superior talents, these gentlemen are
mistaken both in principle and fact I cannot perceive, how the officers or
soldiers who have retained their certificates have any just claim to a
distinction. (They will pardon me for the exercise of a right, for which I will
ever acknowledge myself pr^^cipally indebted to them.) They have never been
injured by the act of those, who have transferred; why then are they to be
placed in a better situation than if not a single certificate had been
assigned? If we had a sum of money in the treasury ^or the payment of our
debts, and upon adjusting every claim, that sum should be found inadequate,
every one to whom a security had been given, or his assignee, who stands in his
place to all intents and purposes, should come in for a fair dividend,
according to the nature of the public engagements. So much for the principle;
but the true state of matters makes every dispute about the principle quite
immaterial, because the ^^^ds belonging to the state are at least equal to its
real debts. Should I fail in she proof of this position, I would th^^ argue in
this way: We are indebted to a variety of creditors, and to a very large
amount; we have a variety of debtors, although to not an equal amount; some of
these debtors are become creditors, by having purchased the government
securities granted to others; some of these securities have been assigned to
persons not indebted to the state. Shall we admit the plain, convenient,
equitable rule of discount, which prevails between individuals? Or shall we
harrass and ruin a debtor, by compelling him to make full payment, whilst he
has a liquidated claim, which would more than balance his debt? Shall we make
sale of his property and the property of his securities? Shall we commit his
body to a gaol, and at the same time defer our payment to him, just as long as
we please? Again. Shall we at a proper period, assign our debts to our
creditors, and thereby gratify both debtors and creditors! Or shall we be at
the risk, trouble, and expense, of collecting from the former, in order to
satisfy some of the latter? The whole appears so plain to my understanding,
that if I had not heard opposite opinions, most pertinaciously maintained, I
should be ashamed to offer a serious argument. I should expect the same fate
with a preacher, who takes his text, divides and subdivides his argument,
fatigues himself and his audience, and makes a mighty pother to demonstrate
what no man in his senses could possibly deny.

Supposing still that the debts due to the state, together with the money lying
idle in the treasury, and the remaining confiscated property, are unequal to
what she owes, why are we to reject the equitable rule of discount? (I will not
ask, whether it is in our power to reject it.) Does justice between the state
and a citizen differ from justice between one citizen and another? If we mean
to pay our debts at all, why may we not set about it at once in a way, which
will produce no inconvenience to the people? Why may we not, as far as
possible, deliver our affairs from embarrassment, perplexity, risk, and
confusion? What valuable end is proposed by delay? It would appear to be the
study of some politicans, to vex and disquiet every body, that has any dealings
with the public. It may answer some private contracted view; they may for a
short season enjoy their beloved popularity; the people, who are seldom
acquainted with the true situation of affairs, being told, that the general
ease and advantage has been consulted, may at first hail them as guardians and
saviors; but when they discover the deception; when they perceive, that a
trifling ease cannot be obtained, without sacrificing the rights of their
fellow-citizens, and of their real saviors and benefactors; when they come to
experience the evils of a weak and corrupt government; when they have the
prospect of still greater before them; they must be senseless and depraved
indeed, if they do not execrate the authors of their calamities; they will at
length perceive, that virtue is the true basis of all free government, and that
a republic, which is false to its own people, and does not watch over the
happiness, and guard the rights of all, will soon lose every thing but the
name, and at last degenerate into despotism, or some other worse species of
tyranny.

To demonstrate how far my plan is likely to produce every end I proposed, it
is time to produce my estimates, which, though not perfectly exact in every
particular, were very near the truth on the 14th of February last, when I
received my information from the treasurer and the auditor, and one of the
commissioners, after a careful examination of their books; whatever change has
since taken place, is immaterial; because no part of the funds can have been
diminished, without also diminishing the debt, or providing so much specie; and
no article of the debts can be augmented, without diminishing the article of
unliquidated debts, which with me must remain a matter of conjecture, for which
I have made a large allowance, but which, there is every reason to believe,
cannot be so great as has been represented.

An estimate of the funds belonging to the state, proposed to be appropriated
to the payment of its debt.
Confiscated property has been sold for redeeming bills of credit to the amount
of L.338.600 2 3; the treasurer has received from the purchasers, for principal
and interest, L.44,834 14 9 in bills, and about L.2,700 in specie; the
commissioners have received L.9,894 14 3; these sums subtracted from the first
sum leave L.281,170 13 3; the interest added makes the amount of what is still
due at least L.305,000 0 0 Confiscated property has been sold for redeeming
army certificates to the amount of L.68,564; the treasurer has received from
the purchasers L.27,205 5 9; the commissioners have received L.14,435 8 6;
these sums subtracted from the first sum leave L.26,923 5 9; the interest added
makes the whole amount of what is still due about L.29,000 0 0 Confiscated
property has been sold for specie specially appropriated to the amount of
L.30,016 5 2 ^/4; I cannot ascertain the sum paid; I suppose there cannot be
due less than 12,000 0 0 Arrearages of the tax for 1781 and 1782, on the
western shore, 89,158 13 8 On account of taxes for 1783, the treasurer of the
western shore has received only L.21,09 (...) 9; the arrearages cannot be
ascertained without the returns of the commissioners of the tax, but they
cannot fall short of 60,000 0 0 There are arrearages of taxes on the eastern
shore, and sums due for class money and upon contracts on both shores; the
receipts of the last year's tax on the eastern shore have not been accounted
for; in the judgment I have formed from authentic documents these articles must
exceed 75,000 0 0 The commissioners estimate the residue of confiscated
property, if sold for bills of credit or certificates of any kind, at 75,000 0
0 Specie lying useless in the treasury, 2,700 0 0 Debts due to the naval
offices, at least 16,000 0 0 Sum total of funds, L.663,858 13 8 An estimate of
the state debt.
Certificates have been issued for liquidated debts to the amount of L.101,142
2 7; there is provision made by the supply bill for paying the interest, I
therefore make no addition on that account. 101,142 2 7 Continental state bills
of credit L.35,978 9 8, with the interest, about L.44,900 (...) (...) Black
state bills L.31,1^1 15 45 with the interest, about 37,500 0 9 Red money,
13,894 9 (...) Subscribers to this money have brought in L.7,050 18 11, which,
with the interest, amounts to about 8,750 0 (...) Army certificates have been
issued to the amount of L.229,827 17 0, bearing in^^^^st from the first of
August 1780; of these (...),205 5 9 have been paid to the treasurer for
principal and interest, and L.14,435 8 6 to the commissioners; soldiers
clothing, etc. has been sold by the intendant to the amount of more than
L.19,000, for various kinds of paper; as it is immaterial in what kind the
purchasers have made or may make their payments, I deduct the whole amount of
sales from the amount of these certificates; there remain then to be called in
L.169,187 2 9, which with the interest amounts to about 20^,000 0 0 The
arrearages of the five months pay, with the balances on journals of accounts,
cannot exceed 5,000 9 0 By Ridley's contract in Holland we may possibly be in
debt more than we have to receive, 25,000 0 0 Accounts settled by the auditor,
and unliquidated debts, about 35,000 0 0 Certificates under the act proposing
to the citizens of this state, etc. 92,033 12 0 Sum total of debts, 568,320 3 9
Sum total of funds, 663,858 13 8 Balance in favor of the state, L.95,538 9 11

N. B. These are estimates of the funds and debts as they stood on the 14th of
February; the change which has since taken place, as I said before, is
immaterial. I have not reckoned on the bank stock, which would make a great
addition to our funds, about L.40,000 sterling.

To save myself, and the gentlemen to whom I am indebted for information, a
great deal of unnecessary trouble, I have made only suppositions with respect
to interest, taking care, that the balance in favor of the state should not
exceed the truth. That balance may stand against unforeseen losses and
deductions from the funds, which I have supposed sufficient only to discharge
the debts contained in my estimate; in less than three years my plan, if
adopted, will have had its full operation, and the surplus, if any, will again
be at the disposal of the state.

The certificates given by virtue of the act proposing to the citizens of this
state, etc. amount to L.92,033 12 0. As we have undertaken to provide for the
punctual payment of the interest of money lent to congress, and as congress is
thereby released from the burden, they will certainly permit us to deduct it
from our quota of the interest of the national debt. Should they refuse so
reasonable a proposition, an inconsiderate politician might move for referring
this last of creditors to their original securities. Great inconveniences
would result from the measure; and I do not believe congress would subject us
to so disagreeable a necessity. That prudent body has always consulted the
welfare of the men, who generously lent them money to prosecute the war, or who
placed any reliance on the public faith. Besides, they would consider, that our
mistake proceeded from an earnest desire of complying with their just
requisitions. Should congress view the matter in a different light; should they
tell us no deduction can be made; we can only contribute our full quota, pay
the interest on these certificates, and carry to the continental treasurer the
original loan-office certificates, which now belong to us, and entitle the
bearer to the sum expressed, and receive just the same interest from him. Take
it either way, and we are not burdened, in the end, more than if we had not
officiously taken the place of congress. Every wise man would indeed prefer a
fair honest discount to a vexatious circuity of payment.

I have been amused at the trouble, some gentlemen have given themselves, to
swell the state debt to a sum truly formidable. To expose a most egregious
imposition, I shall explain the nature of certain debts, set down in their
estimates, which I have not admitted into min^.

It is said, "we have never fully complied with the requisitions of congress,
and we shall be indebted about L.400,000 on that score. We owe for the pay of
our line in the year 1782 about L.200,000. Only a small part of our quota of
the continental bills of credit has been called in, and as we are, agreeably to
a resolve of congress, to redeem them at forty for one, we are indebted on
their account about L.130,000. These several sums amount to about L 730,000."
Not one of them is honored with a place on my estimate, or provided for in my
bill.

In this place, I present my readers with a state of the national debt
published by congress some time in the last year.

An estimate of the national debt, viz.
Livres. Dollars. Due to the farmers general of France, 1,000,000 To
individuals of France on unliquidated accounts, estimated 3,000,000 To the
crown of France, including a loan of 10,000,000 borrowed in Holland, and for
which France is guarantee, 28,000,000 To ditto, a loan for 1783, 6,000,000
38,000,000 At 5 livres 8 sous per dollar, 7,037,037 To lenders in Holland
received in part of the loan contracted for by Mr. J. Adams, 1,678,000 florins,
671,200 Borrowed in Spain by Mr. Jay, 150,000 One year's interest of Dutch loan
of 10,000,000 livres, 26,848 Foreign debt 1st of January 1783, 7,885,085
Domestic debt.
On loan-office certificates reduced to Dollars. specie value, 11,463,802
Interest unpaid for 1781, 190,000 Ditto 1782, 678,828 Credit to sundries in
treasury books, 638* 042 Army debt to 31st of December 1782, 5,635,618
Unliquidated debt, estimated 8,000,000 Commutation to the army agreeable to the
act of 22d March last, 5,000,000 Bounty due to private^, 500,000 Deficiencies
in 1783, suppose 2,000,000 34,115,290 Total debt, 42,000,375 Annual interest of
the debt of the United States.
On the foreign debt, part at 4 and part at 5 per cent. 369,038 6 On the
domestic debt, at 6 per cent. 2,046,917 4 2,415,956

How it should have entered the head of any man, conversant with public
affairs, that the pay due to our line for 1782 constitutes a part of the state
debt, is difficult to be conceived. We here see it comprehended in the
continental debt; and certificates are now issuing to the officers and soldiers
for that pay, and for all that is due besides upon a final settlement.

With respect to deficiencies in our contributions during the war, it is
necessary to speak more fully, to give clear ideas on the subject. For several
years, congress made large requisitions, to enable them to carry on the war.
Not a single state contributed, in any one year, its full proportion. It is
owing to this, that the national debt exceeds 42,000,000 dollars. Commissioners
are appointed, on behalf of congress, to settle with each of the states. The
commissioner, or whoever finally settles the account with Maryland, will charge
u^ with our full quota of the whole requisitions, and give us credit for every
thing, we have fairly advanced. There will unquestionably be a great balance
against us, perhaps much more than L.400,000. The case will be similar with
every other state. What then is to be done, when all their accounts are finally
cosed? Must they discharge each its respective balance, and contribute its
quota of the national debt besides? By no means; for that would be paying
twice. What then will be the end of appointing these commissioners? It will be,
to ascertain the actual contributions of every state. If a state has advanced
beyond its proportion of the whole which congress has received, then congress
will be indebted to it for the excess. If it has advanced less than its
proportion, it will then be indebted to congress for the deficiency. We have
constantly boasted of our exertions, we have acquired great credit with our
sister states, and I incline to believe, this mighty affair of deficiencies
will, at last, turn out to our advantage.

The whole debt then, not comprised in my estimate, is our quota of continental
bills. With respect to this, we have managed poorly indeed! We have neglected
favorable opportunities of calling it in, at little expense; and in the end,
some of the states will perhaps gain an advantage. However, this part of our
debt is that about which we may of all others be the least solicitous; we may
wait, till congress determines what ought to be done. Should any gentleman be
seriously of opinion, that this part of our debt ought to be paid as soon as
any other; should he approve my plan in general, and be satisfied of the
sufficiency of the funds; let him propose by way of amendment, that debtors be
allowed to pay continental bills, at the rate of 140 for one, which is double
the value they passed at, just before they ceased to circulate; that they be
exchanged for bonds; and, when every other purpose shall have been effected,
that the surplus be applied to the buying them up, until the whole of our quota
shall be called in.

5. Certain debtors are indulged with a further time, for obvious reasons. The
red money was called out of circulation by methods, not prescribed in the act
for its emission. It would be idle to allow them to pay any other paper, if we
did not afford them a reasonable time to collect it. To let loose upon them
immediately the vengeance of the law, would produce deeper scenes of distress,
than were exhibited during the war. By the law now in force, the money, when
collected, must be locked up, and until a certain period, remain useless. Both
policy and justice, on this occasion, must plead for mercy. Let it not be said,
that, by indulging our debtors from time to time, we only encourage a bl^meable
remissness. They have had no indulgence, that ought to have been denied. They
will exert themselves when there is a prospect of success; the purchasers, who
have not entered into bond, will make haste to complete their contracts, and
many will be found in condition to make payment, so soon as we shall allow them
to discount government securities. I have proposed another motive for their
diligence; after the first of January 1785, they may have it in their power to
pay only in specie.

6. It remains to say something to an objection, which has had no little weight
with those, who are satisfied with confident words, and general expressions,
and cannot bear the fatigue of a rational enquiry. It has been asserted, that
the present plan originated from malice, and that it is only calculated to
defeat better measures, and to undo all that has been done for retrieving our
affairs from disorder. I should be happy to discover those schemes, and to
contemplate the prosperous train already said. The business surely could not be
concealed from an inquisitive eye, from the assembly, and from all the world.
In plain and sober truth, there has hitherto been nothing like system, or plan.
A succession of crude, indigested measures, springing from disgust, from pique,
from whim and caprice, have plunged us further and further into difficulties,
have dissipated our resources, and done irreparable injuries to individuals. To
prevent further mischiefs, the bill for the relief of public creditors contain^
the only rational, enlarged, comprehensive scheme, that has yet been proposed.
If it should not perform every thing I have promised, it could not fail to
perform a great deal, and the state would be no further bound, than it already
is, to provide ample funds to fulfill all its engagements. No loss, no
dishonor, no disadvantage, can possibly flow from the experiment; it is
calculated to make the most of the present funds; it gives all creditors of the
same description an equal chance; it affords a reasonable relief to-debtors; it
will conciliate the affections of both these classes of citizens; and it will
tend manifestly to diminish the expenses of government.

From the manner, in which I have urged my propositions, it will be concluded,
that I am deeply interested in the scheme. The searcher of all hearts can alone
be acquainted with my motives, which are perfectly immaterial in the discussion
of a public question. I have, however, not the least title to a single bill of
credit, or certificate. I am not indebted to the state. I am not disposed to
hazard my character by speculation. In short. I have no interest in the plan,
which has employed so much of my attention, except that which may result from
the general happiness, prosperity, and honor of my country.

I PROCEED to some considerations, respecting our quota of the national debt,
the recommendations of congress, and the relation we bear to that respectable
body.

If I understand their estimate of the national debt, it amounted on the first
of January last to 42,000,375 dollars, the interest of which is 2,415,956
dollars. They have conjured the states, by every consideration which can affect
an honest mind, to pass such acts as will enable them punctually to pay the
interest. They have ventured to recommend a mode called the 5 per cent. impost,
by which the not sum of 915,956 dollars might be raised, with the greatest ease
to the people; they have left it to each of the states to establish effectual
funds for supplying its proportion of the residue, which is 1,500,000 dollars;
and they have made the compliance of every state necessary to give efficacy to
the resolutions of any. The mode they have pointed out has been rejected by
some of the states, and every art is employed, by designing men, to induce
others to rescind the acts, by which they have adopted it. The second part of
their recommendation I believe has been complied with by only two states in the
union. At the last session of our assembly, I do not recollect to have heard it
even mentioned. There are three ways, by which this backwardness in our state
has been justified. In the first place, "It would answer no purpose for one
state to do what the rest have declined." In the next place, "The back lauds
claimed by individual states, of right belong to the whole, and would alone
constitute a fund sufficient for the punctual payment of the interest, and for
discharging within a reasonable time the principal of the whole national debt."
Again, "If that fund be inadequate, or belongs not to congress, we are not in
condition to pay either principal or interest. As we have done so much for
posterity; as we have taken such care for transmitting to them the fair
inheritance of freedom and independence; it is reasonable, they should share
the expense." A little sober reflection will convince every rational man, how
idle, unjust and dishonorable, are all these excuses and evasions. In the
first place; as it is impossible for thirteen legislatures at the same instant
to do the same thing, if each waits for the rest, the requisition of congress
can never be complied with; but it has redounded much to the honor of those
states, which have discovered an ambition to be foremost.

The "address and recommendation to the states, by the United States in
Congress assembled," from which I extracted the estimate of the national debt,
was not duly circulated; there are few who have seen it. I shall therefore
present another extract for the information of those, who may honor these
sheets with an attentive perusal.

By the UNITED STATES in Congress assembled, April 18, 1783.
Resolved by nine states,
That it be recommended to the several states, as indispensably necessary to
the restoration of public credit, and to the punctual and honorable discharge
of the public debts, to invest the United States in Congress assembled, with a
power to levy for the use of the United States, the following duties upon goods
imported into the said states, from any foreign port, island, or plantation.

90ths of a dollar. Upon all rum of Jamaica proof, per gallon, 4 Upon all other
spirituous liquors, 3 Upon Madeira wine, 12 Upon all other wines, 6 Upon common
bohea tea, per lb., 6 Upon all other teas, 24 Upon pepper, per lb., 3 Upon
brown sugar, per lb., Upon loaf sugar, 2 Upon all other sugars, 1 Upon
molasses, per gallon, 1 Upon cocoa and coffee, per lb., 1

Upon all other goods, a duty of 5 per centum ad valorem at the time and place
of importation.

Provided that none of the said duties shall be applied to any other purpose
than the discharge of the interest or principal of the debts contracted on the
faith of the United States, for supporting the war, agreeably to the resolution
of the 16th day of December last, nor be continued for a longer term than 25
years; and provided that the collectors of the said duties shall be appointed
by the states within which their offices are to be respectively exercised; but
when so appointed, shall be amenable to, and removable by, the United States in
Congress assembled, alone, and in case any state shall not make such
appointment within one month after notice given for that purpose, the
appointment may be made by the United States in Congress assembled.

That it be further recommended to the several states to establish for a term
limited to twenty-five years, and to appropriate to the discharge of the
principal and interest of the debts, contracted on the faith of the United
States, for supporting the war, substantial and effectual revenues of such a
nature as they way judge most convenient, for supplying their respective
proportions of one million five hundred thousand dollars annually, exclusive of
the aforementioned duties, which proportion shall be fixed and equalized from
time to time according to the rule which is, or may be pr^scribed by the
articles of confederation; and in case the re^enues established by any state,
shall at any time yield a sum exceeding its actual proportion, the excess shall
be refunded to it; and in case the revenues of any state shall be found to be
deficient, the immediate deficiency shall be made up by such state, with as
little delay as possible, and a future deficiency guarded against by an
enlargement of the revenue established. Provided that, until the rule of the
confederation can be carried into practice, the proportions of the said
1,500,000 dollars shall be as follows, viz.

New Hampshire, 52,078 Massachusetts, 224,427 Rhode Island, 32,318 Connecticut,
132,091 New York, 128,243 New Jersey, 83,358 Pennsylvania, 205,189 Delaware,
22,443 Maryland, 141,517 Virginia, 256,487 North Carolina, 109,006
South Carolina, 96,183 Georgia, 16,030

The said last mentioned revenues to be collected by persons appointed as
aforesaid, but to be carried to the separate credit of the state, within which
they shall be collected.

That an annual account of the proceeds and applications of all the
aforementioned revenues, shall be made out and transmitted to the several
states, distinguishing the proceeds of each of the specified articles, and the
amount of the whole revenue received from each state, together with the
allowances made to the several officers employed in the collection of the said
revenues.

That none of the preceding resolutions shall take effect, until all of them
shall be aoceded to by every state, after which unanimous accession, however,
they shall be considered as forming a mutual compact among all the states, and
shall be irrevocable by any one or more of them without the concurrence of the
whole, or of a majority of the United States in congress assembled.

Had our legislature passed an act for establishing a substantial and effectual
fund for supplying its proportion of 1,500,000 dollars, such act would not have
been merely nugatory. We should have exhibited an illustrions example, without
any detriment to ourselves, because the burdens to be imposed are not to be
felt, until all the states have acceded to the resolution of congress, by
passing similar acts

With respect to the back lands, we ^ave repeatedly asserted claims which
appear to us founded on reason and justice. The congress, however, is the only
tribunal to determine, and the business is in a way to be settled. If we should
be dissatisfied with their decision, I know not whither we shall carry an
appeal for redress. Ought we on that account to dissolve the union? Ought we to
occasion a national bankruptcy, which would fix an indelible stain on our
character, deprive the soldier of his dear-bought reward, and the h^pes of
future subsistence, insult and injure our generous all^es, and expose us to all
the consequences of anarchy and confusion? If men are disposed to do right, if
they do not wish for a revolution, it can be owing to nothing but a want of
reflection, that they oppose congress in every thing, which is not agreeable to
their own partial judgments. If no measure can be carried into effect, unless
congress can contrive to reconcile jarring interests, and to give complete
satisfaction to thirteen suspicious wrangling states, I could wish the
confederacy at once dissolved, and to meet those evils, which cannot be worse
in reality than they are in contemplation. I^ the states have no confidence in
a body of men delegated by themselves, coming from every part of the republic,
elected on account of their integrity and superior talents, natives of America,
possessed of every light to afford a large compreh^^sive view, having no
separate interests, as members of that body, taking upon them with reluctance
an employment of little honor, less emolument, and short duration; if we
cannot trust these men so far as to adopt their advice, there is no way to
preserve our union, but by enlarging their authority. This they have never
required. They wish to owe our compliance to our free consent, and not to their
own power. Away then with all idle fears and fantastic jealousies, or let them
be transferred to their proper objects. These are the men of turbulent restless
spirits, who although they may be useful, in sounding the alarm, when tyranny
endeavors to steal upon us by imperceptible steps, are equally opposed to
every kind of government, and sometimes acquire a transient popularity, by
rendering it odious to the people.

Let us suppose every acre of the lands in question determined to be public
stock, and every state to have dutifully acquiesced; must our creditors wait
till this fund be sufficiently productive? That whatever expense has been
incurred, in conquering, or securing these lands, shall be reimbursed, is a
condition, to be granted to those states which shall relinquish their claims.
It is perhaps contrary to the immediate interest of this state, for congress to
accept the concession on such terms; at least, those lands cannot for many
years produce a greater revenue than will enable congress to perform the
condition Six millions of acres, which is a tract of country larger than this
state, would produce only L.300,000 at L.5 for 100 acres. I do not believe,
congress could dispose of so much of the remote western territory, at that
rate, nor get that sum of money into their treasury by disposing of their land
at any rate, even in the first year after an office should be opened. A dislike
to the slow methods of industry, the love of change, and a spirit of
enterprise, has already carried away most of those, who were disposed to
migrate to those wild uncultivated regions. There may be others, whom a regard
to posterity may tempt to acquire large tracts of land, which cannot be settled
in their day. In a little time, the demand would lessen, nor would it conduce
to our real interest should it continue. It cannot be kept up, without d^aining
the settled part^ of the country of its inhabitants, or by much la^ge^
emigrations of adventurers from Europe than I can ^ave an idea of. A habit of
calculation would be extremely useful in correcting those mistakes which men
are apt to be led into by an overheated imagination.

I am apprised of the project of selling land warrants for certi^i^^res, and
other public securities; but I cannot conceive it honorable to compel our
creditors to purchase, by holding out the idea, that they are never to receive
any other satisfaction. By far the greater part are in want of money, and would
esteem it better to receive their interest regularly, than a warrant for these
(...) lands, on almost any terms. Let us attend to the hard terms on which the
officers in a neighboring state have (...) of land warrants, to supply their
immediate wants. If the recommendation of congress were adopted by all the
^ates, our creditors would soon have it in their power (...) of the principal
without loss.


. It is sufficient for me, that congress has deemed other funds absolutely
necessary, and that it can have no insidious views in procuring the imposition
of burdens, of which its own members must bear a proportion. They have not
even reserved to themselves the appointment of collectors, and their influence
and importance, even for the short time they hold their seats, will not be at
all increased by our adopting their recommendation.

The national debt does not create the only demand for money. The government of
the United States cannot be carried on without it, unless we could go on for
ever upon credit, without taking a single step to satisfy our creditors. I
believe that substantial resource congress, for the present, is deprived of;
and it will require a great deal of wisdom in congress, and in the different
legislatures, to regain it. To prevent further requisitions for defraying the
expense of its government, for maintaining a peace establishment, and for
guarding every part of its territory, congress is obliged to depend on further
loans. The back lands may hereafter constitute a fund for discharging the new
debt, and for providing against contingencies. A substantial fund for this
latter purpose ought undoubtedly to be vested in the sovereign power of a
republic, which has no authority, upon any emergency, to levy money by
taxation, without the consent of thirteen other deliberative bodies. Congress
has however engaged to apply the revenue to arise from the back lands to hasten
the extinguishment of the national debt; and, since neither congress as a body,
nor its members as individuals, can have any motive for acting contrary to the
true interests of their constituents, they will perform the engagement whenever
it can be done with safety and propriety.

To talk of leaving to posterity the burden of the debt contracted during the
war, is truly ridiculous. I have no precise idea of what is meant by the
posterity of a state. The term, when applied to an individual, every body
comprehends. I should be glad to know what proportion of the individuals
composing this republic, or whether the whole, must quit this earthly stage,
before the succession of posterity is to commence. To refer our creditors
entirely to posterity, would be little more than a declaration, that they never
shall be paid; for, if we entertain so poor a sense of our obligations, they
and their representatives can have little dependence on our posterity. Besides,
posterity must, at all events, bear the burden of the establishments we now
make. They must, perhaps for a long time, pay the interest of the debt, and at
last find means to extinguish the principal. Added to this, they may have
troubles and burdens enough of their own. It was the wicked, ungenerous policy
of anticipating the public revenue, and entailing debts upon posterity, which
has wrought so many evils to Great Britain, and laid the foundation for the
dismemberment of their empire; and it is the business of an infant government
to profit from the experience of all, that have gone bef^^re it.

Let us now ascertain our proportion of the interest of the national debt. If
141,517 dollars are our share of 1,500,000, then 227 999, equal to L.85,499 13
0, is our quota of the whole. From the bottom of my heart, and in the fincerity
of my soul, I despise the man, who would hint at the inability of this state to
furnish congress annually with this sum. That man, if he is not strangely
mifinformed, or weak in his intellects, was never a true whig; he is dishonest
to his neighbor, false to his benefactors, and ungrateful to Providence.

The 5 per cent. scheme It is supposed, congress has erred with respect to the
net amount of a duty of 5 per cent. on imports. It is unjust to draw inferences
from wha^ has happened in the first year after a peace, in two or three trad^ng
towns. It is evident to me, that, after a short time, the imports to America
must, in a great degree, ^e regulated by the exports; that is, the former
c^nnot greatly exce^d the latter* No calculation has ever made the amount of
exports from this state to exceed L.1,000,000. Now suppose the imports to be
exactly equal, the certain duty on enumer (...) articles, and 5 per cent. ad
valorem on all others, would s^arcely yield this state's pro^ortion of the
915,956 dolla^s, which are expected to be levied by an impost. Those who
^magine the impost scheme would produce enough to ^^y the interest of the whole
national debt, if they reason^d at all have formed their conclusion on
premises, which cannot be established.
, which imposes a tax scarcely to be felt, having been adopted by this state,
and there being a reasonable ground of expectation, that all our sister sta^es
will, at last, pay the same regard to this part of the recommendation, all that
we have to do, is to establish for the term of 25 years, a substantial revenue,
for supplying cong^^ss with the annual sum of 141,517 dollars, equal to
L.53,068 17 6. Permit me to pr^pose the following brief sketch of a LANDTAX

1. That there be a valuation, according to the present actual worth of all the
real private property in the state; that this valuation be made by assessor,
under the direction and control of commissioners, in the same manner as has
been heretofore usually done under the acts for raising supplies; that this
valuation be made and transmitted to the governor and the council, before the
20th of August next; that previously to the said return, the assessors of each
county shall meet at a time, and place, to be appointed by the commissioners,
to compare and (if need be) to correct each his several valuations; that, if
the governor and the council shall think the said valuations to be equal, and
just, they shall ratify and confirm the same; or, if they shall think the said
valuations to be unequal and unjust, they shall inform the commissioners of the
counties wherein they shall deem the valuations to be too high, or too low, of
the average price, at which land shall have been valued in each county, and the
commissioners shall thereupon direct the assessors to reconsider their returns;
and the valuations upon such reconsideration shall be final and conclusive, and
shall be returned to the governor and council by the first of November next,
who shall, thereupon, lay and impose for every hundred pounds, such a rate as
may levy the gross sum of L.57,000 from the whole private landed property
within the state; and the said valuations shall be recorded in the respective
county courts, and o^ the journals of the council.

2. That the same provision be made for doing justice between tenants of
particular estates, and those in remainder or reversion, as is made by the act
to raise the supplies for the present year.

3. That, whenever all the states shall have passed similar laws, for
establishing substantial and effectual funds, for supplyi^g their respective
quotas of 1,500 000 dollars, and the some shall be notified by congress, the
governor and council shall forthwith appoint a collector in each county, who
shall give sufficient security for the faithful discharge of his duty.

4. That the said rate be paid by the proprietors of land to the said
collectors, at two equal payments, before the first of March and first of
October, in every year during the term of 25 years; that after the said days in
each year, if the tax shall be unpaid, the collectors be empowered to execute
the land, or goods, and to sell the same, on giving five days notice to the
party, if he be within the county, and at his usual place of residence, or
within ten days, if the party be not within the county and at his usual place
of residence, upon setting up an advertisement at the door of the courthouse;
and the said collectors shall, within two months after the said first of March
and first of October, account for with, and pay to, the treasurer of their
respective shores the whole tax which may be due for their respective counties
(after deducting at the rate of seven per cent. for the whole risk, trouble and
expense of collection) under the penalty of fifteen percent. interest on the
sum, in which they shall be found deficient; and the money so paid in, shall be
subject to the order of the congress, who shall alone be empowered to remove
such collectors, upon misbehaviour; and upon the death, resignation, or removal
of such collectors, the governor and council shall appoint the persons to
succeed them.

It is with extreme diffidence, I make a proposition, which may rouse the
indignation of the whole powerful body of land holders; but, I believe, no man
can point out a more proper and effectual mode of complying with the
indispensable requisitions of congress. Imports will be sufficiently taxed by
the five per cent. scheme; and we could not, at any rate, with prudence, impose
further duties thereon, unless all the neighboring states should do the same.
Duties on exports would be still more detrimental to our commerce, and would,
moreover, be supposed principally to affect the landed interest. We cannot
easily contrive to establish a revenue for 25 years, to be derived from an
assessment on all property, because personal property is perpetually
fluctuating, and it would require the enormous expense of assessors and
commissioners for every year. All sources of revenue, except what I have
mentioned, would be inadequate, and might more properly be applied, to defray
the expenses of our own government.

The congress depended too much on the good sense of their constituents, to
make any provisional requisition. Acting upon the plainest demonstration and
the true principles of policy, they did not say, "If you do not choose to grant
us substantial and effectual revenues, for the term of 25 years, to enable us
to discharge your debt, we entreat you to contrive at least to supply us with
money, to pay your respective quotas of the interest for the year 1784." I
cannot discover, upon what principle the legislature of this state, by the
supply bill, directed a sum of money, "not exceeding one half of the whole
assessment," to be transmitted to congress for the payment of the army. Had
they attended to the estimate, the recommendation and other proceedings of
congress, they must have perceived, that their plan went no farther than to pay
the interest of the army debt, as well as that of other debts. This state's
proportion of the interest of that debt, including commutation, does not exceed
L.21,000. One half of the assessment will amount to about L.42,000, and this,
it seems, congress is to receive, with particular directions as to the
application. If our assembly expected the obedience of congress, they must
entertain such an opinion of that august body, as would not warrant the least
dependence on their conduct. Suppose another state to have gran^ed a sum for
the payment of our illustrious and generous ally; it is easy to perceive how
inconvenient it would be, for congress to abandon its own systems, to gratify
the whims of each distinct legislature. This "one half of the assessment" was
voted without any regard to our quota of the whole debt, or of the amount of
either principal or interest of the army debt; it was merely arbitrary; it
might have been more, or less; it was given unasked; we did not know that other
states would pass similar acts, or that the officers and soldiers of the
Maryland line would derive any material benefit. I am not at all opposed to the
transmitting this money to congress; they have abundant uses for it; it may
come seasonably to answer some occasional purpose; they may consider it as a
free gift, or give us credit for it in our account current; but it will not
support the honor and good faith of the consederacy, give satisfaction to
creditors, or convince the world, that we have done our duty.
An annual contribution, to be raised by a new law every year, would never
answer the views of congress; it is impossible for them, without substantial,
effectual, and certain revenues, to establish a new credit, or to afford any
security to their present creditors. An annual contribution must depend on the
will of every new legislature in thirteen different states, who, upon every
little pique or idle jealousy, might withhold their supplies, embarrass our
affairs, and endanger the union. No man in his senses would lend money to
congress, under such circumstances, or accept an assignment of its assurances,
on terms advantageous to its creditors. We have sufficiently experienced, how
little regard a new legislature pays to the engagements of the last, how
differently it views the same subject, and how vilely the most solemn
assurances have been prostituted.

The rate, I have thus proposed to lay upon real property, would be inferior to
what has been laid on all property, for several years. By the last valuation,
the whole of real property amounted to L.6,303,143 17 10; the rate of 18
shillings on L.100 would produce the gross sum of L.57,000. I conceive,
however, that if real property were fairly estimated, it would amount to at
least L.12,000,000; a rate of 9s6 on L.100 would in that case be sufficient;
but whether the proposed valuation should prove higher, or lower, than the
present, it would make no manner of difference to landholders in general; for
should the valuation be higher, the rate must be lower; and, should the
valuation be lower, ^^e rate must be higher; in either case, the same sum would
be paid for the same land.

I take it to be an established point, that, impose what tax you please, the
party, who is immediately charged, contrives to throw the burden upon others.
It comes round to all; and, at last, every one is compelled to bear his
proportion. In some cases, indeed, the party even derives an advantage.
However, to conciliate the fav^ur of those, who cannot comprehend these
positions, I would not, for any purpose whatever, propose a further tax upon
real property.

THE most ungrateful part of my undertaking remains behind. As it was my
original intention to give the citizens of this state ample information
respecting the situation of their affairs, I cannot omit to say something
respecting the expenses of our own internal government.

By the "act to settle and pay the civil list," including members of congress,
the following allowances are granted: To the governor, L.1000 0 0 To the
chancellor, 600 0 0 To the judges of the general court, each L.350, 1050 0 0 To
the judges of the court of appeals, each L.150, 750 0 0 To the judge of the
court of admiralty, 100 0 0 To the treasurer of the western shore, who is to
pay his clerks, 500 0 0 To the treasurer of the eastern shore, 200 0 0 To the
clerk of the council, 200 0 0 To the messenger, 75 0 0 To the clerk of the
senate, 75 0 0 To the clerk of the house of delegates, 100 0 0 To the members
of the council, who will sit not more than 100 days. each 22s6 per diem, 562 10
0 To the delegates in congress, each 35s^ per diem, suppose two members to
attend every day and another member half the year, 1593 10 0 L.6806 0 0

Add to this the salaries granted by other acts of the legislature.

To the intendant, 500 0 0 To his assistant, 250 0 0 To his clerk, 175 0 0 To
the auditor-general, 400 0 0 To his assistant, 175 0 0 Total of salaries and
allowances, L.8306 0 0

This sum is to maintain thirty-two persons, many of whom are expected to
possess talents, which would render them eminent in any private employment;
they must reside at the seat of government; and "dedicate their time,
abilities, and labor, to the public." Could society subsist without
government, or could government be conducted without delegating power to
individuals; or, if it were reasonable that these individuals should bestow
their "time, abilities, and labor;" or, if patriotism would alone be a
sufficient motive for others, equal or superior in merit, to execute the
troublesome, expensive, and invidious offices of state; there would indeed be
just cause to clamor against even the most scanty allowance, as every farthing
saved would be some diminution of the burdens of the people. But, as civilized
society never did, or can exist, without government; as government cannot be
carried on by all the persons composing society; as the power of administering
the laws must reside in a few; as the public has no right to expect, the whole
burden should be borne by a few, without a suitable reward; as the share,
which each man in the community contributes to this reward, is so exceedingly
light; how are we to account for the endeavors of so many leading men, to
exhibit the officers of government in such odious colors to the people? It is
easy to account for their success; the people have ever wanted information;
they have been taught to believe, that if it were not for the accursed civil
list, they would have no reason to dread the frequent visits of a collector;
that almost every farthing extracted from their pockets, the fruit of honest
industry, is dealt out to a few idle men, who are rioting in luxury, at the
capital, and, at the same time, accumulating fortunes for their descendants. It
is devoutly to be wished, that the people would think more for themselves, that
they would learn to reason, and calculate, and that experience would teach them
to distrust the men, who solicit their suffrages, under the specious pretenses
of consulting their interest.

About L.11,330,000 being the valuation of all the property within the state,
although far inferior to the actual worth, it will require 17 pence in the
L.100 to pay the civil list and delegates in congress. An estate, then, which
is valued at L.1000, contributes to this purpose 14s2. He must be a strange
senseless being, who, for this, is disposed to consider government as a curse
rather than a blessing; and he must be totally ignorant of the nature of our
government who supposes, that its officers will contrive to engross the whole
15 shillings tax, to be raised by the supply bill.

I doubt not, that great merit will, by some well meaning, ill informed
persons, be ascribed to the present assembly for their singular economy. Any
man that will inspect the acts and resolutions of each assembly, and calculate
the value of paper money at the different periods when it was paid, will be
convinced, that the present salaries are nearly double the average allowances,
since the revolution; that this article of our expenditures created but a small
part of the demands of government; and that the people have not, on this
account, one year with another, been taxed more than nine-pence in the L.100,
on a very low valuation of their property. Let him go further, and estimate the
expense of living during the whole time, and he will perceive that an officer,
so far from saving money, could not, by the most rigid economy, have subsisted
on double his allowance, agreeably to his station, even "in this petty
republic." When he looks round, and sees the daily increase of luxury and
dissipation; when he reflects, that at this period, an universal rage for
wealth has seized all ranks and orders of men, that no station, talent, or
character, can command respect without at least a decent competence; he will
hardly expect men of real worth, for a paltry allowance, to occupy the
laborious, troublesome offices of government, and thereby exclude themselves
from the emolument of private employments. It will be too much to look for
inflexible integrity in the servants of the public. Necessity will perpetually
urge them; and they must renounce either their virtue, or their places; the
most worthless characters will succeed them, and the public, in the end, will
be loser by an ill judged parsimony. This observation must strike every one,
that it would be infinitely better to employ an honest intelligent steward, at
a liberal stipend, than trust to a knave or a fool, and pay him no wages at all.

The whole amount of salaries does not equal a moiety of what was paid by the
people of this state to the late proprietary, and his lieutenant governor. It
does not equal the contributions of a single town to the support of a theater.
I will acknowledge the superior merit of the gentlemen, who "hold the mirror up
to nature." They afford us an elegant, agreeable, rational entertainment. By
their conduct in private life, and the excellent lessons they inculcate on the
stage, they cannot fail to improve our taste, refine our manners, and promote
industry, sobriety, economy, and every other concomitant virtue. But the poor
officers of government require food, habitation, and raiment, as well as they.
Is it possible, without spleen, to hear a man exclaiming bitterly against the
civil list, because he is compelled to contribute about the 2000th part of his
property to their support, whilst he cheerfully lays out 10, 20, or 30 times
the sum at the theater. The bare recital of his conduct is a sufficient satire
on his understanding and principles.

It is alleged that offices are multiplied without necessity. Perhaps the
public might sustain no injury by abolishing a part, and by so doing the sum
total of salaries might, upon the present saving plan, be reduced to less than
L.7000. But after every reform, which prudence might dictate, L.10,000 could
not, by any cool, discerning, rational man, be thought too much for the
maintenance of the officers, who ought to be left. This would require an estate
valued the last year at L.1000, to pay annually about 17s6, instead of 14s2,
which it pays at present; and any worthy proprietor of such an estate would
consent to pay the difference, if he reflects, that this trifling addition to
his tax would convert a sordid, illiberal, contemptible establishment, into one
that is decent and respectable, and at the same time would give the best
security for the faithful administration of the laws.

I wish not to conceal the interest I have in this business. It is closely
connected with that of the public. I have more than once, with the freedom
which becomes a republican, expressed to the assembly a strong sense of the
injuries I had sustained, by repeated infractions of public engagements, and a
total disregard to the principles of the constitution. To the man, who will
attempt to combat plain reasoning and honest claims, by ridicule and sarcasm, I
will only say, that he has an unfeeling heart, and a happy front. However, let
the public respect liquidated claims in which I have no concern; let it in
other things consult its own honor and interest, and I will, without a murmur,
submit to my loss, and give every claim of compensation to the winds.

There is one demand for money, to which, it would seem, every other must
submit. The less opulent members of the assembly must punctually receive their
pay, at the close of every session. The citizens of this state are not
generally apprized, that the expense of holding the assembly has, every year,
exceeded the allowance to civil officers; and yet not even the present
increased allowance to its own ^embers can, by any means, be deemed
extravagant. To the defect of system, to the derangement of our affairs, and to
the non-attendance of members, is to be imputed the extreme length of the
sessions, and the inefficacy of measures. When we shall have settled our
affairs (a work, which diligence and a real zeal for public good might soon
accomplish) I cannot think tha^ journals of accounts, which comprehend the pay
of assembly-men, general court jurors, and witnesses, and sundry incidental
charges, could annually exceed the sum of L.10,000. But let us suppose the
annual expense, of government, including a provision for contingencies, with
the charg^^ of co^^ection, to amount to L.24,000; fines, forfeitures, and a
^^ght ^ax on legal proceedings, marriage and tavern licenses, with some other
trifling duties, and a reasonable rate on personal property, would furnish that
sum without the least difficulty.

It is generally agreed, that the present valuation of property by assessors is
far inferior to the actual worth. Should we estimate from the extravagant sales
upon long credit, the value of all the private property within the state would
amount to at least L.30,000,000. The real value, calculating from ready money
prices, and sales upon short credit, where the purchaser may be depended on, is
at least L.20,000 000. I have shown that our quota of the interest of the
national debt amounts to L.85,409 13 0. The gross sum of L91,000 might be
required on this account. The annual expenses of our government cannot exceed
L.24,000. The county tax amounts in the whole state to about L.20,000. These
several sums make the aggregate sum o^ L.135,000 13 0; and each man's
proportion is the price he is to be charged with for protection in his life,
freedom, and property. This last sum bears about the same proportion to
L.20,000,000, as 13s6 does to L.100. A man then who is worth L.1000, to
contribute his just quota to congress, to the state, and to his county, must
annually pay L.6 15 0, which is about one ninth of the legal interest of money.

We have heard so many vague reports about the national and state debts, so
many shocking representations of every fund; we have been presented with such
frightful pictures of beggary and distress, that a man will hesitate to
acquiesce in the plainest demonstration of their fallacy. I beseech every well
disposed man to examine strictly this whole ad^ress, to converse with every
person that can afford authentic information, and to determine whether it is
possible for me to have materially erred in my calculations and inferences. If
I have, let him be pleased to point out the mistakes, and then determine,
whether it would be better to submit to our burdens, supposing th^^ to be
double, than break through every moral obligation, for ever damn our
reputation, run the risk of dissolving the union, of experiencing first all the
horrors of anarchy and confusion; and of at last being subjected to the most
abject slavery. I do not pretend to infallibility; I do not say, my ideas must
be exactly pursued; but I contend, that without more harmony between the
states, without more zeal, public spirit, and attention in our rulers, without
a more vigorous government, without more regard to justice, good faith, honor
and gratitude, this great and stupendous revolution will answer no better
purpose, than to convince mankind, they were never intended to be free. "The
last and fairest experiment in favor of the rights of human nature will be
turned against them, and their patrons and friends exposed to be insulted, and
silenced, by the votaries of tyranny and usurpation."

The great objects upon which I have so largely, although imperfectly
discoursed, demand the instant attention of the legislature. The constitution,
framed in a hurry, amidst the tumults of war, upon speculative principles,
without a proper consideration of manners, habits, and local circumstances,
although admirable upon the whole, in many parts demands an alteration. The
uncertainty of the law in general, the inefficacy of the penal laws, the
disproportion between crimes and punishment, the delays of justice, the want of
regulations in our commerce; all these are evils which demand an early
attention, with the utmost care, circumspection, and some insight into the laws
and regulations of other nations. I am amazed, when I hear it said, at the
opening of every session, that the assembly has little to do. I am amazed at
the little value my countrymen place on the right of suffrage. Would to heaven,
my feeble efforts could rouse every man to his duty. Ye guardians of the state!
Ye chosen few, whom nature has blessed with endowments, whose minds science has
enlarged, think on your trust! reflect on the situation of your country, like
an ardent youth just rising into manhood, whose conduct, at that critical
period, must fix his character for life, and determine whether that life shall
be prosperous, or unhappy. Your task indeed is arduous; you will have to
encounter every opposition, which resentment, envy, and all the malignant
passions, can dictate; but true virtue is generally superior to all assaults;
and, if your labors should prove ineffectual, your bosoms will possess that
sweet tranquillity, which ignoble ambition or triumphant villainy can never
experience.

FINIS.

