DR. HUNTINGTON's ELECTION SERMON* MAY 13th, 1784.

God ruling the Nations for the most glorious end.

A SERMON, In presence of his Excellency, and both Houses of Assembly.

HARTFORD, MAY 13th, 1784.

BY JOSEPH HUNTINGTON, D. D.

For the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat them
like wool; but my righteousness shall be forever, and my salvation from
generation to generation. JEHOVAH. HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON and GOODWIN.

M.DCC.LXXXIV.

At a General Assembly of the Governor and Company of the State of Connecticut,
holden at Hartford, on the second Thursday of May, A. D. 1784.
ORDERED, That William Williams, Esquire. and Capt. Jeremiah Ripley, return the
Thanks of this Assembly to the Rev'd Dr. Joseph Huntington, for his Sermon
delivered before the Assembly on the 13th instant, and desire a Copy thereof
that it may be printed.

A true Copy of Record, Examined, by GEORGE WYLLYS, Sec'ry.

DEUTERONOMY, xxxii. 8. When the Most High divided to the nations their
inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the
people according to the number of the children of Israel.
JUST thoughts of Deity are sublime and exalted thoughts; such are the
sentiments of the great legislator and judge of Israel, in my text, while he
has in full view the attributes and character of that being who is over all.

Moses had seen much of the glory of his Maker in Egypt, at the red sea, in the
Arabian deserts, especially on Mount Sinai, where his infinite majesty, his
awful and endearing glories, beamed forth conspicuous in giving the law. More
was then seen of God than ever had been seen before.

This great man having sustained the toils and burdens of an eminent public
station forty years; and having conducted the chosen tribes to the borders of
the promised land; the divine poem out of which my text is taken, was put into
his mouth, and designed for the benefit of the people of God, in every age of
the world.

The burden of the song is the infinite rectitude, greatness and glory of God;
the exceeding depravity and perverseness of sinful man, the wisdom and
blessedness of obedience, and the folly and misery of rebellion against heaven.

In the fourth verse the prophet speaks of the eternal Being in most becoming
language. "He is a rock, his work is perfect, all his ways are judgment, a God
of truth, without iniquity, just and right is he."

And in my text three points of doctrine meet our view, and demand our serious
attention.

I. All nations of the earth are at the absolute disposal of the Most High, to
be divided and separated at his pleasure. II. His express will that mankind
should live on equal terms, as brethren. III. That all the nations of the earth
shall be subservient to his own peculiar nation and kingdom.
These thoughts, with their application, may improve the present hour.

I. All nations of the earth are at the absolute disposal of the Most High.

"When the Most High divided to the nations their inheritance." Here God
appears inhabiting eternity, and having in his own infinite mind a most
glorious and perfect plan, relating to all the future inhabitants of the world;
the situation, numbers, rise and fall, of the various states and empires that
were to overspread the earth.

God determined all these things, in his boundless wisdom and goodness, before
he began to operate in his providence; that point in the vast round of eternity
cannot be conceived of, when he had not so decreed.

He saw all his works, and all the works and ways of men, the whole business
and result of the world, as clearly before he began to create, as he will at
the consummation of all things.

What God has determined shall be done, is often in sacred scripture, spoken of
in a past tense, as already done; instances in the prophets are many; and the
manner of expression is designed to impress our minds with a sense of the
divine immutability. -- "My counsel shall stand and I will do all my pleasure."
"He rules in the armies of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the world, and
none can stay his hand."

What is past we all know to be certain, and what God has determined and
foreknown is equally certain. So when future scenes of glory and blessedness to
mankind, were opened to saint John, scenes that require many ages for their
accomplishment, he that sat on the throne said, " It is done: I am alpha and
omega, the beginning and the end." Rev. 21.


If any stumble at this part of the divine character, let them remember God is
incomprehensible: if any would thence infer that there is no freedom of will,
or moral agency in men; no desert of praise or blame; let them look into their
own bosoms, and consult the certain feelings of their own hearts.

The divine decrees and certain foreknowledge, are necessary to the perfection
of Deity, and perfectly consistent with the entire freedom and moral agency of
intelligent creatures; and if men or angels cannot explain all that is
connected with these doctrines, it only verifies that we cannot "by searching
find out God, or the Almighty unto perfection." We know not what it is to be
God, to think as God thinks and decree as he decrees.

The divine Being in his wise fixed purpose, "divided to the nations their
inheritance, and separated the sons of Adam," long "before he had formed the
earth or the sea or the highest part of the dust of the world."

But before the days of Moses he had in part unfolded his infinitely wise and
good purposes, in the movements of his Providence. The world was created and
the human kind to replenish it: The garden of Eden was given to them as their
inheritance in the days of innocence but for rebellion against heaven they were
soon turned out of it.

Nothing but sacred history looks back to this early period, there we find
mankind multiplied and spread abroad on the earth, in how many tribes or
nations we are not informed; but may argue from the long period of time before
the flood, about seventeen hundred years: And the longevity of the people, that
a great part of the world might be inhabited.

No doubt the numerous children of Adam were before the flood separated in many
divisions and dilated far and wide on the face of the earth.

After the deluge we find the small remains of mankind on the mountains of
Ararat, which divide the present empire of Persia from Circassian Tartary, on
the north: whence they first moved south-east and lived together in one growing
family or tribe about an hundred years. -- From whence they journeyed westward
as far as the river Euphrates; near the place where the garden of Eden was
situate, in quest, it is supposed, of the ancient paradise, but found it was
wholly demolished by the flood. Yet vainly fond to build something in imitation
of it. They had also the same disposition natural to the nations ever since,
viz. to hold together as long as possible and extend one general empire: But he
who saw fit to separate the sons of Adam, laid the grand foundation of it, in
his Providence, at this time.

For while, on the plains of Babel, they were attempting to "build a city and a
tower whose top might reach to heaven" the Almighty confounded their language.

The language of paradise, and that spoken by God's covenant people to this
day, was in all probability the Hebrew tongue: But now the Almighty wholly
obliterated from the minds and memories of most of them, that ancient language,
leaving only one division of the people to retain it, and impressed on the
minds of all the other divisions respectively, a different dialect, which each
immediately spoke with the same freedom, with which they before spoke their
native tongue.

How many different languages were now given we are not told, nor how many
distinct nations or tribes were made in consequence; God meant it to "separate
the sons of Adam Genesis xi.
" and they were scattered abroad on all the face of the earth.

All the languages now in the world were radically contained in the various
dialects which God then gave on the plains of Shinar; though with much
composition and variation; as no man ever invented a language entirely new,
this seems the prerogative of God himself.

And the Most High in rolling on his purposes, has, in every age, made use of
this as one great medium, even diversity of language, to make or keep the
nations distinct and separate.

But to proceed, infinite Wisdom has many other means, which all cooperate for
the same end.

The enormous growth and extent of nations, and empires, has often brought them
to division.

So the vast extended empires of Greece and Rome, after covering a great part
of the world, broke to pieces under their own weight.

Again God has often made this the event of war foreign or intestine, and many
new nations have rose out of blood.

Also, a tyrannical and oppressive spirit in potentates and rulers has often
had the same effect.

These have made many people so uneasy as to throw off the yoke of subjection,
and set up distinct by themselves. Witness Egypt, in ancient days; the cruel
tyranny of the Monarch lost him the best part of his subjects, the people of
God, the many thousands of Israel. God's purpose was fulfilled, as in all
things; but the tyranny of Pharaoh was the means.

Witness also the despotic language of that unexperienced young Prince in
Israel: No sooner had be answered the supplicating tribes "my little finger
shall be thicker than my father's loins" than a grand division in the nation
took place.

Many examples might be adduced; but we have a recent one almost without a
parrallel. How well connected and quiet was the great British empire, from the
accession of the Prince of Orange, till after the death of George the second?
and how did every branch of the empire dread the thought of disunion? But, when
a British King became a tyrant, and the Parliament a band of despots, and would
be content with nothing less than to bind a great part of the empire in chains
of perpetual slavery, yea, in all cases whatsoever; when they caused the sea
and the waves along our coast to roar with their hostile thunder, and our
defenseless towns to flame to the midst of heaven. When they plunged their
daggers in the breasts of an innocent people, and called upon us the savages of
the wilderness, with all their infernal massacres, our feelings were greatly
changed. We once loved Britain most dearly; but Britain the Tyrant, we could
not love; our souls abhorred her measures; when matters were pushed thus far,
we desisted from all our humble prayers to deaf ears and unrelenting souls. We
rose from the dust where we had been long prostrate -- our breasts glowed with
noble ardor -- we invoked the God of our fathers, and we took the field; and we
have found that "there is none like the God of Jesurun who has rode on the
heavens in our help and in his excellency on the sky."

And yet further; God has often made the lawless ambition, and proud aspiring
spirit of men instrumental of making new kingdoms, or dividing ancient ones. As
in the case of Nimrod, a proud and lawless man; a man of blood in contempt of
heaven, "a mighty hunter before the Lord Genesis x.
," he soon began a kingdom distinct for himself.

The proud spirit of Jeroboam contributed to the same end, in conjunction with
the rashness of the young king and his raw counselors.

Moreover, prospects of gain and worldly advantages, have often laid the
foundation of future empire. With these views many times a few adventrous
people have emigrated from their native land, and when success has crowned
their exertions, and they have so increased in numbers and wealth, and become
so savoured with learning, as to be fit for a distinct empire, the event has
seldom long delayed.

And, indeed, there is the same reason, and it is equally the design of divine
providence, that when any people become adult -- are blessed with numbers,
wealth, knowledge, and in all regards equal to the management of national
affairs, they should then become distinct and independent, as that the branches
of a family should be so, when adult and capable to manage for themselves.
Successful emigrations are the seeds of future empire.

Add to all these religious persecution, which God has made instrumental of new
states and empires. Those who have true religion, prize it far above all
sublunary enjoyments; the rights of conscience they hold as their dearest
rights; and when they are persecuted and may not enjoy the worship and
ordinances of God, as they judge agreeable to his will, they will combine and
defend themselves, if in their power, and have a commonwealth of their own, and
rulers of their own spirit and principles. Witness the united Netherlands. What
floods of trouble and blood did they wade through, much actuated by a sacred
regard to the rights of conscience. The great empire of Spain was divided in
consequence, and the United Provinces assumed sovereign power, with the most
happy constitution, perhaps, then in the world.

This hateful persecution led the way to all the growing greatness of the
United States of America. The sufferings of our progenitors, many and great,
for their religion and strict piety, impelled them to forsake their native
land, and all the affluence they enjoyed there; they preferred a waste, howling
wilderness, with their God, and his ordinances unpolluted, to all the wealth
and splendour of their native Albion. The God whom they served forsook them not;
he commanded the deep in their favor, and guarded them from the power of the
numerous heathen then savages: they made him the glory in the midst of them,
and he was a wall of fire round about them. "The wilderness and the solitary
place was glad for them, and the desert rejoiced and blossomed as the rose."
Isaiah xxxv.


Considered as a people, these were the days of our early youth; and in all the
great things God has done for us of late, he has remembered us "the kindness of
our youth, and the love of our espousals, when we went after him in the
wilderness, in a land not sown." Jer. ii.


By these, and the like means, the Most High has thus far effected his purpose,
and thus all the numerous nations of the earth have been formed: -- the temper
and the exertions of men concerned, have been, in many instances, very wicked;
but God is holy and pure; and when we behold Jehovah taking occasion from the
wickedness of men, to accomplish his own most glorious purposes, and display
his own character, in the most amiable and astonishing view, who shall not
adore him!

II. We next take notice of the manifest will of heaven, that mankind should
live on equal terms as brethren.

This is fully intimated in two expressions in the text, the first is, "their
inheritance." Here we behold Deity as universal parent giving portions to his
children: He is absolute proprietor, has whatever he pleases to give, and
imparts to his great family according to his sovereign good will: What he gives
to each nation in the course of his providence is equally theirs respectively,
and each individual has his property alike confirmed by the father of all.

An empire, or commonwealth newly formed, has its own inheritance, all its
rights and privileges, as firmly established as the most ancient empire in the
world. The inheritance of a small nation is as truly theirs as that of a great
one.

The power there is in great and warlike nations to plunder and destroy those
that are weak and small, gives them no more right so to do, than the wealth of
the rich gives them right to oppress and swallow up the poor that are about
them.

Potentates who have, in their ambition, pride, and other lusts, robbed many
millions of their substance, in former and later ages, and slaughtered millions
more, because it was in their power, have been the most atrocious murderers,
the most execrable robbers, and the most horrid wretches that ever disgraced
human nature.

The other expression in the text which I have alluded to is this, "the sons of
Adam," all near kindred, of one common nature, children of one father. The
Apostle seems to comment on this when he says, God "has made of one blood, all
nations of men, for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and has determined
the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation Acts xvii.
."

Human nature has one common feeling of pleasure and pain, wants and
necessities, sorrows and troubles are common, all have a quick sense of injury
and abuse, all rejoice in kindness received.

Tyrants bent on slaughter and the misery of mankind, ought to realize that the
multitudes they rob and murder, feel plunder and death just as they themselves
would were it their woeful lot to fall into such merciless hands.

"Separated the sons of Adam." Here the branching out of nations, is
represented under the idea of the branching out of families; and as an aged
parent who is blessed with a number of families, formed out of his own house,
calls them all his children, and looks on the whole only as his own family
still, though dispersed in several branches. So, in very deed the whole world is
but one complicated family.

No parents are so unnatural as to be willing that one of their household should
be tyrant and despot over the whole, to vex, oppress, and slaughter the rest at
his pleasure; or that the stronger children should be cruel to the weaker.

Had Adam seen all of this kind that has since fallen out in his family, he
would have wept more bitterly than the poet feigns, when he saw the Lazar
house, with all its dreadful stores of complicated misery, Sight so deform what
heart of rock could long
Dry-ey'd behold? Adam could not, but wept,
Though not of woman born; compassion quelled
His best of man, and gave him up to tears.
MILTON.

As individuals and families are brethren and neighbors to each other, so are
societies, towns, states and nations, and should always act the fraternal part,
and the neighbor, with that amiable spirit which Jesus describes in his
parable of the neighbor Luke x.
.

All are under that divine precept "whatsoever ye would that men should do unto
you, do ye even so to them, for this is the law and the prophets."

It is the law of reason, the law of nature, and in-forced by the whole of
divine revelation.

However mankind have lost a spirit of love, and whatever hatred they often
have to one another; yet they are all very near kindred; and the great pa^ent,
who is love "sees and abhors them, because of the provoking of his sons and his
daughters."

There has never been any intermarriage from without the family of Adam, to
divide the blood, and make the kindred more distant; the family is now very
great, it has many branches, but it is still one, it remains the same; and if
we do not feel our connection with all the human kind to be very near, very
tender, we are past feeling, and our spirit is opposite to nature, to reason,
and to our common father, the fountain of love.

And here again the horrors of wanton, offensive war appear in their proper
color. It is only Cain murdering Abel his brother.

In this men sin more against nature than ever apostate angels did. Well might
the poet exclaim, Oh! Shame to men: devil with devil damned
Firm concord hold: men only disagree.
They live in hatred, enmity and strife,
Among themselves, and levy cruel war,
Wasting the earth each other to destroy.


But God will bring final glory to himself and his church out of all nations.
And here we fall in with the third general head proposed, viz.

III. The divine determination, which shall not be frustrated, to make all
nations subservient to God's own peculiar nation and kingdom.

"He set the bounds of the people, according to the number of the children of
Israel."

Whatever more immediate, or special reference this may have to the situation
of the seven nations of Canaan, and adjacent kingdoms, yet no doubt the words
have that extensive sense I have intimated; the phrases are wholly indefinite,
the nations -- the people -- the sons of Adam -- and the whole analogy of
scripture warrants the idea.

God, from eternity, in his most glorious plan, his infinitely kind decree; set
the bounds of all nations, with a most tender regard to his own covenant
people, in every age, wherever they might dwell, or whatever their number might
be; and in his almighty Providence carries the whole into effect.

There are many phrases in sacred scripture which denote the covenant people of
God, in one age of the world, as well as in another: In these, and in future
days as well as in ages past. Zion, Jerusalem, the seed of Abraham, the seed of
Jacob, the children of Israel, and the like, are expressions well known of this
import. The children of Israel are the church, the people of God in every age.

Were it not for the concerns of religion and immortal happiness, there would
be nothing worthy of God, as the author and disposer, in the creation of the
world, or in the kingdom of providence. Separate from any connection with
eternal glory, all the mighty movements, and all the glory of the kingdoms of
this world are but solemn trifles: But in this connection of great importance.

Immortal happiness is for immortal souls, and not creatures but God himself is
their portion Among the covenant people of God, the way of happiness is
displayed, and God exalted in the glory of his grace,

So we find that king that God has set on his holy hill of Zion reigning for
his church, "Far above all principality and power and might and dominion, and
every name that is named, not only in this world but also in that which is to
come: And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all
things to the church, which is his body, the fullness of him that fills all in
all Ephesians. i.
."

In the context we find "the Lord's portion is his people, Jacob is the lot of
his inheritance." So God says "I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba
for thee," and speaking of Zion "all my springs are in thee."

The affairs of the world, in every empire, every place, will finally result in
this, "be still and know that I am God; I will be exalted among the heathen, I
will be exalted in all the earth."

Much of the divine conduct in the kingdom of providence is not to be
investigated by man: Yet we can easily see enough to illustrate the point now
in view; want of time forbids my giving many instances; let a few suffice as a
specimen of the whole.

Look back into Egypt in the days of Jacob, and succeeding ages. God had set
their bounds not far from Canaan where Jacob dwelt: He had made Egypt in those
days superior to any other empire in the world, for power, wealth, arts and
sciences. And this with design that they should be an assylum for his covenant
people: That there they might be fed in days of famine, and might greatly
increase. The great learning of Egypt was for the education of Moses, that he
might well sustain the important character afterward devolved on him. Aaron
and other leaders, yea the whole people of God, no doubt, (...) much the better
for the many schools and the learning of Egypt, to sustain their respective
characters in the great scenes that were before them. Even the gold of the
nation was laid on the tabernacle of the Most High. Their great kindness to
Israel, for a time, and their hard dealing afterward, conspired to advance the
interest of the people of God. Again,

The nations situate between Egypt and Canaan, in the way that Israel took, had
their bounds for the same end. "He led them forth by the right way, that they
might go to a city of habitation." When the hosts of Israel came out of Egypt
they were not acquainted with war; nor had they instruments of war, sufficient
to encounter the mighty nations of Canaan; but by fighting their way through
smaller opposition, conquering the Amorites and the people of Bashan with their
kings, and breaking through other hostile resistance, they became expert in
war, and well equipped with swords and bows, helmets, spears and shields taken
from their enemies.

These maneuvers made Joshua a great general, and taught the whole army of
Israel all military achievements, and so prepared them to face all the mighty
warriors of Canaan in due time, with all the gigantic sons of Anak in their
front.

There were many and great miracles we know, in conducting the people of God to
the land of promise and their settlement there; but all that might be done for
them in the common course of Providence was done in that way: Thus God has ever
dealt and ever will.

We may look next into the land of Canaan, and we shall find the Most High
planted and supported seven nations there, to cultivate the land and prepare it
for his own people, that they might find it a land flowing with milk and honey,
and very commodious for their residence. The pious governor of Judea speaking
of this, says, "They took strong cities and a fat land, and possessed houses
full of all goods, wells dug, vineyards and oliveyards, and all fruit trees
in abundance, so they did eat, and were filled, and became fat, and delighted
themselves in thy great goodness Neh. ix. 25.
."

In the days of David, what vast territory round about had the nations
cultivated and made fertile, which that great warrior, at the command of God,
brought into the possession of Israel?

In the days of Solomon, how did the nations of the east submit and minister to
the people of God?

They have also had protection whence it was not expected. "Let mine outcasts
dwell with thee, Moab, be thou a covert to them, from the face of the spoil
Isaiah xvi. 4.
"

The vast Persian empire, with Cyrus their renowned prince and general were for
the same end. Persia was then mistress of the world, and Cyrus the greatest
general in it; all for the people of God, "to say to the prisoners go forth,
and to them that sit in darkness show yourselves." In this way the church of
God was delivered from her Babylonian captivity. And some of his successors did
much for their resettlement in the holy land.

The growing greatness of the Grecian empire, in the days of Philip, and more
especially in the time of his son Alexander, was ordered in Providence with the
same view to favor the cause of religion, and prepare the way for a wide
spread of divine knowledge. A great part of the world then received law from
the Greeks and also their language; a solemn, elegant and copious tongue, most
fit for the promulgation of the New Testament. This language was extensive
among the nations when the evangelists and apostles wrote. And had it not been
for a dispensation of Providence of this kind, it had been impossible, without
mere miracles, that the New Testament should have been, in any measure, so
extensively read as it was, at the time of its first promulgation.

The greatness of the Roman empire when the Most High placed Constantine at the
head of it, is another proof of his regard to his own people; great, very
great, were the privileges they enjoyed in the days of that monarch. Though
alas in their abundant favors they soon after waxed wanton and apostatized
from the way of holiness.

Passing over many examples, I shall add but one more so conspicuous, indeed,
that we must not be inattentive to it. I mean the great monarchy of France,
great in wealth, power, numbers, and learning. Great and much honored in the
prince that now sits on the throne: All this indeed to protect the rights of
mankind, to patronize liberty, and serve the cause of religion in such a day as
this. Not only to divide to us our inheritance and separate us from the rest of
the sons of Adam, but to promote the glorious cause of liberty and religion
among the nations.

In these instances and many more that I would name, would the time admit, we
can clearly see the ways of divine Providence, and investigate the footsteps of
the Most High; and we may rest fully assured that all other nations from the
beginning to the end of the world shall finally appear to have been subservient
to the same glorious purpose. And when they have answered this great end they
fall and rise no more; but the kingdom of God stands firm on an everlasting
basis. As it is written, "The moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the
worm shall eat them like wool; but my righteousness shall be forever, and my
salvation from generation to generation Isaiah li.
."

IMPROVEMENT.
From what has been said we learn our duty and interest as a people. We have
lately received our inheritance, as a distinct sovereign empire, from the great
disposer of all things, and a better God never gave to the sons of Adam; a land
as fertile as the land of Canaan, and of much larger extent. He has given us
the best civil constitution now in the world, the same in the general nature of
it, with that he gave to Israel in the days of Moses. And it is remarkable that
our number of people is about the same with their's in the days of Moses -- i.
e. about three millions. Israel had thirteen free independent states, or
tribes, one of them, viz. that of Joseph being subdivided: out of these states
their supreme Council or general Congress was chosen, by delegates from each,
often called their Sanhedrim. Each state managed its own internal police, each
had a General Assembly, composed of their best men, at the free election of the
people, often called the elders of the tribe: their government was
theocratical; so for substance is our free elective government, acording to
that old maxim, vox populi vox dei. And they had their executive courts and
officers in various stations, for substance answering to ours. No matter for
the difference of names, titles and phrases, where the substance of things is
the same.

We may well argue from the wisdom and goodness of God, that this general plan
of government is the most perfect, and best for men, as God himself devised it
and gave it in the greatness of his love, to his own peculiar people. Had any
other been better in the nature of things, God would have given them a
different one. So when they rejected it for monarchy, they rejected the wisdom
and goodness of God, and were great loosers. They had the light of divine
revelation; we in a far more glorious manner. Canaan was their inheritance,
Columbia is ours; and our southern dominions cover the same climate in which
they dwelt.

Now our great duty and interest is to secure and improve our blessed
inheritance, and hand it down to posterity. There is but one way to do this,
and that is to keep the commandments of our God. This will secure to us every
blessing, and make us "high above all nations," -- "great in name, in praise
and in honor;" but if we rebel against God we shall be miserable. We must,
above all things, attend to true religion, and practice every moral virtue,
even that righteousness that exalts a nation, and fly from every vice and
abhor the ways of immorality.

Our danger at this day lies in that shameful irreligious temper that is too
obvious in many -- a man that contemns true religion is a disgrace to human
nature and a great curse to his country. We are endangered by many vices --
injustice and extortion, idleness and luxury, profane swearing, the sure mark
of a thoughtless sinner; profanation of the holy sabbath, intemperance,
lasciviousness and wantonness, pride and extravagance, the Lord in his infinite
mercy deliver us from all these.

But there is one abominable vice that is so pernicious to us every day, and so
immediately threatens us with dissolution and anarchy, that I must bear my
testimony more largely against it.

It is that unreasonable, raging spirit of jealousy pointed against all in
power, especially against those in the most burdensome and important trusts.
Jealousy is the rage and distraction of men, as well in civil as domestic life.
We elect all our rulers, and often enough in all reason: we choose such as we
esteem men of the greatest wisdom and probity: we have no jealousy of them
until we exalt them into office, and burden them with a great weight; then we
turn jealous; for no reason but because they are exerting all their wisdom and
goodness to pour out blessings upon us, and sacrificing their lives to make us
happy. They are as good men after they are in office as before, but we have a
very different spirit toward them. Nay, some are not ashamed openly to say, we
ought to, we must keep a jealous eye over our rulers in every station in order
to secure our privileges; which, by the way, is just as good sense as to say
that a woman ought to be very jealous of her husband, that so she may live
happily with him, and all domestic concerns may go on in peace.

Our rulers in every station, are open and accountable to their constituents in
all they do; and if criminal, are subject to law and punishment, even as any
private man, and we may turn them out of office when we please. But still the
people will inspect them with a jealous mind, and the certain consequence is,
they judge very falsely and abusively of them.

A man under the force of jealousy, never yet judged right in any case, and
never can. Jealousy will soon find enough in the most perfect character in the
world to make it a very bad one. That old poet who so greatly excelled in his
discernment of human nature, has told us the very truth.

"Trifles light as air,
Are to the jealous demonstrations strong
As proofs of holy writ."
SHAKESPEARE. Jealousy makes men uneasy with the best administration, and with
the best men at the head of it; uneasy with all their rulers do, and they will
stone for a good deed as soon as for a bad one. It makes men rebellious,
obstinate and heady, and obstructs a multitude of blessings which good rulers
are pouring down on the people they love.

We expend much to maintain authority, as indeed they ought to have an
honorable support; and would we only let them do us all the good in their
hearts, and in their power under God, they would repay us a thousand fold. But
what can the good patriots do? first we must be jealous of them, next we
certainly think them wicked, and then we destroy their influence and their good
names together. Thus we loose our benefit and our cost of supporting them. We
bind them hand and foot, and are like a man who should hire a number of the
best workmen at a great expense, to build him an house, and as soon as they
began to operate with all their skill and fidelity, should load them with
chains, -- pay might continue, but the work must miserably proceed.

Let our rulers as well as others, be weighed in an even balance: jealousy
makes the balance very uneven: let us judge of those in power as well as of
other men, with all that charity which the Apostle describes, and which,
without solid reason, "thinks no evil."

I am as much engaged for liberty, in the utmost extent of it, as any man on
earth; I would have all in power elective by, and accountable to the people;
and if in any case criminal, on fair trial, let them not be spared. But this
hydra of jealousy and evil surmise, it is not liberty, it is tyranny, it is
confusion, it is death. Proud, selfish, wicked men take the advantage of it;
they lust for offices, for which they are utterly unfit; but they must first
remove those worthy men that hold them: they make or propagate a thousand lies,
to stir up the jealousy of the people, inrage the multitude, and clear the
seats of honor for themselves. And when such brambles get in power, "a fire
soon comes out of the bramble and devours the cedars of Lebanon."

If this vile spirit may have its full growth and universal sway, we shall soon
have few men of wisdom and probity, in seats of honor and trust; and the good
will adopt the words of the prophet, and lament over our land, saying "A fire
is gone out of the rod of her branches, which has devoured her fruit, so that
she has no strong rod to be a scepter to rule: this is a lamentation and shall
be for a lamentation. Ezekiel. xix.
." God grant we may be delivered from this iniquity, and all other land
defiling crimes, practice every virtue, and serve the God of our fathers with a
perfect heart. And shall not all the goodness of God, to our fathers and to us,
especially, recent, wonderful favors lead us to repentance, and engage us to
universal holiness?

God had determined from eternity to divide us our inheritance, as he has
lately done; his Providence began to operate in the days of our fathers though
they had no thought of the result of it.

Thus all those cruel persecutions that were under the kings of the Stuart
family, served, in the Providence of God, to bring into this land people of the
best principles and morals; it is especially true of this part of it.

God established a glorious church in a dreary wilderness: and those words in
the context are as applicable to them as to Israel of old, "He found him in a
desert land, in a waste howling wilderness; he led him about, he instructed
him, he kept him as the apple of his eye."

Our fathers were men of solid wisdom, piety and virtue, and therefore it was
their early concern to promote learning, to establish seminaries, which have
been wonderfully blessed for that end; to provide for the support of a learned
orthodox gospel ministry, to guard the churches: then Moses and Aaron were
brethren indeed, and they went hand in hand, "Thou leddest thy people like a
flock by the hand of Moses and Aaron," our civil constitution was excellent
while inviolate. The people amazingly grew, in numbers, and the Most High was
their defense in all their perils: he was then laying the foundation for what
we now see; and in all the movements of the great and complicated wheels of
Providence, as in the high and dreadful vision of Ezekiel the prophet, "a man,
that man who is God, sat above upon them," rolling us into future empire.

With the same view, God has raised up so many statesmen, and military
commanders, and so many renowned pillars in sacred characters. And as the time
of separation drew near, a spirit of learning, liberty, and a martial spirit
greatly increased. The alwise Being knew what instruments would be most proper
in every department. For this end our late General was born with all his
greatness of soul; called into military service in the days of youth, and
trained up with every noble accomplishment. And the hearts of the whole nation
wonderfully united in him. Divine Providence ordering all the circumstances of
the late war, calls aloud upon us to love and serve the great Ruler of all.

When our tyrannical enemies first attacked us, it was with a force just enough
to rouse and invigorate us; but by no means equal to a conquest. Had they
fallen upon us, with all their might, unarmed, unprovided as we then were, what
would have become of us? They pressed upon us, with increasing force, just fast
enough to confirm our union and martial spirit, and prepare us to give them the
reception they deserved. "Howbeit they meant not so, neither did their hearts
think so," all this was of God.

The forming of the great council of our nation was indeed wonderful; our
association, bill of rights, articles of confederation, and alliance, display
divine wisdom and goodness; our naval achievements, especially when we were
weakest, have shown that God is mighty.

We have been favored with such uncommon health through the States in general,
for seven or eight years past, that not more of our people have died in
proportion to their number, than has been usual in time of peace,
notwithstanding the reeking sword, and the horrible prison-ships of our
enemies. The more than ordinary fruitfulness of the seasons, has, perhaps, been
a counterbalance to our extraordinary consumption, during the war. And surely
God has brought great good to us, out of one very great evil, faithless
depreciating paper currency, indeed one of the worst things that ever a people
are scourged with: yet Providence has so ordered, that it has answered the end
of a mighty tax upon us, and has made even filthy rags a cord for the necks of
our enemies.

The goodness of God is to be noticed in many battles, from the first effusion
of blood at Lexington, to the grand decisive scene at Gloucester and York-Town.
Even all the delays and retreatings of our General, show us that he was guided
from on high; like another Fabius, cunctando restituit rem.

The kind spirit toward us infused into several princes and nations of Europe,
was from on high, and when proud, haughty Britain bows at last, we see God is
mightier than Britain.

I only hint at these things as so many motives to induce us to love and serve
the God of our fathers* He has giv^^ ^s a glorious and honorable peace, "That
being delivered from our enemies, we should serve him without fear, in
righteousness and holiness, all the days of our lives." And may we not
reasonably hope God has done all these things to prepare the way for the most
glorious effusion of his holy spirit in this western world: and to bow the
hearts of millions to himself? That the latter day glory may soon break out
here in its meridian luster and diffuse over all the world, soon darting its
blessed beams to the farthest borders of the east. Oh blessed day! "Come Lord
Jesus come quickly!"

Nothing now remains but the usual addresses, and the character of our first
magistrate, demands our first and most respectful notice.

May it please your Excellency.
We doubt not but thoughts of the greatness and glory of God, and his
overruling hand in the kingdom of Providence, like those now offered, but much
better suggested in your own mind, have been your support and consolation from
the days of youth. More especially when your burdens and cares have been the
greatest.

Very few men, since the world was made ever lived so much for the public, as
you have done. After a liberal education, in early youth, your Excellency was
immediately called into public office, and the burden of complicated public
offices has been your lot ever since. And though it has ever been abundantly
manifest, that your Excellency never sought promotion, or popular applause; but
always made truth and righteousness your guide, as well when you knew it to be
unpopular, as at other times: Yet he who gave all your rich endowments (and to
his name alone be the praise) knew what to do with you, in his great love to
his people.

When our late troubles began, your Excellency's lot was very singular; when to
avoid perpetual slavery, it became necessary to oppose the tyranny of Britain;
your brethren in office, the other Governors all forsook you, but you did not
forsake your God and the people you loved. Your Excellency stood alone, but you
stood firm, "The archers shot at you and you was sorely grieved by the enemies
of our peace; but your bow abode in strength, and your hands were made strong
by the hand of the mighty God of Jacob."

It was not for want of the highest opinion of your Excellency's abilities and
integrity, that self seeking men and enemies to liberty have labored to make
you trouble: But that they knew you stood firm against the measures of all
such, and was the chief support of our righteous cause, and the liberties of
your country. I presume your Excellency has often thought of those words of the
great Roman patriot, "Nemo his viginti annis, reipublicae hostis fuerit, qui,
non eodem tempore, mihi quoque bellum ind^x^rit."

CICERO.


This is more or less the lot of all great and good men, in public character.

In leading us out of a provincial, into an independent state, your Excellency
had the path to beat: You walked before us in a rough and rugged way; but God
remembered his promise, "Thy shoes shall be iron and brass, and as the day is
so shall thy strength be."

When the wrath of a tyrant king roared against you as a lion, and your
Excellency, above all, was marked out for a victim, you endured not fearing the
wrath of the king, choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God,
so dear to you, than to enjoy any emoluments how great soever they might have
been, had you, like many others sought the royal favor. So long as the storms
beat, the thunders roared, the lightnings glared around your head; all the
while the tempest was so black and dreadful, you set steadfast at helm without a
covert. Your Excellency then, desired no man to take that seat of peril: But
now you have rode out the storm and conducted us into the desired haven of
peace, your Excellency has requested that you may retire and another take the
now more peaceful seat. On this I have no remark to make, it is wholly needless
at present: The whole nation will speak; posterity will not be silent.

If we have disobeyed your Excellency this once, and have not released you, we
beg your pardon: and earnestly entreat your further blessings, in the character
you have so long sustained. If the people have obeyed, and have granted your
Excellency retirement, you retire, Sir, with every possible honor: And may the
residue of your days be happy, and your immortality glorious!

And when your Excellency shall be taken up from us, to shine as a star of the
first magnitude, in the kingdom of your Father, forever and ever, your name
shall live, historic pages will shine with your deeds, and generations unborn
shall know you well. "In Freta dum fluvii current, dum montibus umbrae
Lustrabunt convexa, polus dum sidera pascet; Semper honos, nomenque tuum,
laudesque manebunt.

VIRGIL

The address next turns to his honor the Lieutenant Governor, the Honorable
Assistant Counselors, and the whole Venerable Assembly of the State.

Venerable Fathers,

I shall meddle with no policy, but what lies within my own profession, as a
preacher of righteousness: As such, I may stir up your pure minds, to attend
most zealously, to the suppression of all vice and immorality, for this end let
us always have, not only the best laws, but the best men to execute them, men
of ability, men that pay a sacred regard to religion and virtue, in their own
example. Your Honors will continue to be nursing fathers to the church of God,
and will promote the interest of that kingdom which shall finally triumph over
all.

The interest of learning will engross your great attention and patronage, as
it is the strength and glory of a nation -- what could we have done in our late
contest with Britain, had we been destitute of learned men? We have fought to
as good purpose with the pen as with the sword.

I beg leave, earnestly, to recommend the University in this State, to the
intimate acquaintance and most cordial friendship and munificence of this
Honorable Assembly, it is exceeding happy when a college is embosomed in the
bare love and friendship of those that are first in the affairs of state; and
when there is any distant reserve between them it is very unhappy, the college
surely is a most valuable interest and brilliant ornament to the State. Your
Honors see what learned and excellent instructors the college is furnished
with; as also the great increase of students: But alas! the edifices and the
finances how inadequate? How happy if that seminary might always be embraced
and nourished by this Honorable Assembly, as a darling child, by a kind
indulgent parent? Whatever can be done to add to the strength and glory of the
college, will be well done: And should a liberal stream of bounty flow to it,
annually, out of this fountain, we should find our account in the blessing of
heaven on the whole State, and on our land. All inferior schools in this State
claim your kind notice and favor, your Honors will think upon them for good:
But our great and growing unive^sity pleads for your special intimacy and
liberality, that, as times change, and necessities require, nothing may be
wanting to make it most respectable in every view, and most useful to persons
of all ranks and professions. This is an happy era, to do every thing noble
and important for such a seminary.

Moreover, your Honors know what demands on this state, and on the nation, are
justly made, by th^se who have lent us their livings to support the war, or
have served an hard service in it. You know likewise what just obligations we
are under to nations beyond the water, who have lent us their aid. Most
certainly it is high time that this state, and every state, and all in
conjunction, so far as demands are national, make full provision to pay every
honest debt, and till this is done public guilt lies upon us. The cries of
suffering, individuals from whom we with hold their bread, enter into the ears
of the Lord of Sabbath; and when foreign nations make just demands, we shall
find God will vindicate their claim. We are not poor; we are far from a state
of bankruptcy; in a large and good land, flowing with rich treasures. Pray
point out the best way and oblige us to do what is right to all men.

Those that have lent us their money and are now suffering for want of it, are
sons of Adam as well as ourselves, and ought to live on equal terms with us,
and not be wronged and oppressed because the public are many, and mighty, and
can do as they please.

Those who have fought our battles for us are our own brethren: And even
foreign nations to whom we are under just obligations, with the other states,
the whole in union, are children of our own parents. To be just, righteous, and
faithful is humanity. Righteousness is religion pure and undefiled.

A state or a nation ought ever to be as upright and faithful, in dealing with
an individual, or a community, as one neighbor with another: It lies with your
Honors to concert effectual measures, that this state, and, as far as to us
appertains, the whole nation may be so.

The great fountain of light, grant your Honors all wisdom in this dark and
trying day, support you under all your burdens and cares, make your days many,
and fill them with growing usefulness, in mercy to his people. And may we at
last see you all in exalted seats of glory!

I next turn to my Reverend Fathers and Brethren in sacred character.

Much Honored and dearly Beloved.

It is our peculiar happiness, that our lives and labors are more immediately
employed in that kingdom and interest, which is dearer to God than all things
else, and to which all his other works are made subservient.

We have every motive to be faithful, and rejoice with exceeding joy. The
kingdom of Jesus on earth is often not in apparent splendour, or in much favor
with the world; but all the concerns of it are ever moving forward, with a
divine dignity, and rolling on to a most glorious and universal triumph. Our
lot in this kingdom is the happiest lot. We are not indeed in the way to attain
the wealth and splendour and other dying allurements of this world as we might
in other employments: But the very business of our lives is heaven upon earth;
it is to converse with Deity, in all his beauty and glory, through Emmanuel,
beaming forth in his word and in all his works, and to preach Deity displayed,
God manifest in the flesh, to a lost world. As we love true pleasure we shall
be great students, and very active for the good of immortal souls; shall preach
nothing but sound, practical divinity, unite in gospel charity, cement in love,
"for God is love."

In days like these, we are willing to bear our portion of expense and burden
with our brethren; and truly most of us have done that, and many of us much
more: But yet we are well provided for, and ever shall be; no part of the world
was ever kinder to ministers of the gospel than this has been from the first.
Our rulers are benevolent fathers to us; our people loving brethren and dutiful
children.

And only to except him that is now speaking, and, perhaps, a very few beside,
this land has been blessed with the most learned, orthodox, and pious clergy,
from its first settlement to this day, of any part of the world* And we see the
fruit of our labor, in resisting the torrent of wickedness, which flows
dreadful from the human heart; we see good fruit when we are instrumental to
enlighten and regulate our people, and form them for moral and social duties;
and in all the strength and support we give to the commonwealth. But above all,
when God is pleased, by his holy spirit, to make our labors effectual for the
saving good of souls; this no doubt he does in some measure, more or less, with
the labors of every true minister of Christ. And oh! how glorious and joyful,
when the divine spirit is poured out in copious effusions, "as rivers in the
wilderness, and as floods on the dry and thirsty ground," and converts to
righteousness become as the drops of morning dew! This has God done in days
past, nor has he forsaken us in the present day. We hear glad tidings from
several parts, yea, we do in some measure "see the good of his chosen, and
rejoice in the gladness of his nation, and glory with his inheritance."

And do you not learn, my Reverend Fathers and Brethren, from all the movements
of divine Providence and from the prophetic words, "That the time, the set time
to favor Zion is near at hand?" Light and true religion have beamed forth from
east to west, from the beginning: These goings down of the sun, are the last
regions to be thus visited, before the latter day glory. By the isles and the
ships of Tarshish in scripture prophecy, is plainly imported all the western
islands, and all communications from the western part of the world: And shall
not "the isles soon wait on God and the ships of Tarshish first?" "So shall
they fear thy name from the west, and thy glory from the rising of the sun," --
God shall return the captivity of Jacob's tents, and the fullness of the
Gentiles shall come in. Shall not Ethiopia soon stretch out her hands to God?
Is not the accomplishment of those words now in the pleasing dawn? "Then will I
turn to the people a pure language, that they may all call upon the name of the
Lord, to serve him with one consent. From beyond the river of Ethiopia my
suppliants, the daughter of my dispersed shall bring mine offering Zeph. iii
."

Your faith and prayer, oh ye sacred ones, will always concur with the
good will of him that dwelt in the bush: And when Messiah reigns in visible
glory over all the earth, how will your souls rejoice.

God has now given us a blessed inheritance, and spoke peace to this nation, in
its growing greatness; he has spoke peace to some of the nations of Europe, and
can soon speak peace to all the world; "Glory to God in the highest, peace on
earth, good will toward men."

I would now close with a word to this great and respectable Audience at large.

My Fathers, Brethren, and dear Friends,

It is of the last importance that we bear in mind the design of the Most High
in creating all worlds, and disposing of all beings; this world with all the
nations that dwell in it. It is that (...) reign; immortal souls concur with
him, in Go^ (...) ^^^vidence and grace, and be happy.

Whatever part we act in this world; whatever we attain on this side the grave;
if we have not made religion our great business, Jesus our hope, and God our
portion, we shall, in a few days, know we have been but deluded trifles, and
sorely regret that ever we saw the light, or had a portion among the living.

A life of religion is the only proper life of rational, immortal man; to know
God in his dear son is our best knowledge, and to serve him our best work.
Those only who have this temper of mind, and thus live, are the true children
of Israel, to whose happiness and glory, as you have heard, all the nations of
the earth shall bow, "To bind their kings with chains, and their nobles with
fetters of iron, to execute upon them the judgment written; this honor has all
his saints; praise ye the Lord Psalm cxlix.
."

We shall all meet no more until the day of the complete triumph of the
redeemed of the Lord, "When they shall return and come with songs, to the
heavenly Zion, and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads, they shall obtain
gladness and joy, a^^ sorrow, and mourning shall flee away." Oh may you,
beloved, all be found among them, in that day* when princes and potentates, and
all the great ones of the earth, shall mingle with common people, yea with
slaves and vassals, in one great, and undistinguished throng, unless true
religion shall gird them with glory: When all the mighty movements of
Providence in this world shall cease; and kingdoms, states, and empires be no
more, then shall we all know what is the true wisdom and happiness of immortal
man; "Then shall ye return and discern between the righteous and the wicked;
between him that serves God, and him that serves him not."

The END

