AN ORATION, DELIVERED JULY 5th, 1784.

AN ORATION, DELIVERED JULY 5th, 1784 AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF THE
TOWN OF BOSTON; IN CELEBRATION OF THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

BY BENJAMIN HICHBORN, ESQUIRE

Omnium societatum nulla est gravior, nulla carior, quam ea quae cum republica
est (...) nostrum: ca^^ (...) parents, ca^^ liberi, propinqui, familiares: sed
omne omnium caritates patria una complexa est: pro qua quis bonus dubitet
mortem oppe^^^e, si ei (...) pro^^a^^s?

CIC. Hic dies, vere mihi sesers, atras
Exi^^et curas; ego nec tumultum
Nec mori per vim metuam, tenente,
Caesare terrae.
HOR. BOSTON; (Commonwealth of MASSACHUSETTS.) PRINTED BY JOHN GILL, in
COURT-STREET. 1784

AT a Meeting of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the Town of BOSTON,
duly qualified and legally warned in public Town-Meeting assembled, July 5,
1784.
VOTED That John S^^llay, Esquire Nathan Frazier, Esquire Mr. Thomas Greenough, Ezekiel
Price, Esquire Capt. William Mackay, David Jeffries, Esquire and Mr. John Lucas, the
Selectmen, be a Commit to wait on BENJAMIN HITCHBOURN, Esquire and in the name of
the Town to thank him for the Learned and Elegant ORATION, delivered by him
This-Day, at the Request of the Town, upon the ANNIVERSARY of the INDEPENDENCE
of the UNITED STATES of AMERICA, in which, according to the Intention of the
Town, he considered the Feelings, Manner, and Principles, which led to this
great National Event, and to request of him a Copy thereof for the Press.

Attest. WILLIAM COOPER, Town Clerk.

GENTLEMEN!
AS I ever esteem a request from the Inhabitants of the Town of Boston,
equivalent to a command, which I have no right to disobey, I cheerfully submit
this hasty and imperfect Performance to the public eye, without a single
appology for its numberless defects.

BENJAMIN HITCHBOURN.

AN ORATION.
THE right of meeting together uncontrouled, to promote the valued purposes of
society, is deservedly ranked among the first privileges, reserved to the
individual as a badge of native freedom; however enlarged and liberal the basis
of the constitution may prove, if it wants this mark of respect to the natural
rights of the subject and dignity of the man, it must soon prove an
insufficient security against the attempts of the designing and ambitious,
under a sluggish or depraved administration; had our enemies proved successful
in their attempts to deprive us of this weapon, we must have submitted at
discretion, and been conquered without a struggle; -- through this medium our
political watchmen have warned the people of their danger, and taught them to
avoid it.

WHEN I recollect the frequent calls of this once devoted city to assemble and
devise means for their common safety; when I remember that no meanness or
artifice was left untried by our enemies, to wrest from our hands this only
security against their machinations; when I have fresh in my imagination the
interesting scene, which exhibited the chosen troops of Britain, retiring
before a voluntary assembly of unarmed, though determined citizens, I cannot
but admire the wisdom of that constitution, by which this antidote to despotism
is so expressly secured to the people.

As mankind in society, especially under a mild government, naturally grow
secure in their situation, and inattentive to the inroads made upon the
constitution they live under; I think this institution can never be deemed
fruitless, while it serves annually to call our attention to the first
principles of the social compact, and remind us that government is the people's
privilege, but not their burden.

THE annual tribute so often paid to the memory of those citizens, who fell the
first victims to our country's foes, was but their due; and to their hapless
fate, a sympathetic tear shall roll through latest time; but to commemorate the
event which has made a new era in the annals of the world, to celebrate the
day which gave existence to thirteen states, and freed their numerous
inhabitants from disgrace and wretchedness, affords a sea of contemplation, in
which the unnumbered streams of private injury and distress are swallowed up
and lost. -- But since no change of consequence in human life, (however
fortunate,) can take place, without bringing with it the seeds of future
trouble and disappointment, I must confess, I fell a solemnity, in
contemplating the important subject, which cheeks those transports of joy, so
naturally excited by the recollection of such signal successes; and so common
is it for mankind to abuse the good fortune they meet with, that our enemies
have predicted our ruin, not with the diffidence of prophecy, but the
confidence of an historian.

BUT they do not recollect that it is the peculiar characteristic and selicity
of an American, to possess that gravity which is the result of unimpassioned
reason, and which has always taught them equinimity in suffering and success:
-- Our history will furnish proofs of this truth, which must be read by future
ages, rather as the productions of an overheated imagination, than a relation
of very serious facts.

THERE are but few of us who cannot recollect the important crisis, when that
victorious army from the north, conducted by the most favorite and gallant
general in the service of our enemy, threatened a most disgraceful close to a
war, which had spread itself throughout the continent; -- but what were the
sentiments, what was the conduct of the Americans on this gloomy prospect? --
Alarmed at the unexpected defeat of our friends, we flattered for a moment,'
the hope of succor from an established army. -- But when the rapid advances of
the enemy bid defiance to all regular opposition, when they felt themselves in
possession of the heart of our country, and the astonished world contemplated
our fate as already sealed, with what firmness and tranquillity of mind did all
ranks of men rush to arms? And who, without paying at least a silent tribute of
respect can view the conduct of those men hitherto unused to the fatigues and
dangers of war, deliberately parting with their wives, their children and their
possessions, to brave death in every frightful form, rather than live to swell
the triumph of their haughty foe.

To the same cause must be ascribed that unexampled composure of mind with
which this people made the transition from war to peace. -- After a conflict of
more than seven years duration, (in which the most turbulent of human passions
had been deeply engaged) which closed with the acquisition of every thing that
ambition or interest could lead us to wish for; the most unbounded degree of
joy and exultatation could never have exposed us to the imputation of weakness
or vanity; but the philosophic indifference with which this great event was
received, arising not from insensibility, but reflection, shows the genius and
resources of the people, and will be a warning to all future adventurers not to
attempt the conquest of a country, where every subject, is a Soldier,
Politician and Patriot. -- Upon these cardinal characteristics of an American,
and upon these alone, we may account for those causes and effects which have so
long engaged the attention of the world. -- Great Britain, notwithstanding her
pretentions to the partiality and tenderness of a parent, had so long
accustomed herself to consider us merely in the light of property, that the
only question she seemed to make was upon the measure of our abilities, without
any regard to the right or reasonableness of her exactions.

IT has been very fashionable and perhaps equally politic during the late war,
to charge them with more base and unjustifiable motives, in their conduct
toward America, than any other power ever exercised over their meanest
dependents; but the smallest attention will convince us, that human nature is
nearly uniform in all her operations -- that national justice is little more
than a name -- and that there is scarce an exception where the advantages taken
over one nation by another, upon the slightest pretenses, have not been
proportionate to their power.

SINCE it cannot be presumed, that any set of men would become the voluntary
vassals of another power, it never can be a question of very serious enquiry,
whether a country has a right by force or stratagem, to shake off that
dependence, to which the weakness of their infant situation or the rapacity of
more powerful neighbors, for a time obliged them to submit: -- The force of
this truth has been acknowledged by some of our most inveterate enemies, who
possessing too much understanding to dispute the right, have quarreled with us
upon the inexpediency of our opposition to Great Britain.

WHATEVER may have proved the fair result of reason upon an unbiased enquiry,
it is evident, that the contending parties easily reconciled themselves to meet
on a footing of nature, and determine the controversy by the length of their
swords. -- Did the conduct of America need an appology, I should call your
attention to the many suppliant addresses to the King and Parliament of
Great Britain, and finally to the people of that infatuated nation at large,
couched in terms of such humiliating submission, as must cause a conscious
blush upon the cheek of every honest American, till the memory of them shall be
entirely lost -- But whatever may have been the cause which produced this great
appeal to Heaven, the irrevocable decree has past in our favor, and we have
the seal of an Almighty siat to the success of our cause.

To the virtuous firmness of a few patriotic citizens we are much indebted for
the splendour and success of those measures, which placed us in our present
happy situation.

WHO can recollect the unremitted zeal and invincible perseverance of an
Hancock, an Adams, a Bowdoin and a Warren, in the cause of their distressed
country, without feeling emotions of the most affectionate regard? -- It would
be but half the justice we owe them to embalm their memory in the silent
repository of our grateful hearts, while we leave the public record of their
merit to succeeding generations -- Posterity in acknowledging the debt they owe
them, will doubtless fill some of the most brillliant pages of future history.
-- But since the approbation of freemen is the highest incentive to great
actions in a republic, and the only adequate reward for the services of their
benefactors, we may be excused a blush in uttering those sentiments which the
memory of such recent and signal favors so naturally excite.

AMONG the first friends of our orphan cause, we must not forget to enroll the
illustrious leader of that force which has triumphed over the combined power of
our adversaries; -- influenced by no mean view of private interest in accepting
this important charge, an uniform spirit of patriotism has marked his conduct
in every fortune he has experienced; firm in adversity, humane in success, he
was equally esteemed and dreaded by his enemies: Having seen a successful close
to the national controversy in which he engaged, like that standard of eastern
magnanimity and greatness the patriotic Cincinnatus, he threw off the robes of
his distinction and again returned to the common level of his former
fellow-citizens; but finding even here the jealousy of freemen was pursuing him
for one of the most benevolent and disinterested acts of his life, he
cheerfully relinquished the exceptionable parts of an institution, which had
been pursued upon the same innocent and humane principles to which it owed its
existence. -- This last act of true magnanimity and generous respect to the
sentiments and even caprice of the people, must give a stamp of immortality to
the luster of his great achievements, and render the motives of his conduct
through the complicated scenes of a war, in which he has taken so conspicuous a
part, altogether unequivocal.

AND with him we have the most grateful remembrance of the gallant officers,
who with so much fortitude and patience have shared his dangers and his toils
-- actuated by the pure principles of republican virtue, they have with
undeviating firmness, under every disadvantage and discouragement the human
mind is capable of contending with, pursued the true interest of the great
cause in which they had engaged. -- How often have they without pay, provision
or even sympathy to sooth the sufferings and alleviate the hard conditions of
their service, been opposed to the superior force of an enemy pampered with
luxury and paid with profusion.

THE extorted approbation of their conduct in the hour of our danger, is but an
aggravation of the meanness of that disposition which would deny them justice
when their services become unnecessary. But I never can persuade myself that
America will stain her fair reputation by imitating the example of those
countries, who have rewarded the services of their best friends with
ill-grounded suspicions and implacable resentment. -- But I hope the partiality
we feel for our patriotic army will never suffer us to forget, that military
force has always proved dangerous to the liberties of the people, that the
natural safeguard of the country is a well regulated militia, and that America
must date the decline of her peace, her glory and independence from the
establishment of a regular army.

THE American revolution has placed us on some points of advantage which have
been experienced but by very few people since the civilization of mankind; we
have realized the perfect freedom of a state of nature without feeling those
inconveniences which so naturally and almost necessarily flow from such a
situation.

LITERALLY placed on the broad field of nature, we felt no obstacle in
adopting that form of government which seemed most congenial to the
disposition, and best calculated to promote the happiness of those who were to
be the subjects of its control; when these two great ends are answered, the
government must be called perfect; and if we may fairly argue the cause from
the consequence, the present constitution must be deemed the best that human
wisdom can devise, many years experience having confirmed the supposition, and
we hope it will continue for ages.

NEXT to the immediate possessions of our own privileges the constitution has
provided a guardianship the most simple and secure; -- every power in
government which could possibly be fraught with danger annually returning to
the people, the great source from which it flowed. -- This is the grand secret
of political security -- this is the main pillar in the great temple of liberty
you have been so long attempting to rear; -- preserve this inviolate and your
freedom is secure -- suffer this to be infringed and you are an inslaved
people. But as the best of human systems may involve in them the seeds of
future danger to the people's rights; the constitution has wisely provided a
periodical revision which must cure every possible defect. -- Having reached
the sumit of our wishes, we have nothing left but to give efficacy and duration
to the advantages we have obtained.

WHEN we can find the necessary relations and dependencies of nature, we have a
more infalible criterion than that which arrives out of the best human
theories. -- The smallest reflection will convince us that America has no enemy
to fear but from herself; -- separated by nature from every other power of
importance in the world, she must always be secure while she has harmony at
home; for no nation can ever be so infatuated with a lust of dominion as to
attempt in defiance of the great barriers of creation, to carry war into a
civilized country beyond the vast oceans which divide the habitable parts of
the globe, without paying very dearly for their vanity and presumption in a
disgraceful failure of their expensive enterprises.

FROM this source our sages and patriots could predict with such unshaken
confidence the happy revolution which taken place, and derive that fortitude
and perseverance, without which all the advantages of nature in the best of
causes must have proved inadequate to success.

THE author of creation seems to have stamped it on the first page of the great
volume of nature, that America should be mistress of herself; and thanks to
Heaven under this great charter we want for our security against foreign force,
neither armies nor revenue, for without an army, without revenue we may destroy
ourselves, but we never can cease to exist as an independent nation till we
commit political suicide.

THE American States seem by nature to have such an intimate connection, that
necessity will oblige them to be close friends or the most inveterate enemies.
-- Friends they may be for ages, but cannot long exist in a state of war with
each other. -- Separated only by mathematical or imaginary lines, a very small
superiority of force in either, must be fatal to the neighborhood; every
acquisition will render the victorious party more irresistible, and in
proportion as the conquerors advance, the power of opposing them will be
lessened till the whole are subdued by a rapacious discontented part.

BUT experience having taught us that the force of government is generally
lessened in proportion to the extent of territory over which it is to be
exerted, we must expect in a country like this, inhabited by men too sensible
of their rights, to rest easy under a control founded in fraud and supported
by oppression, that discontent will break out in every quarter, till by the
clashing of various powers, a new division of territory will take place, which
must soon be succeeded with fresh quarrels similar to those which disturbed the
original tranquillity; -- thus this happy land, formed for the seat of freedom
and resort of the distressed, may like other countries, in her turn, become a
prey to the restless temper of her own inhabitants; but should any of the
States pressed by unequal force, call in the aid of some foreign power, the
consequences must be equally ruinous. -- A demand of foreign aid in one state
will produce a similar application from another, till America becomes the
common theater on which all the warlike powers on earth shall be engaged. --
But since this combined force without an adequate power some where to give it a
proper direction, can only operate like a mass of unanimated matter to check
and destroy the natural activity of the body from whence it originates, it
becomes an object of the last importance to form some great continental
arrangements.

As an individual I must confess I feel my share of reluctance at parting even
with the shadow of that sovereignty and independence we have so dearly
purchased. -- But when I consider that while we retain the sovereignty and
independence, we must also experience the weakness and insignificancy of an
individual state, I most cheerfully embrace the idea of a qualified federal
government; and since we cannot expect in the most perfect of human
institutions, a delegated power capable of answering any valuable purposes,
which shall not be accompanied with some possible danger, we should not suffer
any ill-grounded jealousy to prevent the representatives of the United States
from being furnished with permanent revenues and the ultimate power of deciding
in all questions of great national concern.

IT is then easy to discover that our only safety lies in a firm union of the
states, -- directed by the common interest, and supported by the combined force
of the whole, we must be happy at home and respected abroad.

HAVING obtained these important ends, we may unfold our arms with
indiscriminate hospitality to all mankind -- I am sensible the calm of peace
which has succeeded the raging storms of war has not yet altogether obliterated
from our minds the memory of injuries we have suffered at the hands of a nation
on whom we had a just claim for the most affectionate partiality. -- But when
we recollect, though deeply injured, we have been as deeply revenged -- that we
have secured all our ancient rights and acquired many new ones, -- when we view
ourselves as placed by our very enemies on a respectable seat among the nations
of the earth, I think a softer passion than that of jealousy or resentment
should fill the mind -- jealousy is undoubtedly the Sentinel of freedom, but we
had better be sometimes unguarded than always subject to false alarms -- there
is a meanness in jealousy at best, which shows a diffidence in our own
abilities -- but if we consider the genius and resources of the country, their
quick sense of injury and disposition to resent it -- that while we can boast
the best of statesmen in our service at home, we are able to send the most
accomplished negotiators abroad, we must be convinced there is but little to
fear from the superior power or artifice of any nation. -- I am sensible these
sentiments will not suit the political pulse of those who have some partial
ends to answer by keeping alive the embers of that malignant fire which have
too long preyed upon the vitals of our tranquillity. -- I hope my friends, we do
not assemble on this occasion to promote the views of any party, however
respectable, but with the freedom and firmness of men, who have a right to
think as well as act for themselves, fairly to annalise the great subject of
out common interest.

But the inquiry grows more important as we advance and take a view of the
commercial state of our affairs -- peace has thrown down the barriers of
commerce, and introduced us to a world of strangers, who with open arms invite
us to partake their friendship and their trade.

LET us then obey the friendly summons, and seize this moment of our newborn
power to spread the broad basis of our future wealth.

IT is a degrading truth we never before had occasion to realize, that commerce
knows no friendship, has no ties but those which spring from interest.

THE illustrious Monarch who so generously took a part in our quarrel, when all
the world beside stood at a cold distance, must forever claim a share in the
warmest gratitude and affection of our hearts, and the name of LEWIS will be
dear to this country, till every generous sentiment of the soul shall be
extinguished; -- but too sensible of the unchanging rights of commerce to
attempt the least infringement of her laws, he has with a magnanimity truly
characteristic of his happy reign, asked nothing but on a footing of perfect
reciprocity.

IT has often been asserted as an undeniable position, that luxury is the
offspring of commerce and the parent of vice; but we may say from experience,
which is the best source of knowledge we possess, that there must be some
exceptions to the rule.

THIS country has long abounded with all the luxuries of the east, but hitherto
has and I doubt not for ages will preserve the strong features of their
original purity.

THE truth is, there are few nations abounding in luxury, among whom there are
not to be found some odious distinctions of rank which gives one class of men
the advantage above another -- But in a country like this, which knows no
distinction but that which arises from merit, where honors are not to be
purchased or the people won by the false splendour of prodigality, we have
nothing to fear from the profusion of wealth which is tendered to us by the
generous hand of commerce. -- Blessed with a government that depends entirely
upon the virtue of the people for its support, we have our own prosperity at
command, and we may be assured while our representation remains free from
corruption, and the undue influence of party spirit, while we feel the
influence of those virtuous principles which produced the Revolution, we must
be independent, rich and happy. -- But when like other nations, forgetting the
great objects of the social compact, we become depraved in principle and
dissolute in (...) till the pulse of republican virtue shall cease to beat,
(...) too we must sink into contempt and ruin.

FINIS

