AN APPEAL TO THE SERIOUS AND CANDID PROFESSORS OF CHRISTIANITY. ON THE
FOLLOWING SUBJECTS.

I. The Use of REASON in Matters of RELIGION. II. The Power of MAN to do the
WILL of GOD. III. Original SIN. IV. ELECTION and REPROBATION. V. The Divinity
of CHRIST, and VI. Atonement for SIN by the Death of CHRIST.
By JOSEPH PRIESTLY, L.L.D. F.R.S. and a LOVER of the GOSPEL.

To which are added, A concise History of the Rise of those DOCTRINES: AND THE
TRIUMPH OF TRUTH; Being An Account of the TRIAL OF MR. E. ELWALL, For Heresy
and Blasphemy, at Stafford Assizes.

To us there is one God, the FATHER, and one Mediator, the MAN CHRIST JESUS. --

1 Cor. viii. 6. -- 1 Timothy ii. 5. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED and SOLD BY ROBERT
BELL, IN Third-Street. M, DCC, LXXXIV.

TO THE READER.
The Character of Doctor PRIESTLEY, is known to stand very high in the literary
World. This small Tract is as much celebrated as any of his numerous
Publications. It is said, that above thirty Thousand Copies of it have been
sold in England. This affords a strong Presumption, in favor of that weight of
Evidence which it contains. Of this, however, let the Reader judge for himself.

The EDITOR.

The Editor's Address to the Clergy of all denominations.
REVEREND SIRS,
It would be offering an insult to your profession, to your characters, to your
high pretensions to literature, to suppose that you can be offended with the
following publication. As gentlemen you must be candid. As Christians, you must
be forbearing. As men of science, you must wish to give every subject a fair
hearing.

We are no longer confined, within those soporiferous circles, which were drawn
by vindictive bigots, in the darkest ages. We are now sensible, that it is our
duty to know the truth, that the truth will make us free. We are convinced,
also, that an implicit faith is not the duty of a Christian, but, on the
contrary, that we should prove all things, and hold fast that which is good, or
that every man should be fully persuaded in his own mind.

If therefore, the sentiments which are urged upon us, in the tract before you
be founded in truth, you, will give them all their influence upon yourselves,
and will recommend them, with the utmost earnestness, to all your different
audiences.

If, on the other hand, you have reason to apprehend, that any errors are
propagated in this book, you have a fair opportunity of confuting them. But
read, read heartily and impartially, before you pronounce the sentence of
condemnation, and direct all those with whom you have any connection, to give
the most unbounded scope to their examination of the doctrines in question,
lest they should say, that you are afraid of the light or injuriously charge
you, with being either not able to defend the truth, or willing to conceal it
under an impenetrable chaos.

When you seriously Weigh the preceding reflections, I shall, I am sure,
receive your thanks for the present publication, and you will endeavor to
accelerate the circulation of it over all this vast continent.

Suffer me to throw out another observation in vindication of myself, some
copies of this pamphlet have crept in among us, and are secretly making many
proselites. on the supposition, then, that it is an heretical performance, by
thus making it better known, you the physicians are called in, before it be too
late, to extricate the poison, and to prevent the spreading of the contagion,
before it go beyond the reach of a radical remedy.

The EDITOR.

The Editor's Address to the Unitarians.
FRIENDS, and BRETHREN,
I WISH you to be without spot. But, I am afraid, if you examine your own
conduct, that you cannot say, this is altogether the case, you have no occasion
to be directed not to imitate those who style themselves the orthodox, in their
malicious calumny, in their aptitude to do every injury in their power to those
who differ from them, or in their habit of condemning unheard, or rejecting
without reading them, such authors as contradict their own sentiments. But
after you have fully examined the doctrines of any particular church, and are
decidedly clear in your own minds, that such doctrines are diametrically
repugnant to the good word of truth, I wish you to imitate the orthodox in not
appearing to give any countenance to such doctrines.

You are sensible, according to the express declaration of the Lord Jesus
Christ, that THE ONLY TRUE GOD IS THE FATHER of all; and you believe with the
apostle Paul, and with all the other inspired writers of the Old and
New Testament, that THERE IS BUT ONE GOD EVEN THE FATHER, who was never born,
who could not become a child, nor suffer death nor be subject to any possible
change.

Should you not, therefore, make your light to shine? If only two or three of
you were convinced of this great truth, should you not by publicly protesting
against the worship of more Gods than one, declare your supreme veneration of
the one only God?

It is unnecessary to inform you, that the true worshippers worship THE FATHER
ONLY, and that the true worshippers worship him in spirit and in truth. But,
they cannot be deemed true worshippers who do not worship at all, who put their
candle under a bushel, who hide their talent in the earth, and do not worship
in the face of men, or, who through the slavish fear of appearing singular,
give countenance to the worship of three, or four Gods.

Come out from among them, and be ye separate. Be not ashamed of Christ, and
his kingdom. Show your faith by your works. Worship publicly the one Eternal
Jehovah. This is your duty, which you cannot controvert or deny. Let it not
therefore be said of you on the last day, that your fear of your fellow
creatures was superior to your veneration of the Almighty Creator, that you
loved darkness rather than light, because your deeds were evil.

The great Lord of the universe requires sincerity from us. But we cannot be
sincere when we appear to give his glory to another.

"I speak as to the wise; -- judge ye what I say." The EDITOR.

The Editor's Address to the Deists.
GENTLEMEN,
YOU are my brethren in nature, and equally with me, subjects of the one
universal parent.

Some of you are charged with duplicity. Some of you are charged with bigotry.
Some of you are charged with insincerity, in being said to appear to conform to
what you utterly disapprove. These are heavy charges. Wipe them away, by
examining heartily every thing that has any pretensions to truth, and by
adhering firmly to whatever your unprejudiced reason shall convince you is
truth.

I believe, you have generally rejected Christianity, because it is doctrines
have been perversely misrepresented to you. You have been told that the doctrine
of a trinity is it is grand basis, and that the doctrines of original Sin,
predestination, a satisfaction, etc. are the superstructures. But examine
christianity itself, and you will find that it contains none of these
doctrines. It is a pure System of faith, in the one God, and Father of all: and
of peace and good will to men.

It Is real doctrines you have now before you, can you say, that any of these
are unworthy of the divine perfections? Can you say that any of these are
repugnant to the natural dictates of your own minds? Can you say, that God
could not reveal himself to men? Can you say, that the infinitely benevolent
Being whose tender mercies are ever over all his works, is not as much disposed
to enlighten our minds and to rescue us from the snares of Sin and death, as to
preserve our bodies and pour upon us a profusion of earthly joys? Look to
yourselves we must all hereafter be accountable for the talents we possess.

This present world is wearing away, The youngest of us must soon leave it. If,
then, there be another world, this should be our grand concern. What can I say
more? The great God has not implanted in us wishes for immortality, without
intending us for such a state. But if we cast away his instructions, and treat
them with scorn, without any examination of them, what can our expectations be?

The author of all our benefits, is entitled to our unceasing praises. Every
thing worthy of him, should be the subject of our most delightful meditations,
and we should always esteem his favor as better than life.

The EDITOR.

An Appeal to the serious and candid Professors of Christianity.
My Christian Brethren,
PERMIT one who professes obedience to the same Lord, and faith in the precious
promises of the same gospel with yourselves to address himself to you, with all
freedom and plainness of speech, on subjects relating to our common salvation.
I need not tell you that these subjects are interesting. In reality, nothing
else is interesting in comparison with them. For what is this world compared
with the future! What is time compared with eternity! Believe me my brethren,
it is nothing but the deepest concern for the honor of a religion which is the
most valuable inheritance of the human race, and which sets us above all the
follies and vices, all the weaknesses and troubles of life, by giving us the
most solid hope in death, that, has induced me to solicit your attention. But I
am confident that you will not think it ill bestowed, because it is upon a
subject that is near and dear to you, and the consideration of which cannot,
but please and profit you.

If, by the blessing of God upon our common endeavors to lead, and to be led
into all truth, I shall be so happy as to bring you to entertain the same views
of these things with myself, we shall rejoice together; and if, after all that
I may be able to advance, you should still think differently from me, I trust
you will, at least, be disposed to think with more candor of some of your
fellow christians, who love the gospel, and are zealous for its honor, though
you may think them mistaken in their conceptions concerning it. Let me entreat
you, therefore, my brethren, to give me a patient and candid hearing. Attend,
in the spirit of meekness, to what I shall say from the earnestness of my
heart; and exercise the reason which God has given you upon this occasion,
which is the noblest on which it can be exercised, and for which you may,
therefore, conclude, that it was principally given you.

I. Of the Use of Reason in Matters of Religion.
BE not backward, or afraid, my brethren, to make use of your reason in matters
of religion, or where the scriptures are concerned. They both of them proceed
from the same God and Father of us all, who is the giver of every good and
every perfect gift. They cannot, therefore, be contrary to one another, but
must mutually illustrate and enforce one another. Besides, how can we
distinguish one scheme of religion from another, so as to give the preference
to that which is the most deserving of it, but by the help of our reason and
understanding? What would you yourselves say to a Mohammedan, whom you would
persuade to abandon the imposture of Mahomet, and embrace christianity, but bid
him use his reason; and judge, by the help of it, of the manifest difference
between the two religions, and the great superiority of yours to his? Does not
God himself appeal to the reason of man, when he condescends to ask us, Whether
his ways be not equal? Ezekiel. xviii. 29. Does not the apostle exhort us that in
understanding we be men? 1 Cor. xiv. 20. Are we not expressly commanded to
prove all things, and then hold fast that which is good? 1 Thessalonians. v. 21. Also,
when we are commanded to search the scriptures, John v. 39 more must be meant
than merely reading them, or receiving implicitly, the interpretations of
others. Searching must imply an earnest endeavor to find out for ourselves,
and to understand the truths contained in the scriptures; and what faculty can
we employ for this purpose, but that which is commonly called reason, whereby
we are capable of thinking, reflecting, comparing, and judging of things?

Distrust, therefore, all those who decry human reason, and who require you to
abandon it, wherever religion is concerned. When once they have gained this
point with you, they can lead you whither they please, and impose upon you
every absurdity which their sinister views may make it expedient for them that
you should embrace. A Popish Priest would require nothing more than this, to
make you believe the doctrine of transubstantiation, and that a man is
infallible; or to persuade you to commit the most flagrant wickedness; as a
means of doing God service. For the first of these articles they do not fail to
urge the words of scripture, which expressly say, concerning the bread that is
used in the Lord's supper, that it is the body of Christ; Matt. xxvi. 6. and
there is no possibility of replying to them, but by appealing to reason, as the
necessary and proper judge of the sense of scripture. The Papists, therefore,
as might well be expected, is forward, on all occasions, to vilify human
reason, and to require men to abandon it; but true Protestants will not part
with it. It is by the help of reason, in conjunction with the scriptures, that
we guard ourselves against the gross delusions of the Papists, who, after
relinquishing reason, have been made to believe a lie; and by the diligent and
continued use of the same power, let us endeavor to combat every remaining
error, and trace out and reform every corruption of christianity, till we hold
the pure truth as it is in Jesus, and obey it in the love thereof.

Do not think that, by recommending the use of reason, I am about to decry the
scriptures. My appeal shall be to both, upon every subject on which I address
you; and I think you cannot but see that the plainnest and most obvious sense
of the scriptures is in favor of those doctrines which are most agreeable to
reason. A good man will rejoice to see them thus go hand in hand, mutually
illustrating and enforcing one another.

II. Of the Power of Man to do the Will of God.
ONE of the subjects with respect to which I earnestly wish that you would
attend to the voice of reason and the scriptures, and with respect to which,
one mistake will be followed by many others, and mistakes of great consequence,
is concerning the power of man to do the will of God. It is a favorite opinion
with many teachers of religion, that men have naturally (or by that
constitution and frame which God their maker has given them) no power at all
to do any thing that is good, not even to think a good thought, much less
actually to obey any of the commands of God; so that, if men were left to
themselves, they could do nothing but sin, and must be under a necessity of
aggravating their condemnation, by every thought, word, and action of their
lives. But, my brethren, how does this doctrine agree with the scriptures, and
particularly with the manner in which the Divine Being constantly expostulates
with the sinful sons of men; as when he says to the Jews, Turn ye turn ye from
your evil ways, why will ye die, O House of Israel. Ezekiel. xxxiii. 11. Wash ye
make you clean. Cease to do evil learn to do well, etc, Isa. i. 16.

Is it not plain from this, that it depends upon men themselves, whether they
will repent and turn to God or not? And how can it depend upon themselves if
they have not naturally, a sufficient power to do it? You cannot think that God
would command, and expect obedience, when he had not given power to obey; and
much less that he would urge men to provide for their own safety and happiness,
when himself had put an effectual bar in the way of it.

Suppose that any man's children were shut up in a building that was on fire,
while he himself was without, and had the key: and that, instead of opening the
door, to favor their escape, he should only call out to them to flee out of
the place, in order to avoid instant destruction; and that, as the necessary
consequence of this, they should all perish in the flames before his eyes; what
would you think of such a father? You would want words to express your
abhorrence of his cruelty; and yet in this very light do many christian divines
represent the conduct of that God whose tender mercies are over all his works,
and who has solemnly declared, that he has no pleasure in the death of a
sinner, but rather that he would turn from his way and live Ezekiel. xxxiii. 11.
yea, who would have all men to be saved. 1 Timothy ii. 4.

The conduct of our merciful God and Father, is certainly far different from
this, and more agreeable to reason and equity. If he designed us to be
accountable creatures, and treats us as such we must have talents given us,
which we may either improve or misimprove. If we be the subjects of his moral
government, we must be in a condition either to observe or to break his laws. A
power to do the one necessarily supposes a power to do the other; and without
this power we should not be the proper subjects of religion; as, in that case
it would be vain to propose to us either rewards for obedience, or punishments
for disobedience.

Nor is the supposition of a power in man to do the will of God, any foundation
for pride. For we must still say, with the apostle, What have we that we have
not received? and how then can we glory, as if we had not received it? Every
good and every perfect gift comes from God; and, knowing this, the more we
receive of his bounty, the more thankful, and the more humble we should be. I
shall, certainly, be more solicitous to exert myself in doing the will of God,
when, I believe that I have a talent to improve, than if I believe that I have
no talent entrusted with me at all; so that I cannot do even so much as the
wicked and slothful servant, who hid his talent in a napkin.

Some of those persons who believe that all mankind are absolutely incapable of
doing any good, are sometimes heard to invite sinners of all kinds to come to
Christ, as they are, and to say, that the viler they are, the more welcome they
will be to him; as if he was, after this, to cleanse them by some miraculous
power. But, my brethren, the invitation of the gospel runs in very different
terms. It is, Repent, and bring forth fruits meet for repentance. Matt. iii. 8.
Repent, and be converted that your sins may be blotted out. Acts iii. 19 And
none are invited to come to Christ, but those who labor and are heavy laden;
nor can they find rest for their souls, till they have actually learned of him
to be meek and lowly in heart. Matt. xi. 28.

What can be more contrary to the maxims abovementioned, than the whole tenor
of that serious expostulation with the children of Israel in the prophet
Isaiah, part of which I quoted above? wash you, make you clean, put away the
evil of your doings from before mine eyes. Cease to do evil, learn to do well.
Seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the
widow. Come now, (and not before) and let us reason together, says the Lord.
Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as snow; though they be red
like crimson, they shall be as wool. Isa. i. 16, etc.

Others, who entertain the same opinion of the utter inability of man to do the
will of God, act more consistently with those sentiments, but far more
inconsistently with the scriptures, in never preaching to sinners at all;
though to call sinners to repentance was the chief end of Christ's coming into
the world. Matt. ix. 13.

Whatever represents a state of acceptance with God, as a thing that may be
brought about without any efforts of our own, and especially if it may be done
in a moment, or in a very short space of time, is sure to be a popular
doctrine. Mankind in general care not how little is expected of them, or how
little they themselves have to do, in order to get to heaven. But true
religion, that alone which affords solid ground of hope toward God, consists
in a change of heart, affections, and habits; which can only be brought about
by serious resolution, and a vigorous and con^^ant exertion of our powers. Nay,
unless a course of virtue be begun, and good habits formed early in life, there
is very great danger that the thorns, briars, or bad soil, will prevent the
good seed from ever coming to maturity.

To believe, as the same persons do, that faith and repentance are nothing that
we ourselves are capable of, but altogether the miraculous operation of the
spirit of God in us and upon us, supposes that this great and sudden change may
as well take place at the last hour of life, as at any other; which certainly
encourages the most unwarrantable and most dangerous presumption, and is far
from having any countenance in the scriptures. The word of God always
represents a safe and happy death as the consequence of nothing but a good and
well-spent life. Some, indeed, are said to have been called at the eleventh
hour, but none at the twelfth, when the time for laboring in the vineyard was
quite over; and not one of the foolish virgins, who had neglected to provide
themselves with oil, was admitted to the marriage-supper.

III. Of Original Sin.
AS a foundation for this strange doctrine, of the utter inability of men to do
what God requires of them, a doctrine so injurious both to our Maker and
ourselves, it is said that by his first offense our first parent Adam, and all
his posterity, lost all power of doing any thing acceptable to God for the
future; that he was the representative of all his posterity; so that when he
sinned, we all sinned; and, every sin being an offense against an infinite God,
we all became, from that moment, liable to an infinite punishment, even the
everlasting wrath and curse of our Maker. And they say, that, on this account
only, it would have been just in God to have made us all suffer the most
exquisite and endless torments in hell, even though we had never sinned in our
own persons.

But, my brethren, you find nothing like any part of this in your bibles. For
there you read, The soul that sins, it shall die. Ezekiel. xviii. 4. And long
after the transgression of Adam, and to this very day, God is continually
calling upon men to cease to do evil, and learn to do well; which certainly
supposes that men always have had, and that we now have, a power to do so. It
is allowed that we suffer by the sin of Adam, as any child may suffer in
consequence of the wickedness of his ancestor; but it is not possible that we
should have sinned in him. Wherever there is sin, there is guilt, that is,
something that may be the foundation of remorse of conscience; something that a
man may be sorry for, and repent of; something that he may wish he had not
done; all which clearly implies, that sin is something that a man has given his
consent to, and therefore must be convinced of the reasonableness of his being
punished for But how can any man repent of the sin of Adam, or feel any thing
like remorse of conscience for it; when he cannot but know that he never gave
his consent to it, and could not possibly have been, in the least degree,
accessory to it? Good and bad conduct are, in their own nature, personal, and
cannot possibly be transferred from one to another. Whatever some divines
pretend, nothing of this kind can be imputed in this sense of the word. We may
receive harm by means of one person, and benefit by means of another, but no
sin of the former, or righteousness of the latter, can be considered as ours,
in the eye of an equitable and just God. The contrary is as much the language
and the plain meaning of the scriptures throughout, as it is agreeable to the
common sense and reason that God has given us.

IV. Of Election and Reprobation.
SUPPOSING that all mankind became liable to the everlasting wrath and curse of
God for the sin of one man, some divines say, that it was mercy in God to save
any, though by an arbitrary decree, which left all the rest of the human race
under an inevitable necessity of perishing. But certainly, my brethren, such
tender mercy is cruelty. All the creatures of God must look up to him as the
author of their being, since it was, undoubtedly, in his power to give, or to
withhold it, at his pleasure; and, surely, a good and merciful God would have
put a stop to the propagation of such a race of creatures, rather then suffer
them to be born in such shocking circumstances; in which he infallibly foresaw,
that the greatest part of them must be exposed to, and even actually suffer
remediless destruction. As surely as I derive my being from a just and merciful
God, I conclude that the terms on which I came into the world are advantageous
to me; and therefore, that it must be my own fault only, if I have not reason
to rejoice in it, and to be thankful, for it. But, indeed, I can hardly think
that any man seriously believes, that the greatest part of his fellow creatures
are born into the world under a predetermined necessity of being for ever
miserable. For in that case, it must appear probable that any children which he
himself may be the means of bringing into the world will be for ever miserable;
and surely no man of real goodness or compassion would wish to have children,
or be necessary to their being born in such circumstances.

If this doctrine be true, what motive can any man have to endeavor to flee
from the wrath to come. Matt. iii. 7. when if it is to be his lot at all,
nothing that he can do will enable him to escape it; or what motive can a man
have to exert himself to lay hold on eternal life, 1 Timothy vi. 12. when, if he
is to enjoy it at all, he cannot possibly miss of it, or of any thing belonging
to it, or that is necessary to prepare him for it? What reason had the apostle
Paul to exhort Christians to take heed lest they should fall, 1 Cor. x. 12.
when none that ever did stand could possibly fall? and what reason had he to
labor, left after having preached to others, he himself should be a castaway,
1 Cor. ix. 27. when, being certain of his conversion, he must have known that
that consequence was impossible?

This doctrine, of absolute election and reprobation, is certainly a doctrine
of licentiousness, and not a doctrine according to godliness; and let divines
employ all the ingenuity they are masters of, it is impossible for them to
clear this opinion from being the cause of fatal despair in some, and as fatal
a security in others. If this opinion were true, and men were really aware of
their situation, I should think it impossible to prevent their falling into
absolute distraction, through terror and anxiety. It would be like a man having
his all, his life, nay infinitely more than his life, depending upon the cast
of a die; the decree of God being a thing that he has as little power to
command. Besides, this doctrine certainly represents the God and Father of us
all in such a light, as no man would choose that he himself should appear in.

V. Of the Divinity of Christ.
SO fatal have the consequences of the sin of Adam been represented, that you
have been told, that nothing but the blood of God himself could reverse them;
and therefore you have been taught to believe, that Jesus Christ, whose proper
title is the son of man, as well as the son of God, was not merely man, but
very and eternal God himself; without considering that, by thus making more
Gods than one, you are guilty of a breach of the first and most important of
all the commandments, which says expressly, Thou shall have no other Gods
before me, Exodus xx. 3. But whatever such divines may say, the apostle Paul
says, in direct contradiction to them, that, To us there is but one God, the
FATHER, of whom are all things; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all
things, and we by him, 1 Cor. viii. 6. And again, after saying that we have one
Lord, one faith, one baptism, he adds, one God and Father of all, who is above
all, and through all, and in you all, Ephesians. iv. 5.6. The creed of all
Christians, therefore, ought to be, There is ONE GOD, and one mediator between
God and men, the MAN Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy ii. 5.

The Father is frequently styled God, even with respect to Christ, as well as
other beings. The God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, give unto
you, that ye may know the exceeding greatness of his power, which he wrought in
Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand,
etc. Ephesians. i. 17. etc. Christ himself uses the same language. I ascend unto my
Father, and your Father, and unto my God, and your God, John xx. 17. My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me?

Christ who was the image of the invisible God, and the firstborn (or most
excellent) of all his creatures, Col. i. 15. and in whom dwelt all the fullness
of the Godhead bodily, Col. ii. 9. acknowledged that his Father was greater
than he, John xiv, 28. and, indeed, upon all occasions, and in the clearest
terms, he expressed his dependence upon God his Father, for all his power and
glory; as if he had purposely intended to guard his disciples against forming
too high an opinion of the dignity of their master. Verily I say unto you, the
Son can do nothing of himself, John v. 19. I can of mine own self do nothing.
As I hear I judge, and my judgment is just, because I seek not mine own will,
but the will of the Father, who sent me, v. 30. The words that I speak unto
you, I speak not of myself, but the Father who dwells in me, he does the
works. xiv. 10. I live by the Father. vi. 57. The Father has given to the son
to have life in himself; and has given him authority to execute judgment. v.
26.27. All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth. Matt. xxviii. 18 He
even calls his Father the only true God, John xvii. 3 that they might know
thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. It appears to me
not to be in the power of language to exclude the idea of the divinity of
Christ more expressly than by these solemn words.

Notwithstanding the divine communications with which our Lord was favored,
some things are expressly said to be withheld from him. For he himself,
speaking of his second coming, says, Mark xiii. 32. But of that day and hour
knows no man, no not the angels which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the
Father. In Matthew xxiv. 36. where the same observation is repeated, it is, but
my Father only.

The apostles notwithstanding their attachment to their Lord, and Master,
always preserve the idea of his subordination to the Father, and consider all
his honor and power as derived from him. He received from God the Father,
honor and glory, 2 Pet. i. 17. It pleased the Father, that in him should all
fullness dwell, Col i. 19. The revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto
him, Rev. i. 1. Ye are Christ's and Christ is God's, 1 Cor. iii. 23. The head
of Christ is God, 1 Cor. xi. 3

The reason why Christ was so much distinguished by God the Father, is
frequently and fully expressed in the scriptures, viz. his obedience to the
will of God, and especially in his submitting to die for the benefit of
mankind. Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life, John x.
17. He humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the
cross. Wherefore God has highly exalted him, and given him a name which is
above every name; that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in
heaven and things in earth; and that every tongue should confess that Jesus
Christ is Lord to the Glory of God the Father, Phil. ii. 8 -- 11. Who, for the
joy that was set before him, endured the cross, despising the shame, and is now
sat down at the right hand of God. Heb. xii. 2.

Our Lord says, that he and his Father are one. John x. 30. but he sufficiently
explains himself, when he prays that all his disciples may be one with him, and
his Father, even as they are one. John xvii. ii. and he gives them the same
glory which God had given to him, ver. 22. Besides, at the very time that our
Lord says, that he and his father are one, and in the very sentence preceding
it, ver. 29. he says, that "his Father is "greater than all. But how could the
Father be greater than all, if there was any other, who was so much one with
him, as to be, in all, respects equal to him.

The mere term God is, indeed. sometimes used in a lower and inferior sense in
the scriptures, denoting dominion only; as when the Divine Being himself says,
that he will make Moses a god to Pharaoh, Exodus vii. 1; but surely, there can
be no danger of our mistaking the sense of such phrases as these; or if it were
possible, our Lord himself has sufficiently guarded against any misconstruction
of them when applied to himself, by the explanation he has given of them;
informing us, that if in the language of scripture, they are called gods to
whom the word of God came, John x. 35 (though, in fact, they were no other than
mere men) he could not be guilty of blasphemy in calling himself only the Son
of God. Now if Christ had been conscious to himself that he was the true and
very God, and that it was of the utmost consequence to mankind that they should
regard him in that light, this was certainly a proper time for him to have
declared himself, and not to have put his hearers off with such an apology as
this.

But even this power and dominion, to which Christ is advanced by God his
Father, who gave all power into his hands, and who made him head over all
things to his church, Ephesians. i. 22, this mediatorial kingdom of Christ (as it is
sometimes, and with sufficient propriety, termed) is not to be perpetual. For
the apostle Paul, speaking no doubt, under immediate inspiration, expressly
says, that when the end shall come, that God shall have subdued all things to
his Son (in which, he observes, that he must be excepted who did subdue all
thing unto him) he must deliver up the kingdom to God, even the FATHER, and he
himself subject to him who had put all things under him, that God may be all in
all. 1 Cor. xv. 24. etc. Nay, he himself says expressly, that he had not the
disposal of the highest offices of his kingdom, Matt. xx. 23. To sit on my
right hand and on my left is not mine to give; but it shall be given to them
for whom it is prepared of my Father.

So clear, my brethren, so full, and so express, is the uniform testimony of
the scriptures to the great doctrine of the proper unity of God, and of the
subordination of Christ, and all other beings to him, that the prevalence of so
impious a doctrine, as the contrary must be, can be ascribed to nothing but to
that mystery of iniquity, which though it began to work in the times of the
apostles themselves, was not then risen to so enormous a height as to attack
the supremacy of the one living and true God, and give his peculiar glory to
another. This, my brethren, among other shocking corruptions of genuine
christianity, grew up with the system of popery; and to show that nothing is
impossible to the superstition and credulity of men, when they are become vain
in their imaginations, after exalting a man into a god, a creature into a
creator, they made a piece of bread into one also, and then bowed down to, and
worshipped, the work of their own hands.

But though it seemed fit to the unsearchable wisdom of God, that all the
errors and abuses of popery should not be reformed at once; and though this
great error was left untouched by the first reformers, blessed be God the bible
is as open to us as it was to them? and by the exertion of the same judgment
and spirit, we may free christianity from the corruptions which they left
adhering to it; and then among other excellencies of our religion, Our Lord
will be one and his name one. Zech. xiv. 9.

If you ask who, then, is Jesus Christ, if he be not God; I answer, in the
words of St. Peter, addressed to the Jews, after his resurrection and
ascension, that Jesus of Nazareth was a man approved of God, by miracles and
wonders and signs, which God did by him. Acts ii. 22. If you ask what is meant
by man, in this place; I answer, that man, if the word be used with any kind of
propriety, must mean the same kind of being with yourselves. I say, moreover,
with the author of the epistle to the Hebrews, that it became him by whom are
all things, and for whom are all things, to make this great captain of our
salvation in all respects, like unto us his brethren, that he might be made
perfect through sufferings. Heb. ii. 10.17. and that he might have a feeling of
all our infirmities, iv. 13. For this reason it was that our Savior and
deliverer was not made of the nature of an angel, or like any super-angelic
being, but was of the seed of Abraham, ii. 16. that is (exclusive of the
divinity of the Father, which resided in him, and acted by him) a mere man, as
other Jews, and as we ourselves also are.

Christ being made by the immediate hand of God, and not born in the usual
course of generation, is no reason for his not being considered as a man. For
then Adam must not have been a man. But in the ideas of St. Paul, both the
first and second Adam (as Christ, on this account, is sometimes called) were
equally men; By man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead,
1 Cor. xv. 21. And, certainly, in the resurrection of a man, that is, of a
person in all respects like ourselves, we have a more lively hope of our own
resurrection; that of Christ being both a proof and a pattern of ours. We can,
therefore, more firmly believe, that because he lives, we who are the same that
he was, and who shall undergo the same change by death that He did, shall live
also. John xiv. 19.

Till this great corruption of christianity be removed, it will be in vain to
preach the gospel to Jews, or Mahometans, or, indeed, to any people who retain
the use of the reason and understanding that God has given them. For how is it
possible that three persons, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, should be separately,
each of them, possessed of all divine perfections, so as to be true, very, and
eternal God, and yet that there should be but one God; a truth which is so
clearly and fully revealed, that it is not possible for men to refuse their
assent to it; or else it would, no doubt, have been long ago expunged from our
creed, as utterly irreconcilable with the more favorite doctrine of a
Trinity, a term which is not to be found in the scriptures. Things above our
reason may, for any thing that we know to the contrary be true; but things
expressly contrary to our reason, as that three should be one and one three can
never appear to us to be so.

With the Jews, the doctrine of the Divine Unity is, and indeed justly,
considered as the most fundamental principle of all religion. Hear O Israel,
the Lord Our God is one Lord, Deuteronomy. vi. 4. Mark xii. 29. To preach the doctrine
of the Trinity to the Jews, can appear to them in no other light than an
attempt to seduce them into idolatry, a thing which they dare not entertain the
most distant thought of.

The great creed of the Mahometans, is, that There is one God, and Mahomet is
his prophet. Now that Mahomet is not the prophet of God, it is to be hoped they
may, in time, be made to believe; but we must not expect that they will so
easily give up their faith in the unity of God. To make the gospel what it was
originally, glad tidings of great joy; and as at last it certainly will be to
all the nations of the world, we must free it from this most absurd and impious
doctrine, and also from many other corruptions which have been introduced into
it. It can no otherwise appear worthy of God, and favorable to the virtue and
happiness of mankind.

Lest some common objections should hinder the reception of the great truth
here contended for, I shall briefly consider and reply to the principle of
them. It is often said that Christ speaks of his humanity only, whenever he
represents himself as inferior to the Father, and dependent upon him. But the
scriptures themselves are far from furnishing the least hint of any such method
of interpretation, though, according to the Trinitarians, it is absolutely
necessary to the true understanding of them.

Besides, when it is applied to the passages in question, it is far from making
them either true in themselves, or agreeable to the obvious purport and design
of the places in which they are introduced. I shall just mention a few. Could
our Lord say with truth, and without an unworthy prevarication, that the Father
is the only true God, John xvii. 3. if any other person, not implied in the
term Father, was as much the true God as himself? Now the term Father being
appropriated to what is called the first person in the godhead, cannot
comprehend the Son, who is called the second. This key, therefore, is of no
service in this case, and our Lord, by expressing himself as he has done, could
not but lead his hearers into what is called a dangerous mistake.

When our Lord said that his Father was greater than he, did he make any
reserve, and secretly mean, not his whole self, but only part, and the inferior
part of himself the other part being equal in power and glory with the Father?
How mean the prevarication, and how unworthy of our Lord!

When our Lord said that the time of the day of judgment was not known to
himself, the Son, but to the Father only, could he mean that his humanity only
did not know it, but that his divinity (which is supposed to be intimately
united with his humanity) was as well acquainted with it as the Father himself?
If the human nature of Christ had been incapable of having that knowledge
communicated to it, the declaration would have been needless; but as that was
not the case, his hearers must necessarily understand him as speaking of
himself in his highest capacity; as he certainly must do, if at all, when he
speaks of himself as the Son, corresponding to the Father.

If Christ had not satisfied the Jews that he did not mean to make himself
equal with God, would they not have produced it against him at his trial, when
he was condemned as a blasphemer, because he confessed that he was the Christ
only: and yet no Jew expected any thing more than a man for their Messiah, and
our savior no where intimates that they were mistaken in that expectation. It
is plain that Martha considered our Lord as a different person from God, and
dependent upon God, when she said to him, John xi. 22. I know that even now,
whatsoever thou will ask of God, God will give it thee.

VI. Of ATONEMENT for Sin by the Death of Christ.
YOU have been taught by divines, that if Christ be not God, he could not have
made an infinite satisfaction for the sins of mankind. But, my brethren, where
do you learn that the pardon of sin, in a finite creature, requires an infinite
satisfaction; or, indeed, any satisfaction at all, besides repentance and
reformation, on the part of a sinner. We read in the scriptures that we are
justified freely by the Grace of God, Romans iii. 34. but what free grace, or
mercy, does there appear to have been in God, if Christ gave a full price for
our justification, and bore the infinite weight of divine wrath on our account.
We are commanded to forgive others, as we ourselves hope to be forgiven, Matt.
vii. 14. and to be merciful, as our Father, who is in heaven, is merciful. But
surely we are not thereby authorized to insist upon any atonement, or
satisfaction, before we give up our resentment toward an offending and
penitent brother. Indeed, how could it deserve the name of forgiveness if we
did? If he only repent, we are commanded to forgive him. Luke xvii. 4.

You read in the scriptures that Christ died a sacrifice for our sins. Heb. ix.
26. So he did; and a sacrifice it was, of a sweet smelling savor to God. To
die, as Christ did, in the glorious cause of truth and virtue; to die, as he
did, in order to show us an example of patiently suffering death for our
religion, and the good of mankind, and in a firm hope of a resurrection to a
future and eternal life; to die, as he did, in express attestation of his own
divine mission, by his manifest resurrection from the dead, and as the fullest
proof of that doctrine, by means of which sinners are continually reconciled
unto God, was a noble sacrifice indeed. We also are commanded to yield our
bodies living sacrifices. Romans xii. 1. And we are required to offer the
sacrifices of praise continually. Psalm. cxvi. 17. But it is plain that all
these are only figurative expressions, and used by way of comparison. Neither
our bodies, nor our prayers can be considered as real sacrifices; nor are we,
therefore, obliged to suppose that Christ was a real sacrifice. And though we,
like him, should be called actually to lay down our lives for our brethren, 1
John iii. 16. which, in imitation of him, we are enjoined to be ready to do, we
should be sacrifices only in the figurative sense of the word.

It is true, that no man who is a sinner (and all men have sinned) can be
justified by his works. We all stand in need of, and must have recourse to,
free grace and mercy; but it is a great dishonor to God to suppose that this
mercy and grace takes its rise from any thing but his own essential goodness;
and that he is not of himself, and independent of all foreign considerations
whatever, what he solemnly declared himself to Moses, at the time of the giving
of the law, to be, namely, a God merciful and gracious, long suffering,
abundant in goodness and in truth. Exodus xxxiv. 6. or that he requires any
other sacrifices, but the sacrifices of a broken spirit, and a contrite heart,
which he will never despise. Ps. li. 17.

Can we wish for a more distinct, and perfect representation of the manner in
which God forgives the sins of his offspring of mankind, than our Savior has
exhibited to us in that most excellent parable of the prodigal son; in which
the good father no sooner sees his child, who had abandoned him, and wasted his
substance in riotous living, returning to him and to his duty; but without
waiting for any atonement or propitiation, even while he was yet a great way
off, he ran to him, fell upon his neck, and kissed him. Luke xv. 20. The same
representation we see in the parable of the creditor, who freely forgave his
servant, because he humbly desired him. Let us not then, my brethren, deprive
the ever blessed God of the most glorious and honorable of all his attributes,
and leave him nothing but justice, or rather vengeance, which is expressly said
to be his strange work. Isaiah xxviii. 21.

It is impossible to reconcile the doctrine of the satisfaction for sin by the
death of Christ, with the doctrine of free grace, which, according to the
uniform tenet of the scriptures, is so fully displayed in the pardon of sin,
and the justification of sinners. When, therefore, the apostle Paul says, Romans
iii 24. That we are justified freely by the grace of God, through the
redemption that is in Christ Jesus, the meaning of the latter clause must be
interpreted in such a manner as to make it consistent with the former; and it
is far from requiring any force or straining of the text to do it. For it is
only necessary to suppose that our redemption (or, as the word properly
signifies, and is indeed frequently rendered by our translators, our
deliverance) from the power of sin, i. e. our repentance and reformation,
without which there is no promise of pardon, is effected by the gospel of Jesus
Christ, who came to call sinners to repentance; but still God is to be
considered as the giver, and not the receiver with respect to our redemption,
for we read that he spared not his own son, but gave him up for us all. Romans
viii. 32.

To say that God the Father provided an atonement for his own offended justice
is, in fact, to give up the doctrine. If a person owe me a sum of money, and I
choose to have the debt discharged, is it not the same thing, whether I remit
the debt at once, or supply another person with money wherewith to pay me to
the debtor's name? If satisfaction be made to any purpose, it must be in some
manner, in which the offender may be a sufferer, and the offended person a
gainer; but it can never be reconciled to equity, or answer any good purpose
whatever, to make the innocent suffer the punishment of the guilty. If, as
Abraham says, it be far from God to slay the righteous with the wicked, and
that the righteous should be as the wicked, Genesis xviii. 25. much farther must
it be from him to slay the righteous instead of the wicked.

I wish the zealous advocates for this doctrine would consider, that if it be
necessary, in the nature of things, that the justice of God be satisfied before
any sin can be pardoned, and Christ be God as well as the Father, whether the
justice of Christ ought not to have been satisfied in the first place. If so,
what other infinite being has made satisfaction to him? But if the divine
nature of the Son required no satisfaction, why should the divine nature of the
Father require any?

If it had been inconsistent with the divine justice to pardon sin upon
repentance only, without some farther satisfaction, we might have expected to
have found it expressly said to be so in the scriptures; but no such
declaration can be produced either from the Old or the New Testament. All that
can be pretended is, that it may be inferred from it. Though good works are
recommended to us in the strongest manner, it is never with any salvo or
caution, as if they were not of themselves acceptable to God. The declarations
of the divine mercy to the penitent are all absolute, without the most distant
hint of their having a reference to any consideration on which they are made.
Thou, Lord, art good, and ready to forgive. Psalm lxxxiv. 5. To the Lord our
God belong mercies and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled against him. Dan.
ix. 3. When David and other penitents confess their sins, and entreat for
pardon, they refer themselves to the divine mercy only, without seeming to have
the least idea of any thing farther. Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my
transgressions; according to thy mercy remember thou me for thy goodness sake,
O Lord. Psalm xxv. 6.

It is particularly remarkable, that when sacrifices under the law are
expressly said not to be sufficient for the pardon of sin, we are never
referred to any more availing sacrifice; but to good works only. Thou desire
not sacrifice, else would I give it; thou delightest not in burnt offering. The
sacrifices of the Lord are a broken spirit A broken and a contrite heart, O
God, thou will not despise. Psalm li. 16 17. If any of the Jews had had the
least notion of the necessity of any atonement for the sins of mankind, they
could not but have expected a suffering Messiah; and yet it is plain that the
very best of them had no such idea. And though our Savior frequently explains
the reason of his coming, and the necessity of his suffering, it is never on
any such account. If he had done it any where, it might have been expected in
those discourses by which he endeavored to reconcile his disciples to his
death, in his solemn prayer before his sufferings, at the time of his agony in
the garden, or when he was upon the cross; yet nothing of this kind drops from
him on any of these occasions.

When our Lord describes the proceedings of the day of judgment, he does not
represent the righteous as referring themselves to the sufferings or merit of
their judge for their justification; and the judge himself expressly grounds it
on their good works only. Though St. Peter, in his discourse to the Jews on the
day of Pentecost, speaks of their sin in murdering Christ as of a heinous
nature, he says not a word of the necessity of any atonement, or that an ample
satisfaction had just been made, by means of their very wickedness. How would a
modern divine have harangued upon the occasion, and what advantage might he
have taken of the cry of the Jews, His blood be upon us, and upon our children.
But St. Peter only exhorts to repentance, and speaks of the death of Christ as
an event that took place according to the foreknowledge of God.

All the discourses of St. Paul upon various occasions in the book of Acts, are
entirely moral. In his celebrated speech at Athens, he only urges his hearers
to repentance, from the consideration of a future judgment. He says not a word
of what is now called the true gospel of Jesus Christ. In short, it is only
from the literal interpretation of a few figurative expressions in the
scriptures that this doctrine of atonement, as well as that of
transubstantiation has been derived; and it is certainly a doctrine highly
injurious to God; and if we, who are commanded to imitate God, should act upon
the maxims of it, it would be subversive of the most amiable part of virtue in
men. We should be implacable and unmerciful, insisting upon the uttermost
farthing.

These, my brethren, are the principal heads on which I proposed to expostulate
with you, in the plain and free manner in which I have done. Do you yourselves,
search the scriptures and see whether these things be so. Pray to the God of
truth to lead you into all truth, and may he give you understanding in all
things.

VII. Practical Consequences of the above Doctrines.
THE found knowledge of christianity is not of importance as a matter of
speculation merely; though abstract truths, especially truths that relate to
God, and the maxims of his moral government, are not without their utility and
obligation; but the truths that I here contend for nearly affect the sentiments
of our hearts, and our conduct in life; as, indeed, has been shown in many
respects, already. Considering God as possessed of the character in which some
divines represent him, it is impossible, while human nature is what it is, that
he should appear in an amiable or respectable light. Such a God may, indeed, be
the object of dread and terror to his creatures; but by no means of their love
or reverence. And what is obedience without love? It cannot be that of the
heart, which, however, is the only thing that is of any real value in religion.
Also, how can a man love his fellow creatures in general, when he considers the
greatest part of them as the objects of the divine abhorrence, and doomed by
him to an everlasting destruction, in which he believes that he himself must
for ever rejoice? And what can remain of virtue, when these two great sources
of it, the love of God and of mankind, are thus grossly corrupted? Lastly, how
must the genuine spirit of mercy and forgiveness, which so eminently
distinguishes the gospel of Christ, be debased, when God himself (whose conduct
in this very respect is particularly proposed to our imitation) is considered
as never forgiving sin without some previous atonement, satisfaction, or
intercession.

On the other hand, loving God, as the compassionate Father of all his
offspring, as willing that all men should be saved, and come to the knowledge
of his truth; and also loving all mankind as our brethren, as, together with
ourselves, the children of the same gracious Father, we cannot want the most
generous and powerful motives to do the will of God, and to provoke one another
to love, and to good works; being in no fear of counteracting the secret
designs of the Almighty, which we believe are aimed, not at the destruction,
but the happiness of all his creatures.

Think not, however, that I am so uncharitable as to suppose that all those who
profess to maintain the doctrines I have been arguing against, are universally
destitute of the genuine love of God, or of their fellow creatures. I am
sensible, and truly thankful, that it is not always the consequence; but it is
because the hearts of such persons are really influenced by better principles
than those which they avow. They by no means habitually regard the Divine Being
in the light in which their principles represent him, but as the true Father of
all the creatures that he has made, and, as such, sincerely desirous to promote
their best interests.

Also, notwithstanding, if they be asked, they will not hesitate to say, that
Christ is God, the supremacy of the Father, even with respect to the Son, is,
at the same time, the real sentiment, of their Minds; and when they lift up
their hearts to God, it is only God the Father that is the proper object of
their adoration. The constant tenor of the scriptures is so contrary to their
professed creed, that though they dare not call it in question, it is not able
to counteract the plainer, the more consistent, and the better principles which
will force themselves upon their minds from conversing with the bible.

Besides, it requires more subtilty and refinement to enter into the principles
abovementioned, than the common people are masters of. They cannot conceive
how one man should sin, and another person, six thousand years after, be guilty
of that sin, and punishable for it; how one person's righteousness should be
considered as the righteousness of another; or that three distinct persons
should each of them be God, and yet that there should be no more gods than one.

Men of plain understandings, in fact, never do believe any such thing; nor can
it be supposed that the gospel, which was intended to be the solid foundation
of the faith, hope, and joy of common people, should require so much acuteness,
as is necessary to give even a plausible color to these strange assertions.
The attempt to explain them (and, till they be explained, they can no more be
believed, than a proposition in an unkown tongue) can lead to nothing but
endless and unprofitable controversy. It is happy, therefore, that so many
persons make a better use of the gospel than their tenets would lead them to
do, and that they consider it chiefly as a rule of life, and the foundation of
hope after death. But, as far as the principles I have been arguing against are
believed, they cannot but do harm to those who entertain them, as well as bring
disgrace upon the christian name; both which every lover of the gospel should
endeavor to prevent.

A concise History of the abovementioned Doctrines.
I. A concise History of Opinions concerning Jesus Christ.
YOU will say, If Christ be not really God, but merely a man, though inspired
and assisted by God, how came the christian world to fall into so great an
error? In return, I might ask, how, if Christ be truly God, equal to the
Father, so many christians, and especially the Jewish christians, and many
others in the very early ages of the christian church came to think him to be
merely a man; when it may be easily conceived that, on many accounts,
christians, who were continually reproached with the meanness of their master,
would be disposed to add to, rather than to take from his dignity? But it is
not difficult to show by what means, and by what steps, christians came to
think as the generality of them now do.

It was the universal opinion of philosophers, at the time of the promulgation
of christianity, that the souls of all men had existed before they were sent to
animate the bodies that were provided for them here, and also that all souls
were emanations, or parts detached from the deity. For at that time there was
no idea of any substance being properly immaterial, and indivisible. When these
philosophers became christians, and yet were ashamed of being the disciples of
a man who had been crucified, they naturally gave a distinguished rank to the
soul of Christ before he came into the world. They even went one step farther,
and maintained that Christ had a body in appearance only, and not in reality,
and therefore that he suffered nothing at all when he was scourged and
crucified.

This opinion the apostle John reprobates with great severity, and even calls
it Antichristian, 1 John iv. 3. whereas though it is acknowledged that the
other opinion, viz. that of Christ being merely a man, existed in the times of
the apostles, it is remarkable that this apostle takes no notice of it. It was
plainly the doctrine of those only who maintained that Christ was not truly a
man that gave this apostle any disturbance, or he could never have said as he
does, 1 John iv. 2. Every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in
the flesh (that is, was truly a man) is of God.

After this, philosophizing christians began to add to the pre-existent dignity
of Christ in another way, and at length carried it much higher than those upon
whom this apostle animadverted with so much severity. They said that Christ was
originally in God, being his reason, or logos, which came out of him, and was
personified before the creation of the world, in which he was the immediate
agent, and that this new personage was henceforth the medium of all the divine
communications to mankind, having been the person who spoke to Adam in
Paradise, to Noah, to Abraham, and all the patriarchs, who delivered the law
from mount Sinai, and lastly inhabited the body of Jesus of Nazareth.

On this principle they explained many passages in the Old Testament, in which
the word of God is spoken of, as that of the psalmist, by the word of the Lord
were the heavens made, etc. making this word to be a person, distinct from God,
whose word it was; whereas nothing can be more plain, then that by the word of
God in this place, is meant the power of God, exerted with as much ease as men
utter words.

These philosophizing christians, took great pains to explain how the reason,
or wisdom of God could thus become a person, distinct from God, and yet God
continue a reasonable being; but their account of it is too trifling to be
recited in this place. However, it was far from being pretended, in general,
that the doctrine of the divinity of Christ was such a mystery as could not be
explained. For by mystery they only meant something of a solemn nature, which
was unknown till it was revealed or explained. And indeed this is plainly the
use of the word mystery in the New Testament; and it was also the usual meaning
of the word when the present translation of the bible was made; the mysteries
of any particular trade being the secrets of that trade, which yet every master
taught his apprentices.

In this state the doctrine continued till after the council of Nice, in the
year of our Lord, 325; but in all this time a real superiority was always
acknowledged in the Father, as the only source of divinity; and it was even
explicitly acknowledged that there was a time when the son of God had no
separate existence, being only the reason of God, just as the reason of man is
a part, or a property, of man. One of the most eminent of the christian Fathers
says, There was a time when God was neither a Father, nor a judge; for he could
not be a Father before he had a son, nor a judge before there was sin.

So far were they from supposing the son of God to be Equal to the Father, that
when they were charged, as they frequently were, with making two Gods, they
generally replied, that the son was only God of God, as having proceeded from a
superior God, which is the language of the Nicene Creed; whereas the Father was
God of himself (autotheos) by which they meant underived, which they held to be
the prerogative of the Father only.

In all this time the Jewish christians who were not tainted with the heathen
philosophy, maintained the doctrine of the proper and simple humanity of
Christ. Athanasius himself was so far from being able to deny this, that he
says all the Jews were so fully persuaded that their Messiah was to be a man
like themselves, that the apostles were obliged to use great caution in
divulging the doctrine of the divinity of Christ. He says that the reason why
Peter, Acts ii. 22. only calls him a man approved of God, and why, on other
occasions in the course of that book, and other parts of the New Testament, he
is simply called a man, was that at first the apostles did not think proper to
do more than prove that Jesus was the Christ, a Messiah, and that they thought
it prudent to divulge the doctrine of the divinity of Christ by degrees. He
likewise says, that the Jews of those times, meaning the Jewish Christians,
being in this error themselves drew the Gentiles into it. Athanasius greatly
commends the apostles for this address in their circumstances. But what the
apostles scrupled to teach, we should be scrupulous in believing.

It also clearly appears from ecclesiastical history, that the unlearned among
the christians were exceedingly averse to the doctrine of the divinity of
Christ, even in the qualified sense above mentioned, opposing what they called
the supreme monarchy of the Father to the novel doctrine of the divinity of the
Son; and the philosophising christians were obliged to make labored apologies
to these early unitarians, acknowledging the perfect inferiority of he Son to
the Father. But at length these unitarians were over-borne by the superior
influence and popularity of their adversaries, who, from believing Christ to be
God in an inferior and qualified sense of the word, came, in the natural course
of things, to believe him to be God equal to the Father himself, and to have
existed from all eternity indepently of him. But it was several centuries
before this doctrine was fully established. And the Holy spirit was generally
considered either as the same thing with the power of God, that is God himself
(just as the spirit of a man is a man) or else a super-angelic being, inferior
both to the Father and the Son, till after the council of Nice.

In the mean time, Arius and his followers, shocked at the doctrine of Christ
being of the same substance with the Father, maintained that, though he had
pre-existed, and had been the medium of all the dipensations of God to mankind,
he was, like all other derived beings, created out of nothing; the opinion of
all souls having been emanations from the supreme mind being then generally
denied by christians.

Thus did it please God, for reasons unknown to us, to permit the rise and
general spread of the trinitarian and arian opinions, as he permitted the rise
and amazing power of the man of sin, and many corruptions and abuses of
christianity utterly subversive of the genuine purity of the gospel, till the
full time for the reformation of this and other gross corruptions of
christianity was come.

II. A concise History of the Doctrines of Grace, Original Sin, and
Predestination.
IT was a controversy about the nature and use of baptism that occasioned the
starting of the doctrine of the natural impotence of man to do what God
requires of him, of the imputation of the sin of Adam to all his posterity, and
of the arbitrary predestination of certain individuals of the human race to
everlasting life, while the rest of mankind were left in a state of
reprobation; and this was so late as four hundred years after Christ. Before
that time it had been the universal opinion of christians, and of Austin
himself, who first advanced the doctrines abovementioned, that every man has
the power of obeying or disobeying the laws of God, that all men may be saved
if they will, and that no decrees of God will be the least obstruction in the
way of any man's salvation.

But Pelagius, a man of good understanding, and exemplary morals, in his
declamations against some abuses of baptism, asserting that baptism itself does
not wash away sin, as was then generally supposed (on which account it was the
custom with many to defend it till near death) nor could have been appointed
for that purpose, because infants, which have no sin, are baptized, Austin in
opposition to him maintained that, though infants have no actual sin of their
own, they have the stain of original sin in which they were born; though he was
far from asserting that Adam was the federal head of all his posterity, and
that his sin was properly imputed to them. This was an improvement upon the
doctrine in after ages. What Austin maintained was, that men derive a corrupt
nature, or a proneness to sin, from Adam.

Also, having been led, in the course of this controversy, to assert that by
means of original sin no man had it in his power to attain to salvation, he was
obliged to maintain that it depended upon the will of God only who should be
finally saved, and that he predestined whom he thought proper for that
purpose, independent of any foresight of their good works, which it was not in
their power to perform without his immediate assistance, and in which he must
be the first mover.

But notwithstanding this doctrine of the corruption of human nature, the
necessity of divine grace for the production of every good thought or action,
and the predestination to eternal life without regard to good works, advanced
by Austin, prevailed in the west, chiefly through the authority of his name, it
was never received in the eastern church, and was much controverted, and held
with various modifications, in the western. Also, together with this doctrine
of grace, the divines of the Roman Catholic church held the doctrine of human
merit, founded on the right use of the grace of God to man. And the present
doctrines of grace, original sin, and predestination, were never maintained in
their full extent till after the reformation by Luther, who was a friar of the
order of Austin, had been much attached to his doctrines, and made great use of
them in opposing the popish doctrines, of indulgence, founded on that of merit.

III. A concise History of the Doctrine of Atonement.
THE doctrine of atonement, or of the necessity of satisfaction being made to
the justice of God by the death of Christ, in order to his remitting the sins
of men, arose from an abuse of the figurative language of scripture, as the
doctrine of transubstantiation also did. But for several centuries these
figurative expressions were understood and applied in a manner very different
from what they now are.

It was granted by some pretty early writers, that we were bought (or redeemed)
with a price; but then, as we had been the slaves of sin, and were redeemed by
God, who ransomed us by the death of his son, it was maintained till after the
time of Austin (the principal author of all the rigid doctrines that are now
called Calvinistic) that the price of our redemption was paid not to God, but
by God, to the devil, in whose power we were. Of this opinion was Austin
himself, who wrote largely on the subject in his treatise on the doctrine of
the trinity. It was long after his time before we find any traces of it, being
generally thought that the price of redemption was paid to the offended justice
of God; and the present doctrine of atonement, founded on the idea of the
absolute necessity of an infinite satisfaction being made by one infinite being
for offenses of an infinite magnitude, as committed against another infinite
being, is subsequent to the reformation. This doctrine was advanced by the
reformers in the course of their controversy with the Papists, about the
doctrine of human merit, works of penance, and the power of granting
indulgences. Now can it be supposed that a doctrine of so much importance, as
this is always represented to be, should have been unknown so many ages?

Thus all these boasted ancient doctrines are in fact of late date, either
having arisen from the principles of heathen philosophy, or having been started
and extended in the course of controversy, one false position making another
necessary for its support; and an air of awful and deep mystery has been no
small recommendation of them to many of the more ignorant.

The doctrine of the trinity, having been one of the earliest, corruptions of
christianity, will probably be one of the last to be completely eradicated. But
the time, I trust, is fast approaching, when, by means of the zeal of truly
enlightened and good men in this great cause, this fundamental error, which
gives such great and just cause of offense to Jews and Mahometans, will be
removed, and all that has been built upon it will fall to the ground.

The Conclusion.
MY Christian brethren, if the reading of this address give rise to any doubts
or scruples in your minds, with respect to some doctrines which you have been
used to consider as true and fundamental in the christian religion, inquire
farther; and if you be satisfied that you have hitherto been mistaken, dare to
avow the truth, and act consistently with it. Dread the consequences of
joining, with an enlightened mind, in the idolatrous worship of any creature,
though enjoined by any human authority; remembering the words of Christ, thou
shall worship the Lord thy God and him only shall thou serve. Matt. iv. 10. and
also that awful voice from heaven respecting all antichristian corruptions of
the gospel, in mystical Babylon; Come out of her, my people that ye be not
partakers of her sins and that ye receive not of her plagues. Rev. xviii. 4.

Think not to avail yourselves of the wretched equivocation of many divines,
who imagine that they may safely ascribe all divine honors to Jesus Christ, on
account of his union with the Father, when they believe no more of his proper
divinity, than professed Arians or Socinians. By this artifice they secure the
reputation and emoluments of orthodoxy; but let them consider the value of the
purchase, and the price they give for it. To mere wordly considerations, to the
praise of men, and filthy lucre, they sacrifice that integrity, for the loss of
which worlds cannot compensate.

The publisher of these tracts does not conceal his name through the fear of
any thing that men can say of him, or do to him, but merely to give what he has
written a better chance of being read without prejudice. What he has done is
out of a sincere good will and compassion to the multitude, who believe they
know not what, or why, and what is of more consequence, who know not what
spirit they are of; but instead of speaking the truth in love, mistake
bitterness and rancour for a zeal for God and his truth, and also for the sake
of a better sort of people, who are unhappily drawn into the same delusions.

The Authors name was not printed in the first Edition.

Considering the deference which the common people always pay to the judgment
of men of learning, there can be little doubt but that, if those persons who,
having studied this subject, have been convinced that Christ is not God, and
ought not to be worshipped as God, had openly avowed their opinion, and had had
recourse to no mean subterfuge or equivocation, this fundamental article of
true and rational christianity had long ago been the prevailing belief; and our
religion appearing more worthy of its divine author, there would have been at
this time fewer unbelievers in all christian countries, and many more converts
made to it from other religions. And, compared with this glorious advantage,
what has been gained by all the arts and sophistry of ministers, who have
concealed their real meaning under ambiguous expressions, lest, as they
pretend, they should too much shock the prejudices of their hearers?

That some regard should be paid to the prejudices of the weak is allowed; but
let not this lead men to criminal dissimulation, or extend to things of so much
importance as this, respecting the unity of God. In this case, let us keep at
the greatest distance from every thing that is disingenuous; let the truth be
spoken in the most explicit manner, and let the consequences be left to the
power of truth, and the God of truth. Besides, it is impossible that while men
retain depraved and unworthy notions of God, their devotion should be such as
God requires; so that this pretended tenderness injures those who are the
objects of it, as well as bears an unfavourable aspect on the interests of
christianity more at large. Such are the effects of the wisdom of this world,
when it is put in the place of sincerity, and a regard to the plain truth of
the gospel of Jesus Christ!

Professing the purity of the christian faith, let us be careful, my brethren,
to adorn it by a blameless and exemplary life. More especially let us beware
that we do not wear the form of godliness, when our hearts are destitute of the
power of it; and that we indulge no secret hope, that by any peculiar
strictness and austerity of life, by frequent or long prayers, or by attending
on much preaching, and using other means of religion, we shall atone for a
neglect of the weight of matters of the law, righteousness, mercy and truth.
Let the integrity of our hearts appear in the cheerfulness of our countenances,
and let us show that we love God whom we have not seen, by loving our brethren
whom we do see, and by being always ready to do them every kind office in our
power.

To judge of our love to God, or of our love to Christ, directly, by what we
feel when we think of them, especially when we are excluded from the world, as
is the custom with many, is to expose ourselves to the grossest and most
dangerous delusions. We find in the scriptures a much plainer, and safer method
of judging in both these cases. This, says the apostle John, is the love of
God, that we keep his commandments. If ye love me, says our Lord, keep my
commandments. Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you; and this is
my commandment, that ye love one another. By this shall all men know that ye
are my disciples, if ye have love one for another.

Remember that true christian charity is humble, modest, and diffident; and
that he is pronounced to be happy, who fears always, so as to be circumspect
in thought, word, and deed; and that, for this purpose, we are to put on the
whole armor of God, that we may withstand the temptations of the world.

Rather than indulge a Pharisaical pride, in recounting your experiences,
boasting how vile you have once been, or thought yourselves to be, in order to
make others believe how holy and sanctified you are now, content yourselves
with the language and practice of the humble publican, who, speaking to God and
his own heart only, cried, God be merciful to me a sinner.

Rejoice in all the real good you see done by others, whatever may be their ill
will, or opposition to you; and be especially upon your guard, lest your just
aversion to what is corrupt in the principles or practices of others, lead you
to dislike what is good in them. Let not the Pharisaical rigor of some throw
you into the opposite extreme of levity; and let not their laying an undue
stress upon praying, preaching, and other means of religion, make you neglect
them as we are too apt to do, with respect to any thing that has been much
abused.

Having enough to do with our own hearts, let us be particularly upon our guard
against that spirit of censoriousness, which many professing christians indulge
with too little restraint. Let us remember that the true christian bears all
things and hops all things; and let us never forget the awful warning of our
Lord, "Judge not that ye be not judged: for with what judgment ye "judge, ye
shall be judged; and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured to you
again.

Be not moved, my Brethren, by the rash censures and reproaches of others.
Persecution, of some kind is what all who live godly in Christ Jesus must
expect to suffer in this world. To their wrath, anger, clamor, evil speaking,
and malice, answer with the wisdom that is from above; which is pure,
peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated; full of mercy, and good fruits,
without partiality, and without hypocrisy. Let us even rejoice that we are
counted worthy to suffer shame, and insult, for the sake of Christ, though our
sufferings come not from the professed enemies of Christ, but from false
brethren; and let us not be concerned at being counted deceivers, if we be
conscious to ourselves that we truly love the gospel, and that we labor to
promote and adorn it.

You will be called Arminians and Socinians by your adversaries, or something
else that shall express more of their hatred and dislike. But let not this
offend you. If there be any proper meaning in those epithets, it can only be
that you hold certain opinions which they deem to be false, but which you
cherish, as the only genuine doctrines of the gospel. If nothing more is meant
by those terms, besides mere reproach and abuse, think yourselves happy, as
being reproached for the name of Christ. 1 Peter, iv. 14. With many the
appellation of Lutheran or Calvinist is reproachful, and with many also, that
of Christian is much more so. Besides, both Arminius and Socinus were men who
loved the gospel, and who suffered more for their adherence to it, than most
others of the Reformers, especially Socinus.

If we be Christians indeed, we shall consider ourselves as not of this world,
but as citizens of heaven. The friendship of this world, therefore, together
with popularity, and success in it, ought not to be considered as any object
for us. If we abide in Christ, and walk even as he also walked, not being
conformed to this world, but being transformed by the renewing of our minds, we
are heirs of a far nobler inheritance, an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled,
and that fades not away, reserved in heaven for us; and when Christ, who is
our life, and for whom we suffer reproach shall appear, we also shall appear
with him in glory.

I shall conclude this address with a word of advice and exhortation to all
unitarians, whether they be members of the established church or of any society
of dissenters in this country.

Of such great importance is the doctrine of the divine unity; that nothing
will more fully justify a separation from any christian church that does not
openly profess it, and much more from those that avow the contrary doctrine,
directing prayers, and paying supreme worship, to any other than the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

It was for the preservation of this great and fundamental doctrine, that
Abraham, and his family by Isaac and Jacob, were separated from the rest of the
world, and made a distinct people, as it were to be the depositaries of the
true religion, which consists principally in the sole worship of the one true
and living God, the maker and preserver of all things. The same important
doctrine was uniformly taught by Christ and the apostles; though christians in
after times, like the Israelites after the time of Joshua, relapsed into that
idolatry which has generally prevailed to this day

If it was a sufficient justification of the first reformers, that they
considered the church from which they separated as worshipping saints and
angels; will it not justify your separation from their partial reformations,
that you consider them as praying to and worshipping one whom you consider as a
man like yourselves, though honored and distinguished by God above all other
men?

To join habitually in public worship with trinitarians, is countenancing that
worship, which you must consider as idolatrous; and which, however innocent in
them, is highly criminal in you. If they think it a point of conscience not to
go to mass in popish churches because, in their opinion, it is idolizing a
piece of bread, you ought to make a point of conscience of not worshipping with
them, because in your opinion it is idolizing a man, who is as much a creature
of God as a piece of bread, and just as improper an object of worship.

Besides, the great offense to Jews, Mahometans, and the world at large, being
the doctrine of the trinity, it is highly necessary that societies of
christians should be formed expressly on this principle of the divine unity,
that it may be evident to all the world, that there are christians, and
societies of christians, who hold the doctrine of the trinity in as much
abhorrence as they themselves can do. For the conversion of Jews or Mahometans
to christianity, while it is supposed to contain the doctrine of the trinity,
no person who knows, or has heard of Jews or Mahometans, can ever expect.

You will say We unitarians are but few, even in large towns, and still fewer
in villages, and there are no men of leisure or learning among us. But was not
this the case with the primitive christians, and yet this circumstance was no
obstruction to the forming of a christian church in any place. We read of
churches in private houses.

Assemble together, therefore, in the name and in the fear of God, and
according to the order of the gospel, every Lord's Day, if there be no more
that two or three, or even a single family of you in a place; read the
scriptures, and pray together. Also read sermons, or other works of moral
instruction, of which there is, happily, no want at this day. Baptize, and
administer the Lord's supper among yourselves; and as you grow more numerous,
form yourselves upon some regular plan of church discipline; that it may be the
means af uniting and keeping you together; and rigorously exclude all persons
whose conduct would be a reproach to you.

As to a learned ministry, it is acknowledged to be desirable, where it can be
had, but it is by no means necessary. The gravest and most respectable persons
among you, and those who have the most leisure, will, in the character of
elders, select and read proper prayers and discourses, and perform all the
offices of christian societies, just as well as the elders in the primitive
churches, who had no such helps as you now have; and miraculous powers were not
of long continuance with them.

If you be at present members of the established church, you will find a
reformed liturgy ready prepared for your use by Mr. Lindsey. But if you should
prefer the mode of worship among the Dissenters (but men of sense will not make
much account of such distinctions) you may in many authors, especially at the
end of Mr. Holland's sermons, find forms of such prayers as you have been used
to: or you may apply to dissenting ministers of your acquaintance, who will
cheerfully give you any assistance in their power.

All these are trifling obstacles to a great design. It requires indeed a
proper degree of chrstiain zeal; but the object is worthy of it. The example
has been already set in Scotland, where it was least of all to be expected; and
the success has been such as should abundantly encourage similar attempts in
this country.

The Baptists and Methodists, not laying much stress upon a learned ministry,
flourish greatly, the Independents are now taking the same methods, and with
the same success; while the rational Dissenters, fancying they would be
disgraced by the want of a learned ministry, are dwindling away almost every
where.

Whatever inconvenience may arise from mere novelty, it is soon over; and as
the Methodists are collecting into bodies in all places; a thing of this kind
will excite much less surprise. But what impression ought the censure of the
world to make upon those who, as christians, profess to be above the world, and
to rejoice that they are counted worthy to suffer shame in the cause of Christ,
and to think themselves happy if they be reproached on that account. You should
imagine that you hear that awful voice from heaven, recorded in the book of
Revelation, chapter xviii. 24. Come out of her (i. e. of mystical Babylon, the
great source of all the corruptions of christianity) my people, that ye be not
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.

Be careful, however, to do this in the spirit of christian charity, which
should be extended to all men, but especially to all that bear the christian
name. Consider them as men who are in an error, which is always involuntary.
Endeavor to remove the prejudices they unhappily lie under, but forbear all
angry reproaches, all insult, and even ridicule; for religion is a serious
thing, and brotherly love is the very essence of it. And if this love is to be
extended even to enemies, much more should it be indulged toward our merely
mistaken friends.

The author of this address entirely approves of Mr. Lindsey's Liturgy, or that
which was used at the Octagon Chapel in Liverpool; and he would recommend
responses especially to societies formed in this manner, in which it is
particularly desirable, that the members, bring nearly on a level, should each
bear his part in the service. But lest some, from the force of habit, should
not be able to reconcile themselves to the use of a liturgy, and object to the
scheme on that account, he intends, (...) should appear to be wanted, to draw
up, or complie and publish, a set of Forms for all the occasions of a christian
society.

PREFACE TO THE TRIAL OF MR. E. ELWALL.
THIS trial is printed from the author's second edition, even without altering
such phrases as are peculiar to that denomination of christians with whom he
generally associated, and whose style he adopted; and certainly the Quakers
ought to think themselves honored even by this kind of relation to Mr. Elwall.
Such firmness in the cause of truth, and such presence of mind in asserting and
vindicating it, as appear in this trial, are truly apostolical, and have had
but few examples since the first promulgation of christianity. It is impossible
for an unprejudiced person to read this account of it (which is written with so
much true simplicity, perspicuity, and strength of evidence) without feeling
the greatest veneration for the writer, the fullest conviction and love of the
truth, and a proportionable zeal in maintaining it. I should even think it
impossible for the most prejudiced person to read it attentively, but, if he
use no violence with his own mind, he will receive some favorable impressions
both of the author, and of that cause, which he supports with such becoming
dignity, and with a temper and disposition of mind, in every respect worthy of
a true christian.

So great was the force of truth on this memorable occasion, that a reputable
and honest Jury, directed by a good-natured and sensible judge, acquitted the
criminal contrary to the express laws of this country, according to which this
glorious man ought to have been sentenced to a severe punishment, as a
convicted and avowed blasphemer. What must a lover of truth, and of free
inquiry, as subservient to truth, think of such laws, and of the ecclesiastical
constitution of the countries in which they are in force!

It is to be wished that such a monument of the TRIUMPH OF TRUTH might be
constantly held out to the view of all mankind, and particularly in this
country where it was exibited.

The Dedication of the treatise, on account of which Mr. Elwall was prosecuted,
is dated the eighth day of the second month, 1724; he speaks of his trial in a
treatise entitled, A declaration against all kings and temporal powers under
heaven, printed in 1732; and Judge Denton, before whom he was tried, went the
Oxford circuit in 1726 and 1728. From these circumstances it may be concluded,
that the former of these years is the date of this remarkable trial, especially
as in some part of the same year 1726. Mr. Elwall published another defense of
the unitarian system, in a treatise which he entitled Dagon fallen before the
Ark of God, which would probably have been mentioned in the course of the
trial, if it had been published at that time.

THE TRIUMPH OF TRUTH; BEING AN ACCOUNT OF THE TRIAL OF MR. ELWALL. for HERESY
and BLASPHEMY, at STAFFORD ASSIZES.
BECAUSE so many persons have earnestly desired to read this trial, I have here
published a second edition of it, in order to encourage all honest men, who
have the eternal law of God on their side, not to fear the faces of priests,
who are generally the grand adversaries of liberty and truth; and the bastions
and bulwarks of all ceremonies, sopperies, and absurd doctrines that are in the
world.

I do this for the glory of the Most High God, and for the honor of his sacred
law, and for the good of all my fellow creatures; that they may obey God, and
not man; Christ, and not the pope; the prophets and apostles, and not prelates
and priests; and God knows this is my sincere desire, that all religion and
spiritual things may be perfectly free, neither forced nor hindered; this being
the true liberty of the gospel of Jesus Christ, who said, The kings of the
Gentiles exercise authority, but it shall not be so with you.

About fourteen years ago, I wrote a book entitled, A True Testimony for God
and his sacred Law; being a plain, honest defense of the first commandment of
God, against all the Trinitarians under heaven, Thou shall have no other Gods
but me. I lived then at Wolverhampton, in Staffordshire, where my ancestors
have lived above eleven hundred years, ever since the Saxons conquered the
Britons.

When this book was published, the priests in the country began to rage,
especially the priests of Wolverhampton; who had a great hand in the several
troubles I underwent, In short, they never ceased till they had procured a
large indictment against me at Stafford assizes; where I felt the power of God,
enabling me to speak before a very great number of people; being accused of
heresy, etc. But I truly answered as my beloved brother Paul did in his day,
viz. In that way which some call heresy, so choose I to serve the God of my
fathers, believing all that is written in the law and the prophets.

After the long indictment was read, I was asked if I pleaded guilty, or not
guilty. I said I was not guilty of any evil, that I knew of, in writing that
book; but if they meant whether I wrote the book or not (for they had quoted
many pages of the book in that indictment) I owned I did write it; and that if
I might have liberty to speak, I believed I should make it manifest to be the
plain truth of God.

Then the judge stood up and said, Mr. Elwall, I suppose you have had a copy of
your indictment? I told him I had not had any copy of it. Upon which he turned
toward the priests, and told them that I ought to have had a copy of it. But
they not answering, he turned to me, and said, That if I would give bail, and
be bound to appear at the next assizes, he would defer my trial till then. But
I told him, I would not give bail, neither should any man be bound for me; that
if the Prince of Wales himself would, he should not; for, said I, I have an
innocent breast, and I have injured no man; and therefore I desire no other
favor, but that I may have liberty to plead to the indictment myself.

Upon which he said, very courteously, You may. The judge having given me
liberty of pleading to the indictment, I began my speech with the sacred first
commandment of God, viz. Thou shall have no other Gods but Me. I insisted upon
the word Me being a singular; and that it was plain and certain, that God spoke
of himself, as one single person or being, and not three distinct persons. And
that it was manifest, that all the church of God, which then heard those words,
understood it in the same plain obvious sense as I do; as is most evident from
the words of the prophet Moses; who said to Israel thus; Unto thee it was
showed, that thou might know, that the Lord he is God, there is none else
besides him; out of heaven he made thee hear his voice, etc. I told them, that
from the words he, and him, and his, it was certain God was but one single
person, one single he, or him, or his. I told them, that all the patriarchs
from the beginning of the world, did always address themselves to God, as one
single being. O thou Most High God, possessor of heaven and earth; and Abraham
said to the king of Sodom, I have lift up my hand unto the Lord, the Most High
God, the possessor of heaven and earth, etc. They knew nothing of a trinity,
nor of God's being a plurality of persons; that monstrous doctrine was not then
born, nor for two thousand years after, till the apostasy and Popery began to
put up its filthy head.

Then I told them, that all the prophets witnessed to the truth of the same
pure uncorrupted unitarian doctrine of one God, and no other but he: Have we
not all one Father, has not one God created us? Then I told them the word of
God to Abraham, I am God Almighty, walk before me, and be thou perfect; and by
the prophet Isaiah, To whom will ye (...) me, or shall I be equal, says the
holy One, not the holy Three. I told them that the words Me and One did utterly
exclude any other person's being God, but that One single Me; and that God
himself often testifies the same truth, by saying, Is there any God besides Me?
And then tells us plainly, There is no God, I know not any: I am the Lord, and
there is none else: there is no God besides me. Isaiah xlv. 5.

Now, said I, let God be true, but every man a liar, that is, every man that
contradicts him; for he is the God of truth; he says, I lift up my hand to
heaven, I say, I live for ever.

After I had pleaded many texts in the Old Testament, I began to enter the New:
and told them, that our Lord Jesus Christ, the prophet, like unto Moses, held
forth the same doctrine that Moses had done; for when a certain ruler came to
ask him which was the first and great commandment (or how he expounded it) he
told him the same words that Moses had said. Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God
is one Lord, not three, and thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, etc. and the scribe said, Thou have answered right for there is but one
God, and there is no other but he, etc. Then I mentioned the words of Christ,
in the xviith of John and ver. 3. as very remarkable and worthy of all their
observation: This is life eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent. And then I turned my face directly to the priests
(my prosecutors, who all stood on the right side of the judge) Now said I,
since the lips of the blessed Jesus, which always spoke the truth, says, his
Father is the only true God; who is he, and who are they that dare set up
another, in contradiction to my blessed Lord, who says, his Father is the only
true God?

And I stopped here, to see if any of them would answer; but the power of God
came over them, so that all their mouths were shut up, and not one of them
spoke a word. So that I turned about over my left shoulder, and warned the
people in the fear of God, not to take their religious sentiments from men, but
from God; not from the Pope, but from Christ; not from Prelates nor Priests,
but from the Prophets and Apostles.

And then I turned toward the judge and told him, that I was the more
convinced of the truth of what I had said, from the words of my bessed Lord;
who said, Call no man Father here upon earth; for one is your Father, even God,
And call no man Master, for one is your Master, even Christ. From hence, said
I, I deduce this natural inference, that in all things that are of a spiritual
nature, we ought to take our religion from God and his prophets, from Christ
and his apostles. It will be too long to mention all the texts and proofs that
I made use of; I will only add one or two, as that of Paul, 1 Cor. viii. 4, 5,
6. where the apostle tells us, There is no other God but one; for though there
be that are called gods (as there be gods many, and lords many) both in heaven
and earth; but to us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things:
so that I told them here was a plain demonstration; for he says, there is but
one God; and tells us who that one God is, that is, the Father. And therefore
no other person could be God but the Father only; and what I had wrote in my
book was the plain truth, and founded on God's own words, Thou shall have no
other Gods but me.

In short, I could plainly perceive there was a general convincement through
the court. The judge and justices of the peace did not like the prosecution;
but saw plainly, that out of envy the priests had done it. I then began to set
before them the odious nature of that hell-born principle of persecution, and
that it was hatched in hell; that it never came from Jesus Christ; that he and
his followers were often persecuted themselves, but they never persecuted any;
that we had now a very flagrant instance of it by the papists at Thorn; where
they first took away the schools where our brethren the protestants educated
their children; then they took away the places of their religious worship; then
they put them in prisons; then confiscated their estates, and, last of all,
took away their lives.

Now we can cry out loud enough against this, and show the inhumanity, cruelty,
and barbarity of it; but, said I, if we, who call ourselves (...), shall be
found acting in the same spirit, against others, the crime will be greater in
us than in them because we have attained to greater degrees of light than they.

However, I told them, that I had put my house in order and made up my accounts
with all men as near as I could: and that as I owed no man here any thing, so I
would not pay a penny toward this prosecution, And that I was sure of it, that
whatever fine they laid on me, or whatever hole or prison, said I, you thrust
me into, I shall find God's living presence with me, as I feel it this day: And
so ended my speech.

Upon this a justice of the peace, one Rupert Humpatch, got up, went to the
judge, laid his hand upon the judge's shoulder, and said, My Lord, I know this
man to be an honest man; and what I say, I speak not by by hear say, but
experience; for I was his next door neighbor three years. Also another justice
spoke to the same effect. Then the judge spoke to me: Mr. Elwall, I perceive
you have studied very deeply into this controversy; but have you ever consulted
any of our reverend clergy, and bishops of the church of England, I answered
Yes, I have; and among others the Archbishop of Canterbury himself, with whom I
have exchanged ten letters, viz. four I have had from him, and six he has had
from me. [At which words, all the priests stared very earnestly.] Well, says
the judge, and was not the archbishop able to give you some satisfaction in
these points, Mr. Elwall? I said, no; but rather quite the reverse; for that in
all the letters I sent to the archbishop, I grounded my arguments upon the word
of God and his prophets, Christ and his apostles; but in his answers to me, he
referred me to acts of parliament, and declarations of state, etc. whereas I
told the bishop, in one of my (...), that I wondered a man of his natural and
acquired abilities, should be so weak as to turn me over to human authorities,
in things of a divine nature; for though in all things that are of a temporal
nature, and concern the civil society, I will be subject to every ordinance of
man for the Lord's sake; even from the king upon the throne, down to the
meanest officer in the land; but in things that are of a spiritual nature, and
concern my faith; my worship of God, and future state, I would call no man
father here upon earth, nor regard either popes or councils, prelates or
priests of any denomination, nor convocations, nor assemblies of divines: but
obey God and his prophets, Christ and his apostles. Upon which the judge
answered, Well, if his Grace of Canterbury was not able to give you
satisfaction Mr Elwall, I believe I shall not: and so sat down and and rested
him, for I think he had stood up for near an hour and a quarter.

Then he stood up again, and turning to the priests, talked softly to them. I
did not hear what he said, or what they said to him; but I guessed from what
the judge said next, for, says he, Mr. Elwall, you cannot but be sensible that
what you have writ, being contrary to the commonly received doctrines of the
church, it has given offense to some of your neighbors, and particularly to
the clergy; are you willing to promise, before the face of the country here,
that you will not write any more on this head? I answered, God forbid that I
should make thee any such promise; for when I wrote this book, I did it in the
fear of God; and I did not write it to please the church of Rome, nor the
church of England, nor the church of Scotland; but to please that God who gave
me my breath; and therefore, if at any time I find myself drawn forth to write
in defense of this sacred first commandment, or any other of the ten, I hope I
shall do it in the same spirit of sincerity as I have done this. And I
perceived the judge was not in any wise displeased at my honest, plain, bold
answer, but rather his heart seemed to be knit in love to me; and he soon
declared me acquitted: and then the clerk of the arrraigns, or assizes, stood
up, and said, Mr. Elwall you are acquitted: you may go out of court when you
please.

So I went away through a very great crowd of people (for it was thought there
was a thousand people at the trial) and having spoken long I was a-thirst, so
went to a well and drank. Then went out of town by a riverside, and looking
about and seeing no one near, I kneeled down on the bank of the river and sent
up my thank offering to that good God who had delivered me out of their hands.

By the time that I returned to the town, the court was up and gone to dinner:
a justice of peace and another person met me, and would have me to eat and
drink with them, which I did: and afterward as I was walking along the street,
some persons hove up a great (...)-window and invited me up to them, and when I
entered the room, I found ten or a dozen persons, most of them justices of the
peace, and amongst them a priest, whom they called Doctor. One of the justices
took me by the hand, and said Mr. Elwall, I am heartily glad to see you, and I
was glad to hear you bear your testimony so boldly as you did. Yes, says
another justice, and I was glad (...) Mr. Elwall came off with flying colors
as he did:

Upon which the Priest said (in a very bitter manner) He ought to have been
hanged. I turned unto him, and said Friend, I perceive thou do not know what
spirit thou art of; for the son of man came not to destroy but to save, But
thou would have me destroyed. Upon which one of the justices said, How, now
Doctor, did not you hear one of the justices say, that he was an honest man,
and that what he said, was not by hearsay, but by experience, and would you
have honest men hanged. Doctor? Is this good doctrine? So that the priest said
but little more for some time.

So I took leave of the justices, and took horse for Wolverhampton, for I knew
there would be great joy in my family, for the common people all expected to
hear of my being fined and imprisoned. But a farmer that lived near, who had
been upon the jury at Stafford got to town before me, and the people went all
up and asked him. What have they done to Mr. Elwall? Have they put him in
prison? He answered No, he preached there an hour together, and our parsons
could say never a word. What must they put him in prison for? I told our
foreman of the jury. Mr. Elwall was an honest man, and his father was an honest
man, I knew him very well so they were all damped. But there was great joy in
my family, and amongst all my friends: Praises, living praises be attributed to
that good God who delivered me out of their hands!

Christ never told us of that scandalous popish invention, of his human nature
praying to his divine nature: but, like a true obedient son of God, submitted
to death, even that cruel death which the hatred and envy of persecuting wicked
priests inflicted on him, because he had so plainly and truly told them all of
their blindness, covetousness, pride, and hypocrisy. And therefore God raised
him from the dead; and for his faithfulness, God has exalted him to be a prince
and a savior to all those that obey that pure doctrine which God gave him to
teach; that denying ungodliness and sinful lusts, we should live soberly and
righteously in this world Then are we his disciples indeed, when we do those
things that he has commanded. Then shall we be saved, not by the merits of
Christ, that is another popish invention; for he never did any thing but what
was his duty to do, and therefore could not merit any thing for others: but he
taught us the true way to find acceptance with God, and that was by "doing the
will of his Father which is in heaven: and therein he is the way, the truth,
and the life, "because no one comes unto the Father, but by that way.

Neither did he make satisfaction unto God for us. It was impossible: and what
God never required: But he who had no pleasure in the death of sinners, but
rather that they should turn from wickedness and live, out of the immeasureable
height and depth of his love, directed our Lord Jesus Christ to teach mankind a
never failing way of being reconciled to God, and that was by sincere
repentance and reformation. This was the gospel or good tidings of Jesus
Christ, Repent ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. He tells us, I am not
come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance; and by that beautiful
excellent parable of the prodigal son, he illustrates the tender mercy of his
God, and our God, of his Father and our Father, without any satisfaction. The
compassionate Father required none at all, but humble confession and
submission, with sincere repentance, and reformation, and then comes the best
robe, the ring, the shoes, and the fatted calf, to demonstrate the paternal
acceptance without satisfaction or sacrifice, but a broken and a contrite heart
which he will never refuse; for he can as soon cease to be God, as cease to be
merciful.

And as to the trinitarians, nothing is more plain, than that they feed upon
ashes: a deceived heart has turned them aside, because they will not make use
of those rational faculties which God has given them; nor say, Is there not a
lie in my right hand? otherwise they would never flatter the humble Jesus, nor
make the most high God to be a plurality of persons.

For as to the Holy Ghost (their third God) it is evidently no distinct person
from God, any more than a man's spirit is a distinct person from the man; so
that the Spirit of God is God's spirit; as is manifest from scripture and
reason, Genesis vi. 3. My spirit shall not always strive with man: And the spirit
of God moved upon the face of the waters: And God said, Let there be light, and
there was light. And God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the
waters And God made all things by the word of his power. So that the word of
God, and the spirit of God, are not distinct persons from God, but the power of
God, and the energy of God. So the word of a man, and the spirit of a man, are
not distinct persons from the man, but the man himself; if his word be false,
or his spirit be wicked, the man is false and wicked.

The same degree of stupidity that leads trinitarians to call the word of God,
and the spirit of God, distinct persons, would lead them to call the wisdom of
God, the goodness of God, the love of God, the peace of God, the power of God,
and the mercy of God, distinct persons; and make God to be a trinity of
trinities: for it is certain, God is expressly called by all those names.

But whosoever goes about to father this absurd and horrid doctrine of the
trinity upon Jesus Christ, do egregiously abuse him; who told us plainly, his
Father was greater than he; and that he could do nothing of himself, which is a
demonstration that he is not God: For we are sure God is omnipotent, and can do
all things of himself; being self-existent and independent, the supreme creator
of the universe; and in this it is, that the unitarians triumph as unswerable,
believing in Jesus Christ, who told us his Father was the only true God, John
xvii. 3.

P. S. By these last words of Christ, I myself was convinced many years ago.

THE END.
A GENERAL VIEW OF THE ARGUMENTS FOR THE UNITY OF GOD; FROM REASON, FROM THE
SCRIPTURES, AND FROM HISTORY. CONTAINING, I. Arguments from Reason against the
Trinitarian Hypothesis. II. Arguments from Reason against the Arian Hypothesis.
III. Arguments against the Trinitarian and the Arian Hypothesis from the
scriptures. IV. Arguments from History against the Deity, and pre-existence of
Christ; or a summary View of the Evidence for the primitive Christians having
held the doctrine of the simple Humanity of Christ. V. Maxims of Historical
Criticism, by which the preceding Articles may be tried.


BY JOSEPH PRIESTLEY, L.L.D. F.R.S.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED and SOLD BY ROBERT BELL, IN Third Street. M, DCC, LXXXIV.

A GENERAL VIEW OF THE ARGUMENTS FOR THE UNITY OF GOD;
I. Arguments from reason against the trinitarian hypothesis.
THAT the doctrine of the trinity could ever have been suggested by any thing
in the course of nature (though it has been imagined by some persons of a
peculiarly fanciful turn, and previously persuaded of the truth of that
doctrine) is not maintained by any persons to whom my writings can be at all
useful. I shall therefore only address myself to those who believe the doctrine
on the supposition of its being contained in the scriptures, at the same time
maintaining, that, though it is above, it is not properly contrary to reason;
and I hope to make it sufficiently evident, either that they do not hold the
doctrine, or that the doctrine of three divine persons constituting one God is
strictly speaking an absurdity, or contradiction; and that it is therefore
incapable of any proof, even by miracles. With this view, I shall recite in
order all the distinct modifications of this doctrine, and show that, upon any
of them, there is either no proper unity, in the divine nature, or no proper
trinity.

If, with Dr. Waterland, and others who are reckoned the strictest Athanasians
(though their opinions were not known in the time of Athanasius himself) it be
supposed that there are three persons properly equal, and that no one of them
has any sort of superiority over the rest, they are, to all intents and
purposes, three distinct Gods. For if each of them, separately considered, be
possessed of all divine perfections, so that nothing is wanting to complete
divinity, each of them must be as properly a God as any being possessed of all
the properties of man must be a man; and therefore three persons possessed of
all the attributes of divinity must be as properly three Gods as three persons
possessed of all human attributes must be three men. These three persons,
therefore, must be incapable of any strict or numerical unity. It must be
universally true, that three things to which the same definition applies can
never make only one thing to which the same definition applies. And when by the
words thing, being, or person we mean nothing more than, logically speaking,
the subject, or substratum of properties or attributes, it is a matter of
indifference which of them we make use of.

Each of these three persons may have other properties, but they must be
numerically three in that respect in which the same definition applies to them.
If, therefore, the three persons agree in this circumstance, that they are each
of them perfect God, though they may differ in other respects, and have
peculiar relations to each other, and to us, they must still be three Gods; and
to say that they are only one God is as much a contradiction, as to say that
three men, though they differ from one another as much as three men can do, are
not three men, but only one man.

If it be said, with the ante-nicene fathers, and with bishops P^arson and Bull
among the modern English writers, that the Father is the fountain of deity, and
that the son is derived from him, whether necessarily or voluntarily, whether
in time or from all eternity, they cannot be of the same rank; but the Father
will be possessed of an original, a real, and proper superiority to the Son;
who will be no more than an effect of the Father's exertion of his powers,
which is, to all intents and purposes, making the Son to be a production, or
creature of the Father; even though it should be supposed with the ancients
that he was created out of the substance of the Father, and without taking any
thing from him. Moreover, as upon this scheme the Son was never capable of
giving birth to another person like himself, he must have been originally
inferior in power to the Father, the source from which he himself sprung. On
this scheme, therefore, there is no proper equality between these divine
persons; and the ante-nicene fathers did not pretend that there was, but
distinguished the Father by the epithet of ( autotheos) God of himself, and the
Son by the inferior title of ( theos ek theou God of God, or a derived God.

If it be said that there is but one intelligent supreme mind, but that it
exerts itself three different ways, and has three different modes of action, or
operation (which was the opinion of Dr. Wallis, and that which was generally
ascribed to the ancient Sabellians) with respect to one of which the same
divine Being was called the Father, to another the Son, and another the Holy
Spirit; there is no proper trinity, at all. For on the same principle one man
bearing three different offices, or having three different relations or
capacities, as those of magistrate, father, son, etc. would be three different
men.

Some represent themselves as believing the doctrine of the trinity by
asserting with Dr. Doddridge, that God is so united to the derived nature of
Christ, and does so dwell in it, that, by virtue of that union, Christ may be
properly called God, and such regards become due to him, as are not due to any
created nature, or mere creature, be it in itself ever so excellent.

See his Lectures, proposition 128, p. 392.

What this union is, in consequence of which any creature can be entitled to
the attributes and honors of his creator, is not pretended to be explained;
but as we cannot possibly have any idea of an union between God and a creature,
besides that of God being present with that creature, and acting by him, which
is the same thing that is asserted by the Arians or Socinians, those nominal
trinitarians must necessarily belong to one or other of these two classes This
is so evident, that it is hardly possible not to suppose but that they must
have been much assisted at least in deceiving themselves into a belief that
they were trinitarians, by the influence which a dread of the odium and other
inconveniences attending the Arian or Socinian doctrine had on their minds. The
presence of God the Father with any creature, whether it be called an union
with him, or it be expressed in any other manner whatever, can be nothing more
than the deity of the Father in that creature; and whatever it be that God
voluntarily imparts, he may withdraw again at pleasure. And what kind of
divinity must that be, which is dependent upon the will of another?

Upon none of the modifications, therefore, which have been mentioned (and all
others may be reduced to these) can the doctrine of the trinity, or of three
divine persons in one God be supported. In most of them the doctrine itself is
lost, and where it remains, it is inconsistent with reason and common sense.

II. Arguments from Reason against the Arian Hypothesis.
THE Arian doctrine, of the world having been made and governed not by the
supreme God himself, but by Christ, the son of God, though no contradiction in
itself, is upon several accounts highly improbable.

Our reasoning from effects to causes, carries us no farther than to the
immediate creator of the visible universe. For if we can suppose that being to
have had a cause, or author, we may suppose that his cause or author had a
higher cause, and so on ad infinitum. According to the light of nature,
therefore, the immediate cause or author of the visible universe, is the
self-existent first cause, and not any being acting under him, as his
instrument. However, the scheme itself is not naturally impossible; since a
being possessed of power sufficient to produce the visible universe, which is a
limited production, may be finite, and therefore may derive his power and his
being from one who is superior to him. But though the Arian scheme cannot be
said to be in itself impossible, it is on several accounts, extremely
improbable a priori, and therefore ought not to be admitted without very strong
and clear evidence.

If this great derived being, the supposed maker and governor of the world, was
united to a human body, he must either have retained and have exercised his
extraordinary powers during this union, or have been divested of them; and
either supposition has its peculiar difficulties and improbabilites.

If this great being retained his proper powers during this union, he must have
been sustaining the whole universe, and superintending all the laws of nature,
while he was in infant at the breast of his mother, and while he hung upon the
cross. And to imagine the creator of the world to have been in those
circumstances, is an idea at which the mind revolts, almost as much as at that
of the supreme God himself being reduced to them.

Besides, if Christ retained and exercised all his former powers in this state
of apparent humiliation, he must have wrought all his miracles by a power
properly his own, a power naturally belonging to him, as much as the power of
speaking and walking belongs to any other man. But this is expressly disclaimed
by our savior, when he said, that of himself he could do nothing, and that it
was the Father within him who did the works. Also, on this supposition, it must
have been this super-angelic being united to the body of Jesus, that raised him
from the dead; whereas this is an effect which is always ascribed to God the
Father only.

If, on the other hand, Christ was divested of his original powers, or emptied
himself of them upon his incarnation, the whole system of the government of the
universe must have been changed during his residence upon earth. Either some
other derived being (which this scheme does not provide) must have taken his
place, or the supreme being himself must have condescended to do that which the
scheme supposes there was an impropriety in his doing. For certainly the making
and the governing of the world would not have been delegated to another, if
there had not been some good reason in the nature of things, though it be
unknown to us and may be indiscoverable by us, why the world should have been
made and governed by a derived being, and not by the supreme being himself. And
this reason, whatever it was, must, as far as we can judge, have operated
during the time that Christ was upon the earth, as well as before.

If Christ was degraded to the state of a mere man during his humiliation on
earth, reason will ask, why might not a mere man have been sufficient? Since,
notwithstanding his original powers, nothing was, in fact, done by him, more
than any other man, aided and assisted by God as he was, might have been equal
to.

If we consider the object of Christ's mission, and the beings whom it
respected, viz. the race of man, we cannot but think that there must have been
a greater propriety, and use, in the appointment of a mere man to that office.
What occasion was there for any being superior to man for the purpose of
communicating the will of God to man? And as an example of a resurrection to an
immortal life (to enforce which was the great object of his mission the) death
and resurrection of one who was properly and simply a man, was certainly far
better adapted to give men satisfaction concerning their own future
resurrection, than the seeming death (for it could be nothing more) of such a
being as the maker of the world, and the resurrection of a body to which he had
been united. For, as he was a being of so much higher rank, it might be said,
that the laws of his nature might be very different from those of ours; and
therefore he might have privileges to which we could not pretend, and to which
we ought not to aspire.

If the world was created and governed by a derived being, this being, on whom
we immediately depended, would be that to whom all men would naturally look. He
would necessarily become the object of their prayers, in consequence of which
the supreme being would be overlooked, and become a mere cipher in the universe.

As modern philosophy supposes that there are innumerable worlds inhabited by
rational and imperfect beings (for all creatures must be finite and imperfect)
besides this of ours, it cannot be supposed but that many of them must have
stood in as much need of the interposition of the maker of the universe as we
have done. And can we suppose either that this should be the only spot in the
universe so highly distinguished, or that the maker of it should undergo as
many degradations as this scheme may require?

The doctrine of Christ's pre-existence goes upon the idea of the possibility,
at least, of the pre-existence of other men, and supposes an immaterial soul in
man, altogether independent of the body; so that it must have been capable of
thinking and acting before his birth, as well as it will be after his death.
But these are suppositions which no appearance in nature favors.

The Arian hypothesis, therefore, though it implies no proper contradiction, is
on several accounts, highly improbable a priori, and therefore ought not to be
admitted without very clear and strong evidence.

III. Arguments against the Trinitarian and the Arian hypothesis from the
scriptures.
I SHALL now show, in as concise a manner as I can, that the doctrine of the
trinity, and also the Arian hypothesis, has as little countenance from the
scriptures as it has from reason. The scriptures teach us that there is but one
God, who is himself the maker and the governor of all things; that this one God
is the sole object of worship, and that he sent Jesus Christ to instruct
mankind, empowered him to work miracles, raised him from the dead, and gave him
all the power that he ever was, or is now possessed of.

1. The scriptures contain the clearest, and most express declarations that
there is but one God, without ever mentioning any exception in favor of a
trinity, or guarding us against being led into any mistake by such general and
unlimited expressions. Ex. xx. 3. "Thou shall have no other God before me."
Deuteronomy. vi. 4. "Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God, is one Lord." Mark xii. 20. The
first of all the commandments is, Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord.
1 Cor. viii. 6. To us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things,
and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by
him. EPHESIANS. iv. 5, 6. One Lord, one faith, one baptism. One God, and Father of
all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all. 1 Timothy ii. 5. For there
is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus.

On the other hand, not only does the word trinity never occur in the
scriptures, but it is no where said that there are three persons in this one
God; nor is the doctrine explicitly laid down in any other direct proposition
whatever. Christ indeed says, John x, 30. "I and my Father are one;" but he
sufficiently explains himself, by praying that his disciples might be one with
him in the same sense in which he was one with the Father. John xvii. 21.22
That they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they
also may be one in us; and the glory which thou gave to me, I have given
them, that they may be one, even as we are one.

2. This one God is said to have created all things; and no intimation is given
of his having employed any inferior agent, or instrument, in the work of
creation. GENESIS i. 1. In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. --
v. God said let there be light, and there was light, Ps. xxxiii 6. By the word
of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the host of them by the breath of
his mouth -- v. ix. He spoke, and it was done, he commanded, and it stood fast.
Is. xliv. 24. Thus says the Lord, thy redeemer, and he that formed thee from
the womb, I am the Lord that makes all things, that stretched forth the
heavens alone, that spreads abroad the earth by myself.

3. This one God is called the Father, i. e. the author of all beings; and he
is called God and Father with respect to Christ, as well as all other persons.
JOHN vi. 27, Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that meat which
endures unto everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give unto you; for
him has God the Father sealed. JOHN xvii. 3, That they might know thee, the
only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. JOHN xx. 17. Go to my
brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father and your Father, and to my
God, and your God. EPHESIANS. i. ^ 17, That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Father of glory, may give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the
knowledge of him. COL. i. 3, We give thanks to God, and the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

4. Christ is said expreslly to be inferior to the Father, all his power is
said to have been given him by the Father, and he could do nothing without the
Father. JOHN xiv. 28, My Father is greater than I. 1 COR. iii. 23, Ye are
Christ's and Christ is God's. 1 COR. xi. 3, The head of Christ is God. JOHN v.
19, Verily, verily, I say unto you, the Son can do nothing of himself. John
xiv. 10, The words that I speak unto you I speak not of myself, but the Father
that dwells in me he does the works. Matt. xxviii. 18, All power is given to
me in heaven and in earth. 2 Pet. i. 17, He received from God the Father honor
and glory. Rev. i. 1, The revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him.

It is now alleged, that Christ did not mean that he was inferior to the
Father with respect to his divine nature, but only with respect to his human
nature. But if such liberties be taken in explaining a person's meaning,
language has no use whatever. On the same principles, it might be asserted that
Christ never died, or that he never rose from the dead, secretly meaning his
divine nature only. There is no kind of imposition but what might be authorized
by such an abuse of language as this.

5. Some things were withheld from Christ by his Father, Mark xiii. 32, But of
that day, and that hour, knows no man; no not the angels that are in heaven,
neither the Son, but the Father. Matt. xx. 23, To sit on my right hand and on
my left, is not mine to give; but it shall be given to them for whom it is
prepared of my Father.

6 As all the dominion that Christ has was derived from the Father so it is
subordinate to that of the Father, 1 Cor. xv 24, etc. Then comes the end, when
he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father, when he shall
have put down all rule, and all authority, and power For he must reign till he
has put all enemies under his feet. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is
death. For he has put all things under his feet. But when he says that all
things are put under him, it is manifest that he is excepted who did put all
things under him. And when all things shall be subdued to him, then shall the
Son also himself be subject unto him that put all things under him, that God
may be all in all

7. Christ always prayed to the Father, and with as much humility and
resignation, as any man, or the most dependent being in the universe, could
possibly do. Our Lord's whole history is a proof of this; but especially the
scene of his agony in the garden, Matt. xxvi. 37, etc. And he began to be sorry
and very heavy; Then says he unto them, my soul is exceeding sorrowful even
unto death, tarry ye here and watch with me. And he went a little farther, and
fell on his face and prayed, saying, O my Father, if it be possible, let this
cup pass from me; nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will.

8. Christ is not only styled a man even after his resurrection, but the
reasoning of the apostles, in some of the passages where he is spoken of,
require that he should be considered as a man with respect to his nature, and
not in name only, as their reasoning has no force but upon that supposition.
ACTS ii. 22, Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of by God, by miracles and
wonders, and signs, which God did by him, in the midst of you HEB. ii. 17,
"Wherefore it behoved him in all things to be made like unto his brethren. HEB.
ii. 10, It became him for whom are all things and by whom are all things, in
bringing many sons unto glory, to make the captain of their salvation perfect
through suffering, 1. COR xv, 21. For since by man came death, by man came also
the resurrection from the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall
all be made alive.

9 Whatever exaltation Christ now enjoys, it is the gift of his Father, and the
reward of his obedience unto death. PHIL. ii. 8, 9, And being in fashion as a
man, he humbled himself, and became obedient to death, even the death of the
cross. Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a name which
is above every name, HEB ii. 9 But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower
than the angels for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor. HEB.
xii 2, Looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith; who for the
joy which was set before him endured the cross, despising the shame, and sat
down at the right hand of the throne of God.

Let it also be considered, that no use whatever is made of the doctrine of the
incarnation of the maker of the world, in all the New Testament. We are neither
informed why so extraordinary a measure was necessary for the salvation of men,
nor that it was necessary. All that can be pretended is, that it is alluded to
in certain expressions. But certainly it might have been expected that a
measure of this magnitude should have been expreslly declared, if not clearly
explained; that mankind might have no doubt what great things had been done for
them; and that they might respect their great deliverer, as his nature, and his
proper rank in the creation, required.

The author of the epistle to the Hebrews evidently considered Christ as a
being of a different rank from that of angels; and the reason why he says that
he ought to be so, is, that he might have a feeling of our infirmities. But,
certainly, we shall be more easily satisfied that any person really felt as a
man, if he was truly a man, and nothing more than a man; than if he was a
superior being, and especially a being so far superior to us as the maker of
the world must have been, degraded to the condition of a man. Because, if he
had any recollection of his former state, the idea of that must have borne him
up under his difficulties and sufferings, in such a manner as no mere man could
have been supported. And it is supposed by the Arians that Christ had a
knowledge of his prior state, for they suppose him to have referred to it in
his prayer to the Father, for the glory which he had with him before the world
was; and yet this is hardly consistent with the account that Luke gives of his
increasing in wisdom.

No person, I think, can, with an unprejudiced mind, attend to these
considerations, and the texts of scripture above recited (which are perfectly
agreeable to the tenor of the whole) and imagine that it was the intention of
the sacred writers to represent Christ either as the supreme God, or as the
maker of the world under God. There is another hypothesis, of some modern
Arians, which represents Christ as having pre-existed; but not as having been
the creator or governor of the world, or the medium of all the dispensations of
God to mankind. But those texts of scripture which seem to be most express in
favor of Christ's pre-existence; do likewise, by the same mode of
interpretation, represent him as the maker of the world; so that if the
favorers of this hypothesis can suppose the language of these texts to be
figurative, they may more easily suppose the other to be figurative also; and
that whatever obscurity there may be in them, they were not intended to refer
to any pre-existence at all.

The passages of scripture which are supposed to speak of Christ, as the maker
of the world, are the following, viz. JOHN i. 1, 10. EPHESIANS. iii. 9. COL. i. 15,
etc. HEB i. 1, etc. These, I will venture to say, are the texts that most
strongly favor the notion of Christ's pre-existence, and no person can doubt
but that, if they must be interpreted to assert that Christ pre-existed at all,
they, with the same clearness, assert that he was the maker of the world. But
if these texts admit of a figurative interpretation, all the other texts, which
are supposed to refer to the pre-existence only will more easily admit of a
similar construction. These two opinions, therefore, viz. that Christ
pre-existed, and that he was the maker of the world, ought, by all means, to
stand or fall together; and if any person think the latter to be improbable,
and contrary to the plain tenor of the scriptures (which uniformly represent
the supreme being himself, without the aid of any inferior agent, or
instrument, as the maker of the universe) he should abandon the doctrine of
simple pre-existence also.

In what manner the proper unitarians interpret these passages of scripture,
may be seen in my Familiar Illustration of particular texts of scripture, in
several of the Socinian tracts, in three volumes quarto, and especially in Mr.
Lindsey's Sequel to his Apology, p. 455, to which I refer my reader for a
farther dicussion of this subject.

It is only of late years, that any persons have pretended to separate the two
opinions of Christ's pre-existence, and of his being the maker of the world.
All the ancient Arians maintained both, as did Dr. Clarke, Mr. Whiston, Mr.
Emlyn, Mr Pierce, and their followers; and I do not know that any other
hypothesis, has appeared in writing, except that it is alluded to in the
Theological Repository.

IV. Arguments from history against the deity and pre-existence of Christ; or a
summary view of the evidence for the primitive christians having held the
doctrine of the simple humanity of Christ.
N. B. To each article is subjoined a reference to publications in which the
subject is discussed: H. signifying the History of the Corruptions of
Christianity, vol. 1. R. Reply to the Monthly Review; and L. Letters to Dr.
Horsley. To each article is also subjoined, a reference to the following Maxims
of Historical Criticism.

1 IT is acknowledged by early writers of the orthodox persuasion, that two
kinds of heresy existed in the times of the apostles, viz. that of those who
held that Christ was simply a man, and that of the Gnostics; of whom some
believed that Christ was man only in appearance, and others that it was only
Jesus, and not the Christ (a pre-existent spirit who descended from heaven and
dwelt in him) that suffered on the cross. Now the apostle John animadverts with
the greatest severity upon the latter, but makes makes no mention of the
former; and can it be thought probable that he would pass it without censure,
if he had thought it to be an error; considering how great, and how dangerous
an error it has always been thought by those who have considered it as being an
error at all? Maxim 12. H. p. 9.

2. The great objection that Jews have always made to christianity in its
present state is, that it enjoins the worship of more gods than one; and it is
a great article with the christian writers of the second and following
centuries to answer this objection. But it does not appear in all the book of
Acts, in which we hear much of the cavils of the Jews, both in Jerusalem and in
many parts of the Roman empire, that they made any such objection to
christianity then; nor do the apostles either there, or in their epistles,
advance any thing with a view to such an objection. It may be presumed,
therefore, that no such offense to the Jews had then been given, by the
preaching of a doctrine so offensive to them as that of the divinity of Christ
must have been. Maxim 12, 13. L. p 50

3. As no Jew had originally any idea of their Messiah being more than a man,
and as the apostles and the first christians had certainly the same idea at
first concerning Jesus, it may be supposed that, if ever they had been informed
that Jesus was not a man, but either God himself, or the maker of the world
under God, we should have been able to trace the time and the circumstances in
which so a great a discovery was made to them; and also that we should have
perceived the effect which it had upon their minds; at least by some change in
their manner of speaking concerning him. But nothing of this kind is to be
found in the gospels, in the book of Acts, or in any of the Epistles. We
perceive marks enough of other new views of things, especially of the call of the
Gentiles to partake of the privileges of the gospel; and we hear much of the
disputes and the eager contention which it occasioned. But how much more must
all their prejudices have been shocked by the information that a person whom
they first took to be a mere man, was not a man, but either God himself, or the
maker of the world under God? Maxim 13. L. p. 55

4. All the Jewish christians, after the destruction of Jerusalem, which was
immediately after the age of the apostles are, said to have been Ebionites; and
these were only of two sorts, some of them holding the miraculous conception of
our savior, and others believing that he was the son of Joseph, as well as of
Mary. None of them are said to have believed either that he was God, or the
maker of the world under God. And is it at all credible that the body of the
Jewish christians, if they had ever been instructed by the apostles in the
doctrine of the divinity, or pre-existence of Christ, would so soon, and so
generally, if not universally, have abandoned that faith? Maxim 6. H. p. 7. R.
p. 3. L. p. 14.

5 Had Christ been considered as God, or the maker of the world under God, in
the early ages of the church, he would naturally have been the proper object of
prayer to christians; nay, (...) so than God the Father, with whom, on the
scheme of the doctrine of the trinity, they must have known that they had less
immediate intercourse. But prayers to Jesus Christ were not used in early
times, but gained ground gradually, with the opinion of Christ being God, and
the object of worship. Maxim 14. L. p 81.

6 Athanasius represents the apostles as obliged to use great caution not to
offend their first converts with the doctrine of Christ's divinity, and as
forbearing to urge that topic till they were first well established in the
belief of his being the Messiah. He adds, that the Jews being in an error on
this subject, drew the Gentiles into it. Chrysostom agrees with Athanasius in
this representation of the silence of the apostles in their first preaching,
both with respect to the divinity of Christ, and his miraculous conception.
They both represent them as leaving their disciples to learn the doctrine of
Christ's divinity, by way of inference from certain expressions; and they do
not pretend to produce any instance in which they taught that doctrine clearly
and explicitly. Maxim 13. H. p. 12 L. p. 3^, 53.

7. Hegesippus, the first christian historian, himself a Jew, and therefore
probably an Ebionite, enumerating the heresies of his time, mentions several of
the Gnostic kind, but not that of Christ being a mere man. He moreover says,
that in traveling to Rome, where he arrived in the time of A^cetus, he found
all the Churches that he visited held the faith which had been taught by Christ
and the apostles, which, in his opinion, was probably that of Christ being not
God, but (...) only. Justin Martyr also, and Clemens Alexandrinus, who wrote
after Hegesippus, treat largely of heresies in general, without mentioning, or
alluding to the unitarians. Maxim 8 H p 8. R p 8.

8. All those who were deemed heretics in early times; were cut off from the
communion of those who called themselves the orthodox christians, and went by
some particular name; generally that of their leader. But the unitarians among
the Gentiles were not expelled from the assemblies of christians, but
worshipped along with those who were called orthodox, and had no particular
name till the time of Victor, who excommunicated Theodorus; and a long time
after that Epiphanius endeavored to give them the name of Alogi. And though
the Ebionites, probably about or before this time, had been excommunicated by
the Gentile Christians, it was, as Jerome says only on account of their rigid
adherence to the law of Moses. Maxim 5. H. p. 14. L. p. 25.

9. The Apostles creed is that which was taught to all catechumens before
baptism, and additions were made to it from time to time in order to exclude
those who were denominated heretics. Now, though there are several articles in
that creed which allude to the Gnostics and tacitly condemn them, there was
not, in the time of Tertullian, any article in it that alluded to the
unitarians so that even then any unitarian, at least one believing the
miraculous conception, might have subscribed it. It may, therefore, be
concluded, that simple unitarianism was not deemed heretical at the end of the
second century. Maxim 7. L. p. 27.

10 It is acknowledged by Eusebius and others, that the ancient unitarians
themselves, constantly asserted that their doctrine was the prevailing opinion
of the christian church till the time of Victor. Maxim 2 H. p. 18. R. p. 25.

11. Justin Martyr, who maintains the pre-existence of Christ, is so far from
calling the contrary opinion a heresy, that what he says on the subject is
evidently an apology for his own: and when he speaks of heretics in general,
which he does with great indignation, as no christians, and having no
communication with christians, he mentions the Gnostics only. Maxim 12. H. p.
17. R. p. 15. L. p. 127.

12 (...), who was after Justin and who wrote a large treatise on the subject
of heresy, says very little concerning the Ebionites. Those Ebionites he speaks
of as believing that Christ was the son of Joseph, and he makes no mention of
those who believed the miraculous conception. Maxim. 12. H p. 15. L. p 32, 118.

13. Tertullian represents the majority of the common or unlearned christians,
the Idiot^e, as unitarians; and it is among the common people that we always
find the oldest opinions in any country, and in any sect, while the learned are
most apt to innovate. It may therefore be presumed that, as the unitarian
doctrine was held by the common people in the time of Tertullian, it had been
more general still before that time, and probably universal in the apostolical
age. Athanasius also mentions it as a subject of complaint to the orthodox of
his age that the many, and especially, persons of low understandings, were
inclined to the unitarian doctrine. Maxim 4, 10. R p 26 L. p. 49.

14. The first who held and discussed the doctrine of the pre-existence and
divinity of Christ, acknowledged that their opinions were exceedingly unpopular
among the unlearned christians; that these dreaded the doctrine of the trinity,
thinking that it infringed upon the doctrine of the supremacy of God the
Father; and the learned christians make frequent apologies to them, and to
others, for their own opinion. Maxim 10. H. p. 54.

15. The divinity of Christ was first advanced and urged by those who had been
heathen philosophers, and especially those who were admirers of the doctrine of
Plato, who held the opinion of a second God. Austin says, that he considered
Christ as no other than a most excellent man, and that he had no suspicion of
the word of God being incarnate in him, or how the catholic faith differed from
the error of Photinus. (the last of the proper unitarians whose name is come
down to us) till he read the books of Plato; and that he was afterward
confirmed in the Catholic doctrine by reading the scriptures. Constantine in
his oration to the fathers of the council of Nice, speaks with commendation of
Plato, as having taught the doctrine of a second God, derived from the supreme
God, and subservient to his will. Maxim 11. H. p. 20,

16. There is a pretty easy gradation in the progress of the doctrine of the
divinity of Christ; as he was first thought to be a God in some qualified sense
of the word, a distinguished emanation from the supreme mind; and then the
Logos or the wisdom of God personified; and this logos was first thought to be
only occasionally detached from the Deity, and then drawn into his essence
again, before it was imagined to have a permanent personality, distinct from
that of the source from which it sprung. And it was not till 400 years after
that time that Christ, was thought to be (...) the Father. Whereas, on the
other hand, though it (...) that the apostles taught the doctrine of the
divinity of Christ, yet it cannot be denied that in the very times of the
apostles, the Jewish church, and many of the Gentiles also, held the opinion of
his being a mere man. Here the transition is quite sudden, without any
gradation at all. This must naturally have given the greatest alarm, such as is
now given to those who are called orthodox, by the present Socinians; and yet
nothing of this kind can be perceived Besides, it is certainly most probable
that the christians of those times, urged as they were with the meanness of
their master, should incline to add to rather than take from, his natural rank
and dignity. Maxim 9. H. p. 20, etc. L p 73.134.

V. Maxims of Historical Criticism, by which the preceding articles may be
tried.
1. WHEN two persons give different accounts of things, that evidence is to be
preferred, which is either in itself more probable, or more agreeable to other
credible testimony.

2. Neither is entire credit to be given to any set of men with respect to what
is reputable to them, nor to their enemies with respect to what is
disreputable; but the account given by the one may be balanced by that of the
other. Summary View, No. 10.

3. Accounts of any set of men given by their enemies only are always
suspicious. But the confessions of enemies, and circumstances favorable to any
body of men, collected from the writings of their adversaries, are deserving of
particular regard.

4. It is more natural for men who wish to speak disparagingly of any sect to
undervalue their numbers, as well as every thing else relating to them; and it
is equally natural for those who wish to speak respectfully of any party, to
represent the members of it as more numerous than they are. Summary View, No.
13.

5. When persons form themselves into societies, so as to be distinguishable
from others, they never fail to get some particular name, either assumed by
themselves, or imposed by others. This is necessary in order to make them the
subject of conversation, long paraphrases in discourse being very inconvenient.
Summary View, No. 8.

6. When particular opinions are ascribed to a particular class of men, without
any distinction of the time when those opinions were adopted by them, it may be
presumed, that they were supposed to hold those opinions from the time that
they received their denomination. Summary View, No. 4

7. When a particular description is given of a class of persons within any
period of time, any person who can be proved to have had the proper character
of one of that class, may be deemed to have belonged to it, and to have enjoyed
all the privileges of it, whatever they were. Summary View, No. 9.

8. When an historian, or writer of any kind, professedly enumerates the
several species belonging to any genus, or general body of men, and omits any
particular species or denomination, which, if it had belonged to the genus, he,
from his situation and circumstances, was not likely to have overlooked, it may
be presumed that he did not consider that particular species as belonging to
the genus. Summary View, No. 7.

9. Great changes in opinion are not usually made of a sudden, and never by
great bodies of men. That history, therefore, which represents such changes as
having been made gradually, and by easy steps, is always the more probable on
that account. Summary View, No. 16.

10. The common or unlearned people, in any country, who do not speculate much,
retain longest any opinions with which their minds have been much impressed;
and therefore we always look for the oldest opinions in any country, or any
class of men, among the common people, and not among the learned. Summary View,
No. 13, 14.

11. If any new opinions be introduced into a society, they are most likely to
have introduced them, who held opinions similar to them before they joined that
society. Summary View, No. 15.

12. If any particular opinion, has never failed to excite great indignation in
all ages and nations, in which a contrary opininion has been generally received
and that particular opinion can be proved to have existed in any age or country
when it did not excite indignation, it may be concluded that it had many
partisans in that age or country. For the opinion being the same, it could not
of itself be more respectable: and human nature being the same, it could not
but have been regarded in the same light, so long as the same stress was laid
on the oposite opinion. Summary View No. 1.11.12.

13 When a time is given, in which any very remarkable and interesting opinion
was not believed by a certain class of people, and another time in which the
belief of it was general, the introduction of such an opinion may always be
known by the effects which it will produce upon the minds, and in the conduct
of men; by the alarm which it will give to some, and the defense of it by
others. If, therefore, no aim was given, and no defense of it was made within
any particular period, it may be concluded that the introduction of it did not
take place within that period. Summary View, No. 2, 3, 6

14. When any particular opinion or practice, is necessarily of customarily
accompanied by any other opinion or practice; if the latter be not found within
any particular period, it may be presumed that the former did not exist within
that period. Summary View, No. 5.

It will be perceived that the whole of this historical evidence is in favor,
of the proper unitarian doctrine, or that of Christ being a mere man, having
been the faith of the primitive church, in opposition to the Arian no less than
the Trinitarian hypothesis.

As to the Arian hypothesis in particular, I do not know that it can be traced
any higher than Arius himself, or at least the age in which he lived. Both the
Gnostics and the Platonizing christians, were equally far from supposing that
Christ was a being created out of nothing; the former having thought him to be
an emanation from the supreme being, and the latter the logos of the Father
personified. And though they sometimes applied the term creation to this
personification, still they did not suppose it to have been a creation out of
nothing. It was only a new modification of what existed before. For God, they
said, was always, logik^s, or had within him that principle which afterward
assumed a personal character.

Upon the whole, the Arian hypothesis appears to me to be destitute of all
support from christian antiquity. Whereas it was never denied that the proper
unitarian doctrine existed in the time of the apostles; and I think it evident,
that it was the faith of the bulk of christians, and especially the unlearned
christians, for two or three centuries after Christ.

THE END
NEW Publications at Bell's Book-Store in Third Street.
1 An Essay on the Justice of God, a quarter dollar.

2 Sermons to Ministers of State, by Murray, half a dollar.

3 Sermons to Asses, and to Doctors in Divinity, 2 vols. one dollar.

4 Universal Redemption for All, through the Everlasting Gospel, which is at
last, to restore the whole Creation, to its primitive Purity by Paul Siegvolk,
one dollar.

5 Life and Adventures of Ambrose Gwinett, Apprentice to an Attorney at law,
Who for a murder which he never committed, was tried, condemned, executed, and
hung in Chains, in Old England; yet lived many Years afterward, and in his
Travels found the Man in the West Indies actually alive; for the Supposed
Murder of whom he had been really executed. With the Life of Matthieson the
Scotchman, and the Extraordinary Adventures of four Russian Sailors, who were
Shipwrecked, and lived six Years on the desert Island of East-Spitzbergen, as
related by themselves, one quarter of a dollar.

6 Memoirs of the Life Travels and Adventures of Edward Wortley Montague,
Esquire; Son to the most famous Traveller, Lady Mary Wortley Montague;
Exhibiting his very eccentric Transactions in England, France, Spain, Italy,
Turkey, Arabia, Egypt, and the Holy Land With Remarks on the Manners and
Customs of the Oriental World. Compiled from original Papers, 2 vols two thirds
of a dollar.

7 The Sorrows and Sympathetic Attachments of Werter, a German Story, in 75
Letters, 2 vols. two thirds of a dollar.

8 Buchan's Family Physician, or Domestic Medicine; Being a treatise on the
prevention and cure of diseases, by regimen and simple medicines; with a
dispensatory and complete Index, for the use of families. N. B. This new
edition contains great additions and improvements, by its original author, the
celebrated Dr. BUCHAN, therefore the utility, necessity and advantage of
possessing this extraordinary treasure of health must be very evident to all
who are willing to be their own or their family physician, at the moderate
price of two dollars.

9 Elliot's Medical Pocketbook; for those who are, and for all who wish, to
be, Physicians. Containing a short but plain Account of the Symptoms, Causes,
and Methods of Cure of the Diseases incident to the Human Body: Including such
as require Surgical Treatment: together with the Virtues, and Doses of
Medicinal Compositions, and simples Extracted from the best authors, and
digested into alphabetical Order* dollar.

10 Captain Carver's Travels, exhibiting his useful explorations, for more than
Five Thousand Miles, in the Course of three Years, through the interior Parts
of North America, Containing an Account of the great Lakes of Canada, and all
the Lakes, Islands and Rivers, Cataracts, Mountains, Mineral, soil and
Vegetable Productions of the North West Regions of that vast Continent; With a
Description of the Birds, Beasts, Reptiles, Insects, and Fishes peculiar to the
Country. Together with a concise History of the Genius, Manners, and Customs of
the Indians inhabiting the Lands that lie adjacent to the Heads and to the
Westward of the great River Mississippi; with an Appendix, describing the
uncultivated Parts of America that are the most proper for forming Settlements,
one dollar.

11 Subterranean Treasure Discovered, That is, of all manner of Mines and
Minerals, from the Gold to the Coal; with plain Directions and Rules for the
finding of them in all kingdoms and Countries. Very necessary for every one to
know, whether he be a Traveller by Land or Sea, or in what Country, Dominion,
or Plantation soever he shall either sojourn or inhabit By Mr. GABRIEL PLATTES.
half a dollar.

N. B. For more particulars in the American Book-World, please enquire, for
BELL's SALE CATALOGUE, of NEW and OLD BOOKS, with the lowest Price printed to
each BOOK, consisting of several thousand Volumes in ARTS, SCIENCES and
ENTERTAINMENT, for Persons of all DENOMINATIONS. Price a quarter dollar.


