OBSERVATIONS ON THE IMPORTANCE OF THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION, AND The MEANS of
making it a BENEFIT to the WORLD.

By RICHARD PRICE, D. D. L. L. D. And FELLOW of the ROYAL SOCIETY of LONDON,
and of the ACADEMY of ARTS and SCIENCES in NEW ENGLAND.

Printed in LONDON in 1784. Reprinted in BOSTON in 1784, BY POWARS AND WILLIS.

TO The FREE AND UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, THE FOLLOWING OBSERVATIONS ARE
HUMBLY OFFERED, AS A LAST TESTIMONY OF THE GOOD WILL OF THE AUTHOR.

JULY 6, 1784.
OBSERVATIONS, etc. Of the IMPORTANCE of the REVOLUTION which has established
the Independence of the United States.
HAVING, from pure conviction, taken a warm part in favor of the British
colonies (now the United States of America) during the late war; and been
exposed, in consequence of this, to much abuse and some danger; it must be
supposed that I have been waiting for the issue with anxiety -- I am thankful
that my anxiety is removed; and that I have been spared to be a witness to that
very issue of the war which has been all along the object of my wishes. With
heartfelt satisfaction, I see the revolution in favor of universal liberty
which has taken place in America; -- a revolution which opens a new prospect in
human affairs, and begins a new era in the history of mankind; -- a revolution
by which Britons themselves will be the greatest gainers, if wise enough to
improve properly the check that has been given to the despotism of their
ministers, and to catch the flame of virtuous liberty which has saved their
American brethren.

The late war, in its commencement and progress, did great good by
disseminating just sentiments of the rights of mankind, and the nature of
legitimate government; by exciting a spirit of resistance so tyranny, which has
emancipated one European country, and is likely to emancipate others; and by
occasioning the establishment in America of forms of government more equitable
and more liberal than any that the world has yet known. But, in its
termination, the war has done still greater good by preserving the new
governments from that destruction in which they must have been involved, had
Britain conquered; by providing, in a sequestered continent possessed of many
singular advantages, a place of refuge for oppressed men in every region of the
world; and by laying the foundation there of an empire which may be the seat of
liberty, science and virtue, and from whence there is reason to hope these
sacred blessings will spread, till they become universal and the time arrives
when kings and priests shall have no more power to oppress, and that
ignominious slavery which has hitherto debased the world is exterminated. I
therefore, think I see the hand of Providence in the late war working for the
general good; and can scarcely avoid crying out, It was the Lord's doing.

Reason, as well as tradition and revelation, lead us to expect that a more
improved and happy state of human affairs will take place before the
consumination of all things. The world has hitherto been gradually improving.
Light and knowledge have been gaining ground, and human life at present,
compared with what it once was, is much the same that a youth approaching to
manhood is compared with an infant.

Such are the natures of things that this progress must continue. During
particular intervals it may be interrupted, but it cannot be destroyed. Every
present advance prepares the way for farther advances; and a single experiment
or discovery may sometimes give rise to so many more as suddenly to raise the
species higher, and to resemble the effects of opening a new sense, or of the
fall of a spark on a train that springs a mine. For this reason, mankind may at
last arrive at degrees of improvement which we cannot now even suspect to be
possible. A dark age may follow an enlightened age; but, in this case, the
light, after being smothered for a time, will break out again with a brighter
luster. The present age of increased light, considered as succeeding the ages
of Greece and Rome and an intermediate period of thick darkness, furnishes a
proof of the truth of this observation. There are certain kinds of improvement
which, when once made, cannot be entirely lost. During the dark ages, the
improvements made in the ages that preceded them remained so far as to be
recovered immediately at the resurrection of letters, and to produce afterward
that more rapid progress in improvement which has distinguished modern times.

There can scarcely be a more pleasing and encouraging object of reflection
than this. An accidental observation of the effects of gravity in a garden has
been the means of discovering the laws that govern the solar system This refers
to an account given of Sir Isaac Newton, in the Preface to Dr. PEMBERTON'S View
of his Philosophy.
, and of enabling us to look down with pity on the ignorance of the most
enlightened times among the ancients. What new dignity has been given to man,
and what additions have been made to his powers, by the invention of optical
glasses, printing, gunpowder, etc. and by the late discoveries in navigation,
mathematics, natural philosophy, etc.?

But among the events in modern times tending to the elevation of mankind,
there are none probably of so much consequence as the recent one which
occasions these observations. Perhaps, I do not go too far when I say that,
next to the introduction of Christianity among mankind, the American revolution
may prove the most important step in the progressive course of human
improvement. It is an event which may produce a general diffusion of the
principles of humanity, and become the means of setting free mankind from the
shackles of superstition and tyranny, by leading them to see and know that
nothing is fundamental but impartial enquiry, an honest mind, and virtuous
practice -- that state policy ought not to be applied to the support of
speculative opinions and formularies of faith. -- That the members of a civil
community are confederates, not subjects; and their rulers, servants, not
masters. -- And that all legitimate government consists in the dominion of
equal laws made with common consent; that is, in the dominion of men over
themselves; and not in the dominion of communities over communities, or of any
men over other men.

Happy will the world be when these truths shall be every where acknowledged
and practiced upon. Religious bigotry, that cruel demon, will be then laid
asleep. Slavish governments and slavish Hierarchies will then sink* and the old
prophecies be verified, that the last universal empire upon earth shall be the
empire of reason and virtue, under which the gospel of peace (better
understood) shall have free course and be glorified, many will run to and fro
and knowledge be increased, the wolf dwell with the lamb and the leopard with
the kid, and nation no more lift up a sword against nation.

It is a conviction I cannot resist, that the independence of the English
colonies in America is one of the steps ordained by Providence to introduce
these times; and I can scarcely be deceived in this conviction, if the United
States should escape some dangers which threaten them, and will take proper
care to throw themselves open to future improvements, and to make the most of
the advantages of their present situation. Should this happen, it will be true
of them as it was of the people of the Jews, that in them all the families of
the earth shall be blessed. It is scarcely possible they should think too
highly of their own consequence. Perhaps, there never existed a people on whose
wisdom and virtue more depended: or to whom a station of more importance in the
plan of Providence has been assigned. They have begun nobly. They have fought
with success for themselves and for the world; and, in the midst of invasion
and carnage, established forms of government favorable in the highest degree
to the rights of mankind. -- But they have much more to do; more indeed than it
is possible properly to represent. In this address, my design is only to take
notice of a few great points which seem particularly to require their
attention, in order to render them permanently happy in themselves and useful
to mankind. On these points, I shall deliver my sentiments with freedom,
conscious I mean well; but, at the same time, with real diffidence, conscious
of my own liableness to error.

Of the Means of promoting human Improvement and Happiness in the United
States. -- And first; of PUBLIC DEBTS.
IT seems evident, that what first requires the attention of the United States
is the redemption of their debts, and making compensation to that army which
has carried them through the war. They have an infant credit to cherish and
rear, which, if this is not done, must perish, and with it their character and
honor for ever. Nor is it conceivable they should meet with any great
difficulties in doing this. They have a vast resource peculiar to themselves,
in a continent of unlocated lands possessing every advantage of soil and
climate. The settlement of these lands will be rapid, the consequence of which
must be a rapid increase of their value. By disposing of them to the army and
to emigrants, the greatest part of the debts of the United States may probably
be sunk immediately. But had they no such resource, they are very capable of
bearing taxes sufficient for the purpose of a gradual redemption. Supposing
their debts to amount to nine millions sterling, carrying interest at 5 per
cent. taxes producing a revenue of a million per ann. would pay the interest,
and at the same time leave a surplus of half a million per ann. for a sinking
fund, which would discharge the principal in thirteen years. A surplus of a
quarter of a million would do the same in 20 years. After discharging the
principal, the appropriated revenue being no longer wanted, might be abolished,
and the States eased of the burden of it. But it would be imprudent to abolish
it entirely. 100,000 l. per ann. reserved, and faithfully laid out in clearing
unlocated lands and other improvements, would in a short time increase to a
treasure (or continental patrimony) which would defray the whole expenditure of
the union, and keep the States free from debts and taxes for ever The lands,
forests, imposts, etc. etc. which once formed the patrimony of the crown in
England, bore most of the expenses of government. It is well for this kingdom
that the extravagance of the crown has been the means of alienating this
patrimony, for the consequence has been making the crown dependent on the
people. But in America such a patrimony would be continental property capable
of being applied only to public purposes, in the way which the public (or its
delegates) should approve.
. Such a reserve would (supposing it improved so as to produce a profit of 5
per cent.) increase to a capital of three millions in 19 years, 30 millions in
57 years, 100 millions in 81 years, and 261 millions in 100 years. But
supposing it capable of being improved so as to produce a profit of 10 per
cent. it would increase to five millions in 19 years, 100 millions in 49 years,
and 10,000 millions in 97 years.

It is wonderful that no state has yet thought of taking this method to make
itself great and rich. The smallest appropriation in a sinking fund, never
diverted, operates in cancelling debts, just as money increases at compound
interest; and is, therefore, omnipotent One penny put out at our Savior's
birth to 5 per cent. compound interest would, before this time, have increased
to a greater sum than would be contained in TWO HUNDRED MILLIONS of EARTHS all
solid gold. But, if put out to simple interest, it would have amounted to no
more than seven shillings and six pence. All governments which alienate funds
destined for reimbursements, choose to improve money in the last rather than the
first of these ways.
. But, if diverted, it loses all its power. BRITAIN affords a striking proof of
this. Its sinking fund (once the hope of the kingdom) has, by the practice of
alienating it, been rendered impotent and useless. Had it been inviolably
applied to the purpose for which it was intended, there would in the year 1775,
have been a surplus in the revenue of more than five millions per ann. But
instead of this, we were then encumbered with a debt of 137 millions, carrying
an interest of near 4 millions, and leaving no surplus of any consequence. This
debt has been since increased to 280 millions, carrying an interest (including
expenses of management) of nine millions and a half. -- A monstrous bubble; --
and as no effectual measures are likely to be taken (or perhaps can now be
taken) for reducing it within the limits of safety, it must, some time or
other, produce a dreadful convulsion. Let the United States take warning --
Their debts at present are moderate. A Sinking fund, guarded When not thus
guarded, public funds become the worst evils, by giving to the rulers of states
a command of revenue for the purposes of corruption.
against misapplication, may soon extinguish them, and prove a resource in all
events of the greatest importance. Let such a fund be established. Could a
sacredness be given it like that of the ark of God among the Jews, it would do
the same service.

I must not, however, forget that there is ONE of their debts on which no
sinking fund can have any effect; and which it is impossible for them to
discharge: -- A debt, greater, perhaps, than has been ever due from any
country; and which will be deeply felt by their latest posterity. -- But it is
a debt of GRATITUDE only -- Of GRATITUDE to that General, who has been raised
up by Providence to make them free and independent, and whose name must shine
among the first in the future annals of the benefactors of mankind.

The measure now proposed may preserve America for ever from too great an
accumulation of debts; and, consequently, of taxes -- an evil which is likely
to be the ruin not only of Britain, but of other European States. -- But there
are measures of yet greater consequence, which I wish ardently to recommend and
inculcate.

For the sake of mankind, I wish to see every measure adopted that can have a
tendency to preserve PEACE in America; and to make it an open and fair stage
for discussion, and the seat of PERFECT LIBERTY.

Of PEACE, And the Means of perpetuating it.
CIVIL Government is an expedient for collecting the wisdom and the force of a
community or confederacy, to preserve its peace and liberty against every
hostile invasion, whether from within or from without. -- In the latter of
these respects, the United States are happily secured; but they are far from
being equally happy in the former respect. Having now, in consequence of their
successful resistance of the invasion of Britain, united to their remoteness
from Europe, no external enemy to fear, they are in danger of fighting with one
another. -- This is their greatest danger; and providing securities against it
is their hardest work. Should they fail in this, America may some time or other
be turned into a scene of blood; and instead of being the hope and refuge of
the world, may become a terror to it.

When a dispute arises among individuals in a State, an appeal is made to a
court of law; that is, to the wisdom and justice of the State. The court
decides. The losing party acquiesces; or, if he does not, the power of the
State forces him to submission; and thus the effects of contention are
suppressed, and peace is maintained. -- In a way similar to this, peace may be
maintained between any number of confederated States; and I can almost imagine,
that it is not impossible but that by some such means universal peace may some
time or other be produced, and all war excluded from the world. -- Why may we
not hope to see this begun in America? -- The articles of confederation make
considerable advances toward it. When a dispute arises between any of the
States, they order an appeal to Congress -- an enquiry by Congress, -- a
hearing, -- and a decision. -- But here they stop. -- What is most of all
necessary is omitted. No provision is made for enforcing the decisions of
Congress; and this renders them inefficient and sutile. I am by no means
qualified to point out the best method of removing this defect. Much must be
given up for this purpose, nor is it easy to give up too much. Without all
doubt the powers of Congress must be enlarged. In particular, a power must be
given it to collect, on certain emergencies, the force of the confederacy, and
to employ it in carrying its decisions into execution. A State against which a
decision is made, will yield of course when it knows that such a force exists,
and that it allows no hope from resistance.

By this force I do not mean a STANDING ARMY. God forbid, that standing armies
should ever find an establishment in America! They are every where the grand
supports of arbitrary power, and the chief causes of the depression of mankind.
No wise people will trust their defense out of their own hands, or consent to
hold their rights at the mercy of armed slaves. Free States ought to be bodies
of armed citizens, well regulated, and well disciplined, and always ready to
turn out, when properly called upon, to execute the laws, to quell riots, and
to keep the peace. Such, if I am rightly informed, are the citizens of America.
Why then may not CONGRESS be furnished with a power of calling out from the
confederated States, quotas of militia sufficient to force at once the
compliance of any State which may show an inclination to break the union by
resisting its decisions?

I am very sensible that it will be difficult to guard such a power against
abuse; and, perhaps, better means of answering this end are discoverable. In
human affairs, however, the choice generally offered us is "of two evils to
take the least." We choose the restraint of civil government, because a less
evil than anarchy; and, in like manner, in the present instance, the danger of
the abuse of power, and of its being employed sometimes to enforce wrong
decisions, must be submitted to, because a less evil than the misery of
intestine wars. Much, however, may be done to lessen this danger. Such
regulations as those in the ninth of the articles of consederation will, in a
great measure, prevent hasty and partial decisions. The rotation established by
the fifth article will prevent that corruption of character which seldom fails
to be produced by the long possession of power; and the right reserved to every
State of recalling its Delegates when dissatisfied with them, will keep them
constantly responsible and cautious.

The observations now made must be extended to money transactions. Congress
must be trusted with a power of procuring supplies for defraying the expenses
of the confederation; of contracting debts, and providing funds for discharging
them: and this power must not be capable of being defeated by the opposition of
any minority in the States.

In short, the credit of the United States, their strength, their
respectableness abroad, their liberty at home, and even their existence, depend
on the preservation of a firm political union; and such an union cannot be
preserved, without giving all possible weight and energy to the authority of
that delegation which constitutes the union.

Would it not be proper to take periodical surveys of the different states,
their numbers of both sexes in every stage of life, their condition,
occupations, property, etc.? -- Would not such surveys, in conjunction with
accurate registers of births, marriages and deaths at all ages, afford much
important instruction by showing what laws govern human mortality, and what
situations, employments, and civil institutions, are most favorable to the
health and happiness of mankind? -- Would they not keep constantly in view the
progress of population in the states, and the increase or decline of their
resources? But more especially, are they not the only means of procuring the
necessary information for determining accurately and equitably the proportions
of men and money to be contributed by each state for supporting and
strengthening the confederation?

Of LIBERTY.
THE next point I would insist on, as an object of supreme importance, is the
establishment of such a system of perfect liberty, religious as well as civil,
in America, as shall render it a country where truth and reason shall have fair
play, and the human powers find full scope for exerting themselves, and for
showing how far they can carry human improvement.

The faculties of man have hitherto, in all countries, been more or less
cramped by the interference of civil authority in matters of speculation, by
tyrannical laws against heresy and schism, and by slavish hierarchies and
religious establishments. It is above all things desirable that no such fetters
on reason should be admitted into America. I observe, with inexpressible
satisfaction, that at present they have no existence there. In this respect the
governments of the United States are liberal to a degree that is unparalleled.
They have the distinguished honor of being the first states under heaven in
which forms of government have been established favorable to universal
liberty. They have been thus distinguished in their infancy. What then will
they be in a more advanced state; when time and experience, and the concurring
assistance of the wise and virtuous, in every part of the earth, shall have
introduced into the new governments, corrections and amendments which will
render them still more friendly to liberty, and more the means of promoting
human happiness and dignity? -- May we not see there the dawning of brighter
days on earth, and a new creation rising. But I must check myself. I am in
danger of being carried too far by the ardor of my hopes.

The liberty I mean includes in it liberty of conduct in all civil matters --
liberty of discussion in all speculative matters -- and liberty of conscience
in all religious matters. -- And it is then perfect, when under no restraint
except when used to injure any one in his person, property, or good name; that
is, except when used to destroy itself.

In liberty of discussion, I include the liberty of examining all public
measures, and the conduct of all public men; and of writing and publishing on
all speculative and doctrinal points.

Of LIBERTY of DISCUSSION.
IT is a common opinion, that there are some doctrines so sacred, and others of
so bad a tendency, that no public discussion of them ought to be allowed. Were
this a right opinion, all the persecution that has been ever practiced would be
justified. For, if it is a part of the duty of civil magistrates to prevent the
discussion of such doctrines, they must, in doing this, act on their own
judgments of the nature and tendency of doctrines, and, consequently, they must
have a right to prevent the discussion of all doctrines which they think to be
sacred for discussion or too dangerous in their tendency; and this right they
must exercise in the only way in which civil power is capable of exercising it,
"by inflicting penalties on all who oppose sacred doctrines, or who maintain
pernicious opinions." In Mohammedan countries, therefore, civil magistrates have
a right to silence and punish all who oppose the divine mission of Mahomet, a
doctrine there reckoned of the most sacred nature. The like is true of the
doctrines of transubstantiation, worship of the Virgin Mary, etc. in Popish
countries; and of the doctrines of the Trinity, satisfaction, etc. in
Protestant countries. -- In England itself, this principle has been acted upon,
and produced the laws which subject to severe penalties all who write or speak
against the Supreme Divinity of Christ, the Book of Common Prayer, and the
Church Articles of Faith. All such laws are right, if the opinion I have
mentioned is right. But in reality, civil power has nothing to do with any such
matters; and civil governors go miserably out of their proper province,
whenever they take upon them the care of truth, or the support of any doctrinal
points. They are not judges of truth; and if they pretend to decide about it,
they will decide wrong. Th^^ all the countries under heaven think of the
application of civil power to doctrinal points in every country but their own.
It is, indeed, superstition, idolatry, and nonsense, that civil power at
present supports almost every where, under the idea of supporting sacred truth,
and opposing dangerous error. Would not, therefore, its perfect neutrality be
the greatest blessing? -- Would not the interest of truth gain unspeakably,
were all the rulers of States to aim at nothing but keeping the peace; or did
they consider themselves as bound to take care, not of the future, but the
present interest of men; -- not of their souls and their faith, but of their
persons and property; -- not of any ecclesiastical, but secular matters only?

All the experience of past time proves that the consequence of allowing civil
power to judge of the nature and tendency of doctrines, must be making it a
hindrance to the progress of truth, and an enemy to the improvement of the
world.

Anaxagoras was tried and condemned in Greece for teaching that the sun and
stars were not Deities, but masses of corruptible matter. Accusations of a like
kind contributed to the death of Socrates. The threats of bigots and the fear
of persecution, prevented Copernicus from publishing, during his whole life
time, his discovery of the true system of the world. Galileo was obliged to
renounce the doctrine of the motion of the earth, and suffered a year's
imprisonment for having asserted it. And so lately as the year 1742, the best
commentary on the first production of human genius (NEWTON'S Principia) was not
allowed to be printed at ROME, because it asserted this doctrine; and the
learned commentators were obliged to prefix to their work a declaration, that
on this point they submitted to the decisions of the supreme Pontiffs. Such
have been, and such (while men continue blind and ignorant) will always be the
consequences of the interposition of civil governments in matters of
speculation.

When men associate for the purpose of civil government, they do it not to
defend truth, or to support formularies of faith and speculative opinions; but
to defend their civil rights, and to protect one another in the free exercise
of their mental and corporeal powers. The interference, therefore, of civil
authority in such cases is directly contrary to the end of its institution. The
way in which it can best promote the interest and dignity of mankind, (as far
as they can be promoted by the discovery of truth) is, by encouraging them to
search for truth wherever they can find it; and by protecting them in doing
this against the attacks of malevolence and bigotry. Should any attempt be made
by contending sects to injure one another, its power will come in properly to
crush the attempt, and to maintain for all sects equal liberty, by punishing
every encroachment upon it. The conduct of a civil magistrate, on such an
occasion, should be that of Gallio the wise Roman proconsul, who, on receiving
an accusation of the apostle Paul, would not listen to it, but drove from his
presence the accusers who had laid violent hands upon him, after giving them
the following admonition; -- If it were a matter of wrong or wicked lewdness,
reason would require that I should bear with you. But if it be a question of
words and names and the law, look you to it. For I will be no judge of such
matters. Acts xviii. 12. etc. How much happier would the world have been, had
all magistrates acted in this manner? Let America learn this important lesson,
and profit by the experience of past times. A dissent from established opinions
and doctrines has indeed often miserably disturbed society, and produced
mischief and bloodshed. But it should be remembered, that this has been owing
to the establishment of the points dissented from, and the use of civil power
to enforce the reception of them. Had civil government done its duty, left all
free, and employed itself in procuring instead of restraining fair discussion,
all mischief would have been avoided, and mankind would have been raised higher
than they are in knowledge and improvement.

When Christianity, that first and best of all the means of human improvement,
was first preached, it was charged with turning the world upside down. The
leaders of Jewish and Pagan establishments were alarmed, and by opposing the
propagation of it, converted a religion of peace and love into an occasion of
violence and slaughter; and thus verified our Lord's prophecy, that he was come
not to send peace, but a sword on earth. All this was the effect of the
misapplication of the powers of government. Instead of creating, they should
have been employed in preventing such mischief, and been active only in causing
the Christian cause to receive a fair hearing, and guarding the propagators of
it against insult. -- The like observation may be made concerning the first
reformers. -- What we all see would have been right in Pagan and Popish
governments with respect to Christianity and the Reformation; would it not be
now right in Christian or Protestant governments, were any attempts made to
propagate a new religion, or any doctrines advanced opposite to those now held
sacred! Such attempts, if unsupported by reason and evidence, would soon come
to nothing. An imposter cannot stand the test of fair and open examination. On
the contrary, the cause of truth will certainly be served by it. Mahometanism
would have sunk as soon as it rose, had no other force than that of evidence
been employed to propagate it; and it is an unspeakable recommendation of
Christianity, that it made its way till it became the religion of the world in
one of its most enlightened periods, by evidence only, in opposition to the
strongest exertions of civil power. There cannot be a more striking proof, that
nothing but fair discussion is necessary to suppress error and to propagate
truth. I am grieved, indeed, whenever I find any Christians showing a
disposition to call in the aid of civil power to defend their religion. Nothing
can be more disgraceful to it. If it wants such aid it cannot be of God. Its
corruption and debasement took place from the moment that civil power took it
under its patronage; and this corruption and debasement increased, till at last
it was converted into a system of absurdity and superstition more gross and
more barbarous than Paganism itself. -- The religion of Christ disclaims all
connection with the civil establishments of the world. It has suffered
infinitely by their friendship. Instead of silencing its opponents, let them be
encouraged to produce their strongest arguments against it. The experience of
Britain has lately shown that this will only cause it to be better understood
and more firmly believed.

I would extend these observations to all points of faith, however sacred they
may be deemed. Nothing reasonable can suffer by discussion. All doctrines
really sacred must be clear and incapable of being opposed with success. If
civil authority interposes, it will be to support some misconception or abuse
of them.

That immoral tendency of doctrines which has been urged as a reason against
allowing the public discussion of them, may be either avowed and direct, or
only a consequence with which they are charged. If it is avowed and direct,
such doctrines certainly will not spread. The principles rooted in human nature
will resist them; and the advocates of them will be soon disgraced. If, on the
contrary, it is only a consequence with which a doctrine is charged, it should
be considered how apt all parties are to charge the doctrines they oppose with
bad tendencies. It is well known, that Calvinists and Arminians, Trinitarians
and Socinians, Fatalists and Free-willers, are continually exclaiming against
one another's opinions as dangerous and licentious. Even Christianity itself
could not, at its first introduction, escape this accusation. The professors of
it were considered as Atheists, because they opposed Pagan idolatry; and their
religion was on this account reckoned a destructive and pernicious enthusiasm.
If, therefore, the rulers of a State are to prohibit the propagation of all
doctrines in which they apprehend immoral tendencies, an opening will be made,
as I have before observed, for every species of persecution. There will be no
doctrine, however true or important, the avowal of which will not in some
country or other be subjected to civil penalties. -- Undoubtedly, there are
doctrines* which have such tendencies. But the tendencies of speculative
opinions have often very little effect on practice. The Author of nature has
planted in the human mind principles and feelings which will operate in
opposition to any theories that may seem to contradict them. Every sect,
whatever may be its tenets, has some salvo for the necessity of virtue. The
philosophers who hold that matter and motion have no existence except in our
own ideas, are capable of believing this only in their closets. The same is
true of the philosophers who hold that nothing exists but matter and motion;
and at the same time teach, that man has no self determining power: that an
unalterable fate governs all things; and that no one is any thing that he can
avoid being, or does any thing that he can avoid doing. -- These philosophers
when they come out into the world act as other men do. Common sense never fails
to get the better of their theories; and I know that many of them are some of
the best men in the world, and the warmest friends to the true interests of
society. Though their doctrine may seem to furnish an apology for vice, their
practice is an exhibition of virtue; and a government which would silence them
would greatly injure itself. -- Only overt acts of injustice, violence or
defamation, come properly under the cogni^^nce of civil power. Were a person
now to go about London, teaching that property is founded in grace, I should,
were I a magistrate, let him alone while he did nothing but teach, without
being under any apprehension than that he would soon find a lodging in Bedlam.
But were he to attempt to carry his doctrine into its consequences by actually
stealing, under the pretense of his right as a saint to the property of his
neighbors, I should think it my duty to lay hold of him as a felon, without
regarding the opinion from which he acted.

I am persuaded, that few or no inconveniences would arise from such a
liberty. If magistrates will do their duty as soon as violence begins, or any
overt acts which break the peace are committed, no great harm will arise from
their keeping themselves neutral till then. Let, however, the contrary be
supposed. Let is be granted that civil authority will in this case often be too
late in its exertions; the just inference will be, not that the liberty I plead
for ought not to be allowed; but that there will be two evils, between which an
option must be made, and the least of which must be preferred. -- One is, the
evil just mentioned. -- The other includes in it every evil which can arise
from making the rulers of States judges of the tendency of doctrines,
subjecting freedom of enquiry to the control of their ignorance, and
perpetuating darkness, intolerance and slavery, I need not say which of these
evils is the least.

Of LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE, and CIVIL ESTABLISHMENTS of RELIGION.
IN LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE I include much more than Toleration. Jesus Christ has
established a perfect equality among his followers. His command is, that they
shall assume no jurisdiction over one another, and acknowledge no master
besides himself. -- It is, therefore, presumption in any of them to claim a
right to any superiority or pre-eminence over their brethren. Such a claim is
implied, whenever any of them pretend to tolerate the rest. -- Not only all
Christians, but all men of all religions ought to be considered by a State as
equally entitled to its protection as far as they demean themselves honestly
and peaceably. Toleration can take place only where there is a civil
establishment of a particular mode of religion; that is, where a predominant
sect enjoys exclusive advantages, and makes the encouragement of its own mode
of faith and worship a part of the constitution, of the State; but at the same
time thinks fit to SUFFER the exercise of other modes of faith and worship.
Thanks be to God, the new American States are at present strangers to such
establishments. In this respect, as well as many others, they have shown, in
framing their constitutions, a degree of wisdom and liberality which is above
all praise.

Civil establishments of formularies of faith and worship are inconsistent with
the rights of private judgment -- They engender strife -- They turn religion
into a trade -- They shore up error -- They produce hypocrisy and prevarication
-- They lay an undue bias on the human mind in its enquiries, and obstruct the
progress of truth. -- Genuine religion is a concern that lies entirely between
God and our own souls. It is incapable of receiving any aid from human laws. It
is contaminated as soon as worldly motives and sanctions mix their influence
with it. Statesmen should countenance it only by exhibiting in their own
example a conscientious regard to it in those forms which are most agreeable to
their own judgments, and by encouraging their fellow-citizens in doing the
same. They cannot as public men give it any other assistance. All besides that
has been called a public leading in religion, has done it an essential injury,
and produced some of the worst consequences.

The Church Establishment in England is one of the mildest sort. But even here
what a snare has it been to integrity? And what a check to free enquiry? What
dispositions favorable to despotism has it fostered? What a turn to pride and
narrowness and domination has it given the clerical character? What struggles
has it produced in its members to accommodate their opinions to the
subscriptions and tests which it imposes? What a perversion of learning has it
occasioned to defend obselete creeds and absurdities? What a burden is it on
the consciences of some of its best clergy, who, in consequence of being bound
down to a system they do not approve, and having no support except that which
they derive from conforming to it, find themselves under the hard necessity of
either prevaricating or starving? -- No one doubts but that the English clergy
in general could with more truth declare that they do not, than that they do
give their unfeigned assent to all and every thing contained in the thirty-nine
Articles and the Book of Common Prayer; and yet, with a solemn declaration to
this purpose, are they obliged to enter upon an office which above all offices
requires those who exercise it to be examples of simplicity and sincerity. --
Who can help execrating the cause of such an evil?

But what I wish most to urge is the tendency of religious establishments to
impede the improvement of the world. They are boundaries prescribed by human
folly to human investigation; and enclosures which intercept the light and
confine the exertions of reason. Let any one imagine to himself what effects
similar establishments would have in Philosophy, Navigation, Metaphysics,
Medicine or Mathematics. Something like this took place in Logic and
Philosophy; while the IPSE DIXIT of Aristotle and the nonsense or the schools
maintained an authority like that of the creeds of churchmen: And the effect
was a longer continuance of the world in the ignorance and barbarity of the
dark ages. But civil establishments of religion are more pernicious. So apt are
mankind to misrepresent the character of the Deity, and to connect his favor
with particular modes of faith, that it must be expected, that a religion so
settled will be what it has hitherto been -- a gloomy and cruel superstition
bearing the name of religion.

It has been long a subject of dispute, which is worst in its effects on
society, such a religion or speculative Atheism. For my own part, I could
almost give the preference to the latter. -- ATHEISM is so repugnant to every
principle of common sense, that it is not possible it should ever gain much
ground, or become very prevalent. On the contrary; there is a particular
proneness in the human mind to SUPERSTITION, and nothing is more likely to
become prevalent. -- ATHEISM leaves us to the full influence of most of our
natural feelings and social principles; and these are so strong in their
operation, that in general they are a sufficient guard to the order of society.
But SUPERSTITION counteracts these principles, by holding forth men to one
another as objects of divine hatred; and by putting them on harrassing,
silencing, imprisoning and burning one another in order to do God service. --
ATHEISM is a sanctuary for vice by taking away the motives to virtue arising
from the will of God and the fear of a future judgment. But SUPERSTITION is
more a sanctuary for vice, by teaching men ways of pleasing God without moral
virtue, and by leading them even to compound for wickedness by ritual services,
by bodily penances and mortifications, by adoring shrines, going pilgrimages,
saying many prayers, receiving absolution from the priest, exterminating
heretics, etc. -- ATHEISM destroys the sacredness and obligation of an oath.
But is there not also a religion (so called) which does this, by teaching that
there is a power which can dispense with the obligation of oaths, that pious
frauds are right, and that faith is not to be kept with heretics?

It is indeed only a rational and liberal religion; a religion founded on just
notions of the Deity as a being who regards equally every sincere worshipper,
and by whom all are alike favored as far as they act up to the light they
enjoy; a religion which consists in the imitation of the moral perfections of
an almighty but benevolent Governor of nature who directs for the best all
events, in confidence in the care of his providence, in resignation to his
will, and in the faithful discharge of every duty of piety and morality from a
regard to his authority and the apprehension of a future righteous retribution.
-- It is only THIS religion (the inspiring principle of every thing fair and
worthy and joyful, and which in truth is nothing but the love of God and man
and virtue warming the heart and directing the conduct.) -- It is only THIS
kind of religion that can bless the world, or be an advantage to society. --
This is the religion that every enlightened friend to mankind will be zealous
to promote. But it is a religion that the powers of the world know little of,
and which will always be best promoted by being left free and open.

I cannot help adding here, that this is in particular the Christian religion.
-- Christianity teaches us that there is none good but one, that is, God; that
he wills all men to be saved, and will punish nothing but wickedness; that he
desires mercy and not sacrifice (benevolence rather than rituals); that loving
him with all our hearts, and loving our neighbor as ourselves, is the whole of
our duty; and that in every nation he that fears him and works
righteousness is accepted of him. It rests its authority on the power of God,
not of man; refers itself entirely to the understandings of men; makes us the
subjects of a kingdom that is not of this world! and requires us to elevate our
minds above temporal emoluments, and to look forwards to a state beyond the
grave, where a government of perfect virtue will be erected under that Messiah
who has tasted death for every man. -- What have the powers of the world to do
with such a religion? -- It disclaims all connection with them; it made its way
at first in opposition to them; and, as far as it is now upheld by them, it is
dishonored and vilified.

The injury which civil establishments do to Christianity may be learnt from
the following considerations.

First. The spirit of religious establishments is opposite to the spirit of
Christianity. It is a spirit of pride and tyranny in opposition to the
Christian lowly spirit; a contracted and selfish spirit, in opposition to the
Christian enlarged and benevolent spirit; the spirit of the world in opposition
to the Christian heavenly spirit.

Secondly. Religious establishments are founded on a claim of authority in the
Christian church which overthrows Christ's authority. He has in the scriptures
given his followers a code of laws, to which he requires them to adhere as
their only guide. But the language of the framers of church establishments is
We have authority in controversies of faith and power. to decree rites and
ceremonies. We are the deputies of Christ upon earth, who have been
commissioned by him to interpret his laws, and to rule his church. You must
therefore follow us. The scriptures are insufficient. Our interpretations you
must receive as Christ's laws; our creeds as his doctrine; our inventions as
his institutions.

It is evident, as the excellent HOADLY has shown, that these claims turn
Christ out of the government of his own kingdom, and place usurpers on his
throne. -- They are therefore derogatory to his honor; and a submission to
them is a breach of the allegiance due to him. They have been almost fatal to
true Christianity; and attempts to enforce them by civil penalties, have
watered the Christian world with the blood of saints and martyrs.

Thirdly. The difficulty of introducing alterations into church establishments
after they have been once formed, is another objection to them. Hence it
happens, that they remain always the same amidst all changes of public manners
and opinions This is an inconvenience attending civil as well as ecclesiastical
establishments, which has been with great wisdom guarded against in the new
American constitutions, by appointing that there shall be a revisal of them at
the end of certain terms. This will leave them always open to improvement,
without any danger of those convulsions which have usually attended the
corrections of abuses when they have acquired a sacredness by time.
; and that a kingdom may go on for ages in idolatrous worship, after a general
conviction has taken place, that there is but one object of religious worship,
namely, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. What a sad scene of
religious hypocrisy must such a discordance between public conviction and the
public forms produce? At this day in some European countries, the absurdity and
slavishness of their hierarchies are seen and acknowledged; but being
incorporated with the state, it is scarcely possible to get rid of them.

What can be more striking than the State of England in this respect? -- The
system of faith and worship established in it was formed above two hundred
years ago, when Europe was just emerging from darkness and barbarity. The times
have ever since been growing more enlightened; but without any effect on the
establishment. Not a ray of the increasing light has penetrated it. Not one
imperfection, however gross, has been removed. The same articles of faith are
subscribed. The same ritual of devotion is practiced. -- There is reason to
fear that the absolution of the sick which forms a part of this ritual, is
often resorted to as a passport to heaven after a wicked life; and yet it is
continued. -- Perhaps nothing more shocking to reason and humanity ever made a
part of a religious system than the damning clauses in the Athanasian creed;
and yet the obligation of the clergy to declare assent to this creed, and to
read it as a part of the public devotion, remains.

The necessary consequence of such a state of things is, that,

Fourthly, Christianity itself is disgraced, and that all religion comes to be
considered as a state trick, and a barbarous mummery. It is well known, that in
some Popish countries there are few Christians among the higher ranks of men,
the religion of the State being in those countries mistaken for the religion of
the Gospel. This indeed shows a criminal inattention in those who fall into
such a mistake; for they ought to consider that Christianity has been
grievously corrupted, and that their ideas of it should be taken from the
New Testament only. It is, however, so natural to reckon Christianity to be
that which it is held out to be in all the establishments of it, that it cannot
but happen that such an error will take place and produce some of the worst
consequences. -- There is probably a greater number of rational Christians
(that is, of Christians upon enquiry) in England, than in all Popish countries.
The reason is, that the religious establishment here is Popery reformed; and
that a considerable body dissent from it, and are often inculcating the
necessity of distinguishing between the Christianity established by law and
that which is taught in the Bible. -- Certain it is, that till this distinction
is made, Christianity can never recover its just credit and usefulness.

Such then are the effects of civil establishments of religion. May heaven soon
put an end to them. The world will never be generally wise or virtuous or
happy, till these enemies to its peace and improvement are demolished. Thanks
be to God they are giving way before increasing light. Let them never show
themselves in America. Let no such monster be known there as HUMAN AUTHORITY IN
MATTERS OF RELIGION. Let every honest and peaceable man, whatever is his faith,
be protected there; and find an effectual defense against the attacks of
bigotry and intolerance. In the United States may RELIGION flourish. They
cannot be very great and happy if it does not. But let it be a better religion
than most of those which have been hitherto professed in the world. Let it be a
religion which enforces moral obligations; not a religion which relaxes and
evades them. -- A tolerant and Catholic religion; not a rage for proselitism.
-- A religion of peace and charity; not a religion that persecutes, curses and
damns. -- In a word, let it be the genuine Gospel of peace lifting above the
world, warming the heart with the love of God and his creatures, and sustaining
the fortitude of good men by the assured hope of a future deliverance from
death, and an infinite reward in the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and
Savior.

From the preceding observations it may be concluded, that it is impossible I
should not admire the following article in the declaration of rights which
forms the foundation of the Massachusett's constitution. -- In this State every
denomination of Christians demeaning themselves peaceably and as good subjects
of the commonwealth, shall be EQUALLY under the protection of the law; and no
subordination of any one sect or denomination to another shall ever be
established by law The NORTH CAROLINA constitution also orders that there shall
be no establishment of any one religious church or denomination in that place
in preference to any other.
.

This is liberal beyond all example. -- I should, however, have admired it more
had it been MORE liberal, and the words ALL MEN OF ALL RELIGIONS been
substituted for the words every denomination of Christians.

It appears farther from the preceding observations, that I cannot but dislike
the religious tests which make a part of several of the American constitutions.
-- In the Massachusett's constitution it is ordered, that all who take seats in
the House of Representatives or Senate shall declare their firm persuasion of
the truth of the Christian religion. The same is required by the Maryland
constitution, as a condition of being admitted into any places of profit or
trust. In Pennsylvania every member of the House of Representatives is required
to declare, that he acknowledges the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to
be given by divine inspiration. In the State of Delaware, that he believes in
God the Father, and in Jesus Christ his only Son, and in the Holy Ghost, one
God blessed forever-more. All this is more than is required even in England,
where, though every person however debauched or atheistical is required to
receive the sacrament as a qualification for inferior places, no other
religious test is imposed on members of parliament than a declaration against
Popery. -- It is an observation no less just than common, that such tests
exclude only honest men. The dishonest never scruple them.

MONTESQUIEU probably was not a Christian. NEWTON and (...) were not
Trinitarians; and therefore not Christians according to the commonly received
ideas of Christianity. Would the United States, for this reason, deny such men,
were they living, all places of trust and power among them?

Of EDUCATION.
SUCH is the state of things which I wish to take place in the united American
States. -- In order to introduce and perpetuate it, and at the same time to
give it the greatest effect on the improvement of the world, nothing is more
necessary than the establishment of a wise and liberal plan of EDUCATION. It is
impossible properly to represent the importance of this. So much is left by the
author of nature to depend on the turn given to the mind in early life and the
impressions then made, that I have often thought there may be a secret
remaining to be discovered in education, which will cause future generations to
grow up virtuous and happy, and accelerate human improvement to a greater
degree than can at present be imagined.

The end of education is to direct the powers of the mind in unfolding
themselves; and to assist them in gaining their just bent and force. And, in
order to this, its business should be to teach how to think, rather than what
to think; or to lead into the best way of searching for truth, rather than to
instruct in truth itself. -- As for the latter who is qualified for it? There
are many indeed who are eager to undertake this office. All parties and sects
think they have discovered truth, and that they alone are its advocates and
friends. But the very different and inconsistent accounts they give of it
demonstrate they are utter strangers to it; and that it is better to teach
nothing, than to teach what they hold out for truth. The greater their
confidence, the greater is the reason for distrusting them. We generally see
the warmest zeal, where the object of it is the greatest nonsense.

Such observations have a particular tendency to show that education ought to
be an initiation into candor, rather than into any systems of faith; and it
should form a habit of cool and patient investigation, rather than an
attachment to any opinions.

But hitherto education has been conducted on a contrary plan. It has been a
contraction, not an enlargement of the intellectual faculties; an injection of
false principles hardening them in error, not a discipline enlightening and
improving them. Instead of opening and strengthening them, and teaching to
think freely; it has cramped and enslaved them, and qualified for thinking
only in one track. Instead of instilling humility, charity, and liberality, and
thus preparing for an easier discovery and a readier admission of truth; it has
inflated with conceit, and stuffed the human mind with wretched prejudices.

The more has been learnt from such education, the more it becomes necessary to
unlearn. The more has been taught in this way, of so much the more must the
mind be emptied before true wisdom can enter. -- Such was education in the time
of the first teachers of christianity. By furnishing with skill in the arts of
disputation and sophistry, and producing an attachment to established systems,
it turned the minds of men from truth, and rendered them more determined to
resist evidence, and more capable of evading it. Hence it happened, that this
heavenly instruction, when first communicated, was to the Jews a stumbling
block, and to the Greeks foolishness; and that, in spite of miracles
themselves, the persons who rejected it with most disdain, and who opposed it
with most violence, were those who had been educated in colleges, and were best
versed in the false learning of the times: And had it taught the true
philosophy instead of the true religion, the effect would have been the same.
The doctrine that the sun stood still and that the earth moved round it, would
have been reckoned no less absurd and incredible, than the doctrine of a
crucified Messiah. And the men who would have treated such an instruction with
most contempt, would have been the wise and the prudent; that is, the proud
sophists and learned doctors of the times, who had studied the Ptolemaick
system of the world, and learnt, by cycles and epicycles, to account for all
the motions of the heavenly bodies.

In like manner, when the improvement of Logic in Mr. LOCKE'S Essay on the
Human Understanding was first published in Britain, the persons readiest to
attend to it and to receive it were those who had never been trained in
colleges; and whose minds, therefore, had never been perverted by an
instruction in the jargon of the schools. To the deep professors of the time,
it appeared (like the doctrine taught in his book on the reasonableness of
christianity) to be a dangerous novelty and heresy; and the University of
OXFORD, in particular, condemned and reprobated the author. -- The like
happened when Sir ISAAC NEWTON'S discoveries were first published. A romance
(that is, the Philosophy of DESCARTES) was then in possession of the
philosophical world. Education had rivetted it in the minds of the learned; and
it was twenty-seven years before NEWTON'S Principia could gain sufficient
credit to bring it to a second edition. -- Such are the prejudices which have
generally prevailed against new lights. Such the impediments which have been
thrown in the way of improvement by a narrow plan of education. -- Even now the
principal object of education (especially in divinity) is to teach established
systems as certain truths, and to qualify for successfully defending them
against opponents; and thus to arm the mind against convictiOn, and render it
impenetrable to farther light. Indeed, were it offered to my opinion which I
would have, the plain sense of a common and untutored man, or the deep
erudition of the proud scholars and professors in most universities, I should
eagerly prefer the former, from a persuasion that it would leave me at a less
distance from real wisdom. -- An unoccupied and simple mind I think infinitely
preferable to a mind warped by systems; and the entire want of learning better
than a learning, such as most of that is which hitherto has been sought and
admired -- A learning which puffs up, while in reality it is nothing but
profounder ignorance and more inveterate prejudice.

It may be worth adding here, that a narrow education (should it ever happen
not to produce the evils now mentioned) will probably produce equal evils of a
contrary nature. I mean, that there will be danger, when persons so educated
come to see the absurdity of some of the opinions in which they have been
educated, that they will become prejudiced against them all, and, consequently,
throw them all away, and run wild into skepticism and infidelity. -- At
present, in this part of the world this is a very common event.

I am by no means qualified to give a just account of the particular method in
which education ought to be conducted, so as to avoid these evils: That is, so
as to render the mind free and unfettered; quick in discerning evidence, and
prepared to follow it from whatever quarter and in whatever manner it may offer
itself. But certain it is, that the best mode of education is that which does
this most effectually; which guards best against filly prejudices; which
inflames most with the love of truth; which disposes most to ingenuity and
fairness, and leaves the mind most sensible of its own need of farmer
information. -- Had this been always the aim of education, mankind would now
have been farther advanced. -- It supposes, however, an improved state of
mankind; and when once it has taken place, it will quicken the progress of
improvement.

I have in these observations expressed a dislike of systems; but I have meant
only to condemn that attachment to them as standards of truth which has been
too prevalent. It may be necessary in education to make use of them; or of
books explaining them. But they should be used only as guides and helps to
enquiry. Instruction in them should be attended with a fair exhibition of the
evidence on both sides of every question; and care should be taken to induce,
as far as possible a habit of believing only on an overbalance of evidence; and
of proportioning assent in every case to the degree of that overbalance,
without regarding authority, antiquity, singularity, novelty, or any of the
prejudices which too commonly influence assent. -- Nothing is so well fitted to
produce this habit as the study of Mathematics. In these sciences no one ever
thinks of giving his assent to a proposition till he can clearly understand it,
and see it proved by a fair deduction from propositions previously understood
and proved. In these sciences the mind is inured to close and patient
attention; shown the nature of just reasoning; and taught to form distinct
ideas, and to expect clear evidence in all cases before belief. They furnish,
therefore, the best exercise for the intellectual powers, and the best defense
against that credulity and precipitation and confusion of ideas which are the
common sources of error.

There is, however, a danger to be avoided here. Mathematical studies may
absorb the attention too much; and when they do, they contract the mind by
rendering it incapable of thinking at large; by disqualifying it for judging of
any evidence except mathematical; and, consequently, disposing it to an
unreasonable skepticism on all subjects which admit not of such evidence. --
There have been many instances of this narrowness in mathematicians.

But to return from this digression, -- I cannot help observing on this
occasion, with respect to CHRISTIANITY in particular, that education ought to
lead to a habit of judging of it as it is in the code itself of Christianity;
that the doctrines it reveals should be learnt only from a critical and fair
enquiry into the sense of this code; and that all instruction in it should be a
preparation for making this enquiry and a communication of assistance in
examining into the proofs of its divine original, and in determining to what
degree of evidence these proofs amount, after allowing every difficulty its
just weight. -- This has never yet been the practice among Christians. The New
Testament has been reckoned hitherto an insufficient standard of Christian
Divinity; and, therefore, formularies of human invention, pretending to explain
and define it (but in reality misrepresenting and dishonouring it) have been
substituted in its room; and teaching these has been called teaching
Christianity. And it is very remarkable, that in the English Universities no
Lectures on the New Testament are ever read, or even suffered to be read; and
that, through all Christendom, it is much less an object of attention than the
systems and creeds which have been fathered upon it.

I will only add on this subject, that it is above all things necessary, while
instruction is conveyed, to convey with it a sense of the imbecility of the
human mind, and of its great proneness to error; and also a disposition, even
on points which seem the most clear, to listen to objections, and to consider
nothing as involving in it our final interest but an HONEST HEART.

Nature has so made us, that an attachment must take place within us to
opinions once formed; and it was proper that we should be so made, in order to
prevent that levity and desultoriness of mind which must have been the
consequence had we been ready to give up our opinions too easily and hastily.
But this natural tendency, however wisely given us, is apt to extend its proper
limits, and to render us unreasonably tenacious. It ought, therefore, like all
our other natural propensities, to be carefully watched and guarded; and
education should put us upon doing this. An observation before made should, in
particular, be inculcated, that all mankind have hitherto been most tenacious
when most in the wrong, and reckoned themselves most enlightened when most in
the dark. -- This is, indeed, a very mortifying fact; but attention to it is
necessary to cure that miserable pride and dogmaticalness which are some of the
worst enemies to improvement. -- Who is there that does not remember the time
when he was entirely satisfied about points which deeper reflection has shown
to be above his comprehension? Who, for instance, does not remember a time when
he would have wondered at the question, why does water run down hill? What
ignorant man is there who is not persuaded that he understands this perfectly?
But every improved man knows it to be a question he cannot answer; and what
distinguishes him in this instance from the less improved part of mankind is
his knowing this. The like is true in numberless other instances. One of the
best proofs of wisdom is a sense of our want of wisdom; and he who knows most
possesses most of this sense.

In thinking of myself I derive some encouragement from this reflection. I now
see, that I do not understand many points which once appeared to me very clear.
The more I have enquired, the more sensible I have been growing of my own
darkness; and a part of the history of my life is that which follows.

In early life I was struck with Bishop BUTLER'S Analogy of religion natural
and revealed to the constitution and course of nature. I reckon it happy for me
that this book was one of the first that fell into my hands. It taught me the
proper mode of reasoning on moral and religious subjects, and particularly the
importance of paying a duel regard to the imperfection of human knowledge. His
sermons also, I then thought, and do still think, excellent. Next to his works,
I have always been an admirer of the writings of Dr. CLARK. And I cannot help
adding, however strange it may seem, that I owe much to the philosophical
writings of Mr. HUME, which I likewise studied early in life. Though an enemy
to his Skepticism, I have profited by it. By attacking, with great ability,
every principle of truth and reason, he put me upon examining the ground upon
which I stood, and taught me not hastily to take any thing for granted. -- The
first fruits of my reading and studies were laid before the public in a
Treatise entitled, A REVIEW of the principal Questions and Difficulties in
Morals. This publication has been followed by many others on various subjects.
-- And now, in the evening of a life devoted to enquiry and spent in endeavors
(weak indeed and feeble) to serve the best interests, present and future, of
mankind, I am waiting for the GREAT TEACHER, convinced that the order of nature
is perfect; that infinite wisdom and goodness govern all things; and that
Christianity comes from God: But at the same time puzzled by many difficulties,
anxious for more light, and resting with full and constant assurance only on
this ONE truth -- That the practice of virtue is the duty and dignity of man;
and, in all events, his wisest and safest course.

Of the DANGERS to which the American States are exposed.
IN the preceding observations, I have aimed at pointing out the means of
promoting the progress of improvement in the United States of America. I have
insisted, particularly, on the importance of a just settlement of the FEDERAL
UNION, and the establishment of a well-guarded and perfect liberty in
speculation, in government, in education, and in religion. -- The United States
are now setting out, and all depends on the care and foresight with which a
plan is begun, which hereafter will require only to be strengthened and
ripened. This is, therefore, the time for giving them advice; and mean advice
(like the present) may suggest some useful hints. -- In this country, when any
improvements are proposed, or any corrections are attempted, of abuses so gross
as to make our boasts of liberty ridiculous The majority of the BRITISH House
of Commons is chosen by a FEW THOUSANDS of the dregs of the people, who are
constantly paid for their votes. -- Is it not ridiculous to call a country so
governed free? -- See a striking account of the state of the British
Parliamentary Representation in Mr. Burgh's Political Disquisitions, Vol. 1, p.
39, etc.
, a clamor immediately arises against INNOVATION, and an alarm spreads, lest
the attempt to repair should destroy. -- In America no such prejudices can
operate. There abuses have not yet gained sacredness by time. There the way is
open to social dignity and happiness; and reason may utter her voice with
confidence and success.

Of DEBTS and INTERNAL WARS.
I HAVE observed in the introduction to this Address, that the American States
have many dangers to shun. In what follows I shall give a brief recital of some
of the chief of these dangers.

The danger from an endless increase of PUBLIC DEBTS has been already
sufficiently noticed.

Particular notice has been likewise taken of the danger from INTERNAL WARS. --
Again and again, I would urge the necessity of pursuing every measure and using
every precaution which can guard against this danger. It will be shocking to
see in the new world a repetition of all the evils which have hitherto laid
waste the old world -- War raging where peace and liberty were thought to have
taken their abodes -- The points of bayonets and the mouths of cannon settling
disputes, instead of the collected wisdom of the confederation -- and perhaps
one restless and ambitious State rising by bloody conquests above the rest, and
becoming a sovereign State, claiming impiously (as Britain once did) full
authority to make laws that shall bind its sister States in all cases whatever,
and drawing to itself all advantages at their expense. -- I deprecate this
calamity. I shudder when I consider how possible it is; and hope those persons
are mistaken who think that such are the jealousies which govern human nature,
and such the imperfections of the best human arrangements, that it is not
within the reach of any wisdom to discover any effectual means of preventing
it; without encroaching too much on the liberty and independence of the States.
I have mentioned an enlargement of the powers of CONGRESS. Others have proposed
a consolidation of the powers of government in one PARLIAMENT representing all
the States, and superseding the particular parliaments by which they are now
separately governed. But it is obvious, that this will be attended with greater
inconveniences, and encroach more on the liberty of the States, than the
enlargement I have proposed of the powers of CONGRESS. -- If such a parliament
is not to supersede any of the other parliaments, it will be the same with
CONGRESS as at present constituted.

Of an UNEQUAL DISTRIBUTION OF PROPERTY.
IT is a trite observation, that dominion is founded on property. Most free
States have manifested their sense of the truth of this observation, by
studying to find out means of preventing too great an inequality in the
distribution of property. What tumults were occasioned at ROME in its best
times by attempts to carry into execution the Agrarian law? Among the people of
Israel, by the direction of heaven, all estates which had been alienated during
the course of fifty years, returned to their original owners at the end of that
term. One of the circumstances that has been most favorable to the American
States in forming their new constitutions of government has been the equality
which subsists among them.

The happiest state of man is the middle state between the savage and the
refined, or between the wild and the luxurious state. Such is the state of
society in CONNECTICUT, and some others of the American provinces; where the
inhabitants consist, if I am rightly informed, of an independent and hardy
YEOMANRY, all nearly on a level -- trained to arms, -- instructed in their
rights -- clothed in homespun -- of simple manners -- strangers to luxury --
drawing plenty from the ground -- and that plenty, gathered easily by the hand
of industry; and giving rise to early marriages, a numerous progeny, length of
days, and a rapid increase -- the rich and the poor, the haughty grandee and
the creeping sycophant, equally unknown -- protected by laws, which (being
their own will) cannot oppress; and by an equal government, which wanting
lucrative places, cannot create corrupt canvassings In this State, and also the
State of MASSACHUSETTS, NEW JERSEY, etc. any attempt to canvas, or even the
expression of a wish to be chosen, will exclude a candidate from a seat in the
House of Representatives. The same is true of any stain on his moral character.
and ambitious intrigue. -- O distinguished people? May you continue long thus
happy; and may the happiness you enjoy spread over the face of the whole earth!
-- But I am forgetting myself. There is danger that a state of society so happy
will not be of long duration; that simplicity and virtue will give way to
depravity; that equality will in time be lost, the cursed lust of domineering
show itself, liberty languish, and civil government gradually degenerate into
an instrument in the hands of the few to oppress and plunder the many. -- Such
has hitherto been the progress of evil in human affairs. In order to give them
a better turn, some great men ( Plato, Sir Thomas More, Mr. Wallis, etc.) have
proposed plans, which, by establishing a community of goods and annihilating
property, would make it impossible for any one member of a State to think of
enslaving the rest, or to consider himself as having any interest distinct from
that of his fellow-citizens. Such theories are in speculation pleasing; nor
perhaps are they wholly impracticable. Some approaches to them may hereafter be
made; and schemes of government may take place, which shall leave so little,
besides personal merit, to be a means of distinction, as to exclude from
society most of the causes of evil. But be this as it will; it is out of doubt
that there is an equality in society which is essential to liberty and which
every State that would continue virtuous and happy ought as far as possible to
maintain. -- It is not in my power to describe the best method of doing this.
-- I will only observe, that there are THREE enemies to equality against which
America ought to guard.

First; Granting hereditary honors and titles of nobility. Persons thus
distinguished, though perhaps meaner than the meanest of their dependents, are
apt to consider themselves as belonging to a higher order of beings, and made
for power and government. Their birth and rank necessarily dispose them to be
hostile to general liberty; and when they are not so, and discover a just zeal
for the rights of mankind, it is always a triumph of good sense and virtue over
the temptations of their situation. It is, therefore, with peculiar
satisfaction that I have found in the articles of confederation an order that
no titles of nobility shall be ever granted by the United States. Let there be
honor to encourage merit; but let them die with the men who have earned them.
Let them not descend to posterity to foster a spirit of domination, and to
produce a proud and tyrannical aristocracy. -- In a word, let the United States
continue for ever what it is now their glory to be -- a confederation of States
prosperous and happy, without LORDS -- without BISHOPS I do not mean by BISHOPS
any officers among Christians merely spiritual; but Lords spiritual, as
distinguished from Lords temporal, or Clergymen raised to pre-eminence, and
invested with civil honors and authority by a State establishment.

I must add, that by what is here said I do not mean to express a general
preference of a republican constitution of government. There is a degree of
political degeneracy which unfits for such a constitution. BRITAIN, in
particular, consists too much of the high and the low, (of scum and dregs) to
admit of it. Nor will it suit America, should it ever become equally corrupt.


-- and without KINGS.

Secondly; The right of primogeniture. The tendency of this to produce an
improper inequality is very obvious. The disposition to raise a name, by
accumulating property in one branch of a family, is a vanity no less unjust and
cruel, than dangerous to the interest of liberty; and no wise State will
encourage or tolerate it.

Thirdly; FOREIGN TRADE is another of the enemies against which I wish to
caution the united States. But this operates unfavourably to a State in so many
more ways than by destroying that equality which is the basis of liberty, that
it will be proper to take more particular notice of it.

Of TRADE, BANKS, and PAPER CREDIT.
FOREIGN trade has, in some respects, the most useful tendency. By creating an
intercourse between distant kingdoms, it extends benevolence, removes local
prejudices, leads every man to consider himself more as a citizen of the world
than of any particular State, and, consequently, checks the excesses of that
Love of our Country The love of our country is then only a noble passion when
it engages us to promote the internal happiness of our country, and to defend
its rights and liberties against domestic and foreign invasion, maintaining at
the same time an equal regard to the rights and liberties of other countries.
But this has not been its most common effects. On the contrary, it has in
general been nothing but a spirit of rivalship between different communities,
producing contention and a thirst for conquest and dominion. -- What is his
country to a Russian, a Turk, a Spaniard, etc. but a spot where he enjoys no
rights, and is disposed of by owners as if he was a beast? And what is his love
to his country but an attachment to degradation and slavery? -- What was the
love of their country among the Jews but a wretched partiality for themselves
and a proud contempt for other nations? Among the Romans also what was it,
however great in many of its exertions, but a principle holding together a band
of robbers in their attempts to crush all liberty but their own? --
Christianity has wisely omitted to recommend this principle. Had it done this,
it would have countenanced a vice among mankind. -- It has done what is
infinitely better -- It has recommended UNIVERSAL BENEVOLENCE.
which has been applauded as one of the noblest, but which, really, is one of
the most destructive principles in human nature. -- Trade also, by enabling
every country to draw from other countries conveniences and advantages which it
cannot find within itself, produces among nations a sense of mutual dependence,
and promotes the general improvement. -- But there is no part of mankind to
which these uses of trade are of less consequence than the American States.
They are spread over a great continent, and make a world within themselves. The
country they inhabit includes soils and climates of all sorts, producing not
only every necessary, but every convenience of life. And the vast rivers and
wide-spread lakes which intersect it, create such an inland communication
between its different parts, as is unknown in any other region of the earth.
They possess then within themselves the best means of the most profitable
internal traffic, and the amplest scope for it. Why should they look much
farther? What occasion can they have for being anxious about pushing foreign
trade; or even about raising a great naval force? -- Britain, indeed,
consisting as it does of unarmed inhabitants, and threatened as it is by
ambitious and powerful neighbors, cannot hope to maintain its existence long
after becoming open to invasion by losing its naval superiority. -- But this is
not the case with the American States. They have no powerful neighbors to
dread. The vast Atlantic must be crossed before they can be attacked. They are
all a well-trained militia; and the successful resistance which, in their
infancy and without a naval force, they have made to the invasion of the first
European power, will probably discourage and prevent all future invasions. Thus
singularly happy, why should they seek connexions with Europe, and expose
themselves to the danger of being involved in its quarrels? -- What have they
to do with its politics? -- Is there any thing very important to them which
they can draw from thence -- except INFECTION? -- Indeed, I tremble when I
think of that rage for trade which is likely to prevail among them. It may do
them infinite mischief. All nations are spreading snares for them, and courting
them to a dangerous intercourse. Their best interest requires them to guard
themselves by all proper means; and, particularly, by laying heavy duties on
importations, But in no case will any means succeed unless aided by MANNERS. In
this instance, particularly, there is reason to fear that an increasing passion
for foreign srippery will render all the best regulations ineffectual. And
should this happen, that simplicity of character, that manliness of spirit,
that disdain of tinsel in which true dignity consists, will disappear.
Effeminacy, servility and venality will enter; and liberty and virtue be
swallowed up in the gulf of corruption. Such may be the course of events in
the American States. Better infinitely will it be for them to consist of bodies
of plain and honest farmers, rather than opulent and splendid merchants. --
Where in these States do the purest manners prevail? Where do the inhabitants
live most on an equality, and most at their ease? Is it not in those inland
parts where agriculture gives health and plenty, and trade is scarcely known?
-- Where, on the contrary, are the inhabitants most selfish, luxurious, loose,
and vicious; and at the same time most unhappy? Is it not along the sea coasts,
and in the great towns, where trade flourishes and merchants abound? -- So
striking is the effect of these different situations on the vigor and
happiness of human life, that in the one population would languish did it
receive no aid from emigrations; while in the other it increases to a degree
scarcely ever before known.

But to proceed to some observations of a different nature --

The United States have, I think, particular reason to dread the following
effects of foreign trade.

By increasing importation to feed luxury and gratify prodigality, it will
carry out their coin, and occasion the substitution of a delusive paper
currency; the consequence of which will be, that ideal wealth will take place
of real, and their security come to depend (as the security of BRITAIN does) on
the strength and duration of a Bubble. -- I am very sensible that paper credit
is one of the greatest of all conveniences; but this makes it likewise one of
the greatest of all temptations. A public Bank, (while it can circulate its
bills) faciliates commerce, and assists the exertions of a State in proportion
to its credit. But when it is not carefully restricted and watched; when its
emissions exceed the coin it can command, and are carried near the utmost
length that the confidence of the public will allow; and when, in consequence
of this, its permanence comes to depend on the permanence of public credulity
-- In these circumstances, a BANK, though it may for a time (that is, while a
balance of trade too unfavourable does not occasion a run, and no events arise
which produce alarms) answer all the ends of a MINE from which millions may be
drawn in a minute; and by filling a kingdom with cash, render it capable of
sustaining any debts, and give it a kind of OMNIPOTENCE. -- In such
circumstances, I say, notwithstanding these temporary advantages, a public BANK
must at lost prove a great calamity; and a kingdom so supported, at the very
time of its greatest exertions, will be only striving more violently to
increase the horror of an approaching convulsion.

The United States have already verified some of these observations, and felt
in some degree the consequences to which I have alluded. They have been carried
through the war by an emission of paper which had no solid support, and which
now has lost all value. It is indeed surprising that, being secured on no fund
and incapable of being exchanged for coin, it should ever have obtained a
currency, or answered any important purpose.

Unhappily for Britain, it has used the means of giving more stability to its
paper-credit, and been enabled by it to support expenses greater than any that
have been yet known, and to contract a debt which now astonishes, and may
hereafter produce a catastrophe that will terrify the world. -- A longer
duration of the late war would have brought on this catastrophe immediately.
The PEACE has put it off for the present. God grant if still possible, that
measures may be adopted which shall put it off for ever.

Of OATHS.
OATHS are expedients to which all States have had recourse in order to obtain
true information and ascertain facts by securing the veracity of witnesses. But
I know not how to relish that imprecation which always makes a part of an oath.
Perhaps, there is no such necessity for it as is commonly imagined. An
AFFIRMATION solemnly made, with laws inflicting severe penalties on falsehood
when detected, would probably answer all the ends of oaths. -- I am, therefore,
disposed to wish, that in the United States imprecatory oaths may be abolished,
and the same indulgence in this respect granted to all which is now granted to
the Quakers. But I am afraid they will think this too dangerous an experiment;
and what is of most consequence is to avoid,

First, Such a multiplicity of oaths as will render them too familiar.

And, Secondly, A slight manner of administering them. ENGLAND, in this
respect, seems to be sunk to the lowest possible degree of degeneracy. Oaths
among us are required on so many occasions, and so carelessly administered, as
to have lost almost all their use and efficacy. It has been asserted, that,
including oaths of office, oaths at elections, custom-house oaths, etc. etc.
there are about a million of perjuries committed in this kingdom annually. --
This is one of the most attrocious of our national iniquities; and it is a
wonder if we are not to be visited for it with some of the severest of God's
judgments.

Of the NEGRO TRADE and SLAVERY.
THE NEGRO TRADE cannot be censured in language too severe. It is a traffic
which, as it has been hitherto carried on, is shocking to humanity, cruel,
wicked, and diabolical. I am happy to find that the United States are entering
into measures for discountenancing it, and for abolishing the odious slavery
which it has introduced. 'Till they have done this, it will not appear they
deserve the liberty for which they have been contending. For it is
self-evident, that if there are any men whom they have a right to hold in
slavery, there may be others who have had a right to hold them in slavery. -- I
am sensible, however, that this is a work which they cannot accomplish at once.
The emancipation of the Negroes must, I suppose, be left in some measure to be
the effect of time and of manners. But nothing can excuse the United States if
it is not done with as much speed and at the same time with as much effect, as
their particular circumstances and situation will allow. I rejoice that on this
occasion I can recommend to them the example of my own country. -- In Britain,
a Negro becomes a freeman the moment he sets his foot on British ground.

CONCLUSION.
SUCH is the advice which I would humbly (but earnestly) offer to the United
States of America. -- Such are the means by which they may become the seats of
liberty, science, peace, and virtue; happy within themselves, and a refuge to
the world.

Often, while employed in writing these papers, have I wished for a warning
voice of more power. The present moment, however auspicious to the United
States if wisely improved, is critical; and, though apparently the end of all
their dangers, may prove the time of their greatest danger. I have, indeed,
since finishing this Address, been mortified more than I can express by
accounts which have led me to fear that I have carried my ideas of them too
high, and deceived myself with visionary expectations. -- And should this be
true -- Should the return of peace and the pride of independence lead them to
security and dissipation -- Should they lose those virtuous and simple manners
by which alone Republics can long subsist -- Should false refinement, luxury,
and impiety, spread among them; excessive jealousy distract their governments;
and clashing interests, subject to no strong control, break the federal union
-- The consequence will be, that the fairest experiment ever tried in human
affairs will miscarry; and that a REVOLUTION which had revived the hopes of
good men and promised an opening to better times, will become a discouragement
to all future efforts in favor of liberty, and prove only an opening to a new
scene of human degeneracy and misery.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT,
THE following letter was written by the late M. Turgot, Comptroller General
(in the year 1774, 1775, and 1776,) of the finances of FRANCE. It contains
observations in which the United States are deeply concerned; and, for this
reason, I now convey it to them, not doubting but that the eminence of Mr.
Turgot's name and character will recommend it to their attention, and that it
will do honor to his memory among all the friends of public liberty.

To Mr. PRICE, In LONDON. PARIS, March 22d, 1778.
MR. FRANKLIN has in your name, Sir, put into my hand the new edition of your
observations upon civil liberty, etc. I am under double obligations to you: In
the first place for your work, of which I long since knew the value, and which
I had read with avidity, notwithstanding the multiplied occupation by which I
was besieged, when it first appeared in print; and in the next place for your
civility in suppressing that imputation of my want of address What is here said
refers to an account of M. Turgot's administration in the second tract on Civil
Liberty and the War with America, p. 150, etc. In the first edition of this
tract I had mentioned improperly his want of address among the other causes of
his dismission from power. This occasioned a letter from him to inform me of
the true reasons of his dismission, and begun that correspondence of which this
letter is a part, and which continued till his death.
which you had mixed with the praise otherwise given to me in your additional
observations. I might deserve it, if you had not in view any other want of
address than my inability to discover the springs of intrigue which played off
against me a set of men much more adroit in that science than I am, than I ever
shall be or than I wish to be. But it appeared that you imputed to me the
indiscretion of having flown in the face of the general opinion of my nation;
and there, I think, you neither did justice to me nor to my nation, which is
much more enlightened than is generally supposed amongst you, and in which
perhaps it is easier than even with you to call the public attention to ideas
of reason. I judge so from the infatuation of the British in the prospect of
conquering America, which continued until the adventure of Burgoyne made them
in some degree open their eyes. I judge so from the system of monopoly and
exclusion which governs all your political writers upon commerce, except Mr.
Adam Smith and Dean Tucker, -- a system which is the true prime cause of your
separation from your colonies. I judge so from all your polemic writings upon
questions which have been agitated for 20 years back, and in which, before
yours appeared, I do not recollect to have read a single piece where the true
point in dispute has been rightly taken up. I have been unable to conceive how
a nation which has cultivated so successfully every branch of the natural
sciences can have continued so greatly beneath herself in the most interesting
science in the whole -- that of the public good; a science wherein the liberty
of the press, which she alone enjoys, must have given her a mighty advantage
over all the rest of Europe. Is it national pride which has hindered you from
making the utmost of that advantage? Is it because you were something better
off than others, that you have turned all your speculations toward persuading
yourselves that you were quite happy? Is it the spirit of party and the wish to
form self-support out of popular opinions, which has retarded your progress,
by leading your politicians to treat as empty See Mr. Burk's letter to the
Sheriffs of Bristol.
metaphysics all those speculations which tend to establish some fixed
principles respecting the rights and true interests of individuals and of
nations? How comes it to pass that you are almost the first among your writers
who have given just notions of liberty, and who have exposed the falsehood of
that thread-bear sentiment of the greatest class of even the most republican
writers, that liberty consists in being subject only to laws, as if a man
oppressed by an unjust law, was free? That is would not be true even if we
suppose all the laws to be work of the entire nation assembled; because, in
fact, the individual has certain rights which the nation cannot take from him
but by violence and an illegal use of the general force. Although you have had
regard to this truth, and have explained yourself thereon, yet perhaps it
merits your care to develope it more at large, considering the little attention
which has been paid to it by even the most zealous partisans of liberty.

It is also a strange thing that it should not be counted, in England, a
trifling observation to say, that one nation can never have right to govern
another; and that such a government could have no foundation but that of force,
upon which also are supported robbery and tyranny; that the tyranny of a people
is of all known in the world the most cruel and most intolerable, leaving no
remedy for the oppressed; whereas a single despot is at length stopped in his
career by self-interest, he has the check of remorse, or that of public
opinion; but a multitude makes no calculations, feels no remorse, and decrees
to itself glory when in fact it deserves the utmost disgrace.

Events are to the English nation a terrible commentary upon your book. For
some months they have been falling headlong with accelerated rapidity. The knot
is untied in regard to America. Lo she is independent irrecoverably! Will she
be free and happy? Will this new people, situated so advantageously to give to
the world the example of a constitution wherein man may enjoy all his rights,
exercise freely his whole faculties and be governed only by nature, by reason,
and by justice, know how to form such a constitution? know how to fix it upon
everlasting foundations, by guarding against all the causes of division and
corruption which would sap it by degrees and overturn it?

I am not satisfied, I own, with any constitutions which have as yet been
framed by the different American States. You blame with reason that of
Pennsylvania for exacting a religious test upon admission into the
representative body. It is much worse in others. There is one of them, I think
that of the Jersies which requires It is the constitution of DELAWARE that
imposes the test here meant. That of the JERSIES, with a noble liberality,
orders that there shall never in that province be any establishment of any one
religious sect in preference to another, and that all Protestants of all
persuasions shall enjoy equal rights and privileges.
* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *. I see in the greatest number an unreasonable
imitation of the usages of England. Instead of bringing all the authorities
into one, that of the nation, they have established different bodies, a House
of Representatives, a Council, a Governor, because England has an House of
Commons an House of Lords and a King. They undertake to balance these different
authorities as if the same equilibrium of powers which has been thought
necessary to balance the enormous preponderance of royalty could be of any use
in republics, formed upon the equality of all the citizens; and as if every
article which constitutes different bodies was not a source of divisions. By
striving to prevent imaginary dangers they have created real ones. They wish to
have nothing to fear from the clergy, and yet unite them under the barrier of a
common proscription. By rendering them ineligible they become formed into a
body and such an one as is foreign to the State. Why should one citizen who has
the same interest as others in the common defense of liberty and property be
excluded from contributing toward it his genius and virtues, because he is of
a profession in which genius and virtue are essentials? The clergy are only
dangerous when they compose a body in the State; when they conceive themselves
to have rights and interests as a body; or when it has been devised to have a
religion established by law; as if men could have any right, or any interest in
regulating each other's consciences; as if an individual could sacrifice to
civil society those opinions on which he thinks his eternal salvation depends,
or as if mankind were to be saved or to be damned by the lump. Wherever true
toleration, that is to say, the absolute incompetency of government over the
conscience of individuals is established, there an ecclesiastic when he is
admitted into the national assembly is but a citizen, when he is excluded from
it he becomes again an ecclesiastic.

I do not perceive that there has been sufficient cause to reduce to the lowest
possible number the kinds of business which the government of each State is to
manage; or to separate the objects of legislation from those of the general and
from those of the particular and local administration; to constitute standing
local assemblies, which, by performing all the functions of detail in
government, may free the general assemblies from engaging therein, and so take
from the members of these latter all means and perhaps all desire, to abuse an
authority which should only be occupied about objects general in their nature,
and therefore unconnected with the little passions which agitate mankind.

Nor do I perceive that due attention has been paid to the great distinction,
and the only one founded in nature between two classes of men; I mean those who
are proprietors in lands and those who are not; -- to their interests and
consequently to their different rights, with respect to legislation, to the
administration of justice and of the police, to the contribution for public
expenses and to their employments.

No fixed principle is established in regard to imposts. Each State is supposed
to be at liberty to tax itself at pleasure, and to lay its taxes upon persons,
consumptions, or importations, that is to say, to erect an interest contrary to
that of the other States.

They suppose in all the States that they have a right to regulate commerce.
They even authorize the executive bodies or the governors to prohibit the
exportation of certain products upon particular occasions; so far are they from
seeing that the law of entire liberty of all commerce is a corollary of the
right of property; so far are they still involved in the mists of European
illusions.

In the general union of the States with one another, I do not see a coalition,
a melting of all the parts together, so as to make the body one and
homogenious. It is only an aggregate of parts, always too separate, and which
have a continual tendency to divide themselves, from the diversity of their
laws, their manners, and their opinions; from the inequality of their present
strength, but more still from the inequality of their future progress. It is
only a copy of the republic of Holland; and this had no occasion like that of
America to dread the possible growth of any one of its provinces. This whole
edifice has been supported until now upon the false basis of very ancient and
very vulgar policy; upon the prejudice which nations, which provinces may have
concerning interests as a province or a nation, different from those which
individuals have of being free and defending their properties against robbers
and conquerors: -- a pretended interest in carrying on more commerce than
others, in not buying merchandise of foreigners, but in forcing these to
consume our productions and the works of our manufacturers: -- a pretended
interest in having more extensive territory, in acquiring such and such a
province, such and such an island, such and such a town -- an interest in
inspiring other nations with dread: -- an interest in excelling them in the
glory of arms or that of arts and sciences.

Each of these prejudices is cherished in Europe, because the ancient rivalry
of nations and the ambition of princes obliges all States to be in arms for
defense against their armed neighbors, and to regard a military force as the
principal object of government. Such is the good fortune of America that she
cannot have for a long time an external enemy to fear, if she does not become
self-divided; therefore she may and ought to estimate, at their true value,
those pretended interests, those grounds of discord which are all that can
endanger her liberty. The sacred principle of freedom of commerce being
considered as the necessary consequence of the right of property, all the
pretended interests of trade vanish before it. The pretended interest of
possessing more or less territory vanishes also when the territory is justly
considered as not belonging to nations but to the individual proprietors of the
soil; and when the question whether such a canton or such a village ought to
belong to such a province or such a state is not decided by the pretended
interest of that province or that state, but by the interest which the
inhabitants of the canton or village have in assembling themselves to transact
their affairs in places the most convenient of access; when that interest,
being measured by the length or shortness of the way which a man can go to
manage his most important without too much injury to his common concerns,
becomes the natural and physical measure of the extent of the jurisdiction of
States, and establishes, throughout, an equilibrium This seems to be a
particular of much consequence. The great inequality now existing, and which is
likely to increase, between the different States, is a very unfavourable
circumstance; and the embarassment and danger to which it exposes the union
ought to be guarded against as far as possible in laying out future States.
of extent and power which annihilates all the danger of inequality and all
pretentions of superiority.

The interest of being dreaded becomes null when we make no demands, and when
we are in a situation not to be attacked even by a considerable force with any
hope of success.

The glory of arms cannot compare with the felicity of living in peace. The
glory of arts and sciences belongs to every one who has spirit to acquire it.
There is an harvest of this kind abundantly sufficient for every body; the
field of discoveries cannot be overtilled, and ALL profit by the discoveries of
ALL.

I imagine that the Americans have not felt these truths so strongly as they
ought to be felt by them for the security of the happiness of their posterity.
I blame not their leaders. There was a necessity of providing against the
exigencies of the moment by some sort of union, against an enemy actually
present and formidable; there was not time to correct the defects in
constitutions or in the models of the different States. But there should be a
dread of perpetuating them, and an application to the means of uniting opinions
and interests, and of reducing them to uniform principles throughout all the
States.

In this pursuit there are great obstacles to be overcome.

In Canada -- the constitution of the Romish clergy and the existence of a body
of noblesse.

In New England -- a spirit of rigid puritanism still subsisting, and always,
as is said, in some degree intolerant. This has been ONCE true of the
inhabitants of NEW ENGLAND, but it is not so NOW. See p. 41.


In Pennsylvania -- a great number of citizens who supporting a religious
principle that the profession of arms is illicit, of course revolt from such
arrangements as are necessary to lay the foundation of a military strength for
the State, in an union of the quality of citizen with that of soldier and
militia-man; which brings on a necessity of making the business of war a
business for mercenaries.

In the middle States -- a too great inequality of fortunes and more especially
the great number of black slaves whose slavery is incompatible with a good
political constitution, and who, even if set at liberty, would still give
embarrassment by forming two people in one State.

Throughout -- prejudices, an attachment to established forms, an habitude of
certain taxes, a dread of such as should be substituted in their place, the
vanity of those States who have thought themselves the most powerful, and an
unhappy beginning of national pride.

I think the Americans are bound to agrandise themselves not by war but by
cultivation. If they leave at their backs those immense deserts which extend
even to the western ocean, a mixture of the banished and other vile subjects
escaped from the correction of laws may there settle with the Savages, and
compose swarms of robbers, who would ravage America as the Barbarians of the
North have ravaged the Roman empire; hence another danger, -- the necessity of
being in arms on the frontiers and living in a continual state of war. The
settlements near to these would consequently be more warlike than the rest: and
that inequality of military force would be a terrible spur to ambition. The
remedy for this inequality would be to maintain a standing force to which all
the States should contribute according to their population; but, the Americans
who have still all the fears which the English ought to have, dread nothing
more than a permanent army. They are in the wrong. Nothing is easier than to
connect the constitution of a permanent army with the militia, so that the
militia may thence become better, and liberty thus be rendered more secure. But
it is far from easy to calm their fears on this head.

Here you see are many difficulties; and, perhaps, the secret interests of
powerful individuals will unite with the prejudices of the vulgar to resist the
efforts of true sages and true citizens.

It is impossible to refrain from fervent wishes that this people may arrive at
all the prosperity of which it is susceptible. It is the hope of the human
race. It may become their model. It should prove to the world in fact that men
may be free and tranquil, and may rid themselves from the many shackles which
tyrants and impostures of every garb have endeavored to impose on them, under
a pretext of the public good. It should give an example of political freedom,
of religious freedom, of the freedom of commerce and of industry. The asylum
which it opens to all the oppressed of all nations, ought to console the whole
earth. The facility of taking advantage of this to get free from the effects of
bad governments will oblige such governments to grow just and enlightened; and
the rest of the world will by degrees open their eyes upon that bubble of
illusions wherein politicians have lulled themselves. But, for this America
ought to become guarantee, and that she will never come to be what your
ministerial writers have so often repeated, an image of our Europe, an amas of
divided powers, quarrelling about territories or the profits of commerce, and
continually cementing the slavery of the people with their own blood.

All men of understanding, all the friends humanity should at this time unite
their knowledge and join their reflections to those of the sage Americans to
contribute the great work of their legislation. This, Sir, would be worthy of
you. I wish I may kindle up your zeal: And, if in this letter I have allowed
myself to be hurried on by my own ideas further than was proper, that wish has
been my only motive, and will, as I hope, excuse me where I may have been
tedious to you. I am desirous that the blood which has flowed, or which may it
still flow in this quarrel, should not be useless toward the happiness of
mankind.

Our two nations are about to do each other much injury, though neither of them
will from thence reap any real profit. The increase of debts and expenses * * *
* * * * * * * * * *, and the ruin of a great number of citizens will perhaps be
the only result. England appears to me to be nearer to it than France. If,
instead of this war, you had been able to behave with a good grace from the
very beginning; if policy had been allowed to do before hand what she will
infallibly be forced to do in the end; if the national opinion could have been
brought to allow your government to prevent what has happened, supposing it to
have been foreseen, if it could have consented outright to the independence of
America, without making war upon any one, I firmly believe that Britain would
have lost nothing by the change. Now she will lose whatever she has expended,
or shall yet expend: She will experience a great diminution for some time in
her commerce, and great internal confusion, if she is forced into a bankruptcy;
and, be that as it may, a great loss of political influence abroad.

But this last article is of very small import to the real happiness of a
people; and I am not at all of Abbe Rainal's opinion in your motto. I do not
think that this will bring you to be a contemptible people and throw you into
bondage.

Your misfortunes will perhaps on the contrary, produce the effect of a
necessary amputation. They may be the only means of saving you from the
gangreene of luxury and corruption. If in your agitations you could correct
your constitution by making elections annual, by distributing the right of
representation more equally and in better proportion to the interests of those
represented, you would gain perhaps as much as America by this revolution;
because your liberty would remain to you, and your other losses would soon be
repaired with that, and by that.

You should judge, Sir, from the frankness with which I open myself to you upon
these delicate points, of the esteem with which you have inspired me, and of
the satisfaction which I feel upon observing that there is some resemblance in
our modes of thinking. I promise myself that this confidence will rest with you
only. I even beg you not to answer me at large by the post, because your letter
would be infallibly opened in our offices: and they would discover me to be far
too much a friend to liberty for a minister, even for a minister in disgrace.

I have the honor to be, With the utmost regard, Sir, Your most humble And most
obedient servant, TURGOT.

Note for page 6th.
Who could have thought, in the first ages of the world, that mankind would
acquire the power of determining the distances and magnitudes of the sun and
planets? -- Who, even at the beginning of this century, would have thought that
in a few years they would acquire the power of subjecting to their wills the
dreadful force of lightening, and of flying in aerostatic machines? -- The last
of these powers, though so long undiscovered, is only an easy application of a
power always known and familiar. Many similar discoveries may remain to be
made, which will give new directions to human affairs; and it may not perhaps
be too extravagant to imagine that (should civil government throw no obstacles
in the way) the progress of improvement will not cease till it has excluded
from the earth, not only VICE and WAR, but even DEATH itself, and restored that
PARADISAICAL state, which, according to the MOSAIC history, preceded our
present state.

Note for page 45th.
The imperfection of REAL knowledge may often produce an unreasonable
incredulity. Had the best philosophers been told a few years ago that there
existed fishes which had the command of LIGHTENING, and always used it to kill
their prey, they would have thought the information absurd and ridiculous.


