AN ADDRESS TO THE People called QUAKERS, Concerning the Manner in which they
treated Timothy Davis, for writing and publishing a Piece on Taxation; and also
concerning the Treatment many others met with from them, for joining with him,
since he was disowned, in the Acts of public Worship.

Signed in Behalf of the Committee who prepared this Address, by Joseph Taber.

BOSTON: Printed by T. and J. FLEET, 1784.

Advertisement.
WE have thought it proper to inform the Reader, that we wrote to our former
Brethren some time past, informing them of the following Address, and that it
was nearly ready for the press, giving them an invitation to read it before it
was printed, with a view, that if they could discover, and manifest to us any
errors that it contained, we should be glad to correct them; and if we could
have been so happy as to have convinced them of some mistakes we think they
have made in the present case in controversy, we should not have had occasion,
so publicly* to have exposed them; but they having had sufficient time to
consider the matter since we wrote, and we not having received any answer,
conclude they do not intend to give any; we therefore think they will have no
just cause to complain of our proceeding to print the following Piece without
making any farther application to them.

Dartmouth, 21st 6mo. 1784.
An ADDRESS, etc.
THE concern which our former Brethren have expressed, on several occasions,
and at several times, for the peace and harmony of the the Church, is worthy of
attention: But whether they consider their incorporate Body, or Church, to be
so, in distinction from all others, they have not in this Controversy, clearly
told us. If they mean by the true Church, all those who are born again from
above by the incorruptible Seed and Word of God, that lives and abides
forever; and that these are not restricted to their own Church, but are to be
found in every other Christian Society all over the World, we freely and fully
acquiesce in this sentiment -- That this is the sincere belief of the Society
in general we cannot doubt, or call in question; But remark, with concern, that
the line of conduct which those have pursued, who were immediately concerned in
disowning us is not favorable to such an opinion, which we trust will be fully
evinced before we close this Address. Whether our idea of the true Church, in
every respect, coincides with theirs must, for the present, remain
undetermined; but that in what is necessary to preserve its peace and unity we
are not, in every respect, agreed, is very clear from the different measures we
have pursued for that purpose -- We have thought it necessary in order* not
only to preserve, but to restore that peace and unity that has been disturbed
in the Society by the present controversy, to investigate the whole of their
conduct, as well as ours, in that case, that it might, if possible, appear who
were the faulty cause of it, which they have constantly declined since Timothy
Davis was disowned about which the uneasiness on our part, arose -- how far
they labored to suppress any thing of that nature before, will, we trust, in
the following lines be manifested.

They allege that every Church has an indisputable right to judge of the
fitness or unfitness of their members to be continued as such.

No one, we apprehend, will dispute this; but then it ought to be considered
that it is possible that a Church may misuse their members and abuse this
right. -- This is what we complain of -- how justly we hope also to make appear
to the satisfaction of the unprejudiced reader.

They say, that the constitution of their Church is such that it affords
sufficient opportunity for us members to vindicate their several causes while
they are under-dealing, by appeals from lesser to superior meetings, without
those meetings being called upon after they have fully heard, considered,
determined and settled a matter.

We answer, That the Church in general gives this liberty is not the matter in
question; but whether that right, in the present case, has been suffered fully
and freely to operate without any interruption, is the matter now in question,
and what we wish to have fairly held up to light, that it may be made manifest
whether their proceedings against us, or ours in our own defense was dictated
and influenced by the Light or not? It is an unhappiness with some, that they
are so prejudiced in favor of their own deeds, they are very averse to having
them brought to the impartial examination of the Light, lest they should be
reproved: How far this will apply to our opposers, in the present case, we
submit to the unprejudiced part of such who are acquainted with the present
controversy.

We think it not unseasonable here to take notice of what they say in a Letter
superscribed to Joseph Taber, and those in whose behalf he signed a Letter,
dated at Dartmouth 14th 7 mo. 1783. which is as follows, viz. It seems -- you
have seen fit to attempt a Prosecution by way of Indictment, a matter of such a
nature, as we apprehend, was never before heard of from any professing
themselves to be the People called Quakers, and which we think the truly
thoughtful among you cannot approve.

We answer. That it appears incontestably true, that Friends have frequently
had recourse to the civil Powers for redress, when under oppression or
persecution; this would have been nothing more had we been concerned in it --
That there was a Prosecution is very true, that happened at Rochester;
occasioned by one Jonathan Macy's publicly opposing Benjamin Bumpus in his
public ministry in Friends Meeting House there, to a very great majority of
such Friends who favored our cause: That, under this (...), such opposition
was not only very injudicious, but a very unlawful disturbance, notwithstanding
they might have a right in the Meeting House, yet being a very small minority
they could have no just pretensions of a right to disturb so large a majority
as there was present at that time, no less interested in the Meeting house than
they. But Macy, with his attendance, it seems, by the aforesaid Letter, were
sent to preserve Peace and good Order; but unhappy for them, they either forgot
their errand, or those from whom they received it did not understand the nature
of such an errand. If such disturbances as this be the effects of such friendly
attention, as they mention in their letter to us, we should be glad that such
marks of it might not be often repeated, otherwise their exhortation to patient
suffering may want their example to give it weight and energy -- Macy did not
pretend to object to what he had heard, but was so inconsiderate as to allege
that he had no right to appear in the Ministry there, being disowned. To this
right, which is pretended to be forfeited by being disowned by them we shall
speak more particularly hereafter.

But with respect to the beforementioned Prosecution, although it is strongly
urged against us, we know not of any one of our Member being concerned in it,
either less or more, directly or indirectly; yet, with gratitude, we acknowledge
the kindness of such others who justly pitied and felt a sympathy for us under
our oppression, and thought it quite time to endeavor a suppression of such
disorder. It is a little surprising that the Authors of this Letter should have
suffered themselves to have been so imposed on -- Men in such high esteem in
the Society for their sagacity, penetration, judgment and discerning, one would
have thought would have sifted a Case with a little more accuracy, wherein
their Reputation would necessarily suffer, they might know, if this insinuation
should fail: But it is an unhappiness with some people that they too easily
yield their assent to that, which they wish to be true of such as they
disaffect, often to the wounding of their own Reputation at least. We think
however, that even this mistake, as great as it is, is capable of being
improved to their, and our advantage, by affording them such a lesson of
instruction as they might not have had, or that they might have overlooked, by
leading them to consider that however great their religious experience has
been, they are yet liable to mistakes, and to be imposed on by wrong
information; and that too from among themselves -- being convinced of this,
they may be led to turn their thoughts toward their former conduct, and see if
they cannot find something out of the line of Truth there, which we think will
not be very difficult, if they are disposed to indulge a little impartial
enquiry -- We doubt not but that we shall be able, before we conclude, to
manifest something in the line of conduct they have pursued, that will hardly
bear the light unreproved, without entering very minutely into every
circumstance of their proceedings against us, and shall therefore say little of
the manner in which the Meeting for Sufferings treated the subject when they
first took it up; they were however the first that discovered to us any
uneasiness in the case.

But with respect to the beforementioned Prosecution; suppose we had been
concerned in it, although we were not, yet we think it would have been much more
eligible than such measures as have been adopted by Friends formerly, in taking
such by the shoulders as they did not approve as Ministers, and such who have
attempted to sit in their meetings of Church Discipline, whom they did not
approve as Members, and leading or forcing them out of a meeting house,
sometimes with much difficulty and not a little confusion, without any
authority from any civil Magistrate, but done altogether in an arbitrary and
forcible manner. If we had approved, and adopted, such a mode of Conduct we
might easily have dispossessed such who have given us disturbance where we are
a majority; but if ever such are dispossessed, where we have the rule in any
Meeting House, it will be, we think by such authority as is Divinely instituted
for the punishment of evildoers and the praise of them that do well, mentioned
by the great Apostle to the Gentiles in the 13th chap. of his Epistle to the
Romans, where he asserts, not only that the institution of Magistracy is
Divine, but also the power of the civil Magistrate under that institution,
which we tenderly recommend to their consideration, and observe in the words of
the same Apostle that when civil Rulers are in their proper places, they are
not a "terror to good works, but to the evil:" Not a terror to those who meet
together peaceably to worship their Maker in the way that they are persuaded he
requires of them, but to those who unreasonably disturb them while they are
performing this important duty. "Will thou then not be afraid of the Power? Do
that which is good and thou shall have praise of the same." Let us then not
assume that Authority with which we have no right to intermeddle, never having
been legally introduced: But as such kind of disturbances come under the
cognizance of civil Jurisdiction, we ought to submit them to their decision, if
we cannot in a mild amicable manner settle them between ourselves, and not
indulge that selfish dictatorial disposition that seeks to be judge in its own
cause.

It is not from an inclination to expose them as a religious Society, that we
expose their proceedings against us to public view, but from a necessity of
vindicating ourselves against their charges and insinuations. We have waited
long, and suffered much from them unjustly in our religious characters in the
Society, while we wished those of it who were immediately concerned in
disowning us to see and acknowledge their mistakes in their proceedings against
us, that the Society may in general be undeceived, who have accustomed
themselves, too much, to the following of the voices of such as they take for
their leaders, without examining for themselves; which is quite repugnant to
that Doctrine that inforceth the necessity of every one's knowing the Lord for
himself: Where this is experienced, they not only know him but know him to be
their Teacher, which removes the occasion of that servile dependence, many have
on their Ministers and some other active and assuming Members.

As they, by their aforesaid Letter, render all hope or encouragement of their
being disposed to recede from their errors in this case, we think we shall be
excusable, at least, in giving a just account of some of their proceedings
against us; but as some part thereof is unpleasant to revive, the undertaking
will be disagreable; yet as there appears a desire, in some well-disposed
persons in the Society, to be informed how the matter was conducted, and they
also being under the influence of misrepresentation, we feel a willingness to
oblige them.

It has been observed, that the Meeting for Sufferings was the first that
manifested, to us, any uneasiness with Timothy Davis's Piece on Taxation, who
have found means to extend their influence through most of the proceedings of
the Society against him, which proved to be a circumstance not favorable to
his cause.

It was, after this, introduced into the Monthly Meeting of Sandwich, and as
far as they acted upon it at that time, they proceeded, in general, agreeable
to the Rules of the Society, and restored him to his former station in the
Church, and for that time dismissed the subject; where it might finally have
terminated, had it not been for a few disaffected members, who, it is probable,
with a view to recommend themselves to some other members of influence, in
other parts of the Country, under the same prejudices, by some means or other
conveyed it back to the Meeting for Sufferings, where the uneasiness
originated, under a pretension, that the aforesaid Monthly Meeting had been
misled: But allowing, for the present, that it had been misled, which was far
from being the case, this was not the way to set it right unless they thought
to mend one error by committing another -- According to the Rules established
in the Society, it ought to have been carried from the Monthly Meeting to the
Quarterly Meeting, by a complaint against the proceedings of the Monthly
Meeting in that case; where he would have had a hearing, if they had allowed
him the liberty provided in such cases, and the Monthly Meeting would have had
a right to have vindicated their proceedings in the case; but we shall see,
before we conclude, how that Meeting was treated, and how tamely they submitted
to it, as unreasonable as the demand upon them was.

If it be asked why they neglected to carry this case in the usual channel to
the Quarterly and Yearly Meeting, and why they carried it to the Meeting for
Sufferings.

We answer, It is hard to say, from the circumstances of their proceedings,
whether they acted from a want of understanding their own Rules, or whether
they were apprehensive, that if he was allowed to defend his own cause, it
would render their success against him too precatious. However, be that as it
may, the Meeting for Sufferings, when they received it, ought immediately to
have dismissed it, with directions to the Monthly Meeting, that if any of her
members remained dissatisfied, the way was open to the Quarterly and Yearly
Meeting, for redress.

How those disaffected members came to meet with such unjust countenance from
the Meeting for Sufferings, is hard to reconcile with that justice and
christian decorum that it ought to be possessed of; for, it seems, they thought
themselves sufficiently qualified by hearing them ex part, to carry the matter
forward to the Yearly Meeting: And they as insensible of their duty and his
right, proceeded to act upon it ex part also.

If it be said they acted no further upon it than to give their advice.

We answer, Admitting they proceeded no further, yet, when we see how important
they consider their advice, and would have others, we shall find that it falls
little short of a final judgment, especially in this case; and that the
subordinate Meetings are little more than their executioners in such cases. See
the Advice and Direction of a Committee of the Yearly Meeting, appointed in
this case, which is as follows, viz.

We the Committee, appointed by our last Yearly Meeting, to visit Sandwich
Quarter, have, after visiting the adjournment of your last Quarterly Meeting,
proceeded to visit Sandwich Monthly Meeting, and advised them to take up the
matter respecting Timothy Davis, and conduct therewith according to the
Direction of said Yearly Meeting, communicated to you. And it is our advice,
that the Quarterly Meeting take the same under immediate notice, and afford
them your assistance, from time to time, until the work be completed. And if
any of your members shall so far disregard the ADVICE and DIRECTION of said
Yearly Meeeting, as to endeavor to obstruct the progress of this necessary
work, that you advise and direct your Monthly Meeting to take notice of such
disorderly persons, and treat them accordingly.

2d 10th mo. 1778.
To the Quarterly Meeting next to be held for Sandwich.
Obadiah Wheeler, Daniel Cass, Stephen Morrel, Jabez Wing, Timothy Peasly.
Josiah Southwick, Daniel Anthony.



Here we think none can hesitate how important they consider their advice, and
would have their members* Their noncompliance with it or laboring to obstruct
its force subjects them to a being dealt with, the consequence of which is, if
they will not comply, they must be disowned: Witness the case of Ebenezer
Gaskil, whose disownment originated in his neglecting a compliance with the
advice of the Elders where he lives, concerning his public appearance in the
ministry, where no doctrinal errors were ever alleged against him, as we have
ever heard of -- As the advice of the yearly Meeting is held in this point of
view, and Timothy Davis's case not only treated accordingly, but he not having
opportunity to vindicate his cause after their taking it up the second time, he
was virtually judged and condemned unheard.

But it is objected on the contrary, that the yearly Meeting treated the matter
with so much tenderness, that they sent a Committee to treat with him on the
subject in dispute.

We answer, that a moderate examination will sufficiently manifest this to be a
mistake. If there was a Committee appointed by the yearly Meeting for that
purpose, they failed in it, for there never was any committee from them, in
that case, that visited him by a particular appointment, and if there had been
one appointed particularly in that case, yet if they were only authorized to
advise and admonish him, and not to hear and determine the matter in dispute,
he was nevertheless condemned without a hearing. There was a committee
appointed by the yearly Meeting to visit the monthly or quarterly Meeting of
Sandwich, who made it in their way to visit Timothy, who told them that he
could freely receive them in their private capacities, but not as a committee,
legally appointed in that service, for that matter was never legally before
that Meeting, and consequently they could not be a legal committee, therefore
he could not confer with them as such, which to do, would be to countenance
such irregularity as ought to be discountenanced by every judicious
conscientious person.

As partial and irregular as their proceedings were, the Monthly Meeting, who
had before restored him to his former station, were reduced to a compliance
with the direction of the yearly Meeting, and reassumed the subject, and
accordingly soon disowned him; who, if they had refused, were liable to have
been disowned, or to have had their Meeting taken from them, or dissolved. This
Meeting also appointed a Committee of admonition to treat with him, but he did
not acknowledge their authority, for the reasons beforementioned, in the
instance of the yearly Meeting Committee, he being tender of the religious
rights and liberties of his christian Brethren. Nor was there the remotest
prospect of his having a free and impartial hearing at this Meeting,
circumstanced as it was, under awe of the yearly Meeting. Indeed the whole
conduct of that Meeting in this case, very clearly manifested that they
intended to carry their point; this we were fully convinced of when they first
took the matter out of its proper channel, after it had been settled by the
Monthly Meeting, and therefore thought it would answer no good purpose to
follow them in their various, and uncertain windings and turnings from one
thing to another, to answer their partial views.

As the Monthly Meeting had at first fully gone into the subject, and had all
the advantage of hearing of it fairly stated and explained, it was no less than
calling upon that Meeting to give judgment twice in one case or to execute the
judgment of the Yearly Meeting contrary to their own. Which conduct, to use an
expression of theirs, is not very savory, nor can we think, that in their
present state, they are very good judges of what is truly so, in a religious
sense.

The right of defending one's self before any judges whatever, either civil or
religious, is held very sacred by all judicious, conscientious people, and
ought never to be given up, or infringed by any Society whatever. The Apostle
Paul seems to have had a very clear sense of that liberty when making his
defense before King Agrippa, and expresses himself on that occasion, as
follows, I think myself happy, King Agrippa, because I shall answer for
myself this day before thee touching all the things whereof I am accused of the
Jews. We cannot but doubt that the Yearly Meeting, when they had this matter
under consideration were insensible of such tender sentiments and feelings, or
they would have called upon him to have answered for himself, touching all the
things whereof he was accused, not by the Jews, or Pharisees, but by a Spirit
which, we fear, too generally presided among them -- Perhaps they were
apprehensive, that if he was allowed that liberty, it might be a means of
strengthening, if not increasing his friends, and they could not then be
certain but that they might be too powerful for such who wished to prevail
against him.

If there remains any true sense of feeling with those who were so active and
busily employed against him, it must, we think, lay very heavy upon them.

However lost to this tender religious right any of that Society may be at
present, it appears that they, formerly, had a very clear sense of, and regard
for if, by their making such large provision for it by appeals from lesser to
superior Meetings: First from Monthly to Quarterly, and finally to the Yearly
Meeting.

If it be said, this practice is still continued.

We answer, the name of it is; but not the use and design of such appeals, they
being superceded, at least in the present case, by a partial application being
made to the Yearly Meeting for advice. The carrying of it by way of the Meeting
for Sufferings to the Yearly Meeting for advice, naturally forecloseth, and
rendereth futile all attempts to appeal to that Meeting.

Whereas, if this christian provision and care was attended to as it ought, it
would very clearly manifest the impropriety, and absurdity, of calling upon the
same Meeting to give a counter judgment in the same case, or to reverse their
former judgment. To make up a judgment in a case, no further than to give
advice, only by a partial hearing, where a case is liable to come by appeal,
betrays very great weakness, as well as insincerity; and what one would hope no
man of candor would be active in.

It is nevertheless urged by some, that he might have appealed from the
judgment of the Monthly Meeting, who disowned him, and have had a hearing.

We answer, that we are very sensible of that, and as clearly sensible, that
they took care to fortify themselves against any appeal that he could make,
unless to him who judges righteously, who never (...) in counsel nor varied in
judgment. Timothy not having had opportunity to vindicate his cause, gave his
opposers all the opportunity they could wish, to spread their influence through
the Society, that there was no kind of reason to hope for success by appealing
to a Quatterly, or Yearly Meeting, from the judgment of a Monthly Meeting, by
whose direction, and under whose influence they acted in disowning him. The
idea of appealing from one, to another, by whose judgment, and under whose
influence the first acted, must be considered as one of the greatest
absurdities, and an appeal in that case a mere empty name.

It is objected, that where Monthly Meetings are weak, there have been frequent
instances of application being made to superior Meetings for advice, which when
they have had, they have conformed to, without making any uneasiness in the
Society.

Answer: It is not improbable this may have been the case; the question is not
how easily they may have imposed on their Members in time part, but whether
such imposition is capable of defense upon christian principles. Unless the
Church has always been infallible in judgment, which they do not pretend,
positively, to assert, it will not be safe to follow her advice implicitly --
no doubt it can be made very clear, that she, and the members under her
jurisdiction, have made many such mistakes -- The thing to be considered is
whether in those cases the interest, spiritual or temporal, or the reputation
of any one or more of her members was concerned, and whether they were liable
to be brought by appeals to such meeting as had given their advice already? If
not, the case is clear they had a right to apply there for advice. But if they
were liable to be brought to such meeting, where such advice originated, and
either interest, or reputation was liable to be affected, they are in danger of
suffering in consequence of such meeting being prejudiced in favor of their
former advice, when they give judgment. It is generally very hard for such
meetings to recede from their former advice, lest it should incur the odium of
instability; especially as they have said so much of an infallible judgment in
the Church; but their frequent mistakes very clearly manifest that they do not
always make use of it, which we think is a pity, it they are really possessed
of it -- It appears, we think, very clear, that such meetings ought to have so
tender a regard to the rights of their members, as not, so far to prejudge any
case, at least, that is liable to come before them by appeal, as to give their
partial advice in it, but wait to have it regularly brought before them and
keep themselves as clear of prepossession as possible.

That the weakness of a meeting may indeed operate against the right of the
aggrieved, we have a sorrowful instance in the present Case, for want of
discretion or a will in Timothy Davis's Judges to do him justice; but where
this is the case it is not likely to mend the matter by applying to a superior
Meeting for advice, where it is liable to come by appeal.

As it appears that every disputable case in a Monthly Meeting, is liable to
have its final issue at the Yearly Meeting, we cannot see what just advantage
can be proposed, by first applying there for advice, unless by the consent of
both sides of the question: An advantage no doubt may be gained, but not a just
one. If the Case is so circumstanced, that the advice of a Yearly Meeting is
rendered really necessary by the weakness of a Monthly Meeting or otherwise, we
can think of no more just and equitable way of proceeding, than to let it have
its regular course there by appeal, where, if they have not already given their
advice or judgment in the case, there will be some prospect of having justice
done; each party having a right to be heard; and where that right, in time
past, has generally been allowed.

Some have urged, that he had full liberty to vindicate his cause at the
Monthly Meeting, when they first took the matter under consideration.

To this we answer, it is very true that he had that liberty, and the
consequence of it was, he was restored to his former station in the Church by a
Committee of seven Friends, all of their own choosing, and it is not improbable,
that he would have been favored with the like success, if he had had an
opportunity to have defended his case through the whole process.

It may not be improper here to observe, that he had no other voice in the
choice of the Committee who restored him to his former station, that a negative
one, which he made use of so far as to object to such as he thought
disqualified for that service; which is by no means equal to a mutual choice;
for though such a Committee may consist of such, as one may have no particular
objection to, yet there may not be any one of them such a one would have any
reason to make choice of. However, as scanty as this liberty is, it is objected
to, as being much too large: Larger they say than what is consistent with their
Discipline; and that his being even present when the aforesaid Committee was
appointed, was an intrusion; but we must confess it that is the case, both we
and Timothy remain still insensible of it. -- It has generally been the
practice within the compass of this Yearly Meeting, to allow a negative voice
to the person under dealing; how arbitrary they may be in other Yearly or
General Meetings we cannot pretend to say, but if it be true, that they do not
admit even a negative voice in similar cases, they ought to be considered as
being indeed very arbitrary, much more so than can be supported by civil or
Christian principles.

Among such objections we find one in a Letter from a Member of another Yearly
Meeting to Timothy Davis, but from a tender regard to the character of the
Author and his brethren, we shall conceal his name, but as his letter is a
little extraordinary, we shall take the liberty to transcribe a passage from
it, which is as follows, viz. As far as I have understood, thou will hardly
allow thy self to be properly disowned, because thy Case was left to a
Committee, chosen by the Monthly Meeting, and that Committee brought it in
little or no offense (as I have understood) but why so, because thou was
willing from thy teeth out to condemn the publishing that Piece, which had a
tendency to undermine and lay waste the judgment of the sensible part of the
Body, but not to condemn the contents of it. Why surely this was a very weak
Committee (perhaps thy choice was also in it) which appears to have had too
little regard to the sincerity of a member, in condemning his misconduct. It
may be thou wast present when the Committee was chosen in that monthly meeting,
so I was informed, and did object to such as would not suit thy turn, if so,
well might thy Friends judge thy bewildered state, and that thy acknowledgment,
in that part, was no more than from the teeth out; in this case, according to
the good Rules amongst us, thou wast a disorderly person to intrude thy self in
the Monthly Meeting of business, after thy matter was brought there. Truly it
was high time for Friends, of the neighboring meetings, to assist that weak
meeting over which by thy great influence, thou had almost over powered. And
how can thou blame Friends for endeavoring to maintain the good Rules
established among them, let all reasonable men judge in this matter.

If by good rules he means those by which they conducted this matter, his
making his appeal to reasonable men, we think, will rather operate against him,
if the matter was to be judged by such: Men of a different character would be
much likelier to favor his cause. We think it will hardly be for the
reputation of the Society, or those rules be refers to, to have them brought
under the examination of Reason. His charge of insincerity is very injurious as
well as unjust. If his meaning can be collected from what he says, we think it
must be this, viz. Timothy's acknowledgment must be insincere, or to use his
own words, from the teeth out, because he only condemned the publication or
rather the manner of it, and not the matter contained in the Piece. It is not
hard to see that this conclusion is very unnatural and injudicious, for the
matter of a performance may be very good, when the manner by which it is
effected may be very much amiss: It needs no great penetration to see this --
The truth of the matter is strictly this: They have a Rule that requires their
members, when any of them propose to publish any thing, by means of the Press,
that they lay it before the Meeting for Sufferings, which Timothy not only
neglected to do, but proceeded to publish a piece when he had received their
advice to the contrary, they having by some means got intelligence of the Piece
he had wrote. This is thought to be a very great Trangression; but there are
some circumstances attending this matter, that are a very great alleviation,
viz. when he first received the advice from them respecting the not publishing
his piece, he expected that the leading part of the Society were that quiet,
peaceable People which they have ever professed themselves to be, and that as a
body they would not, at least, interest themselves in the dispute between
Great Britain and the Colonies, but when he, afterward, met with several of
their publications, especially from Philadelphia, he was obliged, to his great
grief, to change his sentiments concerning them in that respect; from those
publications it appeared very clear that they interested themselves very deeply
in the said public dispute, which was also farther manifested by many of them
refusing to pay Taxes to the American Government; all which he considered as
inconsistent with their former principles and practice, and might involve them
in much unnecessary Sufferings; to prevent which he was induced to publish the
aforesaid Piece on Taxation, not expecting, under these circumstances. to meet
with any encouragement from the Meeting for Sufferings: But however, when he
came fully to consider the circumstances of publishing his Piece without first
laying it before the Meeting for Sufferings, for their approbation, he could do
no less than consider it as a mistep; for let the Society be as much out of the
way as they might, he considered that it did not license him to commit one
error to mend another, and therefore told them that he was sorry he had not
paid more attention to the beforementioned Rule, and laid his Piece before
them, before he published it, or words to that purpose, which they were so far
satisfied with, that they gave him no more trouble about transgressing the
aforesaid Rule, but then took in hand the matter contained in the Piece, and
because he would not condemn that, they disowned him; although it does not appear
that it contains any matter inconsistent with the ancient, and approved
practice of the Society, from their first appearance as such until very lately.

There appeared at that time, very different Sentiments, both with respect to
paying Taxes, and the present Revolution; but many that were in favor of the
Revolution, when they began to feel the weight of increasing Taxes, began to
exclaim against it, and continue to find much fault with the present
Government. There remains, however, a very considerable, as well as respectable
number who continue to justify their ancient and approved practice of paying
general mixed Taxes under every change of Government, who are apprehensive that
they, on the other hand, by disclaiming the practice of paying such Taxes, are,
to use the expressions of the beforementioned Letter writer, laboring to
undermine and lay waste Friends Testimony in that case, which must involve them
in much Suffering, that, to considerate people, appears very unnecessary, to
the grief and sorrow of many of their most sensible experienced members, who
were desirous of continuing and supporting a practice that so nearly concerned
the Peace of Society, both civil and religious.

When this matter was first taken under consideration by the Monthly Meeting,
it appeared that the refusing to pay Taxes was making its way into Society with
too much success, by such who embraced that sentiment of refusing to pay taxes,
etc. who soon became very active and assuming, and according to what has been
observed, labored to bear down every thing that appeared in favor of Timothy
Davis's cause; and took the freedom to complain of intrusion, though without
cause, yet, with as much assurance as if their novel opinions had been received
as articles of faith from their first appearance as a religious Society.

We do not blame them for the sentiment of refusing to pay Taxes, merely
because it is new, but because we think it an error; but suppose it were true,
it is very imprudent to press it so hard, seeing it is new, as to disown any
one for publicly opposing of it. It would be much more Christian like to
exercise a little patience until it is more generally received and established.
A Sentiment's being either new or old, ought never to be a reason for either
receiving or rejecting it; but its being old, and generally received, demands a
very close examination and clear conviction before we part with it. A thing's
being true or false, ought to be the only reasons for which we either receive
or reject it, but we doubt it is an unhappiness with many, that they believe,
or reject, according to the sentiments of those with whom they wish to continue
in favor, whether it be the Church or particular persons.

Timothy was so far from indulging an inclination to intrude himself where he
had no right, or where his right might even be suspected, although without any
reason, that he addressed himself to the meeting, who where about to appoint a
Committee to hear his case, in the following manner. Friends, if my being
present, at the appointment of this Committee, is disagreeable I will withdraw,
as I have no inclination to give uneasiness to any. And received for answer,
that they had no objection to his being present, or words to that purpose, and
he was sensible, they could have no reasonable objection: That this Letter
writer's charge against him, as being an intruder, and a disorderly person for
being present at the Meeting after his case was brought there where the
aforesaid Committee was appointed, is very indecent and even abusive.

But to proceed. After he was disowned, it became a question of importance with
many judicious well-disposed members, that, as he appeared to be illegally
disowned, whether in that case it ought to affect his right in Society? Many of
whom were determined in the negative; partly in consideration of that just
maxim which the Society formerly, when under suffering, were very willing to
take the advantage of, viz. That which is not legally done is not done; and
partly from a consideration that their proceedings against him were without any
just cause, after he had acknowledged his fault in publishing his Piece without
the consent of the Meeting for Sufferings. They were also soon brought under
Dealing for joining him in Prayer, as it is pretended to be a breach of their
Rules to join with one in that duty not a member of their Church: Many of them
notwithstanding continued to join him for sometime, who were at length
terrified into a compliance with their orders, out of fear of being disowned,
and some after they had been disowned on that account and continued to join him
for some time, went back and made them satisfaction -- There were a large
number disowned for joining him, as above, in the duties of external worship,
of which there still remain with him a very hopeful number, among whom is
Benjamin Bumpus, a man of a fair character as a Minister of the Gospel.

The greatest reason, they confess, that inclined them to join Timothy Davis
and Benjamin Bumpus in their public devotion, was, that they thought themselves
fully convinced that they were divinely favored in it, and therefore thought
it not only safe, but an indispensible duty to join with them or any others
favored in like manner. It is a duty, that we should think every one must
acknowledge, to join with those that we are convinced our great Lord and Master
joins with by his sacred influence; nor durst many of them refuse,
notwithstanding the terror of being disowned was often held up to them for
their discouragement; thinking that such rules as required such a compliance,
as lays its members under a necessity of acting contrary to the will of Him who
only has a right to all our obedience, ought not to be considered as binding.
Many, nevertheless, were, at first, frightened into a compliance, from
insinuations, closely urged by some, that could much easier terrify weak minds
than convince the wise, that whatsoever the Church bound on Earth was bound in
Heaven: Not considering that That which is acted even by the Church, if it is
not consistent with the will of Heaven, will never be ratified there, and that
there is some room to think that her conduct, in the present case, is not very
consistent with the Divine Will, we think is very clear.

It has been objected by some, that to join in prayer with such who are
disowned, is an encouragement to them to continue in a state of separation,
which they wish to discourage by an example of disapprobation.

Answer: To us this appears extremely weak, however plausibly expressed. -- Do
they think their example of such importance, that it will over-balance that
Divine approbation and encouragement we receive from the kind and tender
influence of our great Lord and Master: Can they not see the absurdity? -- They
will not say, surely, that His aiding and assisting in Prayer; or Preaching, is
no encouragement to those duties. But some of them say, He may possibly assist
them for a while, in order to bring them off from it, that they may come and be
reconciled to Friends.

Answer: It appears to us a little odd that a person should be encouraged in a
thing to bring him off from it. If they had said that He sometimes witholdeth
his sensible influence to let us see, and feel, our dependence on him, it would
have been talking like experienced Christians.

Some indeed do not care to say that they think those who are disowned, ever
are assisted in Prayer, until they are reconciled to Friends.

Answer: We suppose some are doubtful in this respect, which to us discovers a
very great want of true religious experience, which would furnish with such
Christian charity as disposes us to think humbly of ourselves, and to be
charitable in our thoughts of others. Do they think that a being a member of
their Church is so absolutely necessary a qualification in order to appear in a
Duty of that obligation, that a person can, by no means pray acceptably without
it, and that the Almighty does so strictly adhere to their orders in that case,
as not to influence any unless that qualification be added? -- Do they think He
has as much partiality for them, as they have for themselves? This (...) idea
that this sentiment, in this case, very naturally suggests, though we are far
from insinuating that it is a general received opinion among them. Such as
favor the opinion of not joining in prayer with such who are disowned, we
suppose ground it chiefly on the two following passages of Scripture: The first
is thus expressed as above, viz. Whatsoever ye bind on Earth shall be bound in
Heaven, etc. If what they, either bind or loose on Earth, is not done in the
Counsel of God, it never will meet his approbation. --

The second contains these words, viz. "If thou bring thy gift to the Altar,
and there rememberest that thy Brother has ought against thee; leave there thy
gift before the Altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy Brother, and
then come and offer thy gift." This we think is not very pertinently urged in
this case when compared with their idea of the Gospel Ministry, for they very
justly observe, that no man ought to take this gift, or honor, to himself,
except he is called of God as was Aaron; or in other words of the Apostle, viz.
"A necessity is laid upon me, and woe is me if I preach not the Gospel!" What
will they do with this necessity? Is it in their power to dismiss it when they
please?

We think that, though a brother may allege any thing against a Minister, if it
is not a just charge, it cannot justly be supposed that he will be less
sensible of his necessity to improve his gift, which cannot justly be supposed
to be so pliant as to conform to an unjust charge of a brother, or the partial
decision of a Church; and therefore this Text will not very well apply in this
case, unless they adopt the sentiment of preaching by notes, and consider them
as the gift alluded to by our Savior: This, we confess, may be left at the
Altar, or any where else, at the discretion of the Preacher* If one person
charge another with any thing that is not true, it cannot properly be said he
has any thing against him, or if it be true, if it be not a fault it is the
same case. -- That their charge against Timothy Davis cannot justly be called a
fault, we think appears very clear, and will, we trust, be further manifested.

It may further be considered, that it is no less a breach of their rules to
refuse to join with one who is a member, than it is to join with one who is
not; therefore as it appears that we, according to their discipline, are not
legally disowned, such disownment ought not to affect our liberty, or right in
the Church, they therefore by refusing to join him in prayer, have counteracted
their own rules, and according to them they ought to be dealt with, and if they
refuse to make suitable satisfaction, they ought to be disowned, if the matter
could operate consistently.

It is the general sentiment of such who are disinterested in the dispute, and
who are acquainted with the circumstances of their conduct and sentiments with
respect to the present revolution, that they were too much sharpened by
political disaffection, which gives the greatest uneasiness and
dissatisfaction of any particular circumstance attending the present
controversy to us whom they have disowned, and will remain a powerful obstacle
in the way of a reconciliation, until they, properly and effectually, remove
it, by acknowledging their error in disowning of us by virtue of such
influence. If it be asked how this appears? We answer, from what many of the
most active and severe against us have, with much freedom, expressed in
conversation on the subject of the controversy between Great Britain and
America, as well as from several of their publications, especially that which
they call their Ancient Testimony, etc. before alluded to.

There is something in their proceedings in this case, under such influence,
that so very plainly and clearly discovers an aspect of insincerity and
disingenuity, when colored over with religious pretensions, that it renders a
reconciliation, at least, very difficult, if not impracticable upon christian
principles, unless they retract their proceedings against us. -- We, however,
sincerely wish them well in every sense of the word; but cannot be free to
unite with them in their present situation. We do not mention this from any
personal disrespect to any of them; but could not well suppress what we
earnestly wish them to consider; and are led to think, that if they truly
ponder the matter in that Wisdom which is from above, "which is first pure,
then peaceable; then gentle and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good
fruits, and without partiality or hypocrisy," they will clearly see that the
present unhappy division originated in their political disaffection, as what
Timothy Davis wrote by no means called for such usage from them, nor was it by
any means inconsistent with the long approved practice of the Society; we
therefore think that it naturally, and justly, lies with them, who have
misused us, to make way for a reconciliation, if ever such a thing is rightly
effected.

Some of them say, that they see no less an attachment, in the Piece he wrote
on Taxation, to the Americans.

Answer: Supposing that to be the case, which we cannot fully grant, they were
not the proper persons to deal with him until they had first taken the Beam out
of their own eyes. It appears, we confess, from that Piece, that he was so far
a friend to the American Government, as to urge the lawfulness of paying Taxes
to it as Friends have done to the paying them under every other change of
Government, and why not to the present?

It is objected, That if he, as well as they, was at some times actuated by
political influence, why does he fault them? Where is the difference between
them in that case?

Answer: We have not yet granted that he was in that, or any other public
performance, actuated by political influence: But suppose he was, and had been
equally faulty; the best thing we can think of, would have been for them
equally to have extended their charity and forbearance toward each other. In
this respect there was a very wide difference between them, for it does not
appear by any means, that he had even the remotest thought of withdrawing his
charity from them, merely on account of their political sentiments, nor did he
wish them to be brought under church dealing in consequence of them: But they
would by no means indulge his.

If it be said that they would not have taken any notice of his if he had not
published them, which were exceedingly disagreeable to Friends.

Answer: So did they, which were no less disagreeable to him and his Friends.
He published his sentiments no farther than to show the reasonableness and
expediency of paying Taxes to the present Government consistent with their
universal practice in time past, with a view to prevail with them to keep up a
uniformity of conduct in that respect. But if he had manifested himself to be
as partially in favor of America as they were in favor of Great Britain, it
would have been but just to have let one case have been a balance for the
other, with respect to any church demands. But this, it seems, would not very
well consist with that spirit of Domination that they appear to be so very
anxious for in the church. Can it be thought that they wished to suppress his
Publication, that their's might be the more successful? If this was really the
case it was indeed very ungenerous, which there is but too much reason to
suspect, by the line of conduct they have pursued against him; in which there
is some things so dark and obscure, that it is hard, if not impossible, to
reconcile them with that candor and generosity of sentiment that ought ever to
characterise every professor of Christianity.

It remains a dispute with some, whether Timothy was disowned for the matter
contained in the Piece in dispute, or for some circumstances attending the
Publication; it has generally been thought that he was disowned for both,
until we received the Testimony they gave forth against him, which puts the
matter out of dispute, by which it appears he was disowned for the matter
contained in the piece only, which is as follows, viz.

Whereas Timothy Davis, a Member of our religious Society, has published a
piece on the subject of Taxation, etc. which contained matter altogether
Dissatisfactory to Friends, and inconsistent with our religious Testimony, for
which much labor has been bestowed without its desired effect.

We are therefore constrained to give forth our Testimony against him, the said
Timothy Davis, and deny him of remaining any longer a Member of our Society,
until he be convinced of his misconduct, and finds a place of repentance, which
will enable him to return and make suitable satisfaction for his outgoings,
which is our sincere desire.

Given forth from our Monthly Meeting held at Sandwich the fourth day of the
12th mo. 1778. Signed in and by order of our said Monthly Meeting. By Ebenezer
Allen, Clerk.


That his Piece contained matter altogether dissatisfactory to such who were
unwilling to pay Taxes to the American Government, is not hard to believe; but
that it contained matter inconsistent with their ancient Testimony concerning
paying general mixed Taxes, is not quite so clear. What their Testimony had got
to be, at the time he wrote, was a subject of his inquiry for no other reason,
than to labor to convince such of their error who refused to pay such Taxes;
and more especially as there was too much reason to fear that such refusal,
with many, originated in political disaffection.

Our Letter writer tells us of scruples of that kind some had about twenty five
years ago. We are something acquainted with the history of that matter; from
which it appears that they were far from meeting the general approbation of the
Society, especially in Great Britain, which appears by a Letter from a Meeting
for Sufferings in London to John Hunt and Christopher Wilson, not far distant
from the time he mentions. They in that Letter very clearly show their
disapprobation of their singularity in being scrupulous about paying such
Taxes. This Letter was afterward published in a Piece entitled, a serious
Address, etc. to the People called Quakers -- 1778, by a Native of
Pennsylvania, from which we have extracted what follows, viz.

As you well know that very disadvantageous impressions have been made here by
the advice of some Friends against the payment of a Tax lately laid by the
Provincial Assembly, it is recommended in a particular manner, that you
endeavor to remove all occasions of misunderstanding on this account, and to
explain and enforce our known principles and practice, respecting the payment
of Taxes for the support of civil Government, agreeable to the several Advices
of the Yearly Meeting, founded on the precept and example of our Savior. May
that Wisdom, which is from above, attend you in this weighty undertaking, and
render your labors effectual for the purpose intended, that you may be the
happy instruments of averting the dangers that threaten the liberties and
privileges of the people in general, and restore and strengthen that union and
harmony which ought to subsist in every part of our Christian Society.

We are your Friends and Brethren, Signed in and on behalf, and by order of the
Meeting for Sufferings in London, the 9th day of the 7th month, 1756. By Benj.
Bourne.


We wish not, however, to bear hard upon any who are tenderly scrupulous about
paying such Taxes under any Government whatever, whose scruples do not
originate in political disaffection, but cannot be of their sentiment in this
respect, but are apprehensive that their scruples arise from a want of a well
informed judgment. The chief that we fault them in is, that they press this new
sentiment too hard upon such of their brethren as are differently minded from
themselves in that case, and generally treat them with shyness and disrespect;
but have not been able to establish a Rule in the Society that forbids paying
such Taxes.

What their ancient, and long approved, Testimony was with respect to the
paying Taxes may be seen in the before mentioned Address, and also in their
ancient and most approved Authors, many of whom are quoted in the said Address,
particularly George Fox, whose authority with them, in general, has been as
great, at least, as any one of their Authors. See his Book of Epistles, p. 137,
All Friends every where, who are dead to all carnal weapons, and have beaten
them to pieces, stand in that which takes away the occasion of Wars, which
saves men's lives and destroys none, nor would have others; -- and as for the
Rulers that are to keep Peace for Peace sake and for the advantage of Truth,
give them their Tribute, but to bear and carry weapons to fight with the men of
Peace (who live in that which takes away the occasion of Wars) they cannot act
in such things under the several Powers, but have paid their Tribute, which
they may do still for Peace sake, and not hold back the earth, but go over it,
and in so doing Friends may better claim their Liberty.

He here gives two very powerful reasons for the paying of Tribute. The first
is, that it be done for the preservation of Peace for Peace sake: The second
is, that in so doing Friends may better claim their Liberty. We cannot see with
what confidence any can expect their Liberty preserved, who will not pay their
Taxes to enable the Magistrate to defend it from the hands of violence. These
are reasons, one would think, that none would be weak enough to oppose* Reasons
no doubt, that Christ and his Apostles had in view when they encouraged, and
enjoined, the paying of Tribute or Taxes, and also because it was Cesar's due,
but for no other reason than for his service done, or to be done, to his
Subjects; the same reasons for which Tribute or Taxes becomes due to the
Government we live under, or any other civil Government.

If Friends will grant that it is the duty of the Magistrate to preserve Peace
for Peace sake, they must also necessarily grant that it is his duty to
suppress violence, otherwise Peace will not be likely to take place. -- How far
the Magistrate may act in the suppression of violence for Peace sake, perhaps
is the matter in dispute. George Fox, and many other Friends who have wrote
since, have thought, that they might go so far in the suppressing of violence,
as to pay their Taxes for the Peace sake, and leave it with the Magistrate to
preserve it in any lawful way that he should think proper and most for the
benefit of the subject -- The Magistrates have thought, that to answer so good
and salutary a purpose as the preserving Peace for Peace sake, they ought to do
all that is reasonably in their power to suppress all kind of violence and
intrusion on the Persons, Properties and Liberties of the subjects, whether
committed by any of them, or by foreigners that should intrude themselve

There is, perhaps, not any of their Writers more clear in this point than
Isaac Pennington; nor was there scarcely ever an Author better approved among
them in general, who, in answer to what he calls a weighty Question, as indeed
it was, concerning the Magistrates protection of the innocent; in the
collection of his Writings expresses himself thus, Vol. 1. p. 444. Whether the
Magistrate in righteousness and equity is engaged to defend such who (by the
peaceableness and love which God has wrought in their spirits and by that Law
of Life, mercy, good will and forgiveness which God, by his own finger has
written in their hearts) and taken off from fighting, and cannot use a weapon
destructive to any creature? Here follows his answer:

Magistracy was intended by God for the defense of the people; not only of
those who have ability and can fight for them, but of such also who cannot, or
are forbid by the love and law of God written in their hearts so to do. Thus
Women, children, sick persons, aged persons, and also Priests in Nations (who
have ability to fight, but are exempt by their function, which is not equal to
the exemption which God makes by the Law of his Spirit in the heart) have the
benefit of the Law, and of the Magistrates protection, without fighting for the
defense of either.

Here follows a few very pertinent observations by the Author of the
beforementioned Address, viz. Now, if Magistrates be appointed by God, and it
be the Magistrates duty to defend such, who, either are not able or cannot for
conscience sake defend themselves, is it possible any can be right who lay
waste this ordinance, or speak of such defense as sinful? If any man be
appointed by God to defend my life, is it possible that God can authorize me to
call him a sinner, for doing his duty? Or is it possible that I can, consistent
with my duty, refuse him that Tribute which is absolutely necessary to enable
him thus to defend me? But had I much greater abilities to speak to this
subject than I am conscious of no reasoning of mine could be of equal authority
with the Author above quoted; hear him therefore again, p 448, where treating
on this peaceable principle professed by the Society, he says,

I speak not this against any Magistrate or People defending themselves against
foreign invasions, (...) making use of the Sword to suppress the (...) and evil
doers within their own borders; for the present state of things may and does
require, and a a great blessing will attend the Sword when it is uprightly
borne to that end, and its use will be honorable; and whilst there is need of
a Sword, the Lord will not suffer the Government, or those Governors, to want
fighting instruments under them, for the management thereof, who wait on him in
this fear, to have the edge of it rightly directed; but yet there is a better
state, which the Lord has already brought some into, and which Nations are to
expect and to travel toward.

That this Quotation contained the general sentiment of the Society at the time
of its publication cannot with reason be disputed, for if it had not, it is not
likely they would have published it with a collection of his Works after his
death. A further evidence of its general approbations, is the large number of
Testimonies of some of the most approved Friends in the Society printed at the
beginning of the collection in favor, not only of the Author, but of the
Piece. And it appears with no less certainty that it has continued to be the
received sentiment of the Society of Friends in America, by their causing of it
to be reprinted a few years ago by subscription, from almost every part of the
Country where there are any Friends. And therefore it does not appear to be
either his or our particular sentiment, but that of the Society in general,
both in Europe and America. -- How those who encouraged that Publication by
their subscriptions, could encourage the disowning Timothy Davis is very
unaccountable, as there is nothing in his Piece that can, with any color of
Justice, be construed to be any ways equally in favor of War with that
Quotation, and Timothy, as well as we, think ourselves to be as much called
from the destructive use of the Sword as they: But we have quoted that passage
from Isaac Pennington, that they may, if possible, be convinced of their
partiality -- What we mean to encourage is mutual charity and forbearance to
all Societies.

Now, for such who are called from the use of the sword it would no doubt be a
very great sin for them to make a destructive use of it; who are, no doubt,
designed to be lights in the World, and to hold out the Olive branch to the
Nations until it shall please infinite Wisdom to call the rest of mankind in
like manner from the use of the sword, when every one shall sit quietly "under
their own vine, and under their own fig tree, and none shall make them afraid.
Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim;" for these will
have fully entered into Peace and Righteousness, the Glory and Perfection of
the Gospel Dispensation: But till then it has pleased God to provide for the
peace and safety of mankind by instituting Magistracy for the punishment of
evildoers, while violence and oppression remain in the earth, and the keeping
peace for peace sake is so absolutely necessary.

However shocking some circumstances which may attend the suppression of
violence and injustice may appear to tender minds, yet they ought to consider,
that they are wisely ordered by the disposer of all events to prevent much more
alarming and dreadful consequences that await a state of Anarchy: We therefore
can hardly think that any are so imprudent as to wish the World to be without
Law or Government, if it is not at all times, and at all places, quite as they
would have it, however zealously they may contend against the use of the sword
in the suppressing of violence.

If they are in favor of continuing Magistracy for the suppressing of
violence, would they not be willing to give so much assistance toward it, as to
pay their Taxes, without which Magistracy cannot be supposed to be upheld,
whose business it is to hold up the sword only a terror to evildoers; when it
becomes a terror to others, it is time to take it out of their hands, and place
it where it may answer the design of its institution, viz. that the Magistrate
may not only be a terror to evildoers but a praise to them that do well.

But some can hardly reconcile it with infinite Wisdom and Justice, to prohibit
that in one, which he approves in another. This objection will easily be
removed if we properly advert to the reasons there are for diversity and
variety in the Divine Economy. It appears perhaps no where more convincing
than in the diversity of Gifts mentioned by the Apostle Paul, and his
recommendation to every one to attend to their own proper gifts, otherwise they
might prejudice the cause they were engaged in, and the same reasons hold good
still, and even in temporal matters: And although some may not be qualified or
gifted to bear rule in the Church, yet they may be well qualified for
Magistrates to rule the World, if they are moral men: And it is evident from
the same Apostle that we ought to be subject, and that for conscience sake, not
only to those Magistrates of our own Society, but to those who do not even
profess themselves to be Christians; and these too he calls the Ministers of
God to the subject for good; for they were then under the Roman government, who
did not profess Christianity: Not that we would encourage the introducing such
into authority, where it can be avoided, who do not at least profess the
Christian name.

But with respect to diversity: Our Savior says, in my Father's House are
many Mansions -- But why? Because doubtless there are many kinds of services,
whether we consider those Mansions to respect his Church militant on earth, or
triumphant in Heaven, and it is therefore necessary that there should be many
Rooms or Mansions, that these various services or employments may be properly
attended to, that they might not interfere to the prejudice of each other.
Would it not be ridiculous to ask why he refused one the use of one of these
Rooms, while he granted it to another, and even compelled him to labor in it,
and required the other to return to his own Mansion, where his proper business
was. -- As there are diversities of gifts, so there are diversities of
employments, and therefore every one ought to attend to his own proper business
to prevent distraction; and also for this one incontestible reason, that God is
a God of order and not of confusion.

The consistency of this we should think could hardly be mistaken. The like
reasoning, we think* may very well be admitted with respect to the power of the
civil Magistrate, especially if he be considered as a Minister of God whom we
ought to obey in every thing lawful for conscience sake. The reasonableness of
this diversity and the different departments will further, very clearly,
appear, if we wisely consider the different degrees of growth there are in
religion: We are told not only of Fathers and Mothers in Israel, but of young
Men and new born Babes; and as that of not defending ones self is considered by
Robert Barclay, and no doubt by others, as one of the highest Christian
seize, it can hardly be expected from a new born Babe and therefore if
they will have none in their Church but such who have arrived to that degree of
christian experience as not to defend themselves, they must not admit any new
born Babes who desire the sincere milk of the word that they may grow up
thereby, but all must be born into the Church in the full grown statute of Men
and Women: Whereas it is absolutely necessary that the Members of Christ's
Church should be regenerated and born again as infants; that it appears to us,
there should be somewhere in the Church or house of God, in which light the
Church is sometimes considered, such an apartment as a nursery: And would it
then consist very well with the tender character of a nursing Mother, or
Church, to turn her infant into the world to shift for itself, because it was
not born into the Church a perfect Man or Woman, i. e. that could not see it to
be unlawful to defend itself? We hope that such thoughts as these may awaken
such christian tender feelings in some, as they, either have not indulged, or
have not known.

Wars were not even lawful under the Mosaical constitution, but when they acted
in them according to the counsel of God, and if the same counsel has now made
the sword necessary to assist Magistracy which He has instituted, it cannot be
unlawful for such Magistrates to make use of it who are to serve him in that
department until he shall call them to some other.

This the aforesaid Apostle seems to have been very sensible of,
notwithstanding he was under the Gospel dispensation and influence, when he
said "For this cause pay you Tribute: For they are God's Ministers attending
continually on this very thing." -- To use the words of the aforesaid
Letter-writer, "Truly such must have a very high opinion of their own
judgment," that would set them over the judgment and example of Christ and his
Apostles, as well as their Brethren in general, from their first appearance as
a Religious Society until the late revolution. This we think has a tendency to
undermine and lay waste the ancient Testimony of Friends in that case, founded
on the example and experience as above, and is very afflicting to the sensible,
considerate part of the Society: To prevent which was the desire, we make no
doubt, of the Author of the Piece in dispute.

We cannot, however, think so strange of many of their novel opinions, which
appear to be increasing among them, when we consider the weakness of the human
mind, as well as the animal machine each one of the human race bears about with
him, which is so often controuled by the almost invincible force and power of
an over heated and gloomy Imagination, which is often the cause of the weakness
of our minds and the errors in our judgment, and frequently attended with
doubting, sinking, discouraging thoughts; And as it is generally attended with
ebbings and flowings, it will sometimes rise into very high transports and
elevations; but let them incline to which extreme they may, they are generally
fixed and determined in their conceits until a different habit of body alters
their minds; and cannot be prevailed on to think, but that they are realities;
and often as much, or more selfishly opinionated than any others -- It is a
pity that people under these weaknesses should be much together, for they do
but strengthen and increase each others weaknesses and infirmities of this
nature. People of such gloomy imaginations are almost incessantly ruminating
and revolving their imaginary difficulties -- Reason and argument, and even
advice under the best influence, are generally lost upon them, as there is none
harder to be wrought upon -- When the objects of their doubts and scruples are
religious subjects they ought however to be treated with tenderness, especially
when they do not labor to impose their scruples on others, which when they are
persons of influence in the Church, they often do -- Scruples often of little
or no consequence, and yet sometimes would be very pernicious if they were
received by a Church: Instances of this nature have been so frequent that it is
needless to mention particulars. There have been, every one knows, frequent
instances of persons giving way so far to the influence of such gloomy thoughts
and imaginations as to be led into a state of desperation, and sometimes to do
violence to their own lives. This is of a quite different nature from that
godly sorrow that works true repentance to salvation, not to be repented of:
However, if persons laboring under the pressure of such gloomy imaginations
are real lovers of God they will find this, as well as every other thing, will
work together for their good, as they strive against it in patience and true
resignation to Him who is able to make all things new in them, in his own time
and in his own way, which we ought to strive to be reconciled to. One reason,
perhaps, why many well disposed religious people are imposed on by many such
needless doubts and scruples, as arise in such peoples minds, (...) the
appearance they sometimes make of self denial and humility, by the
sanctimonious appearance they often put on, which is so much of a deception,
that self denial and humility are the most effectual preservatives from, and
remedy against such evils, and will, sooner than any other Christian virtue
bring them out of that dark bewildered state. This we speak from religious
experience, some of us having been in a good degree brought out of that dark
bewildered situation, into the mavelous Light* by being truly humbled before
our great Lord and Master. This sort of people, beforementioned, are as
superstitiously attached to the idols of imagination as any other, if not more
so, and by no means easier to be reclaimed than they, and none more ready to
turn again and rend one; and seem to have little other idea of Humility, than
an external appearance of affected singularity and subjection to their Church,
where they would willingly be regarded as leaders, which is too often the case
-- This temper and disposition of mind is perhaps no way easier discovered than
by its impatience of dissent, which we have never seen more apparently verified
in any case than in the present controversy between Timothy Davis and his
former Friends, notwithstanding the novelty of their sentiments about paying
Taxes, which was the ground of the controversy, and yet they pretend a very
great regard for their Ancestors and their sentiments, but can very easily part
with any of them that do not coincide with their new ones, at the expense of
many of their sober useful Members, who from an inward sensibility of the
rectitude of the sentiments of our, and their predecessors, respecting paying
Taxes, are led publicly to defend them. This is something so inconsistent with
that Christian Liberty, which the Spirit of the Gospel every where breathes,
that, indeed, we cannot but think they are very much in the dark: We therefore
affectionately wish them deeply to consider, both the nature and necessity of
that Humility recommended by our dear Lord and Savior; Mat. chapter 18. v. 3.4.5.
Verily I say unto you, except ye be converted and become as little children, ye
shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Whosoever therefore, shall humble
himself as a little child, the same is great in the Kingdom of Heaven. And
whosoever shall receive one such little Child in my name receives me. We wish
this might be calmly and dispassionately attended to. The Humility here
recommended, does not lead the mind into rambling fluctuating Opinions, nor
into a fixed determined Bigotry, nor into a conceitedness of our having
discovered more than our Predecessors, nor yet to reject that which is true
because not embraced by them, of the Church, of which we are now Members; but
always to receive the Truth for its own sake; and far less to impose our new
Sentiments on our Brethren, or seek occasion, in consequence thereof, to disown
them, when, perhaps, they are only the fruits and effects of our own fruitful
imaginations, but brings the mind, with singleness of heart, to offer up on the
Cross, every favorite opinion to the examination of the Light. In this state of
Resignation our minds are brought to be quiet and contented to pass under the
closest scrutiny by the Light of Christ, however it may eclipse our reputation
as being encouragers, or promoters, of any popular opinions in any Society,
civil or religious, considering that true Reformation consists not in a mere
speculative notion of Religion, but in the sanctification and renovation of
Heart, represented by our Savior under the metaphor of cleansing the inside of
the cup and platter, which he recommends first to be done, that the outside may
be clean also: Then, oh! the quietness the mind enjoys, being retired from
religious partial strife about opinion, zeal and victory; and can say
feelingly, O Lord, although thou stay me, yet will I trust in thee; enable me and
I will follow thee in the way of Regeneration unto Life everlasting! When we
are brought into this humble state, we are not disposed without very great
cause to be very severe in our censures of others, but concerned that nothing
in ourselves pass without the closest examination. In this resignation is found
that Peace and Consolation that the World is a stranger to, as well as the
superficial christian.

There is one thing in the Piece in dispute that has been objected to by some,
which if not mentioned, may be thought to be too great an omission, which is as
follows, viz. By all that I have been able to discover, our Society in
England have ever made a Point of being careful and exact in paying all Taxes,
legally assessed, except the Priests Rates.

This is thought to be a very great blunder: Whether it is or not, may be
easily seen, by even a moderate attention to the manner of his treating the
subject. It may be observed that he does not positively assert they had paid
all such Taxes, but makes this reserve, viz. by all that he had been able to
discover. Now, suppose there had been two or three Taxes, that he had not
discovered, in the first Century after they appeared as a separate Society,
that were calculated merely to defray the charges of War, and we question where
more instances can be produced, that Friends refused to pay; is it not very
disingenuous and unfriendly to labor that to his disadvantage -- The subject
he was upon was general mixed Taxes, and could not well have been understood
otherwise, if proper attention had been paid to the scope of his arguments,
notwithstanding the word, general and mixed were omitted; that, it cannot
reasonably be thought he had any design to impose on his reader; therefore we
cannot see what purpose the above objection was intended to serve, unless to
supply the want of something more to their purpose -- It is indeed matter of
some consolation that they could find nothing greater to lay to his charge: If
they ever have, they have concealed it, both from him and us. In their
Testimony against him, they appear very cautious of mentioning particulars, and
only say that his Piece contained matter altogether dissatisfactory to Friends;
not a word to let us know what that matter is. The reason of this reservedness
perhaps they did not think for their reputation to disclose.

Some, when they have failed in every other attempt against him, allege a want
of spiritual mindedness in him. -- How far this is true he submits to the
candor of those who are the best acquainted with his life and conversation,
and are the least prejudiced in the case, either for or against him. But those
who make this objection pretend to a more certain way of knowing the state of
his mind, by a spirit of discerning; but unhappy for them their spirit of
discerning has sometimes failed them.

The Doctrine of spiritual mindedness, or a being led by the Spirit, is
notwithstanding, so essential both to the being and well being of a Christian,
that it is matter of deep sorrow that its Professors are not more generally led
by it, or that any who profess to be so led should strain their pretensions to
it beyond what the most extensive Charity can lead one to think, by their lives
and conversation, they ever have experienced. We shall however leave them to
their own Master before whom they shall stand or fall.

That there is such a thing as having a spiritual discerning of our own states
in some degree we fully believe, and have some experience of; and that there
are some who pretend to much more than what is real, cannot with reason be
disputed. What we would therefore advise against is a being imposed on, or
imposing on others.

Although he is charged with a want of spiritual-mindedness, we hope it is not
expected that he will attempt by argument to prove himself possessed of it. We
expect, if he is possessed of common modesty, he will not, let his experience,
in that respect, be as great as it may: We therefore think it quite out of
character to charge him with that which he is not at liberty to defend himself
in, unless by his life and conversation.

That some have had a gift of spiritual discerning so far, as at some times, to
see the states of others we fully believe; and that some, in this respect, have
pretended to see the states of others who did not see their own, we as fully
believe. As there are so many instances wherein this pretensions to spiritual
discerning has failed, and persons who have pretended to it have opposed each
other, it appears indisputably necessary to examine such pretensions well
before they are admitted, or before we receive such kind of revelations when
suggested to us, or in any way give way to their dictates. The old serpent, or
transformer, has no doubt as easy access to our feelings, in these cases, as
many others wherein he deceives poor weak man. And we are not without our
doubts that in their conducting the case in dispute, they were imposed on in
that manner; and felt a little too much for their own reputation with a
Political Party; and likely were apprehensive that it might suffer, if they
treated the matter with less severity. Such kind of prejudice is not likely to
help to a very dear understanding of religious matters, especially to judge of
the spirits of others: Like the Night, it often represents objects to be very
different from what they are: Like the want of Faith, which rendereth us very
incapable of judging of, or profiting by the bed instructions. This no doubt an
inspired Apostle was very sensible of, when he said, "the word preached did not
profit, not being mixed with faith in those who heard it." We are
notwithstanding so much in favor of spiritual discerning, or Religious
Feelings, that we think them to be as really necessary to the being and well
being of a Christian, as feeling and discerning is to the life of the body. All
that we reject concerning them, is, what every thoughtful Christian ought to
reject, viz. false pretensions.

That Friends have been a respectable body of Christians is not doubted by us,
which perhaps might have been with more propriety affirmed of them in time past
than at present: But however, as respectable as they may have been, or now are,
we hardly think it safe to follow them implicitly. A Christian Body or Church,
however large or respectable, does by no means entitle it to implicit faith or
blind obedience. -- That we ought to listen with attention to the voice of the
Church is not disputed but to follow it without proper examination betrays very
great weakness, if not very great bigotry. If we are always to follow her
voice, it must be because we are convinced she is always infallible, which we
cannot very willingly assent to; and if she is not, it may be difficult to know
when she is or will be infallible. If it be said by standing in that Light
which only, and truly, makes manifest. We answer, this is very true, and the
only way that a true and saving knowledge is obtained, but it appears by
innumerable facts as well as experience, that neither the Church nor individual
members are at all times so under the influence of the unerring Spirit as to
make up Judgments wholly from its dictates, who may therefore at some times,
with great propriety, say that it is I and not the Lord that speaks, who often
give their judgment as men. And further, if individuals are favored with the
Light as well as the Church, they, in that respect, stand upon the same ground
she does, seeing also the Church is only a collection of individuals that
afford her all the Light she can have from enlightened members, all of which
are liable to be misled, as well in a collective, as in an individual capacity,
and therefore each one has a right to determine for himself according to the
evidence received, whether human or Divine.

That there never was a Church, altogether infallible cannot with reason be
disputed, for such a one would remain to be so still; for that which is
infallible cannot at any time fail, and consequently must forever remain
infallible. But all Protestants are agreed that the primitive churches, however
well founded, have failed in many instances -- If we are to follow the voice of
the Church at this day implicitly, it must be because she is now infallible and
that they were not, which we hardly think any will affirm. But to do justice to
the Society we must say they do not say that the Church, as such, is
infallible, but that there is an infallible Spirit in it; no doubt this is so
far true, that at certain times it has presided in their Church, and that is
the most that can be truly said, either of their Church or any other, and what
all Christians are agreed in, and we fully believe that if all Churches were
truly and humbly to seek and patiently wait for the guidance and direction of
that Spirit they would be much more largely favored with it than they now are;
remembering that encouraging promise, viz The humble, God will teach of his
ways, and the meek be will guide in Judgment, but that he beholds the proud
afar off; and they will forever remain at a distance from him, while in that
situation of mind.

That uncertainty, more or less, attends all Churches in a militant state we
think cannot reasonably be disputed; therefore the members of the primitive
Churches did well in keeping their eyes open to the principles and practice of
them and to take the liberty to judge for themselves concerning their
rectitude, or they would not have been likely to have discovered their errors,
which were complained of in very early days. John the Divine as well as others
of the Apostles take very particular notice of many things among them very far
from being the result of an infallible judgment. It appears therefore highly
necessary, that the members of any church have their attention engaged toward
her sentiments and conduct, even in her best state, otherwise they may not
discover when she begins to decline; for want of such attention she may deviate
so far from her first rectitude as to be past recovery; nor is her confidence
of her own good state always a very clear evidence of it. It is perhaps
sometimes with Churches as with some individual members, who are never more
impatient of dissent than when there is the greatest reason to dissent from
them.

From these considerations it very naturally follows, that no church ought to
discourage the free exercise of private judgment, nor think hard of her Members
if their suspicions are sometimes awakened, especially if they are alarmed by
her adopting new sentiments, contrary to what she has always firmly adhered
to; although it is possible such new sentiments may be true, yet it is as
possible they may not, and therefore it becomes the duty of the Church to wait
on such dissatisfied members with patience, perhaps they may be blessed as a
means to set her right if she has erred, and if not she may be a blessing to
such dissatisfied members in sitting them right; they may however be a mutual
blessing to each other if they truly seek that wisdom which is from above; for
the promise to them that seek is, that they shall find: To the same purpose,
see Phillip, chapter 3.12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
Remembering, as has been observed, that her existence as a Church, is only as
a collection of individuals, and that therefore she is no longer a Church than
while those individual members which constitute her, remain united; whose duty
it is, while thus united, by all lawful means, to preserve that unity, that the
Church may edify itself in love, either by exhorting, reproving, or
encouraging, where necessary This Christian Freedom, in the Spirit of Love,
manifested in gospel tenderness and care for each other, is the most likely
means to preserve true unity and fellowship in a Church -- Severity ought never
to be extended but in wilful obstinate cases, where the peace of the church is
manifestly endangered by them, and perhaps there has seldom been more
distressing instances of that nature than where reformation has been
pretended. The multiplying severities in a Church has seldom been found to be
of real service: It may indeed sometimes procure a superficial and servile
obedience, and thereby increase her hypocrites, but will hardly effect her
reformation.

As we are accountable to One before whom each one must answer for himself and
not another, it is highly reasonable that we ought to think, judge and digest
religious matters for ourselves, without being confined to the voice of a
Church; and it is at least equally reasonable that she be not confined to the
voice or judgment of an individual, let his authority in the Church be as great
as it may: Conviction on either side ought to be the only reason for assent.

Every Church has an undoubted right to settle the Terms of its own Communion,
provided nevertheless, that they do not interfere with the civil or religious
rights of members, or of any one else -- Whenever they interfere with such
rights, it becomes the duty of the civil Magistrate to interfere. Every Member
has an undoubted right to dissent from the Church when he sees reason, yet he
ought not to use this liberty to his own, or the Church's disadvantage, in
suffering small things, or things of mere indifference, to be magnified into
matters of separation; but whether the matters of offense are great or small,
the Church as well as her members have each their undoubted right of
determination; and cannot well walk togther without christian condescension --
But the idea that there is always an infallible judgment in the Church, which
some have embraced, and that she is always led by it, has been a great
hindrance to the exercise of private judgment and free enquiry, and fixed some
so immoveably in a state of bigotry that they receive all from the Church,
without indulging a thought of seeking any further for information, that if it
even comes from Heaven they durst not believe it unless the Church says it came
from thence. -- We ought to consider, that a being immediately led by the
Spirit of God, and a being only implicitly led by the Church, are very
different things. The Primitive Christians were not required to follow even the
Apostles any farther than they followed Christ.

One objection that has been very strongly urged against us is, that we have
applied to the Earthly Powers for the recovery of what we think to be our civil
right in the Society who disowned us, which they refuse to give up, which we
think if properly attended to the reasons for objection, in that case, will
cease. And therefore let it be considered that we made them proposals of
settlement of those matters of property in dispute between us and them to no
purpose, they neglecting or refusing to comply with them, or to treat with us
on the subject, and since have wholly refused, even to submit the matter to
Reference, lest it should embarrass the Society in endless Arbitrations, that
we saw no way for redress but the Law: And to have it remain in that unsettled
situation was likely to produce, as well as continue very disagreeable effects,
while each party claimed what the other thought they had no right to; therefore
to prevent such effects, by Justice taking place, we thought it advisable to
take the most easy way for a settlement both to them and us, which appeared to
us would be to apply to the General Court. This being also consistent with
their own Discipline, one would have thought they would readily have complied.
-- They have constantly urged it as a Rule among them, that Friends do not
attempt to try titles of land in dispute, but that it be referred to the Law
for settlement. This was the way by which we wished it to have been settled,
not with respect to the land only, but the Meeting Houses in the same
disputable situation; where they would have been cited in to have made their
defense: But the General Court thought it more properly came under the
consideration of the Judicial Department, first advising to a Reference, which
we have urged them to, but they, as has been observed, refuse to comply with
it.

It is objected that a Petition of that nature, is to them entirely new and
unprecedented, and a compliance impracticable, and therefore unreasonable; and
the more so, as it has been an established Rule in the Society that such as
are at any time disowned, do not only loose their rights as Members, but also
their right to any property they may have had in the Society.

We answer, That impossibilities are neither required nor expected: But will it
follow, that because length of time, or any other circumstance, has rendered
it impossible to do some people strict justice, that they are justifiable in
refusing it to others in like cases where it is practicable? If they have
always neglected to do justice to their disowned members until it is impossible
to do some of them strict justice, will it follow that they are excusable where
it is in their power to do it? It is not a very good argument to say, that
because in some cases we never have done our duty, therefore, in similar cases
we never ought to. Their alleging the continued practice of the Church in this
case will not help them in point of Justice, nor add to the reputation of their
Church Constitution, when justly considered, however it may have been indulged
by the Law, which we hope it will be before we conclude.

They did not argue as they have done here in the case of the poor inslaved
Negroes: They have very clearly manifested the absurdity of such a kind of
reasoning in that case; therefore, in confuting that kind of reasoning in that
case; they have necessarily confuted it in all similar cases. They did not
think the countenance that iniquitous practice met with from civil Authority,
nor the indulgence and encouragement it met with from the Society in time past,
by any means a sufficient reason to persist in it. The iniquity of refusing
that unhappy People Justice in so tender a point as their Liberty, is perhaps,
by those possessed of them, more easily seen than complied with, and it is not
unlikely it may be the case in the present controversy, which although not
attended with circumstances equally moving, yet equally entitled to Justice,
and therefore demands a very close attention.

A supposition that we have forfeited any part of our property to them, in
consequence of our being disowned by them, to us appears extremely absurd; and
more especially as the disownment of us, all originated in Timothy Davis's
being disowned, who never had a hearing in that case -- We wish them to look at
it. -- That we have properly in those Meeting Houses and Lands appertaining to
them where we claim it, is what they dispute with as little reason as they
might do any property we possess -- What we have contributed to the purchasing
such Houses and Lands has entitled as to a property in them; with as much
reason as they can assign for any property they claim in them, or any other
property they possess; for the like contributions by them is all the reason
they can properly assign for any property they have in them: That while we were
together, our rights to such property were equal; this we think they will not
dispute. The question then wholly turns upon our being disowned by them. Then
it will be necessary to consider whether any Constitution, either civil or
religious, can be considered as just and righteous that considers the Property
of its subjects, or members, so far at its own disposal, as that for any
dissension merely Religious they shall take from them any part of their
Property without their consent. If the civil Authority has not such a right,
which it is clear they have not, then it is as clear they cannot confer any
such Right no not even on membership, for they say that The common right or
privilege of our Meeting Houses, etc is a right annexed to Membership only. We
would willingly know who annexed it; was it the civil Power that had no right
to do it? If it was it cannot be a very conscientious right that Membership is
in possession of, that belongs to other people.

If he aforesaid Society have not received this pretended right to confiscate
to their own use, or the use of Membership, from Civil Government, who had no
just right to bestow it on them, from whence did they derive it? Surely they do
not claim that power of confiscation as a Divine Right, and (...) hope Civil
Authority will nor defend any pretensions to a Power over other peoples
Property which they had no right to give, or the others to claim. That it
therefore very clearly appears that the pretensions of those who have disowned
us to any part of our property in consequence of our being disowned by them, is
built on a foundation that Reason, Revelation Religion and Civil Government
disclaim.

That our being disowned by them should forfeit to their use any part of our
property, has something in it so selfish and unchristian that we are inclined
to hope that the moderate and conscientious among them will relinquish all such
pretensions.

Some have been weak enough to urge that contributing to such religious uses
does not entitle to a right in it, but that it is to be considered as a free
donation; because, say they, any one has an indubitable right to contribute to
any lawful use he pleases, without any hope or prospect of reward, or being by
any means benefited thereby; yea he may lend or give hoping never to receive
again. This they say is the case in contributing to such religious purposes.

Answer: No one can reasonably dispute against the right every one has to
contribute to religious purposes, either with, or without a prospect of being
benefited thereby. But if we properly advert to the nature of the Controversy
in contributing in such cases in general, we shall see that it naturally and
unavoidably suggests the idea of being benefited by them in preference to such
who have not contributed any thing, unless it be such Members on whom the
Society have bestowed those privileges in consequence of their becoming
members; and if they detain all the property those have in the Society whom
they disown, they may afford to bestow a little on those who are not able to
assist by their contributions. They, as a religious body, as well as other
Societies, bold Meeting Houses as well as the Lands appertaining to them as
their own property, which do one else has any right to intermeddle with This
is very easily discovered when they think themselves intruded on, which they
are as sensible of as any other people -- But why is it their property? --
Because, say they, we have purchased it by contributions, or received it as a
donation for that purpose, and consequently we are the proprietors.

It is objected by some, that as do temporal reward is required when a person
is received into membership it would be very unreasonable that they should make
any demands on the Society when they are disowned.

Answer: This objection is very foreign from the Point No one of a common
understanding supposes that a member can justly have any demands on that
Church that has not been benefited by him, unless they have admitted him as a
proprietor in consideration of his being a member only, if this be the case,
they can no more be considered as having forfeited their rights to such
property than those who have contributed to the purchasing of it. In a word, if
a person be justly entitled to the property of the Church, or any part of it,
no act of theirs can justly deprive him of it without his consent. Whenever an
interest is collected, whether by the Church, or any other collective Body,
those who contributed to the collecting of it are undoubtedly interested in it,
according to the assistance they gave in collecting of it, unless they have
bestowed it on that Body as a free donation: If they have, every one knows
that they have no right of demand on that Body: But if they have not, they have
a proportionable right to the interest they have assisted in collecting, and
never ought to be deprived of it but by their own consent.

If they who have contributed to the before mentioned religious purposes, do
not expect to be benefited in preference to those who are by do means
interested in it, in burying their dead, and attending meetings for Worship and
Discipline, there might be something said in favor of their objection, but as
this is not the case, it is in vain to pretend that they do not consider such
interest as their Property, and theirs only.

It has been urged, we apprehend, for want of something more to their purpose,
that one person has no more right to such property than another, because any
sober person who never contributed a farthing, and who is not even a member in
Society is allowed full liberty to attend meetings of Worship.

Answer: This is very true, and what every Christian Society approves of. But
who are they that indulge them in this liberty? Is it they that have no
property in such interest? It is said that those who contribute to such
religious purposes have no more property in them than those who have not: That
if they have such liberty it must be from such who have no right to grant it;
for it is a clear case that those who have no property in such interest, have
no right to grant any liberty concerning it. And if there is none to grant it,
there is none who can justly take it away: Then we who have been disowned stand
upon equal ground with them in that respect, which is all we urge. But they,
when they are molested, can always find some body that has property in such
Meetings Houses without much difficulty, and frequently say we have forfeited
our right to such property, and consider themselves to be the persons to whom
it is forfeited. If we have forfeited it, we must have had it, and indeed are
entitled to it still, notwithstanding any thing they have said or done to the
contrary.

Some indeed are so ingenuous as to confess that they do not think we have
forfeited our right to the Property in question, but do not see that a just
settlement can be had without letting in, and giving an encouragement to others
who have been justly disowned, to bring in their claims in like manner -- This
free confession naturally supposes us to have been unjustly disowned -- Let
them fully reverse that act of disownment, and acknowledge their mistake, and
the matter concerning Property will easily settle. But why does a person's
being properly and justly or unjustly disowned forfeit his right to property,
and especially to those who disowned him? This is opening a door to what is
called pious fraud -- We will suppose that Avaro and Tirannus were leading
active members in a Society that was very rich, who considered the property
those had in Society who were disowned by it to be forfeited to it in
consequence of their being disowned by it: Avaro and Tirannus viewed this large
interest with selfish eyes, and soon began to be very zealous inspectors into
the conduct of its members, and urged that it was quite time that the Church
was purged of its dross and filth; and taking advantage of the superstition and
credulity of their fellow members, began to cast out of the Church, both men
and women, and under some pretensions or other of faults in the Members, never
gave over until the Church was so far dissolved, that they two only were left;
and finding themselves in this happy situation, as they thought, considered
that now the right of Membership and consequently the right to the property of
the Church concentered in them, and therefore sold it and exceedingly enriched
themselves.

Those who have made the foregoing acknowledgement of our right to the Property
in question, but do not see how it can be had without letting into such claims
those who have been justly disowned, should consider, that even a being justly
disowned ought not to affect Property. If they can make appear that they have
property to the Society it ought not to be withheld. No act of the Church
ought, so far, to affect Property as to ingross it themselves; therefore let
any one who claims property be called upon if the case be doubtful, to make
appear that he has been a Member of that Society, which, if he has, will not
be hard to do by their records, and if it can be made appear he has been
interested in the property of the Society, his claim ought to be acknowledged
to be good: And if any one is contented with improving his right by attending
their Meetings, and improving the lands, or any other interest in common with
the Church, there need be no difficulty in that case. But, if any are uneasy
with attending their Meetings, and have a mind to meet by themselves, when a
minority, let them have liberty of the House when the majority do not occupy
it: But if they are a majority they ought to have the rule and direction of
said House, etc. allowing the others the like liberty. This appears to us to be
no more than what Christian condescension will very clearly justify if not
demand.

To conclude, let it be considered, that while that Property, which any one
contributeth to such religious uses, remains in his own hands, it is wholly in
his own power, and at his own disposal; he may therefore dispose of the whole,
or part thereof, or put it just as far out of his power as he pleases. Now, in
contributing to the before mentioned purposes he only gives up his right to
order and dispose of such property, or the use of it, to the Church while he
remains a member of it, in expectation that in consideration of his becoming,
or being a member of said Church he shall be let into the general property
thereof, with every other privilege or appurtenance belonging thereto, in like
manner as the rest of the members: In ordering and directing of which, he only
expects to have a voice with the rest of his Brethren. As every Member becomes
thus interested in, and dependent on the property of each other, so that no one
part of the Church can say that the other has no right in it, the Property of
each individual Member being circumstanced alike, the being disowned ought not
to alienate such Property, neither in justice can it, and therefore when any
one is deprived by the Society of that benefit, in consequence of which he was
induced to contribute, it ought to revert to him again; and more especially,
when we consider that the constitution of their Church is such, that if any one
of their Members is reduced to want, the Church holds itself under obligation
to contribute to his relief as long as he remains a member, and no longer; when
he is disowned they consider themselves released from such particular
obligation, and he is no longer benefited by what he has contributed to the
general stock, but is obliged to go out empty-handed, however large his
contribution may have been, if it be even to the whole of his substance, be it
less or more.

But they say that they hold themselves equally obliged to contribute to the
relief of those who never have contributed a farthing, as those who have
contributed the most largely, without any discrimination.

We answer, that their care in relieving their poor does them very great
honor: It is an example well worthy the imitation of every Christian society.
But do they think to make themselves amends by detaining the property of those
they have disowned? is it just to take from those who have property to give to
those who have not? Such conduct as this will inevitably cast a shade over the
fairest characters. --

We will suppose that some years past, William was so well pleased with being
admitted a member of their Church, that he contributed so largely to it that he
had but little left; William is now convinced of his mistake; the wants of an
increasing family are sensibly felt, and he would willingly leave the Society,
but has strong suspicions that he shall need their assistance, and Membership
will ingross all that he has put into the hands of the Church by his large
contributions to their interests, and his Family will suffer for want of it,
therefore William still remains a member.

Avaro is exceedingly well pleased with this part of the constitution of the
Church, that has annexed all its property to Membership, that provided so well
for her interest; is in hopes in time she will grow rich: And thinks it may be
a means too of preserving her members from leaving of her, and highly commends
her prudence.

But Christianus is as much displeased with it, and it is matter of hesitation
with him whether he had best leave the Society or not: His greatest uneasiness
at present is, that Avaro is so much in favor with the Church and this
sentiment of her detaining the property of her disowned Members. He thinks
indeed it may be a means of preserving her numbers, but not her virtue,
innocence or reputation with truly Christian people.

It is objected that we are grown sower and bitter against them, and in that
bitter spirit are collecting all their weaknesses we can think of.

We answer, That this charge, we hope, is in general without any just
foundation. We think they have given cause for this and much more to have been
said without justly incurring the censure of bitterness. But perhaps in some
times of weakness, something like this charge may have been discovered, which
may not seem very strange if we allow what King Solomon remarks to have any
weight, viz. that oppression will make a wise man mad. It may then be thought
less strange if some of us get a little out of the way in that respect. It is
however what we wish not to indulge -- It is difficult to say what is really
necessary in one's vindication against oppression, either verbally or by
writing, without being thought too fevere, or even bitter or acrid, especially
by those whose conduct we expose -- They are frequently cautioning us against
being too severe and bitter against them, and we wish it to have a good effect,
but they seem not to be under any apprehension of erring in that respect
themselves: We should be glad to be convinced that they do not: We shall
however leave their conduct to manifest what tempers and dispositions they have
indulged toward us in time past, and hope they will be better in future, and
hope also to preserve that disposition toward them that can render good for
evil, and wish well to all men, and have no reason to think but that it is the
sentiment and wish of those among of whom they have disowned.

In the close of the beforementioned Letter signed by Isaac Lawton, etc. they
express themselves thus, viz.

And there having been heretofore, as well as of late, happy instances of a
return from your situation, we may express, on this occasion, our desire that
you may feel their example to be worthy your serious consideration and
imitation; which we trust will be the case of all such as truly seek their own,
and the Church's, Peace.

From this it very clearly appears how high an opinion they have of their
Church, so high, that they insinuate that by being separated from it, we are
rendered incapable of seeking either our own, or the Church's, Peace, until we
return to her again. In this we must take the liberty to dissent from them, and
think that all such who truly seek the peace of that universal Church which
Christ has gathered by his holy Spirit, necessarily seek their own Peace;
which we hope is at least the case with some of us. What examples they may be
able to exhibit of any returns to them that is worthy of imitation we do not
pretend to say; but think that such a partial fondness for, and attachment to
their particular Church, is much more to be lamented than imitated. -- What
solid satisfaction any one, who is truly humble, can expect to hate from a
People so full of themselves, we must leave, and that can so easily lay aside,
or overlook the example of our Savior and the Apostles, as well as their
Predecessors, in the instance of paying taxes, a thing so necessary for the
upholding Civil Government, divinely instituted by the Author of our being and
well-being: To which examples we shall take the liberty to give the preference,
however we may be censured by our former Friends, or those who have returned to
them; and therefore can, by no means, with peace and safety to our own minds,
give so much encouragement to a contrary practice and sentiment, as to
disapprove that public encouragement any of us have heretofore given to the
paying taxes. Had it only been the example of their Predecessors that they had
disregarded, or misconstrued, much might have been said in excuse for them; but
that they should neglect the example of Christ and his Apostles, and recommend,
with so much earnestness, the example of such, who not paying a suitable
attention to the beforementioned example, have returned to them again, who
were laboring to propagate a contrary practice, and to lay waste the
beforementioned example, is very extraordinary, and what we would wish them
carefully to consider. What renders the matter still peculiarly discouraging
is, than those who refuse to pay such taxes are generally the most active and
distinguished in the Society, which, when they become differently minded, we
shall, it is probable, look toward with a much more encouraging prospect.

They could have scarcely suggested any thing more injurious and prejudicial to
our religious Characters in the Society than that we are not in a situation to
seek our own, or the Church's, Peace; nor could they easily have discovered
more partiality for themselves; which indeed has been remarkably manifest
through the most of their proceedings against us, as is very evident from what
has been already said; who have been very industrious in laboring to
foreclose and prevent us, as much as possible, from rendering any public,
religious service to any of our former Brethren; many of whom appeared as ready
and willing to attend our meetings for public Worship as ever they were, but
appear to be afraid of being brought under Church dealing in consequence of it,
and sharing the fate of many of their Brethren who have been disowned, for no
other cause than joining with us in the external acts of public Worship -- We
have reason to think the more strange of their conduct in this Case when we
reflect that they might have been convinced of the impropriety of such a
procedure by a similar weakness that, at a certain time, discovered itself
among the Disciples of Christ, Mark 9.38, 39, 40. And John answered him,
saying, Master, we saw one casting out devils in thy Name, and he follows not
us; and we forbad him, because he follows not us. But Jesus said, Forbid him
not: For there is no man which shall do a Miracle in my Name, that can lightly
speak evil of me. For he that is not against us is on our part. What we
particularly remark as being more especially pertinent to our case are these
words, viz. and we forbad him, because he follows not us -- Our former
Brethren have virtually forbid us, not to cast out devils in a miraculous way,
but to appear in public Prayer to Him, who, through Christ, has taught us to
pray without ceasing. -- If any ask how this appears? We answer, by their
frequently refusing to join us in that public duty as has been observed, which
is considered as an act of disapprobation, and is far, very far, from this
salutary doctrine taught by our Savior, as above; which we think ought to have
more weight in their minds than they give it -- We are however but little
concerned about our Reputation with them in this case, however they may attempt
to injure it, unless because it renders us incapable of being of much religious
service to them. It is our greatest consolation that we are under the tender
care of a kind Providence, to whose wisdom and goodness we commit, for defense
and protection, not only our Reputation, but every thing else that appertains
to us; nothing doubting but that He, whose watchful eye is over all such who
put their trust in Him, will graciously plead our cause.


