ARGUMENTS and JUDGMENT OF THE MAYOR's COURT OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK, IN A
CAUSE BETWEEN ELIZABETH RUTGERS AND JOSHUA WADDINGTON.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY SAMUEL LOUDON. M, DCC, LXXXIV.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE suit between ELIZABETH RUTGERS and JOSHUA WADDINGTON, having from its
peculiar circumstances been a subject of much public expectation, it has been
judged, that a publication of the principles on which the late determination in
the Mayor's Court was founded, might answer some beneficial purposes; and would
at least serve to prevent misapprehension.

In compliance with the wishes and request of several citizens, the arguments
and judgment of the Court are now given to the public.

ELIZABETH RUTGERS AGAINST JOSHUA WADINGTON.
THIS was an action of trespass brought against the Defendant upon an act of
the Legislature of this state, passed the seventeenth of March, one thousand
seven hundred and eighty-three, for the occupation of a brew house and
malt-house of the Plaintiff, from the thirteenth day of August, one thousand
seven hundred and seventy-eight, until the time of passing the act
abovementioned. The cause came on to be argued upon demurrer, before the
Honorable James Duane, Esquire. Mayor, Richard Varrick, Esquire. Recorder, Benjamin
Blagge, William W. Gilbert, William Neilson, Thomas Randal, and Thomas Ivers,
Esquires, Aldermen, on Tuesday the twenty-ninth day of June past.

The Counsel for the Plaintiff, were Mr. Lawrence, assisted by the
Attorney General, Mr. Wilcox, and Mr. Troop. Those for the Defendant, were Mr.
Hamilton, assisted by Mr. B. Livingston, and Mr. Lewis.

Mr. Lawrence opened the pleadings and arguments on the part of the Plaintiff,
and was followed by Mr. Wilcox. Mr. Livingston, Mr. Lewis, and Mr. Hamilton,
were next successively heard, in behalf of the Defendant; and were replied to
by Mr. Lawrence, Mr. Troop, and the Attorney General. The arguments on both
sides were elaborate, and the authorities numerous.

The Court took time to advise, until Tuesday the twenty-seventh day of August,
and then the Honorable the Mayor proceeded to deliver the judgment of the
Court, as follows:

"IN the case of Elizabeth Rutgers, versus Joshua Waddington, which we gave
notice should be determined this day, the Court now proceed to judgment. It is
represented to be a controversy of high importance; from the value of the
property, which in this and other actions depends on the same principles; from
involving in it questions, which must affect the national character: --
Questions whose decision will record the spirit of our Courts to prosperity!
Questions which embrace the whole law of nations!

It were to be wished, that a cause of this magnitude was not to receive its
first impression from a Court of such a limited jurisdiction, as that in which
we preside; -- from Magistrates actively engaged in establishing the police of
a disordered city, and in other duties, which cut them off from those studious
researches, which great and intricate questions require. If we err in our
opinion, it will be a a consolation, that it has been intimated, "to be
probable, whatever may be the determination that it will not end here."

The Counsel on both sides, who have managed this cause, and by whose diligence
and abilities, so much learning, on an uncommon subject, has been drawn into
view, have spared us much labor.

We cannot but express the pleasure which we have received, in seeing young
gentlemen, just called to the bar, from the active and honorable scenes of a
military life, already so distinguished as public speakers, so much improved in
an arduous science. Omnes not poss^nt, ne multi quidem, aut jurisperiti esse,
aut diserti, says Cicero, speaking of the science of the law in his day. The
difficulty is since much enhanced by the progress of commerce, and the change
of manners in different ages.


That in a contest, (which we are told) is not considered without temporary
prepossession, we may express our sentiments with more deliberation and
correctness; and that nothing to be offered by us, may be misunderstood or
misapplied, we have taken the trouble to preserve our remarks by committing
them to paper. Omnis a^sit in judicande precipitantia, adcoque extemporancae
sententieae temeritas cane p^jus et ang^e ^ugiatur.

BARBEYRAC.


The action is grounded on a statute of this state, entitled, an act for
granting a more effectual relief in cases of certain trespasses, passed the
seventeenth day of March, one thousand seven hundred and eighty-three; and the
declaration charges, 1st. The substance of the act, viz. "That it shall and may
be lawful for any person or persons, who are, or were inhabitants of this
state, and who, by reason of the invasion of the enemy, left his, her, or their
place or places of abode, who have not voluntarily put themselves respectively
into the power of the enemy, since they respectively left their places of
abode, his, her, or their heirs, executors, or administrators, to bring an
action of trespass against any person or persons, who may have occupied,
injured, or destroyed his, her, or their estate, either real or personal,
within the power of the enemy."

2. Complains that the Defendant, on the thirtieth day of August, 1778, with
force and arms, etc. occupied one brew house, and one malt-house of the
Plaintiff, situate in the east ward of the city of New York, and within the
jurisdiction of this Court, and his occupation thereof so continued, from the
said 13th day of August, in the year 1778, until the 17th day of March, in the
year 1783.

3. And also, that he the said Joshua, with force and arms, etc. afterward, to
wit, the same 13th day of August, 1778, and at diverse days and times, between
the said 13th day of August, 1778, and the 17th day of March, 1783, occupied
one other brew house, and one other malt-house, of her the said Elizabeth,
within the city and ward, and within the jurisdiction, etc. et alia enormia, to
the great damage, etc. against the peace, etc. And the said Elizabeth avers, --

1st. That there was open war between the king of Great Britain, his vassals,
etc. and the people of the state of New York aforesaid, on the 10th day of
September, 1776, to wit, at the east ward, etc. and within, etc. and that the
said open war continued from the said day, until the time of passing the act
aforesaid.

2d. That the King of Great Britain, his vassals, etc. and the enemy mentioned
and intended in the said act are one and the same and not different.

3d. That she was an inhabitant of the state of New York, and that the place of
her abode was the city of New York, in the state of New York, on the tenth day
of September, in the year last aforesaid, to wit, in the east ward, etc. and
within the jurisdiction, etc.

4th. That by reason of the invasion of the enemy, she the said Elizabeth
afterward, to wit, the said tenth day of September, in the year aforesaid,
left her said place of abode, to wit, in the ward aforesaid and within etc.

5th. That she did not, at any time after she left her said place of abode, as
aforesaid, voluntarily put herself within the power of the enemy aforesaid.

6th. That the brew house and malt-house aforesaid, were parcel of the real
estate of the said Elizabeth, and at the days and times they were occupied by
the said Joshua were in the power of the enemy, to wit, at the east ward, etc,
and within etc.

Wherefore the said Elizabeth says she is made worse, and has sustained
damage to eight thousand Pounds et inde, etc.

The Defendant to this charge, as to the force and arms and whatsoever is
against the peace, and as to the whole of the trespass aforesaid, except as to
the occupying the said brew house and malt-house of the said Elizabeth, on the
twenty-eighth day of September 1778, and continuing the occupation thereof
until the seventeenth day of March 1783, he pleads not guilty and takes issue.

And as to the occupying the brew house and malt-house, on the aforesaid
twenty-eighth day of September, 1778, and continuing the occupation thereof
until the last day of April 1780 inclusively, the said Defendant says, that
the said Elizabeth actionem non, quia dicet, that long before the said
twenty-seventh day of September 1778, to wit, on the fourth day of July 1776,
in (substance) the declaration of independence by Congress, who did then and
there declare, that the United Colonies were, and of right ought to be free and
independent states; that they were absolved from all allegiance to the British
crown, and that all political connection between them an the state of
Great Britain was, and ought to be totally dissolved, etc. That the said
declaration was on the ninth of July, in the year aforesaid, approved of by the
Convention of the state of New York: And afterward, on the 8th day of May
1777, the same was recognized and confirmed by the Legislature of this state.

That upon the 10th day of September 1776, and from that time until after the
last day of April 1783, there being open war between etc. the army of the said
king, on the 10th day of September, 1776, conquered the city of New York, and
continued in uninterrupted possession thereof, from that time until and after
the last day of April 1778; and the said army so being in possession, the said
brew house and malt-house, by virtue of authority from the Commander in Chief
of the said army, on the 10th day of June 1778, was taken possession of by the
Commissary-General of the said army, for the use of the said army -- as by the
laws, etc. of nations in time of war he lawfully might do -- and that the said
Commissary on etc. at etc. gave his license and permission to Benjamin
Waddington and Evelyn Pierrepont, residing in the said city as British
merchants, under the protection of the said British army, and having been from
their birth and still being subjects of the King of Great Britain, to enter
into, use and occupy the said malt-house and brew house, from the said 28th day
of September 1778 inclusively, to the last day of April 1780 inclusively: By
virtue whereof they entered and occupied the premises, from the first of the
two last mentioned days to the last inclusively; and the Defendant as their
servant and at their command, horn time to time, and at diverse times rom the
first to the last of those days, entered into and occupied the said brew house
and malt-house, for the benefit of the said Benjamin and Evelyn; Quae est eadem
etc. whereof the Plaintiff complains, in the first count of her declaration.

And as to the occupying the said brew house and malt-house, from the last day
of April, 1780, to the 17th of March, 1783, he pleads over again the
declaration of independence of these states; the approbation thereof by the
Convention of the state; and the recognition and confirmation thereof by the
Convention; the conquest of the city of New York by the British: And that the
brew house and malt-house, being out of the possession of the Plaintiff, the
Commander in Chief of the said army, on the last day of April, 1780, gave his
license and permission (as by the laws of nations he might lawfully do) to the
said Benjamin and Evelyn (describing them as in the other plea) to enter into
and occupy the said brew house and malt-house, from the last day of April,
1780, until the said license and permission should be revoked; paying therefore
to such person as the Commander in Chief should authorize to receive the same,
at the rate of one hundred and fifty pounds for each year, in quarterly
payments, etc.

He then avers that they accordingly entered and occupied the said brew house
and malt-house, on the 1st day of May, 1780, and continued the occupation
thereof until the 17th day of March, 1783, till when the said license remained
in force; and then avers as before, that he as their servant, and at their
command, from time to time and at diverse times, between the two last mentioned
days, did enter and occupy the said brew house and malt-house, etc, quae est
eadem etc. concluding with an averment, that the said Benjamin and Evelyn did
pay the said one hundred and fifty pounds a year to John Smith, appointed by
the said Commander in Chief to receive the same.

For further plea to the whole of the tresprass, according to the form of the
statute, the Defendant says, that the Plaintiff actionem non etc. Because he
says, that after the passing the act of the Legislature of this state, in the
declaration mentioned, to wit, on the 3d day of September, 1783, at etc. a
certain definitive treaty of peace, between the king of Great Britain and his
subjects, and the United States and the subjects and citizens thereof and of
each of them, was entered into, made and concluded by plenipotentiaries on the
part of the said king and states respectively (naming them) in virtue of full
powers etc. which definitive treaty, on the 14th day of January, 1784, at
Annapolis, etc. by the United States of America in Congress, then and there
assembled in due form, was ratified and confirmed; and afterward on the same
day, announced and published by proclamation under the seal of the United
States, to all the good citizens of the said United States; enjoining all
magistracies, legislatures, etc. to carry into effect the said definitive
treaty etc. prout etc. In virtue of which said definitive treaty, all right,
claim, etc. which either of the said contracting parties, and the subjects and
citizens of either of them might otherwise have had to any compensation,
recompense, retribution, or indemnity whatsoever, for or by reason of any
injury, or damage, whether to the public or individuals, which either of the
said contracting parties, and the subjects and citizens of either might have
done or caused to be done to the other, in consequence of, or in any wise
relating to the war between them, from the time of the commencement to the
determination thereof, were mutually and reciprocally, virtually and
effectually, relinquished, renounced and released to each other etc. -- And he
avers, as in his other plea, that from the time of his birth, and at all times
since, he has been and still is a subject of the king of Great Britain: And
between the times in his plea mentioned, as a subject of the said king, resided
in the city of New York, using the art, trade, etc. of a merchant, under the
protection of the army of the said king, then waging war against the said
state; et hoc paratus est verificari: Wherefore he prays judgment whether the
said Plaintiff, her action against him ought to have or maintain; with this,
that the said Joshua will verify that the whole of the trespass by him supposed
to be committed, is for certain acts etc. by him supposed to have been done
while he was residing as a subject of the said king, and under the protection
of the army of the said king, and in relation to the war aforesaid.

The Plaintiff replies as to the plea of the Defendant, as to the residue of
the trespass, by him done as aforesaid, by him above pleaded in bar, that she
by reason thereof ought not to be barred from her said action; because she
says, that by the act etc. for granting a more effectual relief in cases of
certain trespasses, in her declaration in part recited, it is also among other
things enacted, that no Defendant or Defendants, shall be admitted to plead in
justification any military order, or command whatsoever of the enemy, for such
occupancy: And avers, that the said Commissary-General and Commander in Chief
were, at the time of giving the permission or license, subjects to the said
king of Great Britain, the enemy mentioned and intended by the act aforesaid,
and in the military service of the said king: Wherefore seeing that the said
Joshua has acknowledged the trespass by him done as aforesaid, the said
Elizabeth prays judgment and her damages, etc.

And as to the further plea of the said Joshua, to the whole of the trespass
aforesaid by him pleaded in bar, the Plaintiff demurs.

And the Defendant on his part demurs to the plea of the Plaintiff last above
pleaded.

The pleadings close with joinders in demurrer, in the usual forms.

From these pleadings, and the arguments which they have produced, three
questions are presented for our consideration. --

Is It. Whether the Plaintiff's case is within the letter and intent of the
statute on which this action is grounded?

IIdly. Whether the laws of nations give the captors, and Defendant under them,
rights which control the operation of the statute and bar the present suit?

IIIdly. Whether there is such an amnesty included or implied in the definitive
treaty of peace, as virtually or effectually relinquishes or releases the
Plaintiff's demand under the said statute?

Under one or other of these heads, all the reasons and authorities which have
been offered on both sides, may be properly applied:

I. Then we are to enquire, whether the Plaintiff's case is within the letter
and intent of the statute, on which this action is grounded.

From the concessions which arise out of the pleadings, we find, that according
to the letter of the statute, she was an inhabitant of this city, who by reason
of the invasion of the enemy, left her place of abode; and that she has not
since voluntarily put herself into the power of the enemy; that the brew house
and malt-house in question, were part of her real estate; that they were
occupied by the Defendant as charged in the declaration, and at the time of
such occupancy, were in the power of the enemy: and nothing more is required to
make Mrs. Rutgers a complete Plaintiff, within the statute.

Instead of contesting this point, the Defendant's counsel endeavor to show,
that according to the intention of the Legislature, the statute cannot
comprehend the Defendant. For this purpose, they strongly rely on his being a
British subject, residing in this city as a merchant, under the protection of
the British army, when the cause of action accrued.

Without embarrassing the question at present with the privileges claimed for
the Defendant, either from the temporary conquest of the city, or the
definitive treaty, -- which will hereafter meet with due attention -- it seems
proper to consider simply, whether from the nature of the provision, and the
circumstances of the Defendant, he was intended to be included in the statute,
for if it does not extend to him there is an end of the suit -- if it does
extend, there will be a fair opening to examine -- whether the temporary
conquest, or the treaty of peace, operate as an extinguishment, or release of
the cause of action? And here it will be proper to enquire into the occasion
and nature of the statute -- the remedy it provides -- and the rules by which
it ought to be construed.

The statute was made at the eye of a war, when peace, and an evacuation of the
southern district, were like to take place. The object of it, as the title
expresses, was for granting a more effectual relief in cases of certain
trespasses. The persons who are to be redressed are the exiles, who were
compelled to retire from their estates, on the invasion of the southern
district: The persons to be prosecuted, were those who had occupied, injured,
or destroyed, the real or personal estates of those exiles, within the power of
the enemy: and it is provided, that every Defendant who had occupied, injured
or destroyed the property, shall be held to bail; and that no Defendant shall
be admitted to plead in justification, any military order, or command of the
enemy for such occupation, etc.

This then is clearly a remedial law. Great pains have been taken on both
sides, to enforce the rules by which it ought to be expounded.

The counsel for the Defendant urge, that a sound legal discretion ought to be
used in recurring to first principles; so as to make law a rule of right, and
not a net to entangle justice. That Ratio est anima legis: et qui haeret in
litera haeret in cortice; they point out how far the common law is to be
consulted, Show, 405 to 10 mod. 20.

Bacon, p. 648, 4 co. 71 a.


in the construction of statutes. --

Vin. Stat. 512. 4 co. p. 13.
That statutes against law and reason are void. --

1 Domat. p. 782 Puff. b. 5 c. 12 p. 6.

Plow. 466, 7.


That many things are within the letter, which are not within the equity of a
statute. --

Bac. Stat. 649, to 651.
That no statute can be construed so as to be inconvenient, or against reason.
--

They exemplify these rules by a number of particular cases, to which if time
does not fail us, proper attention shall be paid in another place.

They add, that this being an act of a mere private nature, may be the more
easily controuled.

On the other hand it is urged, -- That when a statute gives a remedy for a
wrong, it is to be construed according to equity. --

That it ought to be construed in suppression of the mischief, Wood 10.
and in advancement of the remedy. --

That it ought to be interpreted reasonably, Wood 9 mod. 161.
and according to the meaning of the Legislature. --

Wood 10.
That what is in the same mischief is in the same remedy, though out of the
letter. --

8 mod. 65.
That even in the construstion of a penal statute the intention is to be
regarded. --

Heb. 97.
That a court ought so to construe a statute as not to suffer it to be eluded.
--

In one point, both parties agree, that the advice of Plowden is most worthy of
attention. In order, says he, to form a right judgment whether a case be within
the equity of a statute, it is a good way to suppose the law maker present, and
that you asked him the question -- did you intend to comprehend this case? Then
you must give yourself such answer as you imagine, he being an upright and
reasonable man, would have given. If this be, that he did mean to comprehend
it, you may safely hold the case to be within the equity of the statute; for
while you do no more than he would have done, you do not act contrary to but in
conformity with the statute.

The result of all these rules is obviously this -- that remedial laws are so
to be expounded as to have their full force -- in advancement of the remedy --
upon an equitable interpretation -- according to the intention of the
Legislature -- to be sought after by a sound, legal discretion

Under the impression of these maxims, it is asked whether the law intended to
exempt, or to include a person under the circumstances or description of the
Defendant.

Here then is a British merchant, who merely for the purpose of commerce
resided in the city, while it was in the power of the British, for his own
private accommodation: He was permitted by the Commissary-General, and
afterward by the Commander in Chief, to enjoy the Plaintiff's property for
near six years: He has paid as a rent, one hundred and fifty pounds a year, for
three years only of the term, to the order of the British Commander in Chief.
He remains in the city, pursuing his business as a merchant, although those under
whose protection he exercised his function, are long since withdrawn.

The temporary conquest and the definitive treaty out of the question, what can
exempt him from the description of the statute? Can any or all the maxims laid
down by his counsel for its construction? Before assent is yielded to such a
proposition, let us take a nearer view of his case as connected with his
principals under whom he justifies.

If they did not come to this country to join the military in its oppression,
and to enrich themselves by its spoils -- a suspicion too dishonorable to be
entertained! If they resided here under the protection of the British army, to
pursue their private affairs as merchants -- as their pleas avow, and we are
bound to believe. -- If for their private purposes, without relation to or
connection with the war, they occupied the Plaintiff's tenements, confessedly
for a considerable part of the time without any consideration at all? why it is
repeated should they be exempted from this statute?

How, as applied to them personally and independent of national considerations,
can it be harder contrary to reason or justice, that they should be compelled
to pay an adequate rent for the accommodations which they have enjoyed? why
should they even wish to be exempted at the expense of a widow, driven into
exile by the dread of a siege, or the expectation of a storm? would not this be
unreasonable, unjust? If, according to the advice of Plowden, we were to
suppose ourselves conversing with the members of the Legislature; that the
Defendant's case was fairly stated, as it in fact existed, at the moment of
passing the statute; and that they had been asked whether they meant to
comprehend such a case, what would probably be their answer? there is no doubt
in our minds but it would be in the affirmative. The spirit import general
terms of the statute; its design and the circumstances which gave it birth,
seem fully to justify this conclusion.

Besides that Legislature knew too well the practice of war, to suppose that
the Commissary-General of a British army had competent authority to grant the
license or permission in question: From the nature of his office the contrary
would be presumed, especially when the pleas themselves aver expressly, that
the said brew house and malt-house, by virtue of authority from the Commander
in Chief of the said army, were taken possession of by the said
Commissary-General for the use of the said army. The license then from the
Commissary to occupy those tenements for the private purposes of the
Defendant's employers was repugnant to the orders of his Commander in Chief; an
encroachment on other departments, for which there was no color of right; and
it is consequently to be considered as a mere nullity. This had the facts been
fully represented, the Legislature could not but have observed: To give it now
its proper weight will be the duty of the court.

As a circumstance of much moment to the Defendant it is contended, that the
obtaining and the occupancy of the tenements in question, related to the war.

In arguments, which display great skill, and an uncommon degree of zeal and
industry, this interesting point is slightly touched.

The relationship to the war results from the capture of the city, say the
gentlemen, by which the right to the use of the lands vested in the conqueror:
His authority to the Defendant to use it continues the relation, and by way of
illustration this case is stated -- a prize ship is condemned and sold -- the
purchaser is a merchant: though this is a private speculation on his part, yet
the damage done was in relation to the war, and the sale and purchase good.

But this is a remote argument indeed. The merchant here had no other agency
than to purchase a prize lawfully condemned, in which, by the law of nations,
the original owner no longer had any interest, the property being absolutely
and effectually changed. Can it then be said with the least appearance of
reason, that this purchase was an act which bore a relation to the war? it is
true the original capture and the damage sustained by it were consequences of
the war; but these circumstances could produce no relationship between the act
done by the merchant -- The purchase, which is the true point -- and the war.

Let us suppose a case; a statute passes to criminate every man within the
power of the enemy, who had voluntarily done any act on the side of the enemy,
in relation to the war; could this Defendant on the facts stated in the
pleadings, have been convicted? Take up that part of the case, which would have
been most unfavourable to him -- his contract with the British commander: He
hired the tenements from him; but it was for the purpose of his own private
commerce: The rent which he paid contributed to strengthen the hands of the
enemy; but they had a right to raise contributions; they had a force to collect
them, which could not be resisted. Here then is no evidence of hostility or
enmity, of a concern in or relation to the war. The most zealous of our
friends, within their power, could have been compelled to be related to the war
in this way: They must either submit to be accommodated on the terms of the
conqueror, or to perish in the streets. Under the prosecution then which we
have supposed, the Defendant must have been acquitted.

We must not be amused by high sounding words -- too much is attempted -- if a
construction of the license from the British commander to occupy the tenements
for the three last years of the term, had depended abstractedly on the voice of
reason, we must have found it difficult to conceive how even such a license
bore a relation to the war.

Here however, other considerations, which it will be premature to explain in
this place, must have their weight.

But when it is insisted that the remainder of the term for which the tenements
were held under the bare unauthoritative permission of the Commissary-General,
had any relation to the war, it is altogether without foundation.

We proceed now to the second general head, in which it is proposed:

IIdly. To enquire -- whether the law of nations gives the captors, and the
Defendant under them, rigths which control the operation of the statute, and
bar the present suit?

To maintain those rights and that control, the Defendant's counsel have
entered into a large display of the law of nations, its principles, divisions,
obligations and effects, and have pointed out the sacredness of its authority,
and the temerity and dishonor, in a national view, of countenancing any act
repugnant to it.

On the other hand, one of the Plaintiff's counsel from a view of the
contradictory opinions, which were read, seemed to think that this law afforded
no rule of right, and ought to have no influence on the government of a people.

The truth is, that the law of nations is a noble and most important
institution: The rights of sovereigns, and the happiness of the human race, are
promoted by its maxims and concerned for its vindication.

We hitherto have not been so loudly called upon to form and inculcate an
extensive knowledge of this interesting science; but now since we are placed in
a new situation, as one of the nations of the earth, it is become an
indispensable obligation. We profess to revere the rights of human nature; at
every hazard and expense we have vindicated, and successfully established them
in our land! and we cannot but reverence a law which is their chief guardian --
a law which inculcates as a first principle -- that the Principles of the Law
of Nature, referred to. -- That man was made for society -- that society is
absolutely necessary for man -- that the public good ought always to be the
supreme rule -- that the spirit of sociability ought to be universal -- that we
ought to have the same disposition toward other men, as we desire they should
have toward us -- that we should behave in the same manner toward other men,
as we would be willing they should behave toward us in the like circumstances
-- that we should preserve a benevolence even toward our enemies -- that
although the exercise of benevolence toward our enemies may from necessity be
suspended, yet we are not allowed to stifle its principle; that revenge
introducing, instead of benevolence, a sentiment of hatred and animosity is
condemned; because such a sentiment is vicious in itself, and contrary to the
public good.
amiable precepts of the law of nature, are as obligatory on nations in their
mutual intercourse, as they are on individuals in their conduct toward each
other; and that every nation is bound to contribute all in its power to the
happiness and perfection of others! What more eminently distinguishes the
refined and polished nations of Europe, from the piratical states of Barbary,
than a respect or a contempt for this law. Books therefore which treat of the
law of nations have always been received with avidity and applause.

The principal authorities adduced in this cause, are from Grotius,
Puffendorff, Wolfius, Burlamaqui and Vattel.

Grotius, A professor of the law at ^roningen.
in his book de jure belli et pacis, professes to treat of but a small part of
the law of nations -- marriage -- the power of fathers -- masters -- and
sovereigns -- promises -- contracts -- oaths -- treaties -- ambassadors --
burials -- punishments -- peace and war.

Commentators have observed, that though this celebrated work contains many
excellent precepts, it is neither methodical nor comprehensive.

Puffendorff next composed his treatise, de jure naturae et gentium, in which
we find more order, and great erudition: But it has been observed, that this
work is not free from error, and that the author has not shown how the civil
does not destroy natural society; and that the latter only serves to perfect
the former.

We are informed, that to illustrate this was attempted by Wolsius; The great
Saxon philosopher.
and after him by Burlamaqui. Professor of civil and natural law at Geneva.
This last work, says a writer, is evidently rather an introduction than a
system; and it served only to excite a desire to see it continued with equal
perspicuity and elegance. The honor of this task was reserved for the great
Vattel, whose work is entitled to the highest admiration? He modestly takes
Wolfius for his guide; but in numberless passages corrects, abridges and
improves him. What Wolfius has diffused into fourteen volumes, our author has
contracted into one; at the same time that his reasonings are clear and
satisfactory, and carry nothing of the dryness of an abridgment.

Thus we see, that the writers on the law of nations are distinguished
philosophers, of different countries and ages; some educated in republics; some
in monarchies; some at a time when prejudice, and an ignorance of the rights of
mankind prevailed; and others when philosophy had refined the reason, and in
some measure subdued the fiercer passions of the human mind.

Hence it can be no more an objection or reproach to the law of nations, than
it is to any other science (for all partake of imperfection) -- that a
difference of sentiments and opinions should be discovered among different
authors! -- A further use intended by these observations, is to justify the
preference, which we shall give to Mr. Vattel, in points where we shall find
him at variance with other writers.

But to return from this digression, to the arguments before us: It has been
objected by one of the Plaintiff's counsel, that these states are not bound by
the customary and voluntary law of nations, any further than as either of them,
has adopted or engrafted them.

But the objection has been fully answered: By our excellent constitution, the
common law is declared to be part of the law of the land; and the jus gentium
is a branch of the common law. In republica maxim conservandi sut jura belli,
is an ancient adage.

Co L. p. 11, b. Black. 4, p. 67, Burr. 3 vol. p. 14 30.
The authorities cited on this point for the Defendant are full and conclusive.

Indeed if we should not recognize the law of nations, neither ought the
benefit of that law to be extended to us: and it would follow that out
commerce, and our persons, in foreign parts, would be unprotected by the great
sanctions, which it has enjoined. --

After being thus explicit, it is almost unnecessary to touch a more limited
question, of the same nature, which has been debated in the course of the
arguments, viz.

Whether the common laws of war which apply to two great nations, apply to two
great parts of the same nation?

The manner in which Mr. Vattel treats this question, is highly satisfactory;
and humanity forbids, that his principles should be ever called in question!

When a nation becomes divided into two parties absolutely independent, and no
longer acknowledging a common superior, the state is dissolved; and the war
betwixt the two parties, in every respect, is the same with that of a public
war, between two different nations. Independent of each other, they can have no
judge; like two different nations, they appeal to the ultima ratio regum --
they decide the quarrel by arms -- were it not for the restraints imposed by
the law of nations, such a civil war would be beyond expression cruel and
destructive. Hasty punishments, in the moment of rage and animosity, would mark
its progress with injustice, slaughter and desolation.

But alas! have the restraints of that benevolent law protected our country in
the late war, from the miseries we have described? They have not! -- Vengeance
unrestrained, and undistinguished, has been let loose upon us in all her
horrors!

But it is peace! -- Let our injuries and our resentments be buried forever in
the definitive treaty! --

What we have suffered cannot alter the common laws of war: they are founded
upon reason and humanity, and will prevail as long as reason and humanity are
cultivated. As philosophy and the love of mankind extend themselves, these
beneficial institutions will, we trust, be still further improved, to control
the human passions, and mitigate the asperities of war; till in the end
hostilities shall be banished from the world, as disgraceful to our nature. The
ancients it is remarked, were impressed with but a very faint idea of the law
of nations. Some are of opinion, that it had its origin in the reign of
Charlemagne, about the middle of the eighth century, before which time the
nations of Europe, but little civilized, observed few treaties: Others fix it
at a much later period, affirming that all knowledge of the science before the
reign of Maximilian Is It. (about the beginning of the sixteenth century) is
rather matter of curiosity than instruction. However since this last period,
its progress has been gradual, and its influence more and more extensive.
But to return to the point.

The words which follow, are the decision of Vattel, speaking of the case
before us -- "The obligation" says he, of observing the common laws of war,
Vatt. b. 3, p. 111, last clause of 3.
is therefore absolute indispensible to both parties; and the same which the
law of nature obliges all nations to observe between state and state.

And here it is questioned, whether since the law of nations is obligatory, it
may in any part be altered by a particular society, so as to deprive a
foreigner, when residing in that country, of his appeal to them?

The Defendant's counsel deny, that in theory, a particular state has such a
right. They raise this distinction, that where there is merely an infringement
of the local law, foreigners like all others, must be judged by that law: But
where the transaction originally affects a man's conduct, as a member of a
foreign nation, he may appeal to the law of nations, and by that law, which is
part of the law of the land, the thing must be decided.

And they consider the foederal compact as giving additional force to this
restraint --

In support of this reasoning, a passage from the elements of jurisprudence,
Elem. Jurisp. page 62.
is cited to this effect:

"States like the individuals who compose them, are moral persons, they have a
public will and understanding, are capable of natural and acquired rights, and
susceptible of respective obligations. The primary law of nations therefore is
no other than the law of nature, so far as it is applicable to them. Whatever,
in this behalf, reason dictates is a duty of natural justice, from the
necessary law of nations."

Thus far we could agree with the professor, that to state can by its separate
ordinance, prejudice any (...) of such a law -- nay, that all the states of the
world united could not; because being of moral obligation, it is immutable. But
when this doctrine is applied in general to all customs, which prevail by tacit
consent as part of the law of nations; we do not find that he is warranted by
authorities.

Hook. ec. pol. b. 1. g. 10.
Hooker's ec. pol. not being at hand, we have not examined him.

But Vattel treating of the necessary law of nations -- which Grotius calls the
internal law of nations, and several others the natural law of nations, uses
these strong expressions.

"Since then the necessary law of nations consists in the application of the
law of nature to states, and is immutable, as being founded on the nature of
things, -- and in particular on the nature of man: It follows, that the
necessary law of nations is immutable, and whence, says he, as this law is
immutable, the obligations that arise from it necessary and indispensable,
nations can neither make any change in it, by their conventions, dispense with
it themselves, nor reciprocally with respect to each other.

The restraint then of which the lecturer speaks is not perhaps so general, as
he teaches; for according to Mr. Vattel, it seems only to be applicable to laws
of moral obligation. Vattel, p. 2 3.


Now we know, that there are usages of nations which are indifferent, and
which, as Mr. Vattel observes, different states may agree to establish by
treaty, or introduce by custom, at their pleasure.

With respect to such usages, it might perhaps have been considered that every
nation by the law of nature, is free and independent of all foreign and
external control; but if one nation must be subjected, at all events, to
usages which she cannot approve, because others may have thought fit to adopt
them, her liberty would no longer remain entire.

The usage of ransoming captures at sea seems to have been dictated by a spirit
of benevolence; it favored personal liberty; it afforded some alleviations to
the misfortune of the captive merchant and mariner, who, unconnected with the
war, were interrupted in the pursuit of their private concerns; it was an usage
which, we believe, every polished nation adopted: Nevertheless, when
Great Britain conceived, that this usage did not correspond with her interest,
her Parliament did not hesitate to abrogate it; for by a statute passed so
lately as 1782, it is made unlawful for any British subject to ransom his ship
or effects when captured, "and all contracts and agreements which shall be
entered into, and all bills and other securities which shall be given to any
person or persons, shall be absolutely void."

It cannot be said, that this is a law operating only on the subjects of the
British state. All commercial nations appear to be interested in the usage; it
was a benefit to the captor as well as the captive; nor is any provision made
for ransom bills, which might have taken effect before the law could be
promulgated to the different parts of the world. Doug. Kep. P. 169.


This circumstance proves, at least, that the British nation did not consider
itself bound by the broad principles laid down by the lecturer.

Time will not permit us to give this subject a fuller discussion.

We must acknowledge there appears to us very great force in the observation
arising from the foederal compact. By this compact these states are bound
together as one great independent nation; and with respect to their common and
national affairs, exercise a joint sovereignty, whose will can only be
manifested by the acts of their delegates in Congress assembled. As a nation
they must be governed by one common law of nations; for on any other principles
how can they act with regard to foreign powers; and how shall foreign powers
act toward them? It seems evident that abroad they can only be known in their
foederal capacity. What then must be the effect? What the confusion? if each
separate state should arrogate to itself a right of changing at pleasure those
laws, which are received as a rule of conduct, by the common consent of the
greatest part of the civilized world.

We shall deduce only one inference from what has been here observed -- that
to abrogate or alter any one of the known laws or usages of nations, by the
authority of a single state, must be contrary to the very nature of the
confederacy, and the evident intention of the articles, by which it is
established, as well as dangerous to the union itself.

We are next led by the arguments which have been offered, to examine --
whether the war was of such a nature; and the capture such a conquest as
absolutely to transfer, under the idea of an usufruct, the rents and issues of
houses and lands to the British Commander, during his occupancy of the city?

On the part of the Plaintiff it is insisted, that the war which was waged
against us by Great Britain was unjust. As a matter of fact this cannot be
denied -- the honor of every American is concerned in its establishment. Every
patriot knows and feels it. Upon account of the injustice of the war, he
renounced his allegiance and committed his fortune and his life to uncertain
hazard. Upon account of the injustice of the war, Lord Chatham exclaimed in the
British House of Peers that he rejoiced America had resisted. -- Against the
injustice of the war Lord Cambden and his compeers protested; and the great
cities of England itself remonstrated: And finally, on account of the injustice
of the war, even the British House of Commons, in spite of the influence of the
court, resolved against its further prosecution. -- And it is not too
presumptuous to think that upon account of its injustice, all the astonishing
efforts to subdue our country were blasted by the hand of Heaven!

Loft's Rep. 79. 2 Vatt. 77. Grot. 698. ^ ^1. n. 9.
Upon this ground then the Plaintiff's counsel enforce her demand; by an unjust
war, they affirm, the unjust party acquires no right; all the acts of that
party, however otherwise allowable, imbibing the taint of the first injustice,

1 Ruth. 33.
That it is a maxim of the law of nations, that no right can be derived from an
injury.

Cro. El. 540. mo. 461. Bull. 92.
That this principle is consonant to the common law; for that wherever there has
been a disseizen, and a recovery is had against the disseizer, or even an
innocent purchaser, the disseizee shall recover the mesne profits; the first
act being tortious no subsequent act could be otherwise.

3 Vat. 72. 183, 187. 3 Gro. 167 8. 3 -- 4. 2 Ruth. 678. 2 Vatt. 10. 26 28.
They subjoin another proposition, "that by the law of nations the rights of war
are only appropriated to war of the solemn kind;" and insist, that the
annunciation of hostilities in the late war, was not attended with the
solemnities which the law of nations requires.

To these observations and authorities the Defendant's counsel reply -- That
the obligation to make restitution of that which is acquired in an unjust war,
rests in foro conscientiae, and is not external -- that in the language of the
law of nations every solemn war is a just war. 3 Vatt. P. 72. 183.187. 3 Gro.
167 8. 3.4. 2 Ruth. 678. 2 Vatt. 10. 26.28.
That the late war was a solemn war: And that no consequence can be drawn from
the injustice 2 Ruth. 508.510.564.579. 2 Hutch. 357. 1 H. P. C. 163 4. 2 Bu. l.
P. 263. Cunn. Policies of Insurance 276.
of the quarrel on the part of Great Britain -- that the opinion of the ancient
Doctors, that the rights of war are only appropriated to war of the solemn
kind, is exploded by some of the most respectable modern authors, who attribute
the same effects to all public wars: But that the war between us and
Great Britain was the most solemn that modern times have exhibited. This they
infer from the act of the British Parliament putting us out of the protection
of the law; and the declaration of the independence of the United States, which
goes on the idea of an open war: and with respect to the formalities in the
annunciation of war they show that they are arbitrary. Burl. 271. 21.


Without entering into a minute examination of the reasons and authorities, by
which the parties have attempted to maintain opinions so opposite to each
other; we shall consider the subject in a more enlarged view.

It is a maxim founded in reason and humanity, that the restoration of peace,
whatever may be the cause of a war, ought always to be in contemplation. Every
impediment then, which might retard this blessing, ought to be discountenanced
-- every facility which could promote it, encouraged; in proportion as the
refinements of civilization enlightened mankind, it was to be expected that the
law of nations, fostered and cherished by philosophers, should become more
benevolent, and more suitable to the dignity and happiness of man. Hence the
doctrine, that the solemnity and justice of a war were essential in
ascertaining the rights acquired as the effects of war, came to be exploded;
because experience had fully proved, that it was productive of mischief. The
shedding of human blood, and the ruin of families and countries could be but
poorly compensated by the most humiliating concessions; while such is the
influence of pride and ambition, that two nations, equally convinced that it is
their duty and their interest to embrace an accommodation, often suffer the
calamities of war to rage only from the fear of being degraded, by making the
first advances toward peace. They wait for some splendid victory, which may
never happen, to have an opportunity of manifesting their superiority, and of
opposing what is necessary to their affairs, as an act of generosity.

If then every treaty of peace was to be determined only by the precise rules
of justice: If it must necessarily be acknowledged on one side, that the cause
of the war was, on their part, unjust, or hostilities were commenced by them
without those previous solemnities which have once been deemed essential; where
is the nation which would confess their wantonness or injustice? or where the
tribunal to whose arbitration they would submit their honor? It is therefore
for the happiness of mankind; founded, in a manner, in necessity, that in a
treaty of peace neither party should be condemned for, or be bound to
acknowledge, precipitancy, or the want of solemnity, in certain formalities in
the commencement of the war; and much less the injustice of their cause; and
that the odium of all the blood which had been shed, was imputable to them.
This would be to subscribe to an indelible disgrace, to which a sovereign power
very seldom would consent, and never but in the last extremity. If then it is
plain, that no acknowledgment of such a nature can be stipulated in a treaty,
and there is no tribunal to judge between sovereign powers, all enquiry into
the justice or solemnity of a war must cease, and those facts be incapable of
servings the basis of a precept --. in short, that they can be no otherwise
material, than in foro conscientiae. -- These observation are justified by the
authority of Mr. Vattel; they are corroborated by the usage of nations; and in
the particular question before us, govern our decision. -- We conclude
therefore, that if there had been a want of solemnity, or the usual formalities
in the commencement of the war -- which we do not think is the case -- and
although as a matter of fact this war, both in its principle and progress, has
been marked with unparralleled injustice and violence; none of these
circumstances are of any avail in the present case. 3 Vatt. 110.


The next point which has been raised, is, Whether the capture and occupancy of
the city of New York, is such a conquest as vested the British Commander with
the disposal of the rents and profits of real property?

To maintain the negative of this question, the Plaintiff's counsel have
recourse to the doctrine of Postliminium -- which is that right, by virtue
whereof, persons and things are restored to their former state; when coming
again under the power of the nation to which they belong.

Vatt. 85.112.87.197.79.214.
They cite opinions, that the acquisitions of a town taken in war is not
complete till confirmed by a treaty of peace, or submission, till then there
are hopes of recovery.

Gro. 616.701. n. 22.
That acquisitions of war are only of force against neutral persons; to give the
conqueror a right, it must be by peace, otherwise the right is supposed to
continue in the old proprietor.

What I have observed, says Grotius, of lands, takes place also in my opinion
in regard to all rights annexed to those lands. Upon this principle it must be
said, that the profits of the land recovered are to be restored; and he refers
to a formal decision of the civilian Paulus, in the point.

They add, that no usurpation puts the party out of possession.

On the other hand the Defendant's counsel argue:

That the Romans and other nations of antiquity, used upon any conquest to make
an immediate distrubtion even of the lands among themselves: But that the
refinements of more civilized ages have softened the rigor of this right,
Vatt. B. 369. P. 62. 165.
so far as to leave individuals who remain with their property, unmolested,
further than in making contribution. Gro. 6.3. C. 9. P. 612. 1.2. Id. P. 622.
13.
But that the personal property of those who fly becomes a booty,

Gro. 2.3. c. 20. P. 721. 22.
To these general authorities which they quote are added two in point, viz.

2 Hutch. 36. Vatt. b. 4. c. 3. Gro. b. 3. c. 20. P. 701. 22.
"To whom any thing is granted by the articles of peace, to him also are
al-allowed all the profits from the time of the grant: but not before."

When lands are enclosed by fortifications the effects of capture take place.
Again, "The products restored on a peace are due from the instant fixed for the
execution. If there is no fixed time, they are due from the moment of
restitution of the things granted, 3 Gro. C. 6. p. 583. 4 Gro. 20 P. 699. n. 1.
12. n. 2. Vatt. b. 4 c. 3. 30. P. 123.
but those which were collected before the conclusion of the peace are not to
be delivered up: For the fruits belong to the proprietor of the stock; and here
possession is accounted for lawful title."

The two authorities quoted from Grotius, and on each side of the question,
seem at the first view, to be repugnant; but on an attentive examination it
will appear otherwise: In the first case he is speaking of profits of lands to
be restored. He conceives, that the profits of such lands ought to be recovered
on account of the antecedent right of soil to which they were annexed.

But in the last case, he speaks of a new right, granted by the articles of
peace, which had no prior existence, there he says the profits shall be allowed
from the time of the grant, and not before. That this distinction is just will
appear from a view of the whole of the last authority:

To whom any thing is granted by articles of peace, to him are also all the
profits allowed from the time of the grant but not before; then follows this
passage which explains the sense of the author -- "As Augustus Caesar well
argued against Sextus Pompeius, who having Peleponnesus granted to him, would
have also had all the tributes, which were in arrear for some years past before
the time of that grant."

Thus Grotius is at unity with himself: But it is not in our power to reconcile
him to Vattel. These authors differ in their opinions with respect to the
restitution after peace, of the fruits collected by a captor during the war.
Besides this, which is under consideration, there are several strong passages
in Vattel, which corroborate the same doctrine; and it receives additional
force from the authority of Burlamaqui and of Barbeyrac in his notes upon
Grotius.

We are therefore of opinion, that restitution of the fruit, or in other words,
the rents and issues of houses and lands, which have been bona fide, collected
by or under the authority of the British Commander, while he held possession of
the city, cannot, according to the law of nations, be required.

The usufruct seems to be placed on the footing of any other contribution
exacted by a conqueror in the course of a war; and the right of demanding
contributions in such case, has, we believe, never been questioned. -- With
respect to the products, which might be due on the conclusion of a peace, they
must cease to be recoverable by the captor after the restoration of the town,
unless the treaty should provide for it by an express stipulation.

But this doctrine in its fullest extent will prove no effectual relief to the
Defendant. As we have before observed the rights of the British General as the
effect of a temporary conquest, could only be communicated by his immediate
authority; the agency of the Commissary General in disposing of those rights,
was an act of usurpation; and it is not pretended that merely as British
merchants and British subjects, either the Defendant or his employers had any
claim or interest in the usufruct.

The Defendant therefore, upon the most liberal construction of the law of
nations, remains chargeable to the Plaintiff in this action.

We proceed therefore to the third general head, to enquire --

Vatt. B. 4. c. 2. P. 120.121 18 to 21 Grot. B. 3. c. 20. P. 699 and
Barbeyrac's Note. Burla. p. 253, 7 -- 1 -- 3.
IIIdly, Whether there is such an amnesty included or implied in the definitive
treaty of peace, as virtually or effectually relinquishes or releases the
Plaintiff's demand?

And here the Defendant's counsel insist, that every treaty of peace implies an
amnesty and oblivion of damages and injuries in the war; and rely on the
authority of Grotius, Barbeyrac, Barlemaqui and V^tel in support of the
proposition.

A treaty of peace can be no more than an agreement. The effect of it is to put
an end to the war, and to abolish the subject of it: as it forbids the revival
of the same war, by taking up arms for the cause which first enkindled it, it
is in reality perpetual.

An amnesty is a perfect oblivion of what is past, and the end of peace being
to extinguish all subjects of discord, this should be the leading article of
the treaty. This accordingly, says Vattel, at present is the constant rule.

But though the treaty, he adds, should be wholly silent on this head, the
amnesty, by the very nature of the peace, is necessarily implied in it.

In another passage, he observes, that the effect of the amnesty, cannot be
extended to things of no relation to the war concluded by the treaty.

These principles are well established by the law of nations; and they are even
admitted by the counsel for the Plaintiff.

But it is objected, on their part, that the occupation of the tenements in
question by the Defendant, had no relation to the war; and that therefore the
amnesty cannot acquit him.

This objection has been fully considered; and we have given an opinion that
the term for which the tenements were held by the permission of the Commissary
General can, on no construction, have a relation to the war:

The amnesty implied in the treaty cannot therefore justify the Defendant; for
all the authorities prove, that it can be only extended to things done in
relation to the war.

The parties have indeed joined their issues upon other points, upon which, if
the cause had entirely rested, judgment ought to have been given.

But it is a known rule, that if upon the whole record, matter in law appear
why judgment should be given against one party, the court must judge so, for it
is the office of the court to judge the law upon the whole record, and the
consent of parties cannot prejudice their opinions, nor acquit them of their
office in that point. Hob. 56.


It has been further objected, that Congress could form no treaty of peace to
reach our internal police.

There is a great distinction between the authority of the treaty; and its
operation and effects.

The first we hold to be sacred and shall never, as far as we have power,
suffer it to be violated or questioned.

It is the great charter of America -- it has formally and forever released us
from foreign domination -- It has confirmed our sovereignty and independence;
and ascertained our extensive limits.

Our union as has been properly observed, is known and legalized in our
constitution; and adopted as a fundamental law in the first act of our
legislature. The foederal compact has vested Congress with full and exclusive
powers to make peace and war. This treaty they have made and ratified, and
rendered its obligation perpetual.

And we are clearly of opinion, that no state in this union can alter or
abridge, in a single point, the foederal articles or the treaty:

But the operation and effects of the treaty, within our own state, are fit
subjects of enquiry and decision: According to its spirit and true meaning we
must determine our judgment: Nor shall any man, by any act of ours, be deprived
of the benefits which, on a fair and reasonable construction, he ought to
derive from it.

On this occasion, we say with the sage -- fiat justitia ruat coelum.

We cannot, it is urged by the Defendant's counsel, impose a sense upon the
treaty different from that which it intrinsically bears. "The rules received
among nations must interpret treaties."

This is an unnecessary observation: No dispute has arisen respecting the
intrinsic sense of the treaty: The Plaintiff's counsel repeatedly insisted that
the article of the treaty which respected an indemnity related to public
offenses -- the Defendant's counsel in answer frankly confessed, that though
that article was mentioned by one of them, it was not relied on. That they
rested on two things; one, the right which the law of nations gives the
captors; the other the amnesty included essentially in every treaty, whether
expressed or not, agreeably to the current of authorities, and the reason of
the thing.

It is then an implied and not an express amnesty, on which the Defendant
relies; an amnesty which necessarily results from every treaty of peace -- And
thus, the intrinsic sense of the treaty and the rules for its interpretation
are out of the question.

We have in some measure anticipated another question, which was much debated
at the hearing --

Whether the courts of justice ought to be governed by the statute, where it
clearly militated against the law of nations.

Here it is material to observe that the description of persons, who are
subject to be sued by this statute is general; extending to all who had
occupied or injured the real or personal estate of the exiles, within the power
of the enemy.

The counsel for the Defendant, by stating a number of pointed cases, showed
clearly, from the nature of things, that the statute must admit of exceptions.
Mr. Attorney General, one of the counsel for the Plaintiff, who argued the
cause very ably, admitted that many cases may be out of the statute, though the
Plaintiff's is not of the number.

Thus then, it seems to be agreed, on both sides, that the provision in the
statute, being general, cannot extend to all cases: and must therefore receive
a reasonable interpretation according to the intention; and not according to
the lattitude of expression of the legislature: It follows as a necessary
consequence, that the interpretation is the province of the court, and, however
difficult the task, that we are bound to perform it.

Hob. 346
The authorities which have been cited on the part of the Defendant, not only
establish this general principle; but bring forward a number of judicial
decisions, wherein the courts of justice have exercised that power. Plowd. 109.
Show. 455. Vin. Tit. statute, P. 514. n. 27, 30, 31, Ibid 524. n. 119 128. Ibid
528. n. 154. n. 156 1 Stat. 506. 4 Bur. 250. 1. Blac. Rep. 602. 10 Mod. 245.


On the other side, the uncontrollable power of the legislature, and the
sanctity of its laws, have been earnestly pressed by the counsel for the
Plaintiff; and a great number of authorities have been quoted to establish an
opinion, that the courts of justice, is no case ought to execise a discretion
in the construction of a statute. 1 Inst. 36, 6. Co. Lit. 24, 6, 290. Vin. Vel.
19. P. 514. n. 22, 24, 25. 4 Bac. 639. 12 Mod. 688. 4 Bac. 651, 3 Rep. 7. 4
Bac. 647. Plowd. 205. Plowd. 205. 11 Rep. 73. 19 Vin. 519. n. 91 464 11 Mod.
161. 1 Black. 91. 4 Bac. 52. 10 Mod. 344. 19 Vin. 520. Hob. 298. Cart. 36.
Vaugh. 179.


However contradictory these authorities may appear to superficial observers;
they are not only capable of being reconciled; but the result of the whole will
appear to be wise, suited to human imperfection and easily explained.

The supremacy of the Legislature need not be called into question; if they
think fit positively to enact a law, there is no power which can control them.
When the main object of such a law is clearly expressed, and the intention
manifest, the Judges are not at liberty, although it appears to them to be
unreasonable, to reject it: for this were to set the judicial above the
legislative, which would be subversive of all government.

But when a law is expressed in general words, and some collateral matter,
which happens to arise from those general words is unreasonable, there the
Judges are in decency to conclude, that the consequences were not foreseen by
the Legislature; and therefore they are at liberty to expound the statute by
equity, and only quoad hoc to disregard it.

When the judicial make these distinctions, they do not control the
Legislature; they endeavor to give their intention it is proper effect.

This is the substance of the authorities, on a comprehensive view of the
subject; this is the language of Blackstone in his celebrated commentaries, and
this is the practice of the courts of justice, from which we have copied our
jurisprudence, as well as the models of our own internal judicatories. To apply
these general remarks to the particular case under our consideration -- The
American prisoners of war, in the power of the enemy, were quartered in the
houses of the exiles: they in fact occupied those houses by a military order or
command, and are included within the general description of the statute, which
according to the letter, extends to all persons without any exception, who have
so occupied or injured such houses. But can we force ourselves to believe, that
the Legislature could have been so unjust and oppressive, as to add to the
sufferings of the patriot soldier, consigned after fighting the battles of his
country, to a long captivity by making him pay for the fetters, which he had
worn in the service of his country, or for want of means, to undergo a second
loss of liberty?

That the legislative, judicial and executive powers of government should be
independent of each other, is essential to liberty.

This principle entered deeply into our excellent constitution, and was one of
the inducements to the establishment of the Council of Revision, that the
judicial and executive of whom it is composed, might have the means of guarding
their respective rights, against the encroachments of the Ligislature, whether
by design, "or by haste or unadvisedness." For this and other purposes, all
bills, which have passed the Senate and Assembly, before they become laws, are
to be presented to the Council for their revisal and consideration; that if it
should appear improper to them, that any bill should become a law, it may be
returned with their objections for further consideration, and become subject to
the approbation of two-thirds of the members of each house, before it can be a
law.

From this passage of our constitution, Mr. Attorney seems to regard this
determination of the Council of Revision on the law in question, in the light
of a judicial decision; by which this court ought to be guided, for the sake of
uniformity in the dispensation of justice. But surely the respect, which we owe
to this honorable Council, ought not to carry us such lengths; it is not to be
supposed, that their assentor objection to a bill, can have the force of an
adjudication: for what in such a case, would be the fate of a law, which
prevailed against their sentiments? Besides in the hurry of a session, and
especially slagrante bello, they have neither leisure nor means, to weigh the
extent and consequences of a law, whose provisions are general, at least not
with that accuracy and solemnity, which must be necessary to ^ender their
reasons incontrovertible, and their opinions absolute. The institution of this
Council is sufficiently useful and salutary, without ascribing to their
proceedings, effects so extraordinary; nor is it probable, that the high
judicial powers themselves, would in the seat of judgment always be precluded,
even by their own opinion given in the Council of Revision; -- for instance, if
they had consented to a bill, general in its provision, and in the
administration of justice they discovered, that according to the letter, it
comprehended cases, which rendered its operation unseasonable, mischievous and
contrary to the intention of the Legislature, would they not give relief?
surely it cannot be questioned.

Upon the whole, this being a statute is obligatory, and being general in its
provisions, collateral matter arises out of the general words, which happens to
be unseasonable. The Court is therefore bound to conclude, that such a
consequence was not foreseen by the Legislature, to explain it by equity, and
to disregard it in that point only, where it would operate thus unseasonably.

The questions then, whether this statute has (...) any respect revoked the
law of nations, or is repealed by the definitive treaty of peace, are foreign
to the circumstances of the case: neither will happen, nor ought to be
apprehended.

There is not a tittle in the treaty, to which the statute is repugnant. The
amnesty is constructive, and made out by reasoning from the law of nations to
the treaty.

The repeal of the law of nations, or any interference with it, could not have
been in contemplation, in our opinion, when the Legislature passed this
statute; and we think ourselves bound to exempt that law from its operation:
First, because there is no mention of the law of nations, nor the most remote
allusion to it, throughout the whole statute: Secondly, because it is a subject
of the highest national concern and of too much moment to have been intended to
be struck at in silence; and to be controuled implicatively under the
generality of the terms of the provision: Thirdly, because the provision itself
is so indefinite, that without any control, it would operate in other cases
unreasonably, to the oppression of the innocent, and contrary to humanity; when
it is a known maxim that a statute ought to be so construed, that no man who is
innocent be punished or endamaged: Fourthly, because the statute under our
consideration, does not contain even the common non obstante clause, though it is
so frequent in our statute book -- "And it is an established maxim, where two
laws are seemingly repugnant, and there be no clause of non obstante in the
latter, they shall, if possible, have such construction, (...) the latter may
not repeal the former by implication:" Fifthly, because although it is a true
rule, that posteriores leges prioribus derogant, to use the language of Sir
Thomas Powis, in the Duchess of Hamilton's case, -- at the same time it must
be remembered, that repeals by implication are disfavoured by law, and never
allowed of but where the inconsistency and repugnancy are plain, glaring and
unavoidable: for these repeals carry along with them a tacit reflection upon
the Legislature, that they should ignorantly, and without knowing it, make one
act repugnant to and inconsistent with another: and such repeals have ever been
interpreted so as to repeal as little of the precedent law as possible. 10 Mod.
118.


Dyer 348, at the bottom. Hard. 344.
The Plaintiff's counsel, who themselves argued in favor of this last
proposition, adduced several authorities to support it.

Whoever then is clearly exempted from the operation of this statute by the law
of nations, this Court must take it for granted, could never have been intended
to be comprehended within it by the Legislature.

It is asked by the Defendant's counsel, whether if a person within the power
of the enemy, had been ordered by them on pain of death, to injure or destroy
the property of an exile, he could have been sued under this statute, for
obeying such order? The answer is obvious -- if he did the injury under
coertion, and for the preservation of his life, the duress on every principle
of law and reason, ought to work out his justification; -- for no one can
conceive that the statute, comprehensive as it is in the provision, could have
been intended to be applied to such a case of extreme and fatal necessity.

Again it is asked, whether vessels condemned here in the (...), can be
recovered under this statute. Whether the British Generals, How and Clinton
can be prosecuted under it for damages which they have committed on the
property of the exiles, in relation to the war? The principles, which we have
lain down, clearly show that such vessels cannot be recovered: That those
Generals cannot be sued; because these are all acts done in relation to the
war, which according to the law of nations, are virtually and effectual buried
in oblivion by the definitive treaty: every such treaty in its very nature
implying a general amnesty.

We have gone further perhaps into many important subjects, which have been
brought into view by this controversy, than was strictly necessary; but it is
time that the law of nations and the nature and effects of treaties should be
understood: And in the infancy of our republic, every proper opportunity should
be embraced to inculcate a sense of national obligation, and a reverence for
institutions, on which the tranquillity of mankind, considered as members of
different states and communities so essentially depends.

Besides the maxim interest reipublicae ut sit finis litium, never applied more
forcibly, than it now does to us in our present circumstances; and it is hoped
by being thus explicit, we may ease the minds of a multitude of suitors, whose
causes are depending here under this statute -- at all events we shall relieve
this Court from an unusual weight of judicial examination, which a want of time
^enders incompatible with our other public and indispensable duties.

Upon the whole, it is the opinion of this Court, that the plea of the
Defendant as to the occupancy of the Plaintiff's brew house and malt-house,
between the 28th day of September, 1778, and the last day of April, 1780; and
the last plea of the Defendant as to the whole of the trespass, charged in the
Plaintiff's declaration are insufficient in the law; and that only the plea of
the Defendant in justification of the occupancy between the last day of April
1780, and the 17th day of March 1783, is good and sufficient in the law. --

Let Judgment be entered accordingly.

ERRATA.
PAGE 4, 23d line, for pros^^rity read posterity. 9, 18th line, for (...) read
constitution. 32, 33d line, for observation read observations.


