A Grammatical Institute, OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE, COMPRISING, An easy,
concise, and systematic Method of EDUCATION, Designed for the Use of English
Schools IN AMERICA.

IN THREE PARTS. PART II. CONTAINING, A plain and comprehensive Grammar,
grounded on the true Principles and Idioms of the Language; with an analytical
Dissertation, in which various Uses of the Auxiliary Signs are unfolded and
explained: And an Essay toward investigating the Rules of English Verse.

BY NOAH WEBSTER, Jun. Esquire.

Usus est Norma Loquendi.

CICERO. HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON and GOODWIN, FOR THE AUTHOR, M, DCC,
LXXXIV. Under Protection of the Statute.

PREFACE* To the Second Part.
THE design of this Part of the Institute, is to frame a Grammar of our own
language upon its true principles, and calculate it for the benefit of common
English schools. No Grammar, that has hitherto appeared, seems well adapted to
answer this particular purpose. Mr. Dilworth's, which has had the most general
circulation in America, is not constructed upon the principles of the English
language; it is, to use the words of an eminent scholar and critic, "A mere
Latin Grammar, very indifferently translated." As to those articles in which
all languages agree, such as the general definition of nouns, adjectives, etc.
he is usually right; but wherever our language is built upon principles
peculiar to itself, he is invariably wrong. We are apt to be surprised, that
men who made the languages their principal study, and during their whole lives,
were employed in teaching youth, should (...) discover that the Grammar of one
language would not answer for another; but our wonder will cease when we
reflect, that the English nation a^ large have, till very lately, entertained
the idea that our language was incapable of being reduced to a sy^ of rules;
and that even now many men of much classical learning warmly contend that the
only way of acquiring, a grammatical knowledge of the English Tongue, is first
to learn a Latin Grammar, That such a stupid opinion should ever have prevailed
in the English nation -- that it should still have advocates -- nay that it
should still be carried into practice, can be resolved into no cause (...) the
amazing influence of habit upon the human mind.

Our language has now arrived to a great degree of purity: and many writers of
the last and present age have, both in elegance and sublimity of style,
equaled, if not surpassed the Roman authors of the Augustan age. To frame such
a Grammar as to instruct our own youth, as well as foreigners, in this purity
of style, is the business of a Grammarian -- a business that appears to be not
yet accomplished.

Dr. Lowth was well acquainted with the origin and genius of the language; and
his Short Introduction to English Grammar, which is an original performance,
cannot be studied with too much attention. But his style and method, are not
suited to the capacities of youth; his treatise was expressly designed for a
private and domestic use, and is exceedingly well calculated for this
particular purpose, as well as for schools of a higher class. But with respect
to the Imperative Mode, the Passive Verb and some other matters of less moment,
he seems to have fallen into obvious mistakes; and in the in^^exion of verbs he
is exceedingly defective.

Mr. B^^hanan, a later and much celebrated Grammarian, has given the world a
Regular English Syntax* he has improved upon Dr. Lowth's method and made many
judicious remarks upon the construction and arrangement of periods: But in the
particulars above mentioned, he is liable to the same exceptions as his
predecessor.

D^ Ash has corrected some errors and supplied some defects of these Authors;
but has omitted other articles of equal importance.

In the short treatise here presented to the public, I have endeavored to
throw the principles of our language into a style and method suited to the most
ordinary capacities. I have generally adhered to the systems of the respectable
authorities above mentioned: Whenever I have deviated, it was with reluctance,
but with the fullest persuasion that I was warranted by the nature and idioms
of the language.

In that new and complicated subject, the illustration of our helping verbs o^
auxiliary signs, I was ^bliged to struggle with a multitude of embarrassments
almost insuperable. And after my most laborious efforts to define their several
meanings and explain their various combinations with accuracy and perspicuity,
I must confess the execution of the design is scarcely satisfactory even to
myself. I was under a necessity of introducing a variety of distinctions and
terms unknown to former Grammars, which may possibly offend those who are
firmly attached to the rules and forms of antiquity. But something of this kind
is certainly wanted: Our auxiliary signs enable us to express the circumstances
of time and mode, of power, liberty, necessity, obligation, promise,
determination and inclination, with greater clearness and precision, than can
be done in any other language with which we are acquainted. But we have no
Grammar that unfolds this intricate subject; and though we are enabled to learn
our own language by the ear, yet foreigners seldom or never acquire such a
knowledge of our verbs as to use them with tolerable propriety. I have attended
to their investigation with uncommon assiduity and in my researches, have
perhaps found more difficulties than I am able to remove. I flatter myself,
however, that upon strict examination, it will be judged that I have introduced
no distinction without a difference, and that the propriety of any deviation
from the received rules of former Grammars, is supported by the established
principles of the language.

The prosody of our language has been neglected or mistaken as much as any part
of Grammar. That master-key to the pronunciation of English, the syllabic
accent, has been very little ^nderstood. Mr. Sheridan is the first who has been
sensible of its importance, and he is perhaps better acquainted with its
utility in prose than in verse. An attempt to investigate the rules of numerous
composition and illustrate them by examples from the best authorities, seemed
necessary to complete this Part of the Institute.

In all the rules, definitions and illustrations, accuracy and perspicuity have
been my principal study; and I cannot but think that this will be sufficient to
justify the length of the Dissertation on the Auxiliaries, as well as several
repetitions in the examples of false construction and inelegant arrangement.

OF GRAMMAR. Grammar consists of four parts; viz. Orthography, Prosody, analogy
and Syntax. Orthography teaches to spell and write words with proper letters.
Prosody teaches a true pronunciation of words. Analogy or Etymology teaches the
derivation and declension of words. Syntax teaches the proper arrangement of
words in Sentences. Orthography and Prosody in general, are the subject of the
first part of this Institute. Prosody, applied to verse; Analogy and Syntax are
the subjects of this second Part or Grammar.

What is Grammar? GRAMMAR is the art of speaking and writing our thoughts with
propriety.

What is the subject of Grammar? Grammar treats of Letters, Syllables, Words
and Sentences.

What is a Letter?A Letter is a mark of a simple found, of which there are
twenty six in English. We have also several simple sounds expressed by double
Letters.

What is a Syllable? A Syllable is one letter, or a union of so many letters as
can be pronounced at one breath. A vowel may make a syllable of itself; but
consonant^ ^out vowels, cannot make a syllable; except the half-vowels, which
may make an imperfect syllable of themselves.

The English vowels expressed by single characters are a, e, i, o, u, y, w W
makes no syllable of (...) assist ^n f^^ming diphthongs. The powers of the Le^
(...) be ^amined (...) the second edition of the First (...) of the Institu^^^.
. The sounds of oo and au are also vowels.

The consonants are b, c, d, f, g, h, j, k, l, m, n, p, q, r, s, t, v, x, z,
ch, sh, th, and zh, or s in delusion and (...) in song.

The half vowels are f, l, m, n, r, s, v, z, th, sh, ^h and ng.

Of WORDS.
What are Words? Words are articulate sounds used by common consent as signs of
ideas or notions.

Written words are composed of letters to which custom has affixed certain
sounds.

How many sorts of words are there? Three, primitive, derivative, and compound.

What is a primitive word? A primitive or simple word is such as is not derived
and can not be separated into parts without destroying the word; as, man, hope,
good, bless, agree.

What is a derivative word? A derivative is a primitive word, with the addition
of one or more syllables; as, man-ly, hope-less, good-ness, bless-ing,
agree-able.

What is a compound word? A compound word is formed of two or more simple
words; as, countryman, goldsmiths, ink-horn; or of a simple word and a
preposition; as, overcome, withdraw, dis-engage.

How must derivative words be spelled? (...) general the primitive word must be
preserved en^; as, turn-ed, nation-al, book-ish, learn-ing; but ^he following
exceptions must be observed.

1. When the primitive word ends with a vowel and the syllable that is added,
begins with a vowel, the first vowel must be dropped; as in the following.

Primitive. Derivative. Prim. Deriv. fame fam-ous dance danc-ing move mov-ed
trifle trifl-ing (...) ^^-ing desire desir-ing

But e must not be dropped after c and g before able, for this would render c
and g hard; as, serviceable, if e be dropped, will be sounded servikabl^.

If the syllable added begin with a consonant, then the vowel of the primitive
must be retained; as,

Prim. Deriv. Prim. Deriv. name name-less like like-ness love love-ly grace
grace-ful safe safe-ty confine confine-ment

2. When the primitive ends in y, it is changed into i in the derivative; as,
envy, envi-ous, holy, holiness. But y is retained before i; as in de^^-ing,
envy-ing.

3. When a word of one or two syllables ends (...) single consonant and the
accent lies on the last syllable, the consonant is doubled in the derivative;
(...) put, putting, pen, penned, prefer, preferred.

How many are the parts of speech? Nine, viz. the Article, Noun, Pronoun,
Ad^ective, Verb, Adverb, Preposition, Conjunction, ^^terjection.

ARTICLE.
What is an Article? An article is a word placed before a noun to show how far
its signification extends.

How many are the English Articles? Two, a and the. A is placed before
consonants and before the vowels y and w; as, a year, a week: But for the ease
of pronuciation, it becomes an, before a, e, i, o, u, and before a silent h;
as, an art, an egg, an inch, an ounce, an umbrella, an hour.

How is the article a used? The article a or an, is used to point out one
single thing of a kind; as, a tree, a book; but leaves us uncertain which one
of the whole is r^^ant^ A (...) therefore called the indefinite article.

How is the article the used? The is used to point out one thing or a number of
things, which are supposed to be known; as, the Commander in Chief, the Church,
the twelve Apostles. The is therefore called the definite article.

Is the article a ever used before plural Nouns? Never, except before the
adjectives few, many, dozen, hundred, thousand, and million. We say with
propriety, a few men, a great many trees, a dozen books, a hundred towns, a
thousand soldiers, a million dollars; though we must not say, a men, a trees, etc.

But the is used before both singular and plural nouns.

Is the ^ver used before the adverbs, more, most, less, lest, better, best?
Sometimes it is, in order to mark the degree or quantity more precisely.
Example; the more I see (...), the better I like it; I like this the lest or
the best of any.

NOUN.
What is a noun? (...) noun or Substantive is the name of any thing (...)
exists, and conveys an idea without the help of any other word; a^, book, pen,
power, mind Every thing that can be perceived by the five senses, viz. hearing,
seeing, feeling, tasting, smelling, is a noun. Also every thing that conveys an
idea or notion to the mind, is a noun, as, will, delight, virtue, holiness*


How is a noun divided? Nouns are either proper or common.

What is a proper noun? A proper noun is the name of an individual, when there
is but one thing of that kind; as, George, Philadelphia, Missisippi.

Note, All names of persons, kingdoms, cities, towns, and rivers, are proper
nouns and ought to be written with a capital letter.

Are the articles a and the used before proper nouns? Never, except by a
figure; as, "Our General was a Fabius;" and a traitor is called " an Arnold;"
or when there are two persons of the same name; as, " the two Howes;" or when a
common noun is understood; as, " the Hudson," that is, " the river Hudson." The
reason is, because without articles the names are as certain and determinate as
they can be.

Will proper nouns admit of the plural number? Never, except when there are two
persons of the same name; as, "the two Howes;" and in this case, they seem to
become common nouns. But we can not say "the two Bostons," because there is but
one.

What is a common noun? A common noun is the name of a sort or species of
things; as, animal, horse, fish, fowl. Animal is a name common to all things
that have life; horse is a name common to a sort of animals; fish, to another,
and fowl, to another. Each of these therefore is a common noun.

NUMBER.
How many numbers are there? Two, the Singular and Plural. The singular number
speaks of one thing; as, hat; the plu^^^ of more than one; as, hats.

How is the plural number formed? It is formed from the singular, by adding s
or es, as, tree, trees, fox, foxes. When the word ends in ch, sh, ss, or x, the
plural is made by adding es; as,

Singular. Plural. Sing. Plu. church churches glass glasses brush brushes box
boxes

Some nouns ending in s or fe, for the ease of pronunciation, make the plural
by changing f into v; as,

Sing. Plu. Sing. Plu. life lives half halves knife knives staff staves wife
wives loaf loaves leaf leaves sheaf sheaves calf calves shelf shelves self
selves wolf wolves

The following nouns are irregular in the plural; viz.

Sing. Plu. Sing. Plu. man men die dice woman women louse lice brother brothers
or brethren mouse mice goose geese penny pence phenomenon phenomena child
children seraph seraphim tooth teeth cherub cherubim foot feet

Have all nouns the singular number? The following nouns, from the nature of
the things they express, are used only in the plural number; viz. Aborigines
aloes alms amends annals archives ashes assets bowels bellows breeches calends
compasses cresses embers entrails fetters gallows goods lungs news News is
always plural and yet we always join to it a verb in the singular number; as,
What is the news? etc. This is certainly an impropriety, however authorized by
custom.
pincers scissors snuffers shears thanks tongs trowsers wages


What nouns have no plural number? Names of virtues and vices, as pride, sloth,
gratitude, industry, etc. names of herbs, as, grass, wheat, rye, etc.

N. B. Sheep, deer, hose, fern, are the same in both numbers.

CASE.
What is meant by case? It means a different ending of a word to express a
different relation.

Have English nouns any cases? They have properly two cases or different
endings; the first is the name of the person or thing -- the second is made by
adding an s, separated from the word by an apostrophe; thus "John's book." This
denotes possession and may be called the possessive case When a noun stands as
the agent to a verb, I shall call it the nominative word. When it follows a
verb or preposition, I shall call it the objective word.

EXAMPLES.
Nom. words. Verbs. Objective words. Obj. words, After prepositions. John eats
apples. to Jo^^ she loves virtue. with them he esteems a friend by honor we
live. from vice they remain. in summer they see us. during win^er we see them.
against me

A pronoun before a verb may with propriety be called the nominative case; but
it is immaterial.




When nouns end in es or ss, how is the possessive formed? By adding an
apostrophe, without s; as, "for goodness' sake;" "on eagles' wings;" "Socrates'
wisdom."

Note, This phrase, "the King of Great-Britain's soldiers," though admitted by
Dr. Lowth, seems to be ungrammatical. Every phrase that cannot be resolved or
analyzed by the rules of Grammar and the established idioms of the language,
ought to be rejected as a corruption. This seems to be the case with the
foregoing phrase The following sentence has a phrase of the same (...)
"Tiberius proposed a new edict, which should decree (...) the King of
Pergamus's treasure should be divided among the ^est of the citizens, who were
to have a share in the distrib^^^on of public lands, etc."

Ozell's translation of Vertot's Revolutions. Vol. 2. pag^ (...) Land. Ed. 1770.


.

GENDER.
How many genders have nouns? Two, masculine and feminine. All males are
masculine; all females are feminine; and things without life are of no gender.
These, for the sake of distinction, may be called neuter.

N. B. Neuter cannot properly be called a gender -- it is rather a destitution
of all gender; and in this sense only I shall use it.

How are these different genders expressed? Sometimes by different words; as,

Masculine. Feminine. Mas. Fem. Father mother bridegroom bride husband wife
bachelor maid brother sister boy girl son daughter buck do nephew niece bull
cow man woman drake duck uncle aunt gander goose

Sometimes by the words male, female, man, maid, prefixed to the common noun;
as, a male-child, a female gamester, a manservant, a maidservant.

But the regular ending of nouns feminine is in ess; as in these that follow.

Mas. Fem. Mas. Fem. Abbot abbess peer peeress actor actress priest priestess
adulterer adulteress prince princess ambassador ambassadress poet poetess baron
baroness prophet prophetess benefactor benefactress shepherd shepherdess count
countess sorcerer sorceress deacon deaconess tutor tutoress duke duchess
traitor traitress elector electress tiger tygress emperor empress songster
songstress governor governess seamster seamstress heir heiress viscount
viscountess jew jewess lion liones;s Some make ix in the feminine. marquis
marchioness administrator administratrix master mistress executor executrix
patron patroness testator testatrix protector protectress hero makes heroine or
heroess

Are not things without life sometimes spoken of as male or female? Very
frequently. We say of the Sun, "he cheers the earth with the mild influence of
his rays:" Of the Moon, "she sheds her silver beams:" Of a ship, "she is a
swift sailor." And this figurative way of expression, especially in poetry, is
highly ornamental.

PRONOUN.
What is a pronoun? A pronoun is a word standing for a noun.

How many things belong to a pronoun? Four, viz. person, number, gender, and
case. Pronouns, like nouns, have two numbers, the singular and plural; and are
of all genders, masculine, feminine and neuter.

How many persons are there? There are three persons who may be the subjects of
a discourse; first the person speaking, who calls himself I, secondly, the
person spoken to, who is called thou Thou is used only in the sacred or solemn
style, as in the scriptures, in addresses to the Deity, and in some of the
graver kinds of profane writings. The same is to be observed of ye in the
plural. But in familiar d^scourse and writings we now use you, which is always
plural and ought always to be joined to a plural verb, though it be applied to an
individual. Thus, you was, is as improper a^, you a^^, you best. We ought to
say, y^u were.
* thirdly, the person spoken of, who is called, if a male, he; if a female,
she; if a thing without life, it. The first and second persons, being always
supposed present, and consequently their sex known, have no distinction of
gender: Both men and women say I and thou. But the third person, being often
absent, and the sex unknown, it is necessary that its gender should be
distinguished by different words; thus mas. he; fem. she; neut. it; As the
subjects of discourse are many, therefore these persons have the plural number;
as,

Singular. Plural. I,1 thou,2 he, she3 or it. we,1 ye or2 you, they.3

How many cases have pronouns? Pronouns have three cases, the nominative,
possessive and objective.

The three personal pronouns are thus declined or varied to express number and
case.

First Person. Second Person. Sing. Plu. Sing. Plu. Nominative, I we Nom. thou
ye or you Possessive, mine ours Poss. thine yours Objective, me us Obj. thee
you Third Person. Sing. Plu. Mas. Fem. Neut. Nom. he she it they Poss. his hers
its theirs Obj. him her it them

The personal pronouns have the nature of substantives and as such stand by
themselves. The others, being joined to nouns, like adjectives, may be called
pronominal adjectives; such as thy, my, her, our, your, their. This, that This
and these refer to something present; that and th^se to something absent.
, other, any, some, one, none, may be called definite pronouns, because they
limit or define the extent of the noun to which they are joined. The three
first are varied to express number.

Sing. Plu. this these that those other others

But they have no variation of case.

What part of speech are who, which and that?

Who, which Who is applied to persons only, and which to things. Formerly which
was applied to persons also, though very improperly. Thus we read in the sacred
writings, "There was a certain rich man, which had a steward." "Ye are they,
which justify yourselves." It ought to be who in these and in all other places
where the antecedent is a person.
and that are called relative pronouns, because they refer to some noun going
before, called therefore the antecedent; as, "there was a man, who saw the
action;" where who is a relative and man is its antecedent. Who is varied thus,
nom. who, poss. whose, obj. whom.

Who, which and what, when they ask questions, are called interrogatives.

What, is a peculiar word, including both the relative and antecedent; as, this
is what I took; that is, that which I took.

What are each, every and either called? Each, every and either, are called
distributive pronouns because they denote a number taken separately; as, "here
are five boys, each of whom is studious;" where each refers to every individual
taken separately from the others.

What is the use of own and self? Own and self are added to some pronominal
adjectives to express opposition or emphasis; as, "I did it myself." "It is my
own." But, self, which makes selves in the plural, like a noun, is often
employed as such.

Note 1, When a person does an action upon himself; that is, when the same
person is both the agent and the object, the word that follows the verb in the
objective case, may be called a reciprocal pronoun; as, "he loves himself."
This pronoun is always formed with the termination self; as, herself,
themselves, etc.

Note 2, All nouns and pronouns are of the third person, except I and thou, we
and you or ye.

ADJECTIVE.
What is an adjective? An adjective is a word added to a noun to express its
quality; as, a good house, a wise man, a virtuous woman: Here good, wise, and
virtuous are adjectives added to the nouns, house, man, woman, to express their
qualities. Therefore adjectives alone cannot make sense, but must always refer
to some noun, expressed or understood That (...), omitted in the sentence, but
necessary in the sense.
.

Have adjectives any variation? They are not varied to express number, gender
or ^ase. But as qualities may be of very different degrees, these are expressed
by three different endings, which are called degrees of comparison, viz. the
positive, comparative, and superlative.

How are the comparative and superlative degrees formed?

By r or er, st or est added to the positive: Thus, Positive. Comparative.
Superlative. wise wiser wisest mild milder mildest great greater greatest

Or by the adverbs more and most, less and lest, placed before the positive; as
wise more wise most wise wise less wise lest wise

All monosyllables may be compared by er and est and many dissyllables; as.
happy happier happiest polite politer politest

All adjectives may be compared by more and most; and most adjectives of more
than one syllable and all of more than two, must be compared by more and most,
less and lest.

Irregular Adjectives.
Pos. Comp. Sup. good better best bad worse worst fore former first little less
lest many or much more most near nearer nearest or next old older or elder
oldest or eldest late later or latter latest or last

VERB.
What is a verb? A verb is a part of speech that signifies being or doing.

How many kinds of verbs are there? Two, transitive and intransitive This is
the most accurate and unexceptionable division of verbs; the common division
into active, passive and neu^er is faulty. Many verbs commonly called active,
imply no action at all, or of the mind only; as, to see, to desire, to feel;
while some that are ranked under the term neuter, imply action merely; as, to
run, to fly, etc. The division into transitive and intransitive, admits of no
exception.

As to passive verbs, we have no such thing in the language. I cannot better
express my ideas on this subject, than in the words of Dr. Ash, in a Grammar
prefixed to his Dictionary. He observes that "Properly speaking, there is no
passive verb in the English language; for though, I am loved, is commonly
called a passive verb, yet love is no part of the verb, but a participle or
adjective derived of the verb, love." "I am very sensible that the greatest man
Dr. Lowth, followed by Buchanan.
, perhaps, that ever wrote on the subject, is of a different opinion. He says,
"There are three kinds of verbs active, passive and neuter." And when he comes
to the grammatical resolution of this sentence, " In whom I am well pleased;"
he tells us that am is "The indicative mode, present time, and first person
singular of the neuter verb to be; well an adverb; pleased the passive
participle of the verb to please, making with the auxiliary verb am, a passive
verb." The consideration of this, I must confess, could by no means induce me
to suppress the above note. In parsing every word should be considered as a
distinct part of speech; for though two or more words may be united to form a
mode, a tense or a comparison; yet, it seems quite improper to unite two or
more words to make a noun, a verb or an adjective, etc."

I am happy to find my own opinion supported by so respectable an authority as
Dr. Ash; both with regard to the passive verb and the i^perative mode.
Grammarians, conforming to the inflection of Latin verbs, without attending to
the principles of our own language, have considered the verb let merely as an
auxiliary sign and have used it to form the first and third Persons of the
imperative mode. It may be doubted whether, in any case, the imperative admits
of these persons; the second person only being the object of command or
exhortation. But in most cases, let is certainly a principal verb, of the same
import as permit or suffer, and used in the second person of the imperative
mode. These expressions therefore, let me write, let him write, so far from
being the first and third persons, are in fact the second person of the
imperative. In some instances, they are merely advisory, but in many cases,
they imply a command, directed to a second person.

If a person hold me fast and I say to him, let me go, I presume no one will
contend that this is a command or exhortation directed to myself. In the first
person plural, let us go, has the force of advice and exhortation to a number,
among whom, the speaker includes himself, and this may possibly be called the
first person of the imperative; but, let me, let him and let them, must be
considered as the second person, implying the same as suffer or permit me, etc.
The Romans used the first person of the subjunctive mode for the purpose of
exhorting; not having any first person in the imperative. The French imperative
has all persons, except the first of the singular. The English imperative has
no person but the second; to supply the place of the first and third in other
languages, we use the verb let, with a pronoun in the objective case and a verb
in the infinitive.


. A transitive verb implies some action that passes over from the agent to the
object; as, he loves virtue. Here the action of loving passes from the agent he
to the object virtue.

What is an intransitive verb? An intransitive verb implies action or being
which is all confined to the agent or nominative word; therefore an object can
follow the verb; as, I remain -- he liv^s -- it dies -- we run.

How do we know a transitive verb from an intransitive? If a verb will admit an
object after it, it is transitive; as, "I admire fidelity." "I abhor
treachery." If a verb will not admit an object after it, it is intransitive;
as, "I remain him" "I cease vice." The impropriety of these last expressions,
shows that the verbs remain and cease, are intransitive.

Verbs intransitive admit objective words after them of the same signification;
as, "to live a life of (...)." "to dream a dream, etc."

(...) verbs are to be considered, the persons, number^, modes and tenses.

How many persons are there? Three, in each number, I, thou, and he, she or it
in the singular number; we, ye or you, and they in the plural. These are the
agents or nominative words to verbs.

How many numbers are there? Two, the singular, and plural, as in nouns.

The modes and tenses are explained in the dissertation.

What are participles? Participles are words derived of verbs, and have the
nature of verbs, adjectives or nouns. They always end in ing, d, t, n or ght*
as from the verbs, move, dwell, write, teach, are derived the participles,
moving, moved, dwelt, written, taught The division of participles into active,
perfect and passive, (...) by no means accurate; and that into, present,
perfect and passive, in wholly de^^^^ive. Participles in in^, or of the present
tense, as they are usual^y denominated, are as often used in the past and
future tenses, as in the present, as, I was writing or I shall be writing.
Neither are they always active; for we can find very little activity in a
person that is sleeping, a tree that is standing or a plant that is growing.

Thus particip^es in ed, t, n; as, loved, taught, etc. are used in all tenses
indifferently* as, I am loved, I shall be taught; and in either an active or
passive sense, I have taught or I am taught. In general they are mere
adjectives or nouns and can not be said to belong to tense any more than kind
or smooth: I choose therefore to call them ^y one general name, participles,
leaving it for the Instructor to determine, by the sense, wherever they occur,
whether they be nouns, or adjectives, or retain the signification of the verbs
from which they are derived


.

How do the English form the different modes, tenses and persons of the verbs?
Principally by the help of several small words which are called, from their
use, auxiliaries, that is, helpers.

The proper uses of the English auxiliaries being so intricate and
embarrassing, especially to foreigners, and so little understood even by those
to whom the language is vernacular, I shall attempt a critical investigation of
the subject in the following DISSERTATION.

MODE.
Mode is the manner of representing a being or action.

The Modes are five; the Infinitive, Indicative, Imperative, Potential and
Subjunctive. The infinitive expresses an action or being indefinitely, without
regard to number or person; as, to see, to learn.

The indicative declares some action absolutuly or asks a question in order to
obtain a declaration; as, I see, do I see?

The imperative commands and exhorts; as, see, do thou see.

The potential declares the liberty, power, necessity, inclination and
obligation of the agents, which are expressed by the signs, may, can, must,
would, should, etc.

The subjunctive represents an action under some condition or limitation, or
else doubtful; and is always preceded by a verb or some conjunction; as, if,
though, unless, whether, etc.

TENSE.
Tense is the time of an action or being.

Time is, strictly speaking, divided only into present, past, and future. But
as we have occasion to point out the time of action with more precision, we are
obliged to use other artificial tenses both simple and compound. I shall
therefore divide the tenses as usual into present, imperfect, perfect,
pluperfect, and future, with the compound perfect and future.

The present tense represents an action as now performing; as, I write.

The imperfect expresses an action that is past; as, I wrote.

The perfect represents an action as past and completed; as, I have written.

The pluperfect represents an action as past, prior to some period of time
specified in the sentence; as, " I had written, when he came in."

The future represents an action as yet to come; as, I shall write.

We use a tense compounded of the perfect and future, which I call the compound
future: this denotes that at some time specified, an action will be past; as,
"when you have supped, I shall have finished my business."

The expression, I may have written, seems, to be a compound of the present and
perfect, in the potential mode. It expresses a present possibility that an
action has been done in some past time: This I call the compound perfect.

But there is another important distinction of tenses, peculiar to the English
Language, viz. into indefinite and definite.

The indefinite tenses represent an action as present, past or future, in a
vague indeterminate manner; the definite, ascertain some particular time or
circumstances of action.

The definite tenses are formed by the verb to be and the participle in ing;
as, I am writing. The difference in the use of these tenses, requires
particular explanation.

Present Indefinite. I love. I write. These expressions, though evidently in
the present tense, do not denote any particular exercise of body or mind now
performing or existing -- they convey general and vague ideas. Indeed in many
instances there is very little reference to time or action; for, he writes a
good hand, is often used to signify merely skill in writing.
Definite. I am loving. I am writing. These signify that I am now in the actual
exercise of the passion of love, or performing the action of writing.
Imperfect indefinite This tense seems not so properly called the imperfect;
for in this expression, I wrote a letter last week, the action is as perfectly
past as in, I have written; but it is a matter of little consequence, provided
we understand the tenses.
. I loved. I wrote. Here is no particular time pointed out; the phrases may
refer to yesterday or last year; but both seem to imply a completion of the
actions; for we may say, " I loved him yesterday, though I despise him to day."
Definite. I was loving. I was writing. We use this tense to point out the
precise period when an action was performing, and it commonly has reference to
some other event mentioned as taking place at the same time; as, " I was
writing when you came in."
Perfect indefinite. I have loved. I have written. This tense shows the action
to be completed; but leaves it indeterminate as to the point of time.
Definite. I have been loving. I have been writing. We use this tense to
express an action we have just finished; as, "I have just been drinking;" or
the length of time we have been employed; as, "I have been writing these two
days;" or when a comparison is made in point of time, between different
employments; as, "I have been writing, while you have been playing" In all
which instances, the tense is as definite as possible.
Pluperfect indefinite. I had loved. I had written. This tense shows that an
action was prior to some other event and complete at the time of the event; but
does not determine at what distance of time.
Definite. I had been loving. I had been writing. This is used, when an action
has just been performing, prior to some event; as, "when you came in, I had
just been telling my friend."
Future indefinite. I shall love. I shall write. This signifies merely that an
event will take place in some future time; as, "I shall write a letter to
morrow."
Definite. I shall be loving. I shall be writing. This is used when we foretell
that an action will be performed at the same period with another action or
event; as, "I shall be writing when you will be asleep."
Compound future indefinite. I shall have loved. I shall have written. This
tense has been explained already; and the definite form, I shall have been
writing, is rarely used; though by no means improper; as, "by the time you
arrive, I shall have been writing an hour

AUXILIARY SIGNS OR HELPING VERBS.
The English auxiliary signs are, do, be, have, shall, will, may, can, should,
would, might, could, and must, with their variations.

DO.
Do which makes did in the past time, is used either as a transitive verb, or
as an auxiliary. As a transitive verb, it signifies to perform, and is varied
in all modes and tenses, with the help of the auxiliary signs and its
participle done; as, I have done, I might have done, etc. But as an auxiliary,
it is used only in the present and imperfect tenses, to answer the following
purposes: 1. To express emphasis; as, "Perdition catch my soul, but I do love
thee." 2. To save the repetition of another verb; as, "you write better than I
do: that is, than I write." 3. To ask questions; as, do I write? or express
command; as, do you write.


In all other cases, it seems to be inelegant and obsolete.

BE.
Be is either a principal verb or an auxiliary. When a principal verb, it is
intransitive, signifying merely being or existence, and is varied in all modes
and tenses with the auxiliaries and its participle been; as, I have been, I
could have been, etc. As an auxiliary, it is merely a sign of time, and assists
in forming the various modes and tenses of our principal verbs, as will be
hereafter explained.

HAVE.
Have is both a principal verb and an auxiliary. When a principal verb, it is
transitive and signifies to hold or possess. It is used in all modes and tenses
with the other auxiliaries; as, I have, I shall have, I had had; in which last
expression, the first had is an auxiliary, and merely a sign of the pluperfect
tense, and the last, a transitive verb, denoting possession.

As an auxiliary, it is merely a sign of time.

SHALL.
Shall is always a sign of the future tense.

In the first person, both singular and plural* shall simply foretells an
event; as, "I or we shall go tomorrow."

But in the second and third persons, it promises; as, "you shall have your
money tomorrow;" or, it implies determination or threatening in the speaker;
as, "he shall go, or I will punish him."

The several significations of shall are also variously affected by the manner
in which it is uttered. In the first person without emphasis, it foretells; but
when uttered with emphasis, it expresses a much greater degree of certainty;
as, "I shall be there, you may depend on it." In the second and third persons,
without emphasis, it barely promises; as, "he shall be paid:" but with
emphasis, it promises with determination; as, "he shall have his money at all
events;" or it has the force of a threatening or command; as, "you shall behave
better; the boys shall study, or I will punish them."

WILL.
This is also a sign of the future tense; but for the most part, is directly
the reverse of shall; that is, it has the same force or meaning as shall, but
in different persons. In the first person, it promises; as, "I will write:" In
the second and third, it simply foretells; as, "you will or he will go to
Philadelphia." An emphasis, in the first person, adds force to a promise and
amounts to a determination in the person promising; as, "I will come, upon my
honor; I will go, at all events." An emphasis in the second and third persons
foretells an event with greater assurance.

MAY.
May expresses possibility or liberty, and properly belongs to the present
tense of the potential mode. It denotes possibility; as, "I may go perhaps, but
it is uncertain;" or it denotes liberty; as, "Master tells me that I may go;"
and it is always absolute or unconditional.

CAN.
Can expresses power solely; as, "I can go, if I please." It belongs to the
present tense of the potential mode, and is always absolute or unconditional.

SHOULD.
Should has various uses. It belongs to all tenses indifferently, and signifies
obligation, event or determination. In the first person, should, without
emphasis, expresses event conditionally; as, "I should go, if it did not rain."
With emphasis, it expresses obligation; as, "my friend is in distress, and I
should help him." In the second and third persons it expresses obligation
without emphasis; as, "you saw your friend in distress and should have relieved
him." He saw, etc. But with emphasis, it expresses the resolution of the
speaker; as, "had I been there, he should have gone at all events;" implying a
right in the speaker to command him. But should especially in the first person
plural, is often used to express obligation without emphasis.

WOULD.
Would in the first person, without emphasis, is used to express a promise or
intention conditionally; as, "I would go, if I had a horse." With emphasis, it
imports a resolution of the speaker, which upon certain conditions, he was
determined to carry into effect; as, "I would have gone, had I been in your
place." In the second and third persons, without emphasis, it denotes intention
or inclination or even event conditionally; as, "you would purchase, if you
were able." With emphasis, it carries an idea of the settled purpose or
determination of the person spoken of; as, "he would rule, if he could;" in
which case could is also emphatical.

Would in the second and third persons is also used to denote the certainty of
an event which depended on the will of another person, who, unless some
circumstances had prevented, would surely have carried his purpose into effect;
as, "you would have gone, if I had had the care of you." "He, would behave
better, if his master were present."

In this phrase "I would advise my friend to accept of the offer," there is no
condition expressed, but the sense evidently implies one. If I mean to give my
advice absolutely, I express myself thus, "I advise or do advise him;" but "I
would advise," implies a condition that "if I were a proper person," or "if my
advice were asked," then, etc. But would has, in many cases, usurped the place
of do and is used to express a positive declaration; I think improperly; as
when a person is asked if he will drink a glass of wine and he replies, "I
would not choose any." He means absolutely, "he does not choose any" and absurdly
uses a conditional form of expression.

MIGHT.
Might is derived from may, but differs from it in this; may is an
unconditional declaration of possibility or liberty; might expresses the same
possibility or liberty under a condition, which defeats the effect; as, "I
might go, if my master would permit." It is used in both the present and past
tenses. In the present tense it is always conditional; as in the foregoing
example. In the past tense, it is either absolute or conditional: Absolute; as,
"I might have gone then, but had no inclination;" conditional; as, "I might
have gone, if business had not detained me."

COULD.
The same observations apply to could, which is derived from can and expresses
the power of doing an action. In the present tense it is always conditional; in
the past tense, either absolute or conditional.

MUST.
This auxiliary denotes necessity. It has no variation, but is used in almost
all tenses of the potential mode.

Some Grammarians, if not all, have used might, could, would, and should, as
signs of the imperfect tense only of the subjunctive mode and made little or no
difference between the subjunctive and potential. In both these particulars
they appear to me to be inaccurate. The foregoing auxiliary signs are more
frequently used in the present tense than in the imperfect. In the present
tense they are always conditional -- in the past tense either absolute or
conditional, according to the nature of the sentence. "I might go, if I had a
horse" is present time and conditional; "I might not go yesterday, but may go
to day," are absolute declarations; the first in the past time and the last in
the present.

In the subjunctive mode they are also used as signs of the imperfect tense;
as, "I told him that I could go; you said that I might go, etc." As to a
distinction between the potential and subjunctive modes, it appears to me as
real and important, as any distinction in Grammar. Whenever there is a
declaration that something is or is not so, it is called the indicative mode.
When there is a declaration, not that an action is done or not, but that there
is a power, liberty etc. of doing it, it is called with propriety the potential
mode. These modes are independent of all others and may stand alone, except the
conditional tenses of the potential, which have a necessary connection with some
other mode, which is usually the subjunctive. But the subjunctive mode, is
always dependent either on some conjunction or some preceding verb The
dependence of the modes upon each other may be thus explained.

1. The absolute tenses of the potential mode may stand alone; but when they
have any connection with another mode, they are preceded or followed by an
absolute declaration in the indicative mode, or a doubtful tense of the
subjunctive.

Examples
Potential. Indicative. I can write but I will not. Subjunctive. I can write if
I please, or if I have a pen.

2. The conditional tenses of the potential, always imply a subjunctive, though
it is very often omitted. But if they are preceded or followed by any verb, it
must be by a conditional tense of the potential, or hypothetical tense of the
subjunctive.

Examples.
Potential. Subjunctive. I could write if I had a pen, or if I pleased. I could
write if I would.

These are invariable rules; as will appear by uniting the absolute tenses with
the conditional. Thus "I can write, but I would not;" "I can write, if I
pleased;" "I could write, if I please," are evident improprieties. It is true
we say, "I could write, but I will not," but here is a condition implied; viz.
"I could write if I pleased; but I will not."

It must be further observed that when I speak of the conditional tenses of the
potential, I do not mean that the condition is contained in this mode; for,
might, would, could, and should, are all absolute, unless they are rendered
conditional by some phrase in the subjunctive mode, either expressed or
understood.

INTERROGATIVE SENTENCES.
The general rule for forming an interrogative phrase in English, is, to place
the nominative word after the auxiliary; and if there be two auxiliary signs,
the nominative follows the first; as, Do I write? Have I been writing? In this
situation, several of the auxiliaries acquire different meanings which demand
explanation.

WILL.
Will cannot with propriety be used in asking questions in the first person;
The expressions, Will I write? Will we write? are absurd and ungrammatical.

Will you write? refers to the will or determination of the person addressed
and is followed by a promise, I will.

Will he write? refers to the will or determination of the third person, with
which the person addressed is supposed to be acquainted, as appears by the
answer, he will.

The same remarks apply to the second and third persons plural.

SHALL.
Shall asks questions in any person.

Shall I write? refers to the will of another and is followed by a declaration
in the nature of a command, you shall.

Shall you write? refers to the intention or determination of the person
addressed and is answered by, I shall.

Shall he write? refers to the will of the person addressed and supposes he has
a right to command the person spoken of; it is therefore followed by an answer
expressing the determination of the person addressed, he shall.

WOULD.
Would never asks questions in the first person. It is sometimes used by way of
echo, when we repeat a question asked by another; as, "would you purchase that
lot of goods?" The person not distinctly hearing the question, repeats it,
would I? But this is an affront both to grammar and to good manners.

Would you write? is both present and past time; but most commonly present, it
refers to the inclination of the person addressed, provided he were in the
place of the person speaking, or in some other particular circumstances, and is
answered by a conditional promise, I would; that is, "if you were in my
situation, would you sell your house?" The answer is, "if I were in your
situation, I would, or would not sell my house.

Would he write? refers to the inclination of a third person, upon condition he
were in certain circumstances. It supposes the person enquired of, knows what
the inclination of the person spoken of, would be under those circumstances;
and his answer, grounded upon that supposition, is expressive of the event of
that disposition, he would.

SHOULD.
Should I write? This enquires whether it is my duty to write, either
positively or conditionally; and is answered by you should, which, without
emphasis, always expresses obligation.

Should you write? The meaning of should here depends upon the manner in which
it is uttered. Without emphasis it enquires concerning an event merely and is
answered by I should, which declares what my conduct would be under certain
circumstances. But with emphasis it either expresses a stronger assurance of an
event, or a person's obligation; in which case, the answer is also emphatical.

Should he write? without emphasis, refers merely to the obligation of the
person, and the answer is declaratory of that obligation, he should. But with
emphasis, it refers to the determination of another person, which is expressed
by an emphatical answer, he should.

The other auxiliaries, in the interrogative form, have no particular uses that
require explanation.

Before I proceed to inflect a regular verb, with the auxiliaries, it is
necessary to exhibit the several uses and differences of these difficult signs,
shall, will, should, and would, by a comparative view of them in different
persons.

Future tense. Singular.
Foretelling. Promise and determination. I shall will learn. thou will shall he
will shall

Plural.
we shall will learn. ye or you will shall they will shall

Present tense.

An event mentioned under a condition, without emphasis.

Sing. Plu. I should learn. we should learn. thou would ye or you would he
would they would

A determination under a condition expressed by emphasis.

Sing. Plu. I would learn. we would learn. thou should ye or you should he
should they should

Obligation.

With emphasis. With emphasis. I should learn. we should learn. without
emphasis. without emphasis. thou should ye or you should he should they
should

Note. It is difficult to determine, in all cases, to which tense these words
belong; whether to the present, past, or future. The time can be ascertained
only by the sense of the phrase where they occur.

The inflection of a regular English verb and the several combinations of
auxiliaries, in all modes and tenses, may be exhibited and explained in the
following

EXAMPLE.

INFINITIVE MODE.
Present Tense. Indefinite, to learn. Definite, to be learning. Perfect.
Indefinite, to have learned. Definite, to have been learning. Participles.
learning, learned.

INDICATIVE MODE.
Present Tense. Indefinite.

Singular. Plural. 1 I learn or do learn. 1 we learn or do learn. 2 thou
learnest or do learn. 2 sol. ye 3 sol Sol. stands for, solemn style; fam.
for, familiar style.
. he learneth or does learn. 2 fam. you 3 fam. he learns or does learn. 3 they

Definite.

I am learning. we are learning. thou art you I shall make use of you only, in
this example; (...) may be supplied by the instructor. In the third person
singular, he only i^ mentioned; she and it may be supplied by the instructor as
occasion req^ires.
he is they

Imperfect Tense. Indefinite.

I learned or did learn. we learned or did learn. thou learned or did
learn. you he learned or did learn they

Definite.

I was learning. we were learning. thou wast you he was they

Perfect Tense. Indefinite.

I have learned. we have learned. thou have you sol. he has they fam he has

Definite.

I have been learning. we have been learning. thou have you sol. he has they
fam. he has

Pluperfect Tense. Indefinite.

I had learned. we had learned. thou had you he had they

Definite.

I had been learning. we had been learning. thou had you he had they

Future Tense. Indefinite.

foretell. prom. and determ. I shall, will learn. thou will, shall he will,
shall foretell. prom. and determ* we shall, will learn. you will, shall they
will, shall

Definite.

Sing. Plu. I shall, will be learning. we shall, will be learning. thou will,
shall you will, shall he will, shall they will, shall

Future Tense. Compound.

I shall, have learned. we shall, have learned. thou will, shall you will,
shall he will shall they will, shall

N. B. Some Grammarians, particularly Mr. Buchanan, have placed this tense in
the subjunctive mode; but with what propriety, I cannot conceive. It is as
positive, unconditional a declaration, as any expression in the language; and
appears to belong to the indicative mode, as much as the future simple or any
other tense.

IMPERATIVE MODE.
This mode has no distinction of tenses and no person but the second; the
person to whom an address is made, being the only subject of command.

Singular. Plural. Learn or learn thou or do thou learn. Learn or learn you or
do you learn.

Definite form.
Be learning or be thou learning or do thou be learning. Be learning or be you
learning or do you be learning.

The definite form of this mode is seldom used, except in verbs that signify
bodily motion or employment; as, "be going immediately;" or when a person is
commanded to do something while another thing is performing; as, "be studying,
while I am hearing your brother."

POTENTIAL MODE.
The tenses of this mode are divided into present, imperfect, perfect and
future; and into absolute and conditional.

Present Tense. Absolute. Indefinite.

This declares an absolute liberty, power or necessity of doing an action.

Singular.

Liberty. I may, thou may, he may learn. Power. I can, thou can, he can
Necessity. I must, thou must, he must

Plural.

may learn. we, you, they can must

Definite.

I may be learning, etc. It is needless to set down the definite tenses at
large; the student may form them, by substituting be learning in the place of
learn in the present and future; and been learning in the place of have learned
in the past tenses.

Present Tense. Conditional. Indefinite.

This expresses liberty, power, obligation, promise, event, etc. under some
condition or limitation, which prevents the effect.

Liberty. I might, thou might, he might learn* Power. I could, thou could,
he could Oblig. etc. I should, thou should, he should Prom. etc. I would,
thou would, he would might learn. could we, you, they should would

The condition is not always expressed; but is always implied, and it may
precede or follow the potential mode; as, "if I had books, I might learn," or
"I might learn, if I had books."

This conditional form is also used absolutely as an imperfect tense,
especially in negative and interrogative sentences; as, "I might not go
yesterday;" "I could not go," "would he go?" etc. Sometimes in affirmative
sentences; as, "Those Islanders, by being less exposed to foreign intercourse,
could more easily preserve their laws and their virtues."

Essay on the characters of women.

But we more commonly use the following form for time past.

Perfect Tense. Absolute or conditional. Indefinite.

I might, thou might, he might I could, thou could, he could I should,
thou should, he should I would, thou would, he would I must, thou must, he
must
have learned.

we, you, they might have learned. could should would

These expressions, when unattended with a condition, in the subjunctive mode,
are absolute declarations; as, "I could have gone to Hartford yesterday;" that
is, I had it in my power. But, "I could have gone, if I had had a horse;" is
purely conditional.

Some writers upon this subject, have introduced this form of expression, "I
might have had learned," as a pluperfect of the potential mode; a phrase that
does not belong to the language, and I presume, is found in a few Grammars
only: There being no possible case in which the same word can be used as an
auxiliary twice in the same phrase.

Perfect Tense. Definite.

The definite form of the foregoing tense, is, "I might have been learning,"
etc.

Perfect Tense. Compound. Indefinite.

I may have learned. we may have learned. thou may you he may they

Definite.

I may have been learning, etc.

This tense denotes a present possibility that something has been done in time
past. It is an unconditional declarati^n.

Future Tense. Indefinite.

This is varied like the present tense absolute, and is distinguished only by
some subsequent word, denoting futurity, or by the evident meaning of the
phrase.

I may I can I must
learn tomorrow, next week, etc.

Definite.

I may I can I must
be learning, tomorrow, etc.

The conditional form of the present is also used as a future, especially would
and should. "I would go, or I should go tomorrow, if I had a horse," are
evidently future and by no means ungrammatical. But whether might can with
propriety be used as future, seems rather doubtful.

SUBJUNCTIVE MODE.
This mode is used to express something of a doubtful, contingent, or
indeterminate nature. It is always preceded by some other verb on which it has
dependence; or by some conjunction, implying condition, supposition, etc. as,
if, unless, though, whether, lest or except. Its tenses seem to require a
curious distinction which I have never seen sufficiently illustrated. Whenever
we speak of a matter of certainty, we use the indicative mode after any of the
foregoing conjunctions. For example, " though Arnold was an American by birth,
yet he betrayed his country." Here is no doubt with respect to the fact; we
therefore use the indicative mode was, after though. But when there is any
doubt or condition with respect to the fact, we use the subjunctive mode; as,
"though he slay me yet will I put my trust in him." Job xiii.15. Here is a
condition implied; it would therefore be improper to use the indicative,
"though he slays me, etc. But in this mode we use another tense, which has not
been noticed; and which implies the supposition of a fact directly the reverse
of what is mentioned. That is, an affirmative sentence amounts to a full
declaration in the negative; and a negative sentence implies a declaration or
confession of the affirmative. Thus, "if I were in Charlestown," supposes I am
not in Charlestown; but, "if I were not in Hartford," implies a full certainty
that I am in Hartford. This tense which, in principal verbs, is the same as the
imperfect of the indicative mode, I shall denominate hypothetical; the other,
the doubtful tense.

When we speak of a fact certain in our own minds or granted by all parties, we
use the indicative; as, "if I am writing, it is not your concern."

When we speak of a doubtful matter, we use the subjunctive mode; "if I be
writing At least this was formerly the case. I^ seems to be now customary to
use the i^ ^tive to express a doubt; and probably custom will in time get the
better of the ancient rules of propriety and banish the doubtful tenses of the
subjunctive mode from the language. We say, if he is, if you are, in cases of
uncertainty, and you be, I be, in declaratory phrases. This is however an error
and a real misfortune to the language, because it destroys a distinction that
is essential and ought to be preserved.
."

When we speak of a fact which we allow is not so, but if it were, we want to
inform what the consequence would be, we use the imperfect tense of the
indicative mode; as, "if I were writing;" or rather, "if I wrote as well as you
do, I should think myself an excellent penman." This phrase thus used, becomes
present time and belongs to the subjunctive mode. This perhaps will hardly be
admitted; and yet it is a (...) much used as any in the language. The phrases,
I ^ld go, if it did not rain;" "I would walk, if I were not lame;" "I would
ride, if I had a horse;" "if he attended to his studies, he would make a
figure, in the literary world;" are as frequent as any in the language; they
are evidently present time and deserve a separate place in Grammar. It is
needless to enquire how this came to be the case or to object to its propriety.
Custom is sovereign in the use of language; and when universal invariable
custom has introduced and established any form of expression, we may possibly
doubt its analogy to the rules of other languages, but ought not to scruple its
propriety in our own.

Present Tense. Doubtful. Indefinite.

I learn or do learn. we learn or do learn. If, etc. thou you he they

Definite.

I be learning. we be learning. If, etc. thou you he they

This tense is preceded or followed by a positive declaration in the indicative
or potential modes; as, "if I learn I shall, or may, or can be a scholar."

Present Tense. Hypothetical. Indefinite.

I learned or did learn. we learned or did learn. If, etc. thou learned or
did learn. you he learned or did learn. they

Definite.

I were learning. we were learning. If, etc. thou were you he were they

This tense is preceded or followed by the conditional form of the potential;
as, "if I learned as fast as he does, I should be as great a scholar."

This same form of expression, which is used as a hypothetical tense in present
time, is also used as the imperfect tense doubtful. For example, "if I learned
wit when young, I shall be prudent in old age." This is evidently past time and
implies uncertainty. That it is a distinct form of expression from the present
hypothetical, is evident from this consideration, that it is attended with an
absolute declaration; whereas the hypothetical is always attended with a
conditional declaration. Thus, "if I learned as fast as you do, I should be a
scholar," is hypothetical; but "if I learned when young, I shall be wise in old
age," is doubtful. The first is attended with a conditional sign, should; the
last with a positive declaration, shall.

The same distinction of doubtful and hypothetical, runs through all the
several modes of expressing power, liberty, obligation, etc. The auxiliaries
may, can, must, form the doubtful tenses; and might, would, could, and should,
the hypothetical. These may be called, by way of distinction, the auxiliary
tenses of the subjunctive mode.

EXAMPLE.

Present Tense. Doubtful. Indefinite.

I may, thou may, he may learn. If, etc. I can, thou can, he can I must,
thou must, he must may learn. we, you, they can must

These imply a doubt whether there be a liberty, power, or necessity of doing
an action; and this tense is always followed by an absolute declaration in the
indicative mode; as, "if I can learn the science of geography, I will."

The definite form is, "if I can be learning," etc.

Present Tense. Hypothetical. Indefinite.

I might, thou might, he might learn. I could, thou could, he could If,
etc. I should, thou should, he should I would, thou would, he would might
learn. could we, you, they should would

These, in affirmative sentences, imply a supposition that there is no liberty,
power, inclination, or obligation, to do an action. But in the negative form,
they imply a supposition that there is liberty, etc. of doing an action. This
tense is followed by the conditional form of the potential mode; as, "if I
might learn, I would."

Note, Should and would, in this form, refer to event and inclination rather
than to obligation and perhaps belong more properly to the future tense.

The same distinction and the same remarks apply to the past time.

Perfect Tense. Doubtful. Indefinite.

I have learned. we have learned. If, etc. thou have you fol. he has they fam.
he has

Definite.

I have been learning. we have been learning. If, etc. thou have you fol. he
has they fam. he has

These imply an uncertainty whether I have learned or been learning or not; and
are followed by absolute declarations; as, "if I have learned, or been
learning, I have done my duty and shall be the wiser man."

Perfect Tense. Hypothetical. Indefinite.

I had learned. we had learned. If, etc. thou had you he had they

Definite.

I had been learning. we had been learning. If, etc. thou had you he had they

This tense, in the affirmative form, supposes that I have not learned and in
the negative form, supposes that I have learned. It is always followed by the
conditional tenses of the potential mode; as, "if I had learned wit when young,
I should be more prudent." "If I had not read Virgil when young, I would read
him now." The first is affirmative and supposes that I did not learn wit when I
was young; the last is negative and supposes I did read Virgil when I was young.

This same tense, when followed by a positive declaration, is used as a
pluperfect; as, "though he had learned to read, yet he was no penman." But this
implies a certainty or concession of the fact, and seems rather the indicative
mode.

The foregoing past tense refers to a fact merely; but when there is a
reference to the liberty, power, inclination, necessity or obligation, to do an
action, it is expressed by the past tense of the potential mode, subjoined to a
conjunction.

Perfect Tense. Indefinite.

I might, thou might, he might have learned. I could, thou could, he could
If, etc. I should, thou should, he should I would, thou would, he would I
must, thou must, he must might have learned. could we, you, they should would
must

Definite.

If, etc. I might have been learning, etc.

This is the same tense as the foregoing; but the question is not whether I
learned or not; but whether I had liberty, etc. to learn. This tense is
followed by a declaration in the past tense of the potential mode; as, "if I
could have gone, I should."

Note, Should and would, in this tense, without emphasis denote merely event
and inclination, in all the three persons. With emphasis, should denotes
obligation and would a fixed intention or determination.

The same remarks will perhaps apply to the following.

Future Tense. Indefinite.

I should or would learn. If, etc. thou should or would he should or would

we you they
should or would learn.

Definite.

If, etc. I should or would be learning, etc.

Future Tense. Compound. Indefinite.

I should have learned. we should have learned. If, etc. thou should you he
should they

Definite

If, etc. I should have been learning, etc.

This tense signifies, that upon condition, at a certain future time, an action
shall be past, etc.

Both futures are followed by conditional forms of expression.

Note, The conjunction is very often omitted and the nominative placed after
the verb or auxiliary; as, "were I present," instead of, "if I were present;"
"had I been learned," instead of, "if I had been learned." This is a common
mode of expression and by no means in elegant.

In the inflection of the foregoing regular verb, the several combinations of
auxiliaries have been delineated, and their uses explained. But it has been
remarked before, that be, do and have are often principal verbs; the first
intransitive and the two last, transitive; for which reason it is necessary to
decline them at large, in all modes and tenses.

The English not having any passive verb, make use of the verb be, joined with
the participle in ed, en, t, or ght, derived of transitive verbs, or what has
been called the passive participle; which form of expression precisely answers
to the Latin and Greek passive verb. Let the learner therefore be informed that
by adding this participle of any transitive verb, to the following inflection
of be, he has the English form of Latin passive verbs.

INFINITIVE MODE.
Present, to be. Participles. Past, to have been. being, been.

INDICATIVE MODE.
Present.

I am taught, moved, etc. we are. thou art you he is they

Imperfect.

I was we were. thou wast you he was they

Perfect.

I have been. we have been. thou have you he has they

Pluperfect.

I had been. we had been. thou had you he had they

Future.

foretell. prom. etc. I shall, will, be. thou will, shall he will, shall
foretell. prom. etc. we shall, will be. you will, shall they will, shall

Compound.

I shall have been. we shall have been. thou will, shall you will, shall he
will, shall they will, shall

Note, Shall, in the second and third persons of this tense, is used only when
subjoined to some conjunction; as, "by the time that you shall have been there
an hour," etc. and it denotes event merely.

IMPERATIVE MODE.
Be or be thou or do thou be. Be or be you or do you be.
POTENTIAL MODE.
Present. Absolute.

I may, thou may, he may I can, thou can, he can I must, thou must, he must
be.

may be. we, you, they can must

Conditional.

I might, etc. be. might be. I could, etc. could I should, etc. we, you, they
should I would, etc. would

Note, It were, is often used for, it would be, in this tense, and that by our
best writers.

The foregoing is used as an imperfect tense, especially in negative and
interrogative sentences; as, "I might or could not be." "Could he be? etc.

Perfect. Both Absolute and Conditional.

I might, etc. have been. might have been. I could, etc. could I should, etc.
we, you, they should I would, etc. would

This tense, when absolute, is followed by a positive declaration; as, "I might
have been there, but I had no inclination for it." When conditional, it is
followed or preceded by a condition; as, "I might have been there, if I had
been well."

Perfect. Compound.

I may have been we may have been. thou may you he may they

Future.

This is no otherwise distinguished from the present absolute, than by some
subsequent words; as, "I may be next week," etc.

SUBJUNCTIVE MODE.
Present. Doubtful.

I be. we be. If, etc. thou you he they

Hypothetical.

I were we were. If, etc. thou were you he were they

Imperfect. The same as the foregoing.

Perfect. Doubtful.

I have been. we have been. If, etc. thou have you he has they

Hypothetical.

I had been. we had been. If, etc. thou had you he had they

Future.

I should or would be. we should or would be. If, etc. thou should or would
you he should or would they

Future Compound.

I should have been. we should have been. If, etc. thou should you he should
they

Note, The doubtful forms of power, liberty, etc. are expressed by the present
tense absolute of the potential mode; as, "if I may, can," etc. and the
hypothetical forms, by the conditional tenses of the same mode; as, "if I
might," etc.

It may be further remarked, that the definite tenses of verbs are all formed
by adding the participle in ing, to the foregoing verb in all its variations.

The indicative form of the future is also very often used with a preceding
conjunction; as, "if I shall," etc.

INFINITIVE MODE.
Present Tense. Indefinite, to do. Definite, to be doing. Perfect Tense.
Indefinite, to have done. Definite, to have been doing.

INDICATIVE MODE.
Present.

Indefinite. Definite.

I do we do. I am doing, etc. thou do you fol. he does they fam. he does

Imperfect.

Indefinite. Definite.

I did we did. I was doing, etc. thou did you he did they

Perfect.

Indefinite. Definite.

I have done. we have done. I have been doing, etc. thou have you fol. he has
they fam. he has

Pluperfect.

Indefinite. Definite.

I had done. we had done. I had been doing, etc. thou had you he had they

Future.

foretell. prom. etc. I shall, will do. thou will, shall he will, shall
foretell. prom. etc. we shall, will, do. you will, shall they will, shall

Compound.

foretell. prom. etc. I shall have done. thou will, shall he will, shall
foretell. prom. etc. we shall have done. you will shall they will shall

IMPERATIVE MODE.
Do or do thou Do or do you. or do thou do. or do you do.
POTENTIAL MODE.
Present. Absolute.

I may, thou may, he may I can, thou can, he can I must, thou must, he must
do.

may do. we, you, they can must

Conditional.

I might, etc. do. might do. I could, etc. could I should, etc. we, you, they
should I would, etc. would

The foregoing is used as an imperfect tense especially in negative and
interrogative sentences; as, "I could not do it then." "Could he do it?"

Perfect. Absolute or Conditional.

I might, etc. have done. might have done. I could, etc could I should, etc.
we, you, they should I would, etc. would

Perfect. Compound.

I may have done. we may have done. thou may you he may they

Future.

The same as the present absolute, and known only by some words denoting
futurity; as, "I may do it next week, etc.

N. B. The definite tenses are formed, as in the example of a regular verb, by
substituting be doing in the place of do in the present and future and been
done in the place of done in the past.

SUBJUNCTIVE MODE.
Present. Doubtful.

I do. we do. If, etc. thou you he they

Hypothetical.

I did we did. If, etc. thou did you he did they

Imperfect.

If, etc. I did, etc. like the foregoing.

Perfect Tense. Doubtful.

I have done. we have done. If, etc. thou have you he has they

Hypothetical.

I had done. we had done. If, etc. thou had you he had they

Future.

I should, or would do. we should or would do. If, etc. thou should, or
would you he should, or would they

The doubtful forms of power, liberty, etc. are expressed by the absolute
tenses of the potential mode, subjoined to some conjunction; as, "if I may do."
The hypothetical forms are expressed by the conditional tenses of the same mode
subjoined to some conjunction; as, "if I might or could do."

INFINITIVE MODE.
Present, to have. Past, to have had. Participles, having, had.
INDICATIVE MODE.
Present.

I have we have. thou have you he has they

Note, The definite form of this verb is seldom used. The only instance that
occurs to me at present, is when it is followed immediately by a noun and
passive participle; as, "he is having his clothes mended." But this is by no
means elegant, for which reason I shall omit the definite tenses in the
inflection of this verb.

Imperfect.

I had we had. thou had you he had they

Perfect.

I have had. we have had. thou have you he has they

Pluperfect.

I had had. we had had. thou had you he had they

Future.

foretell. prom. etc. I shall, will have. thou will, shall he will, shall
foretell. prom. etc. we shall, will have. you will, shall they will, shall

Future Compound.

I shall have had. we shall have had. thou will, shall you will, shall he will,
shall they will, shall

IMPERATIVE MODE.
Have or have thou Have or have you or do thou have. or do you have.
POTENTIAL MODE.
Present. Absolute.

I may, etc. have. may have. I can, etc. we, you, they can I must, etc. must

Conditional.

I might, etc. have. might have. I could, etc. could I should, etc. we, you,
they should I would, etc. would

In interrogative and negative sentences, the foregoing is used as an imperfect
tense; and sometimes in affirmative sentences.

Perfect. Absolute or Conditional.

I might, etc. have had. might have had. I could, etc. could I should, etc. we,
you, they should I would, etc. would

Perfect. Compound.

I may have had. we may have had. thou may you he may they

Future.

I may have, tomorrow, etc.

SUBJUNCTIVE MODE.
Present. Doubtful.

I have. we have. If, etc. thou you he they

Hypothetical.

I had we had. If, etc. thou had you he had. they

The foregoing is also used as the imperfect Tense.

Perfect. Doubtful.

I have had. we have had. If, etc. thou have you sol. he has they ^^m. he has

Hypothetical.

I had had. we had had. If, etc. thou had you he had they

Future.

I should or would have. we should or would have. If, etc. thou should or
would you he should or would they

The remarks made under the subjunctive of be and do, with respect to the
doubtful and hypothetical forms of power, etc. apply to this verb.

In the foregoing analysis of verbs in the Subjunctive mode, I have explained
them according to their usual sense, when preceded by the conjunction if. But
when preceded by other conjunctions, the phrases vary their meaning according
to the purport of the conjunction. The difference however is immaterial and
will lead into no sensible errors.

With respect to the auxiliaries, it is to be further observed, that have is
used only before the participles ending in ed, t, or n. Be is used before all
participles. All the other auxiliaries are used only before the verb in its
original form; and the past time will admit no preceding auxiliary. For example.

Present. Past. Participles. do. did. done This was originally spelt done.
, doing. may do. can do. must do. might do. could do. have done. shall do. be
done. will do. be doing. should do. would do.

Here it is observable that may, can, etc. are employed before the present
tense do or the verb in its original form. The past time did admits no
auxiliary. The participle done is used after have and be, but be only is used
with doing.

When an auxiliary is joined to a verb, the auxiliary only is varied; as, "I
shall do, thou shall do," etc.

When two or more auxiliaries are joined to a verb, the first auxiliary only is
varied; as, "I have been learned, thou have been learned," etc.

Intransitive verbs will very seldom admit of the passive form; in some
instances they will -- and when this is the case, the participle, joined with
the auxiliary be, becomes a mere adjective, and the verb is intransitive; as,
"I am fallen, I am grown," etc.

IRREGULAR VERBS.
All English verbs that make the past time and participle in ed, are accounted
regular: All that vary from this rule may be called irregular. I shall rank the
whole of our irregular verbs under three heads; first those that make the
present tense, past and participle all alike; as, Present. Past. Participle.
hurt hurt hurt

Of this kind are the following: beat, burst, cast, cost, cut, heat, hit, knit,
let, put, read, rent, rid, set, shed, shred, shut, slit, split, spread, thrust,
wet.

The addition of ed after d or t, would render the sound of the word
disagreeable; as, hitted, putted, etc. for which reason it is omitted.

Note, Beat sometimes makes beaten in the participle, and heat, heated.

2. Those that make the past time and participle alike, but different from the
present time; as the following, Present. Past and Part. Awake Awoke abide abode
be been behold beheld bend bent unbend unbent bereave bereft beseech besought
bind bound bleed bled breed bred bring brought build built or builded buy
bought catch caught creep crept deal dealt dig dug dream dreamt dwell dwelt
feed fed feel felt fight fought find found flee fled fling flung freight
freighted A regular verb.
geld gelt or gelded gild gilt or gilded gird girt or girded grind ground hang
hung or hanged have had hear heard keep kept lay laid lead led leave left leap
leapt or leaped lend lent lose lost make made mean meant meet met pay paid rend
rent say said seek sought sell sold send sent shoot shot sleep slept sling
slung smell smelt spend spent spin spun stand stood stick stuck sting stung
sweep swept sweat swet teach taught tell told think thought weep wept wind
wound work wrought wring wrung


3. Those that have the present, past and participle all different; as the
following, Present Tense. Past. Participle. BEAR bore or bare borne or born
begin began begun bid bade bidden bite bit bitten blow blew blown break broke
broken chept chid chidden choose chose chosen cleave clove or clave cloven or
cleft come came come crow crew crowed dare durst dared die died dead do did
done draw drew drawn drink drank drunk drive drove driven eat ate eaten fall
fell fallen fly flew flown forsake forsook forsaken freeze froze frozen get got
gotten give gave given go went gone grow grew grown hew hewed hewn hide hid
hidden hold held holden know knew known lade laded laden load loaded loaded or
laden ly or lie lay lain mow mowed mown ride rode ridden ring rang rung rise
rose risen run ran run see saw seen saw sawed sawn sees sod sodden shave
shaved shaven shake shook shaken shear sheared shorn strew strewed strewn also
strew strowed strown show showed shown also show showed shown shrink shrank
shrunk sing sang sung sink sank sunk sit sat sitten slay slew slain slide slid
slidden smite smote smitten sow sowed sown speak spoke spoken spring sprang
sprung steal stole stolen stink stank stunk strike struck struck spit spat
spitten strive strove striven swear swore sworn swell swelled swollen swing
swang swung swim swam swum take took taken tear tore torn thrive throve thriven
throw threw thrown tread trod trodden win won won wear wore worn weave wove
woven write wrote written wax waxed waxen

For the rules of forming regular participles, both in ed and ing, see pages
eighth and ninth.

Here let it be again observed that no auxiliaries can with propriety be joined
with the past time. The expressions, I have wrote, I have bare, I have began, I
have drove, etc. which are so much in vogue, are shocking improprieties: The
childish phrases, you am, I is, etc. are not more repugnant to the rules of
Grammar.

And yet men of the first reputation, will indulge fashionable errors, which
they know have a tendency to embarrass a language built on the simplest
principles, and eventually to destroy all rules of analogy. An ancient Roman
would be startled to hear a Latin Grammarian use ille fuit amatus est* a
Frenchman, to hear, il a punit -- and the most unlettered Englishman would
laugh to hear another say, he has went, or it will be gave; and yet, I have
wrote, have drove, etc. which are quite as improper, have become so familiar to
our ears, that we can every hour hear them uttered by some of our best
Grammarians without a smile of ridicule. I have written, have driven, etc. are
as easy to be learned and employed as the past tense wrote and drove; and it is
inexcusable to sacrifice propriety to any consideration whatever.

As no abuses of language are more frequent than those of joining our
auxiliaries have and be, wi^h the past tense of our irregular verbs, I will set
an example in all modes and tenses.

INFINITIVE MODE.
Present Tense. Indefinite, to write. Definite, to be writing. Past Tense.
Indefinite, to have written. Definite, to have been writing. Participles,
writing, written.

INDICATIVE MODE.
Present.

Indefinite. Definite.

I write, thou writest, etc. I am writing, thou art, etc*
Imperfect.

Indefinite. Definite.

I wrote we wrote. I was writing, thou wast, etc. thou wrotest you he wrote
they

Perfect. Indefinite.

I have written. we have written. thou have you he has they

Definite.

I have thou have he has or has
been writing, etc.

Pluperfect.

Indefinite. Definite.

I had written, etc. I had been writing, etc.
Future.

Indefinite. Definite.

I shall or will write, etc. I shall or will be writing, etc.
Future Compound.

Indefinite. Definite.

I shall have written, etc. I shall have been writing, etc.
IMPERATIVE MODE.
Write thou, etc.

POTENTIAL MODE.
Present. Absolute.

Indefinite. Definite.

I may, etc. write. I may, etc. be writing. I can, etc. I must, etc.

Conditional.

Indefinite. Definite.

I might, etc. write. I might, etc. be writing. I could, etc. I should, etc. I
would, etc.

Perfect. Absolute and Conditional.

Indefinite. Definite.

I might, etc. have written. I might, etc. have been writing. I could, etc. I
should, etc. I would, etc.

Perfect. Compound.

Indefinite. Definite.

I may have written, etc. I may have been writing, etc.
Future. Indefinite.

I may write tomorrow, etc.

I can, etc.

Definite.

I may be writing tomorrow, etc.

I can, etc.

SUBJUNCTIVE MODE.
Present. Doubtful.

Indefinite. Definite.

I write I be writing If, etc. thou write etc. If, etc. thou be etc. he write
he be

Present. Hypothetical.

Indefinite. Definite.

I wrote I were writing* If, etc. thou wrotest etc. If, etc. thou went he wrote
he were

Imperfect, the same as the foregoing.

Perfect. Doubtful.

Indefinite. Definite.

I have written. I have been writing, etc. If, etc. thou have he has

Hypothetical.

Indefinite. Definite.

I had written. I had been writing, etc. If, etc. thou had he had

Future.

Indefinite. Definite.

If etc. I should or would write, etc. I should or would be writing, etc.

Compound.

Indefinite. Definite.

If, etc. I should have written, etc. I should have been writing, etc.

In this example it is observable that no auxiliary, in any tense, precedes the
past time wrote; that the auxiliary have is always followed by the participle
written, and that be is followed by either participle written or writing.

ADVERBS.
What is an adverb? An adverb is a word added to verbs, to adjectives and to
other adverbs, to express some circumstance or modification of the action,
quality or manner.

To a verb; as, "he reads properly, you run slowly;" here properly and slowly
are adverbs, modifying the verbs, read and run.

To an adjective; as, "the boy is very studious;" here very is an adverb,
pointing out the degree of studiousness.

To another adverb; as, "I heard very attentively;" here very attentively are
adverbs; attentively shows the manner in which I heard, viz. with attention;
and very expresses the degree of that attention.

Have adverbs any variation? A few only are varied, like adjectives, to express
degrees of comparison; as, soon, sooner, soonest; often, oftener, oftenest*
well, better, best.

Adverbs which are derived of adjectives, and respect the qualities of things,
may all be compared by more and most; as, wisely, more wisely, most wisely.

Which are some of the adverbs most commonly used? Already, always, by and by,
else, ever, enough, far, hence, here, how, hither, indeed, much, no, not,
never, now, often, perhaps, rather, seldom, then, thence, there, very, when,
where, whether whilst, yes, yesterday.

All adjectives may be made adverbs, by adding ly: as, honest, honestly We are
apt to use adjectives instead of adverbs, as in the following expressions;
"extreme cold; exceeding fine; indifferent well;" all which are very improper
and ungrammatical. We ought to make the first an adverb by adding ly, thus,
"extremely cold; exceedingly fine; indifferently well." So also we say, "he
speaks proper," when we mean "he speaks properly."
.

PREPOSITION.
What are prepositions? Prepositions are words set before nouns and pronouns to
show their relation to other words.

How many sorts of prepositions are there? Two, separable and inseparable. The
separable prepositions may stand alone; but the inseparable are used only in
conjunction with other words.

Which are the separable prepositions?

Above before for till or about behind from until after beneath in or into to
against below of, on or upon The preposition on by a habit of quick
pronunciation is called a. Thus we say a bed, a board, a shore, a coming, a
going, etc. which seem to be only corruptions of on bed, on board, on shore, on
^^ming, on going. Thus we say one o'clock for one on the clock.
toward among or between out or out of under amongst betwixt over with at "Ye
blind guides who strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel." Matt. xxiii. 24* This
is an error of the translators. The original sense requires the preposition out
to be used in this place; "who strain out a gnat." By employing a wrong
particle, they have destroyed the meaning of the phrase.
beyond through within amidst by during without

Which are the inseparable prepositions? A, be, con, dis, mis, per, pre, re,
sub, un.

What is the use of prepositions in composition with other words? They commonly
give a new meaning to the word, as is observable in the following: Original
words. Compounded. throw overthrow stand under-stand draw withdraw go out-go
engage dis-engage take mis-take join sub-join unite reunite etc.


CONJUNCTION.
What is a conjunction? A word that joins sentences together, so as of two, to
make one.

How many kinds of conjunctions are there? Two, copulative and disjunctive.

How is the copulative conjunction used? The copulative conjunction continues
both the sentence and the sense by expressing an addition; as, "you and I and
John rode to Philadelphia."

How is the disjunctive used? The disjunctive conjunction continues the
sentence, But denotes an opposition in the sense; as, "you and I rode to
Philadelphia, but John staid at home."

Which are the conjunctions?

And as neither wherefore though also if yet except namely either indeed that
unless however both or because whether notwithstanding but nor therefore since
nevertheless

INTERJECTION.
What is an interjection? It is word thrown in to express an affection of the
mind or a sudden passion; as, grief, joy, wonder, etc. It has no connection
with the sentence either by government or agreement. Ah! alas! oh! fie! pish!
or any sounds expressing the feelings of the speaker, are interjections.

SENTENCES.
What is a sentence? A sentence is a number of words, ranged in proper order
and making complete sense.

What does the formation of sentences depend on? On agreement and government.

What is agreement? When one word stands connected with another word, in the
same number, case, gender and person.

What is government? It is when one word causes another to be in some case or
mode.

RULE I.
A verb must agree with its nominative word in number and person.

EXAMPLES.
In the solemn style: Thou read; he reads; y^ read.

In the familiar style: I go; he goes; we go; you go.

EXPLANATION.
Thou is the second person singular number, and so is the verb, read. He is
the third person singular, and so is reads. Ye is the second person plural
number, and so is the verb read. And it may be observed in the familiar style,
that each verb is in the same person as its nominative word.

REMARK I.
Although the nominative word commonly stands before the verb, as in the
foregoing examples; yet it may follow an intransitive verb; as, "on a sudden
appeared the Queen."

And when a question is asked or a command given, the nominative must follow
the verb or auxiliary sign; as, did he go? were you there? go thou: awake you.
But in giving commands, we generally omit the nominative; as, go, awake.

REMARK 2.
When there, nor or neither, precedes the verb, in the beginning of a phrase,
the nominative follows the verb or auxiliary; as, " there was a man;" " nor am
I solicitous;" "neither has this man sinned, nor his parents." John ix. 3.

REMARK 3.
When a neuter verb stands between two nominative words, the one in the
singular, the other in the plural number, the verb more elegantly agrees with
the first; as, "the sum is ten pounds;" "all things are dust."

FALSE CONSTRUCTION.
Solemn style.
Who is art.
thou, O man, that presume presumest.
on thy own wisdom? Thou ought ought.
to know thou are art.
ignorant. He that confess confesses.
his sins and forsake forsakes.
them, shall find mercy. A soft answer turns turns.
away wrath. Anger rest rests.
in the bosom of fools.

familiar style.
Philadelphia are is.
a large city; it stand stand.
on the west side of the river Delaware and am is.
the most regular city in America. It contains contains.
a variety of different sects; these all speaks speak.
their own language; and they worshipeth worship.
as they please. I were was.
much delighted with it; I wishes wish.
that you could could.
see it and observe its manners.

N. B. The nominative to a verb is found by asking a question, who or what?
Example: "A clear conscience, which we ought carefully to preserve, in every
station of life, and which will secure to us a perpetual source of inward
tranquillity, will also be our principal guard against the abuses of
malevolence.." Here the question occurs, what will be our guard? etc. the
answer is, a clear conscience; which is therefore the nominative word to the
verb be. The noun to which an adjective refers, is found in the same manner.
Example: "A man in office, to whom some important trust is committed, ought to
be exceedingly cautious in his behavior." Ask the question, who ought to be
cautious? the answer is, a man in office; man therefore is the noun, to which
the adjective cautious refers.

RULE II.
Two or more nouns singular connected by a copulative conjunction, must have
verbs, pronouns and nouns agreeing with them in the plural number.

EXAMPLES.
1. Envy and vanity are detestable vices.

2. Brutus and Cassius were brethren; they were friends to Roman liberty.

EXPLANATION.
1 Envy and vanity are both nouns in the singular number, but being joined by
the copulative conjunction and, they require the verb are to be in the plural
number.

2 Brutus and Cassius are both in the singular number, but being united by a
copulative conjunction, they form a plural and require the verb were, the nouns
brethren and friends and the pronoun they, to be in the plural number.

REMARK.
When nouns singular are united by a disjunctive conjunction, the verb, pronoun
and noun following, must be in the singular number, as referring to one only;
as, "either John or I was there;" "neither pride nor envy nor any other vicious
passion disturbs my repose."

FALSE CONSTRUCTION.
Wisdom and learning is are.
very necessary for men in high stations. Peace and security is are.
the happiness of a community. Sobriety and humility leads lead.
to honor. You and I is are.
very studious. You and he was were.
accounted good scholar scholars.
. Prince Eugene and the Duke of Marlborough was were.
great Generals; he was scourge they were scourges.
to the house of Bourbon. Love, joy, good humor and friendship raises raise.
correspondent feelings in every heart; it sweetens they sweeten.
all the pleasures of life: But hatred, ill nature, jealousy, envy, insincerity
and melancholy diffuses diffuse.
its their.
baleful influence, and casts cast.
a cloud over social felicity.

N. B. It must be remarked, that when different persons are mentioned, the verb
must agree with the first in preference to both the others, and with the second
in preference to the third. Thus all three persons united; as, you and I and
he, make we, the first person plural.

You and I, make we.

You and he, make ye or you, the second person.

RULE III.
Nouns of multitude, though they are in the singular number, may have a verb
and pronoun agreeing with them either in the singular or plural.

EXAMPLES.
The assembly is or are very numerous; they are much divided. "My people is or
are foolish; they have nor known me." The company was or were noisy.

EXPLANATION.
Assembly is a noun of multitude, and may be united with is in the singular or
with are in the plural number. The same is observable of people and company.

N. B. We should have strict regard to the meaning of these collective nouns,
in determining whether the singular or plural number is most proper to be
joined with them. And if the indefinite article a or an precede the noun, the
verb must be singular; as, " a people is," " a company was," etc.

FALSE CONSTRUCTION.
His cattle is are.
very large. Their constitution were was.
subverted by ambition. The church were was.
not free from false professors. The island contain contains.
many inhabitants.

N. B. Cattle, though in the singular number, conveys an idea of plurality, and
therefore requires the verb to be plural, in all cases. But constitution,
church and island are not nouns of multitude and require a singular verb;
though good writers have used them as such, with a plural verb. "What reason
have the church of Rome to talk of modesty in this case?" Tillotson vol. 1.
ser. 49.

RULE IV.
An adjective must agree with its noun in number.

EXAMPLES.
This man, that boy, these men, those boys.

EXPLANATION.
Man is in the singular number and so is the adjective this. Boy is singular
and so is that. Men and boys are plural and so are the adjectives these and
those It will be well to remark that we have no adjectives in the language that
are varied, except this and that All others, being the same in all genders and
numbers, cannot help agreeing with their nouns; as, a good boy, or good boys,
or good girls. Participles, in the nature of adjectives, fo^low the same rule.
.

REMARK 1.
Adjectives are commonly placed before the nouns to which they refer.

EXAMPLES.

Adj. Nouns. Adj. Nouns. Brave men warm weather virtuous women polite behavior
kind friends frugal manners wise rulers illustrious general

EXCEPTIONS.
I. When something depends on an adjective, it follows the noun; as,

Nouns. Adjectives. Articles necessary for a family. food convenient for me.
method suited to his capacity.

2. When the adjective is emphatical, it is placed after the noun; as,

Nouns. Adjectives. Alexander the great. Scipio the younger. Socrates the wise.

3. Sometimes an intransitive verb is placed between the noun and adjective;
as, Nouns. Verbs. Adjectives. The sun is pleasant. the war was expensive.
virtue is amiable.

4. Sometimes the adjective stands before the verb or auxiliary; as,
Adjectives. Verbs. Nouns. Happy is the man. happy shall he be.

5. When several adjectives agree with one noun, they stand after it; as, a
woman, modest, sensible and prudent.

REMARK 2.
Articles are commonly placed before adjectives; thus, Art. Adj. Nouns. A wise
legislator. a great scholar. the best season. the sweetest apples.

But they are placed after the adjectives all, such and many; thus, Adj. Art.
Nouns. All the men. such a man. many a man.

And after any adjective, subjoined to the adverbs, so, as, how; thus, Ad. Adj.
Art. Nouns. So great a hero. as fine a genius. how bright a sun.

REMARK 3.
When this and that, these and these stand opposed to each other, this and
these refer to the last member of the sentence, that and those to the former.

" Self-love, the spring of action, moves the soul;
Reason's comparing balance rules the whole;
Man, but for that, no action could attend,
And but for this, were active to no end."
POPE. That, in the third line, refers to self-love in the first; and this in
the fourth, refers to reason in the second.

" Some place the bliss in action, some in ease;
Those call it pleasure and contentment these."
Those refers to men who place the bliss in action; these, to men who place the
bliss in ease.

REMARK 4.
The distributive pronominal adjectives, each, every, either, must always have
verbs agreeing with them in the singular number; for they refer to individuals
separate from each other; as, Each of us is -- not each of us are.
every one was -- not every one were.
either of the men is -- not either of the men are.


REMARKS 5.
Adjectives frequently become nouns, take the plural form, and stand as a
nominative or objective word; as, " evil be to them that evil think;" "the
chief good." "the evils of life;" "the goods of fortune."

Evil and good are originally adjectives; but in these expressions, they stand
for nouns.

When two nouns are joined by a hyphen, thus, seawater, fire-shovel,
glass-window, the first noun has the nature of an adjective.

FALSE CONSTRUCTION.
This These.
scissors will not cut. That those.
pens want mending. This these.
bellows are broken. That those.
books are torn. These this.
is a fine day. That those.
will make excellent scholars. Those that^
lad will be an honor to his friends. This these.
are the means of acquiring knowledge. This these.
ladies behave with modesty.

"To diversify these This kind.
kind of informations, the industry of the female world is not to be
unobserved."

Spectator No. 428.

Note, The custom of joining numeral adjectives denoting plurality, to nouns of
weight and measure in the singular form; as, thirty foot, ten s^^re, etc. is as
great an impropriety as any in the language.

RULE V.
The relative pronoun must agree with its antecedent in number, gender and
person.

EXAMPLES.
1. This is the boy, who studies with diligence; he will make a scholar.

2. The girl, who sits by you, is very modest; she will be a very amiable woman.

3. The pen, which you gave me, is good; it writes very well.

EXPLANATION.
In the first example, boy the antecedent, is masculine gender; therefore who
and he, the relative and pronoun, must be masculine.

In the second, girl the antecedent, is feminine; therefore the relative who
and pronoun she are feminine.

In the third, pen the antecedent, is neuter or of neither gender; therefore
the relative which and pronoun it must be used; these standing for things
without life.

REMARK.
The antecedent is sometimes omitted; as, "give tribute to whom tribute is
due;" that is, to the person to whom tribute is due.

The relative is often omitted; as, "the man I saw;" "the thing I want;" that
is, "the man whom I saw;" "the thing which I want."

FALSE CONSTRUCTION.
He which Who.
is not contented with the goods of fortune, whom which.
he now enjoys, must expect to be unhappy, even with greater possessions. He
which who.
delights in villainy, must be rewarded with the infamy whom whi^
he deserves.

His sister, which who.
is much beloved by his her.
acquaintance, for its her.
virtue and good sense, is older than I am; he she
sings and dances well, and his her.
good-breeding and sweetness of temper are the admiration of its her.
companions.

Virtue is his its.
own reward. In this life she it.
affords peace of mind to those which who.
possess him it.
.

N. B. Who, is both masculine and feminine; referring to persons of both sexes:
Which, is applied to things without life, and to brutes.

The relative pronouns are the same in both numbers.

Whose, the possessive of who, is of both genders, and in both numbers.

RULE VI.
If no nominative come between the relative and the verb, the relative is the
nominative.

EXAMPLES.
This is the man, who taught rhetoric. The estates of those who have taken arms
against their country, ought to be confiscated. We have a constitution, which
secures our rights.

EXPLANATION.
In these expressions, there being no nominative between the relatives who and
which and the verbs, taught, have and secures, therefore the relatives are the
nominatives.

REMARK.
The verb to be has a nominative after it, as well as before it; as, " it was
I;" "ye are they who justify yourselves." For this reason, this passage seems
to be ungrammatical, " whom do men say that I am." Matthew. xvi.13. It ought to
be who, governed of am.

But in the infinitive mode, an objective case follows be; as, "I thought it to
be him;" "you believe it to be me."

RULE VII.
But if a nominative come between the relative and the verb, the relative is
governed of the following verb or some other word.

EXAMPLES.
This is the man whom I esteem, whose virtues merit distinction, and whom I am
happy to oblige.

EXPLANATION.
There being the nominative I between the relative whom and the verb esteem,
whom is in the objective case, governed of the transitive verb esteem. The n^^t
relative denoting possession, is put in the possessive case, whose; virtues
being the nominative to merit. In the last member of the sentence, whom is
governed of oblige; there being a nominative I between the relative and the
verb am.

N. B. The compounds of who, follow the same rule. "Whoever I am;" "whomsoever
you please to appoint."

FALSE CONSTRUCTION.
The boys, who whom.
I admire, are those that study. The women, who whom.
I saw, were very handsome. The servant, who whom.
you sent, is not returned. Who whom.
should I meet the other day. Who whom.
should I see but my old friend. The boy, whom who.
loves study, will be beloved by his instructor. The ladies, whom who.
possess modesty, are always respected.

RULE VIII.
Two nouns, signifying the same thing, must be in the same case and are said to
be in apposition; as, "Paul the apostle;" "Alexander the conqueror."

But if they signify different things, and imply property, the first is put in
the possessive case, by adding s separated from the word by an apostrophe.

EXAMPLES.
This is John's paper. We admire a man's courage and a lady's virtue.

EXPLANATION.
The words John's, man's, lady's, denote proper^y and are in the possessive
case.

The same ideas may be thus expressed; "this is the paper of John. We admire
the courage of a man* and the virtue of a lady."

REMARK 1.
In common discourse, the name of the thing possessed is generally omitted; as,
St. Paul's; Mr. Addison's; that is, St. Paul's church; Mr. Addison's house.

REMARK 2.
The apostrophe ought always to be placed in the possessive case to distinguish
it from the plural number. Thus, "see the lad's manners," is possessive; but,
"the lads have no manners," is plural.

FALSE CONSTRUCTION.
See that boys boy's.
impudence; he disobeys his masters master's.
orders. That girls girl's
bonnet is awry. John his John's.
book is lost. This is George his George's.
paper. The kings King's.
edict is published.

RULE IX.
Transitive verbs govern an objective case or word.

EXAMPLES.
1. I admire her. She saw him. The scripture directs us.

2. Religion honors its votaries. Shame follows vice.

EXPLANATION.
1. The verbs admire, saw, directs, are transitive and govern the pronouns her,
him, us, in the objective case.

2. Honors and follows, being transitive verbs, are said to govern the words
votaries and vice which express the objects of their influence.

REMARK 1.
Sometimes the personal pronouns and always the relatives, who, which, what,
that, are placed before the verb that governs them.

Pro. and Rel. Governed of the Verbs. Whom ye ignorantly worship him declare I
unto you* whom do you see? which will you take?

REMARK 2.
Participles may govern the same cases as their verbs; as, "I am viewing a fine
prospect;" "I have moved them." Here viewing and moved are participles, yet
govern the words prospect and them.

N. B. As few or no errors are committed under this rule, it is needless to
give examples of false construction.

RULE X.
The answer must be in the same case, as the question; it being always governed
of the verb that asks the question, though the verb be not expressed.

EXAMPLES.
Questions. Answers. Who wrote this book? George. who is this? he. whom do you
see? them. whom do you admire? her.

EXPLANATION.
In the two first questions, who, the word that asks the question, is in the
nominative; and so are the answers George and he. In the two last, whom is in
the objective, and so are the answers them and her.

The propriety of this will better appear by expressing the questions and
answers at large.

Questions. Answers. Who wrote this book? George wrote it. who is this? it is
he whom do you see? I see them. whom do you admire? I admire her.

RULE XI.
Prepositions govern an objective case or word.

EXAMPLES.
I write for him, Give the box to her. You will ride with them, or with us.

E^PLANATION.
For, to, and with, are prepositions and require the pronouns him, her, them
and us to be in the objective case.

REMARK 1.
The preposition may be omitted with propriety; as, "give me the book;" that
is, to me. "I will go next Monday;" that is, on next Monday.

REMARK 2.
Prepositions are improperly separated from the words which they govern; as,
Whom did you give it to? whom did you come with? him I will attend to.


Grammarians seem to allow of this mode of expression in conversation and
familiar writings; but it is generally inelegant, and in the grave and sublime
styles, is certainly inadmissible. But this is much more pardonable than
another error that has crept into general use; which is to make prepositions
govern a nominative case; thus, Who did you give it to? who do you speak to?
who is she married to? who did you go for? who did he come with?


These are questions in every person's mouth and yet they will be shocked to
hear the preposition pronounced where it ought to stand; thus, To who did you
give it? to who do you speak? to who is she married? for who did you go? with
who did he come?


Yet these last are as proper as the first, though not so familiar to the ear.

REMARK 3.
Formerly prepositions joined with adverbs, supplied the place of pronouns;
thus, Herewith were used for with this wherewith with which thereto to that
thereat at that thereby by that whereby by which whereunto to which whereof of
which wherein in which

But these are growing into disuse and will probably be soon banished from the
language.

Note, Prepositions are sometimes prefixed to adverbs; as, to where, from
where, over where, etc. This is only an elliptical form of expression; the word
place or some word of the same import, being implied. For example; "The western
limit of the United States extends along the middle of the river Missisippi, to
where it intersects the thirty-first degree of north latitude;" that is, to the
place where. But the phrase is by no means elegant.

Note further, that prepositions are often placed after verbs and become a part
of them; being essential to the meaning. Thus, in the phrases, to fall on, to
give over, to cast up (an account) the particles on, over, up, are essential to
the verbs to which they are annexed, because on them depends the meaning of the
phrases. This sort of verbs is purely Saxon and they seem to be growing into
disuse; but they are often very significant and their place cannot always be
supplied by any single word.

RULE XII.
Conjunctions connect like cases and modes.

EXAMPLES.
You and I were both present. He and she ^it together. It was told to him and
me. It is disagreeable to them and us.

EXPLANATION.
The pronoun you, being in the nominative case, I is required to be there too,
because it is coupled to you by the conjunction and. The case is the same with
he and she; him and me; them and us; except that the four last are in the
objective case.

REMARK.
When a comparison is made between different persons or things, the word that
follows than, is not governed of it, but of some verb or preposition implied;
thus, You are taller than I. Are better understood, thus, You are taller than I
am. he is older than she, he is older than she is. we are younger than they. we
are younger than they are. you think him handsomer than me* you think him
handsomer than you think me. she sings as well as he. she sings as well as he
sings. I write as well as you. I write as well as you write.

The absurdity of the following expressions, which are common, is exposed by
supplying the ellipsis*

You are taller than me. You are taller than me am. he is older than her. he is
older than her is. we are younger than them. we are younger than them are. she
sings as well as him. she sings as well as him sings. I write as well as her. I
write as well as her writes. you think him older than I. you think him older
than you think I.
FALSE CONSTRUCTION.
It was agreeable to him and I me.
, that we and them they.
should study together. It was told to us and ye. you.
Will he go with you and I me.
? Neither she nor him he.
was there. He taught both me and she her.
. Either you or me I.
must go. Neither they nor us we.
were present. John and me I.
are not good scholars.

N. B. The relative who after than, is improper; it ought always to be whom, in
the objective; as, "we have a General, than whom Europe cannot produce a
greater character."

RULE XIII.
The infinitive mode follows a verb, a noun, or an adjective.

EXAMPLEs.
1. It follows a verb; as, let us learn to practice virtue.

2. A noun; as, you have a sine opportunity to learn.

3. An adjective; as, my friend is worthy to be trusted.

EXPLANATION.
In the first example, practice, is a verb in the infinitive mode, following
the verb learn.

In the second, learn, is in the infinitive, following the noun opportunity.

In the third, be, is in the infinitive, following the adjective worthy.

REMARK 1.
The infinitive mode often has the nature of a noun and does the office of a
nominative or objective word.

Of a nominative; as, Of an objective; as, To play is pleasant. I love to play.
to study is useful. I hate to quarrel. to be virtuous is wise. I desire to
learn.

REMARK 2.
The infinitive mode is often made absolute or independent of the sentence; as,
" to confess the truth I was in fault;" "but to proceed;" " to conclude," etc.
This mode of expression may be resolved into the subjunctive; thus, "that I may
confess the truth; that I may proceed; that I may conclude," etc.

REMARK 3.
It is a general rule in the language that to is a sign of the infinitive mode;
but we have a few verbs that will admit of another verb after them in the
infinitive without to, such as, bid, dare, need, make, see, hear, feel; as, "he
has bid me do it," not bid me to do it. But the infinitive after see, hear,
feel, seems to be a corruption; for to, in no instance can be used. "I saw him
to go;" "I heard him to say;" "I felt my blood to chill," are all absurd. It
seems therefore that we ought to use the participle in ing, "I saw him going,"
etc. and not a verb after see, hear and feel.

RULE XIV.
A participle, with a preposition preceding it, answers to the Latin gerund,
and may govern an objective word or case.

EXAMPLES.
By avoiding evil. by doing good. by seeking peace and by pursuing it. By
shuning him. in observing them. for esteeming us. by punishing them.
EXPLANATION.
The participles avoiding, doing, seeking, etc. govern the objective words
evil, good, etc.

REMARK 1.
But a participle, with an article before it, generally has the nature of a
noun and requires the preposition of after it.

By the avoiding of evil. by the doing of good. By the observing of which. by
the punishing of whom.
The following expressions seem to be not grammatical; neither By the avoiding
which. nor By avoiding of which. by the doing which. by doing of which. by the
observing them. by observing of them.

Either the before the participle and of after it, ought both to be used or
both to be omitted.

But our best writers always have and still do use the article before the
participle, without the preposition after it and in some instances it is not
avoided without difficulty.

REMARK 2.
Participles often become mere adjectives, denoting a quality, and as such
admit of comparison; thus, Pos. Com. Super. A learned more learned most learned
man. a loving more loving most loving father. a feeling more feeling most
feeling heart.

REMARK 3
A participle, with an adverb, may be placed independently of the sentence; as,
"this, generally speaking, is a good rule."

Note, Instead of the participle in ed some writers, particularly the Poets,
have used an adjective derived of a verb; as, devote, annihilate exhaust for
devoted, annihilated, exhausted. But these are become obsolete.

RULE XV.
A nominative case or word, joined with a participle, often stands
independently of the sentence. This is called, the case absolute.

EXAMPLES.
The sun being risen, it will be warm. They all consenting* the vote was
passed. "Jesus conveyed himself away, a multitude being in that place."

EXPLANATION.
The words in Italics are not connected with the other part of the sentence,
either by agreement or government; they are therefore in the case absolute,
which, in English, is always the nominative.

FALSE CONSTRUCTION.
Him He.
being sick, the physician was called.

Him he.
being crazy, in was necessary to confine him.

Her she.
being dressed, she went to the assembly.

Them they.
being convened, they began business.

Us we.
knocking, the door was opened.

Note, This form of expression is a mere ellipsis; for the sun being risen is
only a contraction of when or after the sun was risen.

RULE XVI.
An adverb must always stand near the word which it is designed to affect or
modify.

1. It is placed before an adjective; as, Adv. Adj. Very wise. extremely cold.
rigidly just.


2. It is usually placed after a verb; as, Verbs. Adv. To write correctly. to
sing sweetly. to behave politely.


3. It is placed between an auxiliary and a verb or participle; as, Aux. Adv
Verbs or Part. She was elegantly dressed. she was greatly admired. I have often
seen. he has been much celebrated. we shall be highly pleased. they will soon
observe.

REMARK 1.
We use many adverbs before a single verb; as, "I commonly eat at six o'clock;"
and the adverb never is usually placed before both verbs and auxi^^ries; as, "I
never will be seen there." But (...) seems not so elegant; as, "I will never be
seen there."

REMARK 2.
Two negatives destroy each other and amount to an affirmative; thus, I do not
know nothing about it. Are the same in sense as, I do know something about it.
I did not hear nothing. I did hear something. I did not hear not one word. I
did hear one word. he may not get none. he may get some. you cannot see none.
you can see some.

REMARK 3.
No stands alone in an answer; as, Will you go? No. But if any other word be
used, the negation is expressed by not; as, Will they go? They will not.

No is improperly used for not; as, "I will go, whether he will or no." Will go
is understood in the last member of the sentence, and by supplying it, we may
observe the impropriety; as, "I will go, whether he will or will no go." It
ought to be ^ot.

No is used as an adjective before nouns; as, no man, no house.

None is compounded of no one.

RULE XVII.
Conjunctions implying doubt or supposition govern the subjunctive mode.

EXAMPLES.

" Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him."

Job xiii.15. " Whether it were I or they." etc.

1. Cor. xv.11. " If thou be the son of God." etc.

Matthew. iv.3. " Unless he wash his flesh." etc.

Live. xxii.6. EXPLANATION.
The conjunctions, though, whether, if, unless, imply something doubtful or
uncertain; therefore the verbs, slay, were, be, wash, are in the subjunctive
mode.

REMARK 1.
But when there is no doubt or condition implied, the verb may be in the
indicative mode; as, "though Arnold was an American, yet he betrayed his
country." Here is no uncertainty, therefore was is in the indicative mode after
the conjunction though.

REMARK 2.
The conjunction is sometimes omitted and the nominative follows the verb or
auxiliary; as, "were I the person;" "had I been there;" "charm he ever so
wisely "Charm he never so wisely," is an impropriety. The adverb never makes
the sentence negative, contrary to the meaning of the phrase.
:" That is, "If I were the person;" "if I had been there;" "though he charm
ever so wisely."

REMARK 3.
Some conjunctions have correspondent conjunctions, which ought to follow in
the subsequent part of the sentence.

Although or though must be followed by yet or or. whether or. either or.
neither or nor nor. as so or as. so as or that.

EXAMPLES.

Although our enemies were powerful, yet we defeated them.

Whether it were I, or they.

Either the one, or the other.

Neither the one, nor the other.

As with the people, so with the priest; as tall as I.

Their troops were not so brave as ours*

Some writers have used or after neither instead of nor, and some Grammarians
have asserted the propriety of it. But it must be observed that or is
disjunctive and affirms something of two subjects: Nor is a copulative and
denies both; as, "it is either rain or hail;" that is, it is one of them; "it
is neither rain nor hail;" that is, it is neither of them. To say "it is
neither rain or hail," denies the former and affirms the latter; which is an
absurdity.

AN EXERCISE.
The following examples will teach children to distinguish the parts of speech
and enable them to understand their connection by agreement and government
according to the foregoing rules This is called parsing. In this children may
be much assisted by Entick's or Perry's pocket Dictionary, which distinguish
the parts of speech. This method of parsing the English language, which has
been hitherto very little practiced, is the only way to obtain a thorough
knowledge of it; and without an acquaintance with the parts of speech, their
variations and connection, according to the principles of the language and the
construction of sentences, no person can have the le^t claim to the ^le of
Grammarian.
.

EXAMPLE 1.
"A woman who has merit, improved by a virtuous and refined education, retains,
in her decline, an influence over the men, more flattering than even that of
beauty: She is the delight of her friends, as formerly of her admirers."

"Admirable would be the effects of such refined education, contributing no
less to public good than to private happiness. A man, who at present must
degrade himself into a fop or a coxcomb, in order to please the women, would
soon discover, that their favor is not to be gained, but by exerting every
manly talent in public and private life, and the two sexes, instead of
corrupting each other, would be rivals in the race of virtue. Mutual esteem
would be to each a school of urbanity; and mutual desire of pleasing would give
smoothness to their behavior, delicacy to their sentiments and tenderness to
their passions." Home's Hist. Man. Sketch 6.

The foregoing paragraph may be analyzed as follows: A Is the indefinite
article. woman A common noun, in the singular number, and is the nominative
word to the verb retains. who A relative pronoun, in the nominative case
singular, referring to woman, its antecedent, the nominative word to the verb
has, by rule 6. has A transitive verb, in the indicative mode, present tense
indefinite, third person singular, agreeing with its nominative who, by rule 1.
merit, A noun, in the singular number, the objective word after the transitive
verb has, by rule 9. improved A participle, from the verb improve, having the
nature of an adjective and referring to its noun merit, by rule 4. by A
preposition. a The indefinite article. virtuous An adjective, derived from the
noun virtue, referring to the noun education and expressing the nature of it,
by rule 4. and A copulative conjunction, connecting the words virtuous and
refined, by rule 12.

Note, There is an elipsis in this part of the sentence; the whole being
expressed, it would stand thus, "improved by a virtuous education and improved
by a refined education."

refined A participle, in the nature of an adjective, from the verb refine,
referring to education, by rule 4. education, A noun, in the singular number,
governed of the preposition by, by rule 11. retains, A verb transitive, in the
indicative mode, present tense indefinite, third person singular, agreeing with
its nominative woman, by rule 1^. in A preposition. her A pronominal adjective,
agreeing with its noun decline, by rule 4. decline, A noun, in the singular
number, governed of the preposition in, by rule 11. an The indefinite article,
standing for a, because the following word begins with a vowel. influence A
noun, in the singular number, governed of the transitive verb retains, by rule
9. over A preposition. the The definite article. men, A noun, in the plural
number, govern of over, by rule 11. more An adverb. flattering A participle,
in the nature of an adjective, derived of the verb flatter, agreeing with the
noun influence, by rule 4.

Note, Flattering with the help of the adverb more forms the comparative degree.

than A conjunction. even An adverb. that A relative pronoun, supplying the
place of influence, its antecedent, the nominative to the verb is understood.
of A preposition. beauty: A noun, governed by the preposition of, by rule 11.
She A personal pronoun, third person feminine gender, nominative to the verb
is. is An intransitive verb, indicative mode, present tense, third person
singular, agreeing with its nominative she, by rule 1. the The definite
article. delight A noun, in the singular number, the nominative after is, by
remark on rule 6. of A preposition. her A pronominal adjective, agreeing with
friends, by rule 4. friends, A noun, in the plural number, governed by the
preposition of, by rule 11. as A conjunction. formerly An adverb, derived of
the adjective former. of As before. her As before. admirers. A noun, in the
plural number, governed by the preposition of, by rule 11. Admirable An
adjective, referring to effects, but placed before the verb be, by rule 4,
exception 4. would be Would is an auxiliary, and be an intransitive verb, when
united they form the present tense conditional of the potential mode, third
person plural, agreeing with the nominative effects, which follows its verb by
remark 1, on rule 1. the The indefinite article. effects A noun, in the plural
number, nominative to the verb be, as before mentioned. of A preposition. such
An adjective, referring to its noun education, by rule 4. refined A participle,
in the nature of an adjective, agreeing with education, by rule 4. education, A
noun, in the singular number, governed by of, by rule 11. contributing A
participle, from the verb contribute, agreeing with education, by note on rule
4. no An adverb. less An adverb. to A preposition. public An adjective,
agreeing with its noun good, by rule 4. good Originally an adjective, but
standing for a noun, by remark 5, on rule 4, governed of the preposition to, by
rule 11. than A conjunction. to As before. private An adjective, agreeing with
its noun happiness, by rule 4. happiness. A noun, in the singular number,
governed of the preposition to, by rule 11. A The indefinite article. man, A
noun, in the singular number, the nominative word to discover. who A relative
pronoun, nominative case to the verb degrade, by rule 6. at present Used
adverbially; at is properly a preposition and present an adjective, and it is
probable that the expression is a contraction of, at the present time; but as
they are now used, at present supply the place of an adverb. must An auxiliary,
importing necessity. degrade A transitive verb, which with must forms the
present tense absolute of the potential mode, third person, singular number,
agreeing with who, by rule 1. himself A reciprocal pronoun, in the objective
case, governed of degrade, by rule 9. into A preposition. a As before. fop A
noun, singular, governed of into, by rule 11, or A conjunction disjunctive. a
As before. coxcomb, A noun, singular, connected with fop by the conjunction or;
into being implied. in A preposition. order A noun, singular, governed of in,
by rule 11. to A preposition. please A transitive verb, which with to preceding
forms the infinitive mode, following the noun order, by rule 13, 2. the The
indefinite article. women, A noun, plural, governed of please, by rule 9. would
An auxiliary, expressing event conditionally. soon An adverb, between the
auxiliary would and the verb discover, by rule 16, 3. ^iscover, A transitive
verb, with the auxiliary would forming the present tense conditional of the
potential mode, third person singular, agreeing with its nominative man, by
rule 1. that A conjunction. their A pronominal adjective, agreeing with favor,
by rule 4. favor A noun, singular, nominative to is. is An intransitive verb,
i^ present tense, third (...) agreeing with favor, by (...) not An adverb. to
be Infinitive mode of the intransit^ be following is, by rule 13, 1. gained, A
participle, from the verb to gain, agre^^ing with favor, by rule 4. but An
adverb, it is commonly a conjunction, but in this place is not used as such. by
A preposition. exerting A participle, from the verb exert, retaining its
government, and answering to the Latin gerund, by rule 14. every A distributive
pronominal adjective, agreeing with talent, by rule 4. manly An adjective,
agreeing with talent, by the same rule. talent A noun, singular, governed of
the participle exerting, by remark 2, on rule 9. in A preposition. public An
adjective, agreeing with life, by rule 4. and A copulative conjunction. private
An adjective, agreeing with life, by rule 4. life, A noun, in the singular
number, governed of in, by rule 11. ^^nd As before. ^e The definite article.
^wo An adjective, agreeing with sexes, by rule 4. ^exes, A noun, plural,
nominative to would be. instead An adverb. of A preposition. corrupting A
participle, from the verb corrupt, retaining its government, by rule 14. (...)
A distributive pronominal adjective* agreeing with other, by rule 4. (...) ^
^onominal adjective, standing for a ^oun, by rema^k 4, on rule 4, governed of
corrupting, by remark 2, on rule 9. (...) An auxiliary, as before. (...) An
intransitive verb, with would, forming the present tense conditional of the
potential mode, third person plural, agreeing with sexes, by rule 1. rivals A
noun, in the nominative, plural, following be, by remark on rule 6. in A
preposition. the As before. race A noun, singular, governed of in, by rule 11.
of As before. virtue. A noun singular, governed by of, by rule 11. Mutual An
adjective, agreeing with esteem, by rule 4. esteem A noun, singular, nominative
to be. would An auxiliary, as before. be An intransitive verb, in the same mode
and tense, as before, agreeing with its nominative esteem, by rule 1. to As
before. each A distributive, as before, governed of to or rather agreeing with
sex understood, by rule 4. a As before. school A noun, the nominative after be,
by remark on rule 6. of As before. urbanity; A noun, singular, governed by the
preposition of, by rule 11. and As before. mutual An adjective, agreeing with
desire, by rule 4. desire A noun, singular, nominative to give. of As before.
pleasing A participle* from the verb please, governed by of, by rule 14. would
As before. give A transitive verb, joined with would, forming the present
conditional tense of the potential mode, third person singular, agreeing with
its nominative desire, by rule 1. smoothness A noun, from the adjective smooth,
governed of the verb give, by rule 9. to As before. their A pronominal
adjective, agreeing with its noun behavior, by rule 4. behavior, A noun,
singular, governed of to by rule 11. delicacy A noun, singular, governed of
give implied, by rule 9. to As before. their As before, agreeing with
sentiments, by rule 4. sentiments A noun, plural, governed of to, by rule 11.
and As before. tenderness A noun, singular, governed of give implied, by rule
9. to As before. their As before, agreeing with passions, by rule 4. passions.
A noun, plural, governed of to, by rule 11.

Note, The last part of this sentence, is very elliptical, and will be better
understood by being expressed at large; thus, "Mutual desire of pleasing would
give smoothness to their behavior and mutual desire of pleasing would give
delicacy to their sentiments and mutual desire of pleasing would give
tenderness to their passions."




EXAMPLE 2.
"The argument indeed would be conclusive, were ten females born for one male."

Home's Hist. Man, Sketch 6.

PARSED.
The The definite article. argument A noun, singular, nominative to be. indeed
An adverb. would An auxiliary. be A verb intransitive, in the same mode and
tense as in the last example, agreeing with its nominative word argument, by
rule 1. conclusive, An adjective, agreeing with argument, by rule 4. were A
verb intransitive, in the subjunctive mode, present tense hypothetical, third
person plural, agreeing with females, by rule 1. ten An adjective, agreeing
with females, by rule 4. females A noun, plural, nominative to were and placed
after the verb, because the conjunction if is omitted, according to note on the
subjunctive mode, page 46, and remark 2, on rule 17. born A participle from the
verb bear, agreeing with females, by rule 4. for A preposition. one An
adjective, agreeing with male, by rule 4. male A noun, singular, governed of
for, by rule 11.
The importance of studying our language grammatically, illustrated by the
obvious errors which are found in the sacred writings and in the works of our
best authors.

EXAMPLES.
The number of the names together were about an hundred and twenty. Acts i.15.

The number of the months are with thee. Job xiv.5.

And Rebekah took goodly raiment of her eldest son Esau, which were with her in
the house and put them upon Jacob her youngest son. Genesis xxvii.15.

In one hour so great riches is come to naught. Rev. xviii.17.

Great pains has been taken. Pope.

There is two or three of us. Shakespeare.

Nor thou that flings me. Pa^nel.

I have considered what have been said. Tillotson.

Whoever the king favors. Shakespeare.

Those who he thought true to his party. Clarendon.

Who should I meet the other night. Spectator No. 32.

Laying the suspicion upon somebody, I know not who. Swift.

Whom do men say that I am?

But whom say ye that I am? Matthew. xvi 13 15.

So also Mark viii.27 29. Luke ix.18 20. Acts xiii.25.

And so was also James and John the sons of Zebedee which were partners with
Simon. Luke v.10.

What reason have the church of Rome to talk of modesty in this case? Tillotson.

There is no constitution so tame and careless of their defense. Addison.

All the virtues of mankind are to be counted upon a few fingers; but his
follies and vices are innumerable. Swift.

And, him destroyed. Milton.

Him only excepted. Tillotson.

To see so many to make so little conscience of so great a sin. Tillotson.

To see a young person to acquit himself gloriously. Ibid.

I hope, my Lord, I not offend.

She not denies it.

Which they themselves not feel. Dryden.

I have not wept this forty years. Dryden.

I fancy they are these kind. Addison.

I am not recommending these kind of sufferings. Sherlock.

Let each esteem other better than themselves. Phill. ii.3.

CORRECTED.
The number of the names together was about an hundred and twenty. By rule 1.

The number of the months is with thee. By ibid.

And Rebekah took goodly raiment of her eldest son which was with her in the
house, and put it upon Jacob her youngest son. By ibid and 5.

In one hour, so great riches are come to naught. By rule 1.

Great pains have been taken. By ibid.

There are two or three of us. By ibid.

Nor thou that flingest me. By ibid.

I have considered what has been said. By ibid.

Whomever the king favors. By rule 9.

Those whom he thought true to his party. By ibid.

Whom should I meet the other night. By ibid.

Laying the suspicion upon ^^mebody I know not whom. By ibid.

Who do men say that I am?

But who say ye that I am?

By remark on rule 6.

And so were also James and John the sons of Zebedee who were partners with
Simon. By rule 2 and 5.

What reason has the church, etc. By rule 1.

For church is not a noun of multitude.

There is no constitution so tame and careless of its defense. By rule 5.

All the virtues of mankind are to be counted upon a few fingers; but their
follies and vices are innumerable. By rule 5.

And, he destroyed. By rule 15.

He only excepted. By ibid.

That is, he being destroyed, he being excepted, in the case absolute.

To see so many make or making so little conscience of so great a sin.

To see a young person acquit, etc.

See remark 3, on rule 13.

I hope, my Lord, I not offend.

She denies it not.

Which they themselves feel not. All by rule 16.

I have not wept these forty years. By rule 4.

I fancy they are this kind. By rule 4.

I am not recommending this kind of sufferings. By ibid.

Let each esteem other better than himself. See remark on rule 4.

Either is improperly used for each in the following expressions.

The king of Israel and Jehosaphat sat either of them on his throne. 2. Chron.
xviii.9.

Nadab and Abihu took either of them his censer. Lev. x.1.

And a line of twelve cubits did compass either of them about. 1. Kings vii.15.

They crucified two other with him, on either side one and Jesus in the midst.
John xix.18.

And there were stays on either side. 1. Kings x.19.

Of either side of the river was there the tree of life. Rev. xxii^2.

In all these instances, each should be used in the place of either.

In the following expressions, adverbs are improperly used as adjectives.

We may cast in such seeds and principles as we judge most likely to take
soonest and deepest root. Tillots;on.

Thine often infirmities. 1. Tim. v.23.

Soonest and often are adverbs and ought not to be placed before nouns like
adjectives.

Quickest and frequent would be employed with more propriety.

Other Improprieties.
I had rather.

He is a great ways off, or good ways off.

I had as goods go.

As it were.

I am done.

What is wanting?

Must needs "He added, that he promised himself that the Roman people must
needs allow, that they had never received so many benefits before from one
single citizen."

Vertot's Revolutions, Vol. 1, Page 148. Land. Ed. 1770. The expression is
totally improper in any case and certainly too vulgar to find a place in a
celebrated Roman history.


.

I have got to go.

Corrected.
I would rather.

He is at a great distance.

I may as well go.

I have done.

What is wanted?

Must necessarily or of necessity.

I must go.

ELLIPSIS.
Ellipsis is the elegant omission of a word or words in a sentence.

This figure, judiciously managed, renders language concise, without obscuring
the sense.

EXAMPLES.

True Construction.
1. God will reward the righteous and God will punish the wicked.

2. Give your heart to your maker -- give honor to your parents -- and give
your bosom to your friend.

3. Here is the virtue which I admire and which I will endeavor to imitate.

4. Avoid company which company has a tendency to corrupt your manners.

5. This horse is the General's horse.

6. This horse is the General's horse.

7. Turn to the right hand.

8. He sailed in the ship Confederacy.

The answers to questions are very elliptical.

9. Q. Who went with you to Philadelphia?

A. John went with me to Philadelphia.

10. Q. Where were you educated.

A. I was educated at Boston.

The member of a sentence following than, as, or do, is usually suppressed.

11. You are younger than I am.

12. He sings and dances as well as you sing and dance.

13. You write better than I write.

An ellipsis in the beginning of a sentence is often admissible

True Construction. 14. I always have been faithful to my country and always
will be faithful to my country.

In an enumeration of particulars, the conjunction and is elegantly suppressed,
except before the last particular.

15. Love and joy and peace and endless felicity will be the portion of the
righteous.

In enumerating qualities that belong to the same thing, the noun is joined to
the last only.

16. She is a sober woman, a modest woman, a delicate woman and an agreeable
woman.

Elliptical.
Nominative omitted.
God will reward the righteous and punish the wicked.

Verb omitted.
Give your heart to your maker -- honor to your parents -- and your bosom to
your friend.

Relative omitted.
Here is the virtue I admire and will endeavor to imitate Authors are too apt
to omit the relative; and in this example it would be better to omit the last
only. The perspicuity of a sentence depends much on the proper use of relatives
and pronouns.
.

Antecedent omitted.
Avoid company which has a tendency to corrupt your manners*

Noun omitted.
This horse is the General's.

This is the General's horse.

Turn to the right.

He sailed in the Confederacy.

John.

At Boston.

You are younger than I.

He sings and dances as well as you.

You write better than I do.

Elliptical.
I always have and always will be faithful to my country.

Love, joy, peace and endless felicity will be the portion of the righteous.

She is a sober, modest, delicate and agreeable woman.

Many other instances of the ellipsis might be mentioned; but these are
sufficient to give the learner some idea of this figure, the proper use of
which assists us to express our sentiments with clearness without multiplying
repetitions.

TRANSPOSITION.
Transposition or inversion, is the placing of words out of tneir natural order.

The order of words is either natural or artificial.

The natural order of words in a sentence is when they follow each other in the
same manner as the conceptions of the mind.

Artificial order is when words are so arranged as to render the sentence
harmonious and agreeable to the ear, without obscuring the sense*

EXAMPLES in PROSE.

Natural Order.
"We hear daily complaints of depopulation, in every great State where the
people are sunk into voluptuousness, by prosperity and opulence." Home's
Sketches.

"The people are knowing and conversable in a country where several occupations
must be carried on by the same person from want of hands: People are ignorant
and unsociable in a populous country where manufactures flourish." Ibid.

Artificial Order.
In every great State, where the people, by prosperity and opulence, are sunk
into voluptuousness, we hear daily complaints of depopulation.

"In a country where, from want of hands, several occupations must be carried
on by the same person, the people are knowing and conversable: In a populous
country where manufactures flourish, they are ignorant and unsociable."

In the foregoing examples, the artificial order of the words, is as
perspicuous as the natural, and more elegant and harmonious. But when an
inversion serves to embarrass a period, it ought to be avoided; for perspicuity
ought not to be sacrificed to any other ornament.

The following example appears to me faulty in this respect.

"Now from these evils, the love of letters, with that liberal cast of thought
which they are naturally calculated to give, would, I am persuaded, be one
powerful preservative." Fordyce's Ser. 8.

Corrected.
"I am persuaded that the love of letters, with that liberal cast of thought
which they are naturally calculated to give, would be one powerful preservative
against these evils.

POETRY.
Inverted Order.
"Or southward far extend thy wondering eyes,
Where fertile streams the garden'd vales divide;
And mid the peopled fields distinguished rise*
Virginian towe^s and Charlestown's spiry pride."
Elegy on the times. Natural Order.
Or extend thy wondering eyes far southward, where fertile streams divide the
gardened vales; and Virginian towers and Charlestown's spiry pride rise
distinguished amidst the peopled fields.

2
Here the pure church, descending from her God,
Shall fix on earth her long and last abode;
Zion arise, in radiant splendors dressed
By Saints admired, by Infidels confessed
Her opening courts, in dazzling glory blaze;
Her wa^ls salvation and her portals praise."
Prospect of peace. The natural Order, supplying the Ellipsis.
"Here the pure church, descending from her God, shall fix her long and last
abode on earth; Zion shall arise, dressed in radiant splendors, being admired
by Saints and confessed by Infidels; her opening courts shall blaze in dazzling
glory; her walls shall be salvation and her portals shall be praise."

Transposition is more necessary in poetry than in prose; but in either it
ought not to be indulged, unless to acquire some ornament which cannot be
compassed in a natural order.

ARRANGEMENT.
As the principal object to be considered in any composition whether prose or
verse, is perspicuity, and as this depends much on a proper arrangement of the
members of a period; it is necessary to lay down some general rules with
respect to this point and illustrate their propriety by examples of wrong
arrangement.

1
Words, expressing ideas that are connected in the mind, ought to be placed as
near together as possible.

The want of such connection is obvious in the following examples.

"For the English are naturally fanciful, and very often disposed, by that
gloominess of temper which is so frequent in our nation, to many wild notions
and visions, to which others are not so liable. Spect. No. 419.

For as no mortal author, in the ordinary fate and vicissitude of things, knows
to what use his works may some time or other be applied, etc. Spect. No. 85.

"The same Lucumo, having afterward attained the crown, with the name of
Tarquin the ancient, by the favor of the people, did, that he might preserve
their affection, choose out of their order a hundred Senators, etc."

Corrected.
For the English are naturally fanciful and by that gloominess of temper which
is so frequent in our nation, are very often disposed to many wild notions and
visions to which others are not so liable.

For as in the ordinary fate and vicissitude of things, no mortal author knows
to what use his works may, sometime or other be applied, etc.

"The same Lucumo having afterward, by the favor of the people, attained the
crown, with the name of Tarquin the ancient, did, etc.

Answer to Earl Stanhope's memorial prefixed to Vertot's revolutions, page
19th, London 1770.

2
A circumstance ought not to be placed between two capital members of a period;
for this renders it doubtful, to which of the two members, the circumstance
belongs. Witness the following example.

Since this is too much to ask of freemen, nay of slaves, if his expectation be
not answered, shall he form a lasting division upon such transient motives?
Bolingbroke.

Corrected.
Since this is too much to ask of freemen, nay of slaves, shall he, if his
expectations be not answered, ^ form a lasting division upon such transient
motives?

In this example it is doubtful, whether the circumstance in Italics, belong to
the first or last member of the period; in the correction the ambiguity is
removed.

3
A circumstance should be placed near the beginning of a period, rather than at
or near the conclusion. The mind passes with pleasure from small to great
objects; but the transition from great to small is disagreeable. For this
reason, the closing member of a period ought to be the most important.

In this respect the following examples are exceptionable.

"And although they may be and too often are drawn, by the temptations of youth
and the opportunities of a large fortune, into some irregularities, when they
come forward into the world; it is ever with reluctance, and compunction of
mind, because their bias to virtue continues." Intelligencer No. 9.

"And although, when they come forward into the world, they may be and too
often are drawn, by the temptations of youth, and the opportunities of a large
fortune, into some irregularities; it is ever with reluctance and compunction
of mind, because their bias to virtue continues."

In this example, the circumstance in Italics, is placed too late in the
period, and renders the first division of it, flat and unimportant; in the
correction, the circumstance is placed in the beginning of the period, and its
harmony and dignity are not afterward interrupted.

"Let us endeavor to establish to ourselves an interest in him who holds the
reins of the whole creation in his hand." Spect. No. 12.

"For the armies of Alexander contained but thirty thousand men and he overcame
in one battle Darius, who had ten hundred thousand, when he was so heavy with
sleep that his eyes were scarce open, as the stories report." Notes on Daniel,
7.6.

Let us endeavor to establish to ourselves an interest in him, who holds, in
his hand, the reins of the whole creation."

"For the armies of Alexander contained but thirty thousand men, and in one
battle, he overcame Darius, who had ten hundred thousand, when, as the stories
report, he was so heavy with sleep, that his eyes were scarce open."

In both these examples, the circumstances that close the periods, are the lest
important, and render the conclusion flat and languid. In the first example
corrected, the closing word creation being the most important, gives the whole
period an air of dignity and leaves a deep impression upon the mind. In the
other example, the period is mended, but the meaning is still left obscure; for
we are at a loss to know whether Darius or Alexander is said be nearly asleep.
The ambiguity is removed by the following arrangement. "For the armies of
Alexander contained but thirty thousand men and in one battle, as the stories
report, when he was so heavy with sleep that his eyes were scarce open, he
overcame Darius, who had ten hundred thousand." Though it must be confessed
that the words are hardly capable of an elegant or perspicuous arrangement.

"The Emperor was so intent on the establishment of his absolute power in
Hungary, that he exposed the Empire doubly to desol^tion and ruin, for the sake
of it." Bolingbroke.

"The Emperor was so intent on the establishment of his absolute power in
Hungary, that, for the sake of it, he exposed the Empire doubly to desolation
and ruin."

In this example, the closing circumstance, which abounds with particles, is so
feeble and unimportant as to disgust every reader of the lest taste.

4
A number of circumstances ought not to be crowded together, but interspersed
among the capital members of a period.

Example.
"It is likewise urged that there are, by computation, in this kingdom, above
10,000 parsons, whose revenues etc." Swift

Corrected.
"It is likewise urged, that, in this kingdom, there are, by computation, above
10,000 parsons, whose revenues etc."

The two circumstances, by computation and, in this kingdom, placed together,
destroy the clearness and beauty of the period "They beheld, with wonder, at
court, a young lady so intelligent, and who spoke the ancient languages with no
less purity than grace." Essay on char. of women.

"They beheld, with wonder, a young lady at court, who was so intelligent and
spoke the ancient languages with no less purity than grace."



Perhaps the best arrangement would be, "With wonder they beheld etc." "In
England we meet with the three Seymours, sisters, nieces to a king and
daughters to a protector, all celebrated for their learning, and for their
elegant Latin verses, which were translated and repeated all over Europe; --
Jane Gray, whose elevation to the throne was only a step to the scaffold, and
who read before her death, in Greek, Plato's Dialogue on the immortality of the
soul." Ibid.

One would imagine by the situation of the two circumstances, before her death
and in Greek, that her death was in Greek: It ought to be, who, before her
death, read in Greek, etc. The ellipsis also in the beginning of the period,
rather serves to obscure the sense. "The three Seymours who were sisters, etc."
would be more perspicuous. Perhaps the greatest fault in Mr. Russel's style,
is, a too frequent use of the ellipsis.

5
A pronoun ought to stand as near to its antecedent as possible. A wide
separation of words so intimately connected, often renders the sense ambiguous.

"It is the custom of the Mahometans, if they see any printed or written paper
upon the ground, to take it up and lay it aside carefully as not knowing but it
may contain some piece of their alcoran." Spect. No 85.

"It is the custom of the Mahometans, if they see, upon the ground, any printed
or written paper, to take it up and lay it aside carefully etc."

In this example, the construction of the sentence, leads us to imagine that
the pronoun i^ refers to ground; whereas its antecedent is paper: And the
nearer these stand to each other, the more easily does the mind comprehend the
meaning of the author.

"Tom is a lively impudent clown, and has wit enough to have made him a
pleasant companion, had it been polished and rectified by good manners."
Guardian, No. 160.

"Tom is a lively impudent clown and has wit enough, had it been polished and
rectified by good manners, to have made him a pleasant companion."

6
The members of a period ought if possible to be so arranged, that the mind
will easily comprehend the meaning and the connection as fast as the eye
surveys the word. A suspension of thought till the close of a period is painful
and embarrassing to the understanding. Witness the following, Example.
" She again, who should not perceive herself prompted to a prudent and amiable
demeanor, or guarded against the contrary, by those pictures of discretion and
excellence on one hand, and of levity and worthlessness on the other, with
which sentimenta^ and moral writers abound, must be absolutely void of decency
and reflection." Fordyce, Sermon. 3d.

Corrected.
"She again must be absolutely void of decency and reflection, who should not
perceive herself prompted to a prudent and amiable demeanor, or guarded
against the contrary, by those pictures of discretion and excellence on one
hand, and of levity and worthlessness on the other, with which sentimental and
moral writers abound."



In this example, the first word she is intimately connected with the last
member of the period, must be etc. and it is a task too painful for the mind to
retain the first word till it arrives to the close, and at the same time
comprehend the meaning of the intervening circumstances.

The arrangement in the correction renders the period smooth and perspicuous.

An elegant writer of the present day is guilty of the same fault, in the
following example.

"The burning ardours and the tormenting jealousies of the Seraglio and the
Haram, which have reigned so long in Asia and Africa, and which in the southern
parts of Europe have scarcely given way to the differences of religion and
civil establishments, are found, however, with an abatement of heat in the
climate, to be more easily changed, in one latitude, into a temporary passion
which engrosses the mind, without enfeebling it and which excites to romantic
achievements, etc."

Forguson's essay on the history of civil society, part 3, sect. 1. Here the
capital members of the period, viz. the burning ardours and the tormenting
jealousies of the Seraglio and Haram are found to be more easily changed into a
temporary passion etc. are separated at such a great distance and disjoined by
such a number of intervening circumstances, as to perplex the read and fatigue
his mind by closely attending to the connection of ideas.

It may also be remarked in general, that sentences ought not to close with
adverbs, relatives, or particles. Little unimportant words; as, to, for, with,
it, etc. close a period without force and leave a feeble impression upon the
mind. Important words, such as nouns, verbs, participles and adjectives, make
the best figure in the conclusion of periods -- they add dignity to style and
energy to sentiment.

REDUNDANCY of WORDS.
It has been remarked, in the first part of this Institute, that the present
English language is derived principally from two sources, the Saxon and the
Roman; the Saxon words forming the language of the common people; and the
Roman, the learned and sublime style. For this reason, we may ob^erve that, to
express the same idea, we have at lest two words, the one of Saxon, and the
other of Roman original. That this is the case with respect to the common ideas
of mankind, will appear from the following comparison.

Saxon. Roman. truth veracity talk conversation house dome or palace greatness
magnitude raise elevate tool instrument praise commendation want poverty keep
preserve laugh at deride show exhibit gift gratuity bloody sanguinary
thankfulness gratitude end termination life animation enough sufficient asleep
dormant bargain contract trust confidence friendship amity being existence
inward internal freedom exemption rest tranquillity harmless innocent light
luminous worship adoration
The words, veracitas, conversatio etc. in the Latin language, conveyed the
same ideas as truth, talk etc. in the Saxon and in the modern English. Where
the Latin has not furnished us with a convenient word, we have borrowed from
the Greek and French, and sometimes from the modern German. This in one respect
is a real advantage to the language; as it affords a variety of words to
express our ideas, and prevents the necessity of repeating the same words, as
was the case with some of the ancient oriental languages. At the same time, it
leads ignorant and half-learned people into the frequent and disagreeable use
of synonymous terms. Thus we often hear it said that "he is a man of truth and
veracity," which is saying no more than that he is a man of truth and truth. In
the solemn act of prayer, we often hear the Deity entreated to keep and
preserve us; which, by any explication, will amount to no more than an
intercession to keep and keep us.

The Hebrew language, at the time the scripures were written, consisted of few
words It is said to consist of about two thousand words. The English contains
twenty thousand; besides the singular advantage of composition, which by
prefixing to words certain particles and annexing terminations of determinate
and known significations, renders the language capable of an endless variety.
, and in order to express ideas with uncommon energy, the writers were obliged
to use repetitions. But the, copiousness of our language supersedes the
necessity and consequently the propriety of using two or three synonymous terms
to express any idea, however forcible: And in expressing the common unimportant
ideas of mankind, every word that does not add somethig to the meaning of a
phrase, must be considered as superfluous and detracting from the beauty of
style. To set this impropriety in a striking point of light, I will insert a
passage from the Spectator, No. 302, and add a great number of synonymous terms
to the original.

"Who ever beheld and saw the charming Emilia without feeling in his breast at
once the glow and ardour of love, and the tenderness of virtuous friendship.
The unstudied and natural graces of her behavior and the pleasing and
agreeable accents of her tongue, insensibly and imperceptibly draw you on to
wish for a nearer enjoyment of them; but even her smiles carry in them a silent
reproof to the impulses of licentious and lawless love. Thus, though the
attractives of her beauty play almost irresistibly upon you and create and give
birth to desire, you immediately stand corrected, not by the severity and
rigor, but by the decency of her virtue. That sweetness and good humor, which
is so visible and apparent in her face and countenance, naturally diffuses and
spreads itself into every word and action. A man must be a savage who, at the
sight and view of Emilia, is not more inclined and disposed to do her good than
to gratify himself. Her person, as it is thus studiously embellished and
ornamented by nature, thus adorned with unpremeditated and unstudied graces, is
a fit and proper lodging and habitation for a mind so fair and lovely, handsome
and amiable; there dwell and reside rational piety, modest hope, and cheerful
resignation. Were I to relate that part of Emilia's life which has given and
granted her an opportunity and occasion of exerting the heroism and fortitude
of christianity, it would make and form too sad and sorrowful, too tender and
affecting a story: But when I consider her done in the midst of her distresses
and sufferings, looking beyond this gloomy and dark vale of affliction and
sorrow into the joys of Heaven and immortality, and when I see and view her in
conversation and discourse thoughtless and easy, as if she were the most happy
creature in the world, I am transported and carried away with admiration and
wonder,"

In this beautiful description of female excellence, the words in Italics are
superfluous: Let them be omitted and we have the passage in the original style,
which is pure and elegant.

But it must be remarked that custom has affixed very different meanings to the
same words and very often different from the original sense. Thus freedom is
much more general in its signification, than exemption. To say a man is free
from trouble and exempt from trouble, is saying the same thing: But the phrase
political exemption is not admissible; though political freedom is as common
and proper as any phrase in the language. When therefore I say that two words
of the same import ought not to be used at the same time, I would be understood
to mean, that they ought not to be used to convey exactly the same idea.

For examples of the needless use of synonymous terms, see Spectator No. 352.

In discourse and familiar writings, I would generally prefer the Saxon to the
Roman words. Many of the Saxon words and phrases have a particular force or
beauty that is lost in Roman words of correspondent import. But many Saxon
words which were used in the time of Spencer and Chaucer are now become
obsolete; others are grown vulgar; and the prevailing taste of the English
seems to be, to neglect their native tongue in complaisance ^o the ancient
Roman and modern French and Italian.

DERIVATION and COMPOSITION of WORDS.
This is what Dr. Ash calls the grand laboratory of the English language; for
by the help of certain prefixes and terminations, we form new words to express
any idea we please. The modes of derivation and composition of most general use
are the following.

Saxon Modes.
From a substantive or noun we form an adjective by the terminations, Noun.
Adj. full which signifies abundance as, joy, joyful. some the same as, game,
gamesome. less which denotes a want as, hope, hopeless. of the quality ly which
denotes likeness to, as, man, manly. y which denotes fullness etc. as, dirt,
dirty. ish denoting likeness to as, child, childish. like the same as, lion,
lionlike. wise denoting skill as, weather, weatherwise.

From one noun we form another by the termination, Noun. Noun. head denoting
state or condition as, God, Godhead. h^^d the same as, man, manhood. ship
denoting office or jurisdiction as, clerk, clerkship, rick the same as, bishop,
bishopric, wick the same as, bailiff, bailiwick. dom jurisdiction as, king,
kingdom.

From an adjective we form a noun by the termination, Adj. Noun ness denoting
state or condition as, good, goodness.

Another adjective, by the terminations, Adj. Adj. some denoting the quality in
great degree as, glad, gladsome. ish denoting a diminution of the quality as,
white, whitish.

From adjectives we form adverbs in ly, w^^^h signify the manner of a quality
or action* as prudent, prudently; that is, in a prudent manner.

From a verb we form a noun by the termination er, as help, helper.

The particle un, is prefixed to verbs, adjectives, and participles, and
implies negation; as, dress, undress, holy, unholy.

Re, signifies repetition, and is prefixed to, nouns, verbs and participles;
as, union reunion, animate, re-animate, elect re-elect.

The words well, ill, half, are prefixed to participles; as, accepted,
well-accepted, advised, ill-advised, eaten, half-eaten.

All, is prefixed to adjectives and participles; as, wise, all-wise, seeing,
all-seeing.

Happify, is a compound of British and Latin originals.

Latin Modes.
From nouns we form adjectives by the terminations, Nouns. Adj. ous which
denotes the quality of the noun as, joy, joyous all the same as, scripture,
scriptural. ive the same as, sport, sportive. able denoting power or capacity
as, sale, saleable.

From nouns we form other nouns by the termination, Noun. Noun. is it as, art,
artist. ian as, logic, logician.

From an adjective we form another adjective by the termination al, as, heroic,
heroical; but these signify the same thing; and the termination is commonly
omitted.

From an adjective we form a noun, in ity, as, pliable, p^^^^ility.

From the verb we form adjectives by the termination, Verb. Adj. able which
denotes power or capacity as, attain, attainable. ive as, effect, effective.
ant as, comply, compliant ent as, differ, different.

From the verb we form nouns in, Verb. Nouns. ation as, frustrate, frustration.
etion as, complete, completion ition as, add, addition. ance as, attend,
attendance ence as, exist, existence.

Prefixes.
Ante, prefixed to verbs, participles and nouns, signifies before, as dated,
ante-dated, chamber, ante-chamber.

Co, signifies with, as exist, co-exist, partner, co-partner.

Non, signifiing not, is prefixed to nouns, as conformist, nonconformist.

In, im, ir, implying negation, are prefixed to nouns, adjectives and adverbs,
as congruity, incongruity, possible, impossible, regular, irregular.

Pre signifying priority or eminence, i^ prefixed to verbs, nouns and
adjectives, as suppose, pre-suppose, existence, pre-existence, eminent,
pre-eminent.

Counter, signifying opposition, is prefixed to nouns, verbs and participles,
as project, counter-project, act, counter-act, poised, counter-poised.

Super, signifying above, is prefixed to adjectives and verbs, as abundant,
super-abundant, abound, super-abound.

Inter, signifying between, is prefixed to verb^, nouns and participles, as
mix, intermix, (...), intermission, woven, interwoven.

Greek Modes.
From the noun we form a verb in ize, as author, authorize, and another noun is
ism, as Calvin, Calvinism.

From the verb, is formed a noun in sm, as baptize, baptism.

Anti, signifying opposition, is prefixed to nouns and adjectives, as
ministerial, anti-ministerial.

French Modes.
From a noun is formed another noun, in age, as pound, poundage, person,
personage.

From a verb is formed a noun, in meant, as resent, resentment.

Mis, emplying error, is prefixed to nouns, verbs and participles, as demeanor,
misdemeanor, apply, misapply, informed, misinformed.

Dis, implying contrariety, is prefixed to nouns, verbs and participles, as
repute, disrepute, claim disclaim, possessed, dispossessed.

We have one species of composition, which is very common, especially among
poets, which must not be omitted: This is when two whole words are united to
express some complex idea with conciseness and energy. Of this kind are the
following: "Cloud-compelling Jove," " cloud-topt hill," Pope. "Root-obstructed
channel," Hervey. " Heartfelt pangs," " Sun-descended race." These are
adjectives in sense, but formed of a noun and a participle and convey the whole
meaning of a phrase in a single word.

Many of these compound adjectives, in the sublime style, acquire a beauty and
force that would be entirely lost in a circumlocution. But care should be taken
not to indulge this license of composition to such a degree, as to unite words
that appear harsh and unnatural. Such are the " devotion-confounding pests"
^heridan, and the " sin and sorrow-sunk" of Dodd.

PROSODY or An attempt to investigate the rules of English Verse; with some
preliminary observations on Accent and Emphasis.
The precise definition of the terms accent and emphasis, in our language,
seems never to have been settled. This has given rise to various disputes among
Grammarians.

Accent has been generally used to signify the peculiar stress of the voice on
a particular syllable, in words of more syllables than one: Emphasis, to denote
the peculiar stress of the voice, on a particular word in a sentence. According
to these definitions, no monosyllable can have any accent; and emphasis is
limited to one kind.

Mr. Sheridan, who has taken more pains to regulate the pronunciation of the
English language, than any other writer, defines accent to be the stress of
voice on a particular letter of a syllable, which distinguishes it from the
rest; and confines emphasis to those particular words in a sentence, which
demand, not only a greater stress, but a change of tone in the voice.

This definition of accent appears to be more accurate and useful, than the
former, especially as it enables us to make, in all words, the necessary
distinction between accented vowels and accented consonants.

But this is not perfectly accurate; for by this rule, no word consisting of
more letters than one, can be unaccented; and he calls the particles of, at,
in, to, etc. unaccented by mistake; while the pronoun I, which often requires
great stress of voice, without change of note, can have no accent, because it
has but one letter.

Perhaps the following definitions may ^^^rly explain the distinctions.

In every word in the English language, there is some particular letter on
which the stress of the voice falls in pronouncing it. This stress of the
voice, regulated merely by the rule of pronunciation, I would call accent.
Emphasis is a stress of voice, regulated only by the sense and importance of
the word; but it always falls on the accented letter.

Emphasis is of two kinds; the first I call the natural emphasis, as it is
constant and invariable, and depends on the importance of the word with respect
to the idea it conveys, without regarding its relation to other words in the
sentence.

Thus the words man, house, strength, are in their nature important and
consequently emphatical in any sentence where they can be placed. They will
naturally be pronounced with more force than the particles, at, of, in, etc.
which instead of being unaccented, as Mr. Sheridan calls them, are more
properly unemphatical. All nouns and principal verbs have this emphasis in the
highest degree -- all adjective^ participles and adverbs, in a less degree --
pronouns though they supply the place of nouns, are generally deprived of
emphasis in pronunciation. Conjunctions, interjections, prepositions,
auxiliaries and articles, are in their nature unemphatical. This kind of
emphasis requires no change of tone, but only that natural force of voice with
which we pronounce important words.

The other kind of emphasis, which is the most forcible, depends merely on the
importance of the word on which it falls, in the particular sentence where it
is used. It often determines the sense of the phrase, and usually requires a
change of tone as well as stress of voice on the accented letter. This
emphasis, which may be called accidental, being regulated entirely by the
sense, may fall on any word in the language and cause particles to be
pronounced with the highest stress of voice.

Scarcely any subject has been less attended to than English Prosody.
Grammarians have gone no farther than to divide the kinds of verse into the
iambic, (...) and anapaestic, and to distinguish them (...) number of syllables
in each line. The rule laid down generally for the heroic measure, is, that it
consists of five feet and that to make a perfectly regular verse, these ought
to be all iambic, with this exception only that the first foot may sometimes be
a trochee. All variations from the iambic in the subsequent feet, are
considered as defects in the structure of the verse.

These rules have taught all common readers of poetry to affect the placing of
the accent or emphasis on every second syllable, which makes our versification
thus pronounced, the most monotonous and ridiculous of all poetry in the world.
But the truth is, our heroic iambic verse admits of a greater variety of feet,
than the heroic measure of any language with which I am acquainted. The Latin
and Greek, as it is well known, admit but two, the dactyl and spondee, except
only that the last foot may be a trochee; which however in that place can
hardly be perceived by the ear.

In order to explain the nature of English verse, it is necessary to give some
rules concerning long and short syllables in our language, which has not yet
been attempted on its true principles -- the Latin prosody having nothing to do
with the English language.

1st. Every accented syllable is long. This has never been doubted, where the
accent falls on a vowel; as, glo-ry, ho-ly. Where the accent falls on a
consonant, as in hab-it, bat-tle, the preceding vowel is undoubtedly short; but
the syllable is nevertheless long. Thus in the syllable prac, the vowel is as
short as possible, the syllable being closed by a pure mute consonant; but when
we join to it another syllable, if it begin with a consonant; as, prac-tice,
the time required to place the organs of speech in a position to pronounce the
consonants, renders the syllable as long as if the accent lay on the vowel. And
if the following syllable begin with a vowel, we cannot avoid joining to it the
last consonant, which is the same as doubling the consonant; for the words
hab-it and hab-bit are pronounced precisely alike and in the same space of
time. And I appeal to the most accurate ear, whether there be any difference in
the ordinary pronunciation of these words glo-ry, ho-ly, hab-it, prac-tice.

This difference however must be observed, that all accented syllables are not
equally long, for all are not equally accented. In many polysyllables, besides
the principal accent, there is a weaker accent on another syllable, which may
with propriety be called the half accent. Thus in the word ex-pos-tu-la-to-ry,
the full accent is on the second syllable and the half accent on the fifth;
this syllable is longer and more distinctly articulated than the unaccented
syllables, though it is not so long as the second, on which lies the principal
accent.

The half accent, especially when it follows the full accent, renders such
words ungraceful in poetry, except in one single place in the verse; for the
half accent may fall gracefully upon the last syllable but two, as in these
lines of an anonymous writer: "A new disgrace inevitably sheds."
"Gives the keen curse accumulated gall."


When the half accent precedes the full accent, it is stronger -- indeed in
many words there are two accents almost equal; as, exaltation, explanation,
commutation; and such words, if they exceed not four syllables, are graceful in
poetry

2d. Every emphatical syllable is long. This rule applies to all monosyllable
nouns and all other monosyllables used emphatically. In these lines of Pope's,
"Respecting man, whatever wrong we call
May, must be right, as relative to all."
The monosyllables wrong, right, may, must, the two former of which being
adjectives, are naturally emphatical; and the two last which are auxiliaries,
and accidentally so -- are all important -- and in pronunciation are equally
long.

3d. All unaccented syllables are, in our language, naturally short. The voice
is to dwell on there no longer than is necessary to pronounce distinctly the
combination of letters of which they are composed. And although some of them,
having more consonants, require more time in pronouncing than others, yet this
makes no difference in their use or effect in poetry.

4th. All unemphatical monosyllables are naturally short; as, prepositions,
conjunctions, adverbs and articles.

From the foregoing rules, it appears that the movement of our verse is
regulated by accent and emphasis That the movement of our verse depends not on
the length of the vowels, is evident from this; that our longest vowels and
diphthongs are often thrown into the shortest place in the line and that
without injuring the versification. "Above, how high, progressive lif: may go!"

Pope. May is long, but arbitrarily shortened; may go, not forming a spondee.
Whether the accented syllables and emphatical monosyllables are all really
long, in the same sense as syllables are denominated long in the Greek and
Roman languages, is a dispute of little consequence. All accented syllables and
all monosyllables either naturally or accidentally emphatical, are important --
on these depend the dignity and harmony of verse -- and by these, the prosody
of our language, with all its variety, may be reduced to rules as simple and at
the same time as accurate, as those of any other language According to the
rules of English prosodians, the monosyllables, strength, health, thrust,
thick, are short syllables; for the vowels are as short as possible. But the
fact is, they are some of the longest syllables in the language; and the word
language, in which there is no long vowel, requires as much time to be
pronounced distinctly, as many words of three syllables. In learning our
language, it is of the highest importance to know the long vowels from the
short; but in investigating the rules of verse, we are to attend less to the
length of the vowels than to that of the syllables, which depends much upon the
combination of consonants and the force of utterance.


In illustrating the rules of metrical composition, for want of proper types, I
shall use figures to represent the length of the syllables -- the long (...)
important syllables, by the figure 1; the short or unimportant, by the figure
2. The syllables, which exemplify the rules, are printed in Italics.

The feet we admit into the heroic measure, are nine; the iambus, the trochee,
the spondee, the pyrrhichius, the dactyl, the anapaest, the tribrachus, the
amphibrachus and the antibacchus.

The iambus, is a foot of two syllables, the first short and the second long;
as, be2-hold.1 The trochee, two syllables, the first long and the second short;
as, glo1-ry.2 The spondee, two syllables, both long; as, earth1-quake.1 The
pyrrhichius, two syllables, both short; as, of2 a.2 The dactyl, three
syllables, the first long and the two last short; as, fu1-ri2-ous.2 The
anapaest, three syllables, the two first short and the last long; as, to2 be2
sure1 The tribrachus, three syllables, all short; as, impet-u2-ous2 to2 the
plain. The amphibrachus, three syllables, the first and third short, the second
long; as, re2-quire1 it.2 The antibacchus, three syllables, the two first long
and the last short; as, go,1 take1 it.2
The iambus, which is the ground of this measure, may be used in every foot and
is most frequent in all.

"Let2 these1 -- the2 brave1 -- triumph2 1 -- ant2 vic1 -- tor2 grace,1

And2 war1 -- ring2 na1 -- tions2 part1 -- in2 leagues1 -- of2 peace."1

POPE. These lines are purely iambic. Each consists of five feet, the first
syllable of which is short, and the last, long. That is, every second syllable
is accented or emphatical and pronounced with a stress of the voice: The others
are unaccented or unimportant and pronounced with less force.

The trochee may always be used gracefully in the first foot; as, " Glowed1 in2
-- the2 front1 -- of2 heaven1 -- and2 gave1 -- the2 day."1

POPE. Here the first foot is a trochee and the rest are iambic.

The trochee is most graceful when followed by a spondee; as, "Load1 the2 --
tall1 bark1 -- and2 launch1 -- in2 to2 -- the2 main."1

POPE.

In the second foot, it is rarely admissible. Dryden has used it, but the verse
is ungraceful; "Each1 Greek1 -- was1 ^^^2 -- Ulys2 1 -- ses,2 such1 -- a2
dread."1

In the third and fourth feet, it is harsh, but may have a beauty when it suits
the sound to the sense; as, "Eve1 right1 -- ly2 called1 -- mother1 2 -- of2
all1 -- mankind."2 1

MILTON. "And2 stag1 -- ger'd2 by2 -- the2 stroke1 -- drops1 the2 -- large1
ox."1

PIT.

If the trochee in the first foot, be followed by a short syllable, in the same
word, it almost destroys all melody; as, " Happi1 2 -- ly2 thus1 -- they1 pass1
-- the2 pleas1 -- ing2 hour."1

In the last foot it is always inadmissible.

The spondee may be used gracefully in every foot.

In the first; as, " Good1 life1 -- be2 now2 -- my2 task1 -- my2 doubts1 --
are2 done."1

DRYDEN.

In the second; as, "As2 some1 -- lone1 moun1 -- tain's2 mon1 -- strous2
growth1 -- he2 stood."1

POPE.

In the third; as, "The2 moun1 -- tain2 goats1 -- came1 bound1 -- ing2 over2 --
the2 lawn."1

POPE.

In the fourth; as, "All1 looked1 -- for2 arms1 -- in2 vain1, -- no1 arms1 --
were2 nigh."1

POPE.

In the fifth; as, "Singed1 are2 -- his2 brows1 -- the2 scorch1 -- ing2 lids1
-- grow1 Mack."1

POPE.

On this foot it may be observed, that in our language the two syllables can
never be equally long, because the accent or emphasis on one will always be
stronger than the other; as in earthquake, the strongest accent is on the
first syllable: So a monosyllable adjective has less emphasis than a noun. A
noun and a verb are nearly equal in emphasis naturally, yet the sense will ever
determine one to be more emphatical than the other, These ought to be so
managed that the most strongly accented syllable or the most emphatical should
be the last of the foot; unless it stand in the first place, where the contrary
is equally graceful; as, " Death,1 great1 -- propri2 1 -- etor2 2 -- of2 all1
-- it is2 thine,1 etc."

YOUNG.

Or sometimes in the second place, where it is allowable and may be graceful in
the solemn and elegiac style; as, "The2 broad1 -- moon1 swim1 -- ming2 through2
-- the2 bro1 -- ken2 clouds."1

Or in blank verse, to begin the next sentence after a full pause in the middle
of the line.

The pyrrhichius in the first foot is admissible but weak; as, " Nor2 in2 --
the2 help1 -- less2 or1 -- phan2 dread1 -- a2 foe."1

POPE.

But may be aided by a succeeding spondee; as, "To2 the2 -- great1 sire1 --
whom1 heaven1 -- and2 earth1 -- adore.2 1

In the second it is hardly admissible; yet Pit has used it in the example
cited above, "And2 stag1 -- ger'd2 by2 -- the2 stroke1 -- drops1 the2 -- large1
ox."1

In the third, it is admissible but weak; as, "A2 ser1 -- vant2 ad1 -- ded2 to2
-- his2 ab1 -- sent2 Lord."1

POPE.

In the fourth, it is usually graceful; as, "And2 thus1 -- concludes2 1 -- the2
glo1 -- ries2 of2 -- the2 day."1

The dactyl is admissible when it consists of word capable of an elision; as,
different, etc. in which the second syllable is too weak to make a full
syllable in the verse. These have been usually printed with an apostrophe,
thus, different; but are not pronounced so; for we give every syllable its full
sound, which makes it a proper dactyl.

It is also necessarily admitted in many words, when two vowels meet, each of
which forms a syllable, though unaccented, and which are incapable of ^lision;
as, glorious, furious, infuriate.

In the first foot, the dactyl is graceful, as, Furious1 2 2 -- he2 spoke1, etc.

In the second, it is scarcely admissible; it being a general rule that the
last syllable of the second foot should be accented or emphatical.

In the third it is sometimes admissible, but ungrateful; as, "Thus2 spoke1 --
the2 king,1 -- furious1 2 2 -- the2 chief1 -- replied."2 1

In the fourth, it is hardly admissible, and in the fifth never.

The anapaest is composed of the same kind of words as the dactyl.

It can have no place in the first foot; but in the others, it is graceful. In
the third; as, "Fiery1 2 2 -- The2 fi1 -- ery2 2 Duke1 -- tell1 the2 -- hot1
Duke."1

SHAKESPEARE.

In the third and fifth; as, "And2 hosts1 -- infu2 1 -- riate2 2 shake1 -- the2
should1 -- dering2 2 plain."1

In the second and fourth; as, "On2 ev1 -- ery2 2 side1 -- with2 shad1 -- owy2
2 squad1 -- rons2 deep."1

MILTON.

The tribrachus is composed of like words as the dactyl and anapaest. It may be
used in the third and fourth places.

In the third; as, "And2 rolls1 -- impet2 1 -- uous2 2 to2 -- the2 sub1 --
ject2 plain."1

In the fourth; as, "And2 thun1 -- ders2 down1 -- impet2 1 -- uous2 2 to2 --
the2 plain."1

POPE.

The amphibrachus is used only in the last foot, when we take the license to
add a short syllable; as, The2 piece1 -- you2 think1 -- is2 in1 -- correct2 1
-- why2 take1 it.2

I Am1 all1 -- submis2 1 -- sion2; what1 -- you would1 have1 -- it,2 make1 it.2

This may also be an antibacchus; as, go,1 take1 it.2

POPE.

But this is improper in the solemn style.

It may be also remarked that in dissyllables and polysyllables, the accented
syllable can never be the first syllable of a foot in any place but the first,
in which a dissyllable will make a graceful trochee. But an emphatical
monosyllable may stand in any place in the line.

In English poetry, there are as many full accents or equivalent emphases, as
there are nouns, adjectives, verbs or participles in a line; besides many other
words which are accidentally emphatical. This is a source of great variety in
our versification.

A regular, though weak line, may be composed with but three emphatical or
accented syllables; as, Or2 to2 -- a2 sad1 -- vari2 1 -- ety2 2 -- of2 woe.1

And with four, very frequently; as, 'He2 mounts1 -- the2 storm1 -- and2 walks1
-- upon2 2 -- the2 wind.'1

POPE.

This example has seven: "Men,1 bearded,1 2 bald,1 cowl'd,1 uncowl'd,2 1 shod,1
unshod."2 1

POPE.

Hence lines, abounding with monosyllables that are emphatical, are the most
forcible and solemn; but are often two much encumbered.

To end a line with a trissyllable, the last syllable of which has the half
accent or none at all, though sometimes practiced by our best Poets, is
subversive of all harmony and contrary to the genius of our poetry.

"The eternal art, educing good from ill,
Grafts on this passion, our best principle."
POPE. "The first of men in sovereign misery."
POPE. In these cases, y is made to rhyme sometimes with long I and sometimes
with long e, neither of which is the proper sound of the vowel y, in unaccented
syllables.

"Blessed are the saints who sit on high
Around thy throne of majesty."
WATTS. "Till a wise care of piety
Fit us to die and dwell with thee."
WATTS. It is a pity that such improprieties should be mingled with the best
productions in the language.

It is to be remarked that the rules given above apply particularly to rhyme;
for in blank verse, a much greater license may be indulged without injuring the
verification.

It would exceed the limits of my design to enter into a particular explanation
of the other kinds of English verse; and it is rather unnecessary, as they
depend much upon the same principles as the iambic measure.

The trochaic measure, consisting of three, five or seven syllables, the lines
beginning with an accented syllable, is but an elliptical form of the iambic;
for by prefixing a short syllable to each line, the verse becomes purely
iambic; as, A "Little Siren of the Stage,
The "Charmer of an idle age,
An "Empty warbler, breathing lyre
The "Wanton gale of fond desire.


In the anapaestic measure, every third syllable is accented, and the multitude
of short syllables gives the verse an air of li^eliness, well suited to
cheerful subjects; as, "Not2 a2 pine1 in2 my2 grove1 is2 there2 seen1

But2 with2 tendrils1 2 of2 woodbine1 2 is2 bound."1

SHENSTONE.

Sometimes a syllable is omitted in the first foot; as, "Old2 Plato1 2 that2
learned1 2 divine."2 1

An alexandrine is a heroic verse of twelve syllables and is of the iambic
measure; as, "Who guides the vengeance of mechanic power, To2 blast1 -- the2
wa1 -- tery2 2 world1 -- and2 guard1 -- the2 peaceful1 2 shore."1

Prospect of Peace.

With respect to the pauses of our verse, which constitute an essential
article, I shall only observe that they are of two kinds; the cesural pause,
and the final.

The cesural pause happens in almost every line of heroic verse and after
almost every syllable: But it is most graceful after the 4th, 5th, 6th or 7th
syllables.

After the fourth; as, "Know then thyself; presume not God to scan."

POPE.

After the 5th, 6th and 7th in the following lines; "Men would be angels,
angels would be Gods.
Aspiring to be Gods, if angels fell;
Aspiring to be angels, men rebel."
POPE.

And it very frequently happens that either the sense or harmony or both
require two or more semi-pauses; as, "To him no high, no low, no great, no
small;
He fills, he bounds, connects, and equals all."
POPE.

The final pause must be observed at the end of every line, whether there be a
stop in the sense or not. Thus in reading these lines "And who but wishes to
invert the laws
Of order, sins against the eternal cause."
The voice must be suspended at the close of the first line, but not elevated
or depressed. And it may be observed that in the second line, there is a pause
after the third syllable.

The nature of the cesural pause is well considere^ in Kaim's Elements of
Criticism; and the final pause, in Sheridan's Rhetorical Grammar.

To read verse with propriety, let the following rules be observed.

1. All the words should be pronounced just as they are in prose.

2. The voice should bound from accent to accent, and no stress should be laid
on unaccented syllables.

3. The emphasis should be observed as in prose.

The pauses, which are marked by the sense, and may be called sentential,
should be observed as in prose. But the cesural and final pauses, which are
designed merely to add harmony to verse, and depend on the structure of it,
require only a suspension of the voice without elevation or depression. Where
these points are observed in reciting verse, if it then be ungraceful, it is
the author's fault, not the reader's.

PUNCTUATION. Abridged from Dr. Lowth.
Punctuation is the art of marking in writing the several pauses or rests
between sentences and the parts of sentences.

As the several articulate sounds, the syllables and words, of which sentences
consist, are marked by letters; so the pauses, between sentences and their
parts, are marked by points.

The different degrees of connection between the parts of sentences, require a
great variety of pauses o^ different lengths; yet, to express this variety, we
use only four points. For this reason the doctrine of punctuation must
necessarily be imperfect and not reducible to precise rules.

But a few general remarks on this subject may be useful in directing the
judgment of the learner.

The points used to make the pauses between sentences and their several parts,
are the period, colon, semicolon, and comma. The proportional quantity of time
between these may be, as, six, four, two and one.

The period is the whole sentence complete in itself, wanting nothing to make a
full and perfect sense, and not connected in construction with a subsequent
sentence.

The colon or member, is a chief constructive part, or greater division of a
sentence.

The semicolon or half member, is a less constructive part or subdivision of a
sentence or member.

A sentence or member is again subdivided into commas or segments; which are
the least constructive sense of a sentence or member, in this way of
considering it; for the next subdivision would be the resolution of it into
phrases and words.

In order the more clearly to determine the proper application of the point
which marks it, we must distinguish between an imperfect phrase, a simple
sentence, and a compound sentence.

An imperfect phrase contains no assertion, or does not amount to a proposition
or sentence.

A simple sentence has but one subject, and one finite verb.

A compounded sentence has more than one subject, or one finite verb, either
expressed or understood; or it consists of two or more simple sentences
connected together.

In a sentence, the subject and the verb may be each of them accompanied with
several adjuncts; as the object, the end, the circumstance of time, place, and
manner, and the like: and this, either immediately, or mediately; that is, by
being connected with something which is connected with some other; and so on.

If the several adjuncts affect the subject or the verb in a different manner,
they are only so many imperfect phrases; and the sentence is simple.

A simple sentence admits of no point by which it may be divided, or
distinguished into parts.

If the several adjuncts affect the verb in the same manner, they may be
resolved into so many simple sentences; the sentence then becomes compounded,
and it must be divided into its parts by points.

For, if there are several subjects belonging in the same manner to one verb,
or several verbs belonging in the same manner to one subject, the subjects and
verbs, are still to be accounted equal in number: for every verb must have its
subject, and every subject its verb; and every one of the subjects or verbs;
should or may have its point of distinction.

EXAMPLES.

"The passion for praise produces excellent effects in women of sense."
Addison, Spect. No. 73. In this sentence passion is the subject, and produces
the verb: Each of which is accompanied and connected with its adjuncts. The
subject is not passion in general, but a particular passion determined by its
adjunct of specification, as we may call it, the passion for praise. So
likewise the verb is immediately connected with its object, excellent effects*
and mediately, that is, by the intervention of the word effects, with women,
the subject in which these effects are produced; which again is connected with
its adjunct of specification; for it is not meant of women in general, but of
women of sense only. Lastly, it is to be observed, that the verb is connected
with each of these several adjuncts in a different manner; namely, with
effects, as the object; with women, as the subject of them; with sense, as the
quality or characteristic of those women. The adjuncts therefore are only so
many imperfect phrases; the sentence is a simple sentence, and admits of no
point, by which it may be distinguished into parts.

"The passion for praise, which is so very vehement in the fair sex, produces
excellent effects in women of sense." Here a new verb is introduced,
accompanied with adjuncts of its own; and the subject is repeated by the
relative pronoun which. It now becomes a compounded sentence, made up of two
simple sentences, one of which is inserted in the middle of the other; it must
therefore be distinguished into its component parts by a point placed on each
side of the additional sentence.

"How many instances have we [in the fair sex] of chastity, fidelity, devotion?
How many ladies distinguish themselves by the education of their children, care
of their family, and love of their husbands; which are the great qualities and
achievements of woman kind; as the making of war, the carrying on of traffic,
the administration of justice, are those by which men grow famous, and get
themselves a name."

Ibid. In the first of these two sentences, the adjuncts chastity, fidelity,
devotion, are connected with the verb by the word instances in the same manner,
and in effect make so many distinct sentences: "How many instances have we of
chastity? How many instances have we of fidelity? How many instances have we of
devotion?" They must therefore be separated from one another by a point. The
same may be said of the adjuncts, "education of their children, etc" in the
former part of the next sentence: as likewise of the several subjects, "the
making of war, etc." in the latter part, which have in effect each their verb;
for each of these "is an achievement by which men grow famous."

As sentences themselves are divided into simple and compounded, so the members
of sentences may be divided into simple and compounded members: for whose
sentences, whether compounded or uncompounded, may become members of other
sentences, by means of some additional connection.

Simple members of sentences closely connected together in one compounded
member, or sentence, are distinguished or separated by a comma: as in the
foregoing examples.

So likewise, the case absolute; nouns in apposition, when consisting of many
terms; the participle with something depending on it; are to be distinguished
by the comma: for they may be resolved into simple members.

When an address is made to a person; the noun, answering to the vocative case
in Latin, is distinguished by a comma.

EXAMPLES.

"This sa^^ he formed thee, Adam; thee, O man, Dust of the ground."
"Now morn, her rosy steps in the eastern clime,
Advancing, sowed the earth with orient pearl."
Milton. Two nouns, or two adjectives, connected by a single copulative or
disjunctive, are not separated by a point; but when there are more than two, or
where the conjunction is understood, they must be distinguished by a comma.

Simple members connected by relatives, and comparatives, are for the most part
distinguished by a comma, but when the members are short, in comparative
sentences; and when two members are closely connected by a relative restraining
the general notion of the antecedent to a particular sense; the pause becomes
almost insensible, and the comma is better omitted.

EXAMPLES.

"Raptures, transports, and ecstasies, are the rewards which they confer: sighs
and tears, prayers and broken hearts, are the offerings which are paid to them."

Addison, Ibid. "Gods partial, changeful, passionate, unjust; Whose attributes
were rage, revenge, or lust."

Pope. "What is sweeter than honey? and what is stronger than a lion?"

A circumstance of importance, though no more than an imperfect phrase, may be
set off with a comma on each side, to give it greater force and distinction.

EXAMPLE.

"The principle may be defective or faulty; but the consequences it produces
are so good, that, for the benefit of mankind, it ought not to be extinguished."

Addison, Ibid. A member of a sentence, whether simple or compounded, that
requires a greater pause than a comma, yet does not of itself make a complete
sentence, but is followed by something closely depending on it, may be
distinguished by a semicolon.

EXAMPLE.

"But as this passion for admiration, when it works according to reason,
improves the beautiful part of our species in every thing that is laudable; so
nothing is more destructive to them, when it is governed by vanity and folly."

Addison, Ibid. Here the whole sentence is divided into two parts by the
semicolon; each of which parts is a compounded member, divided into its simple
members by the comma.

A member of a sentence, whether simple or compounded, which of itself would
make a complete sentence, and so requires a greater pause than a semicolon, yet
is followed by an additional part, making a more full and perfect sense, may be
distinguished by a colon.

EXAMPLE.

"Were all books reduced to their quintessence, many a bulky author would make
his appearance in a penny paper: there would be scarce any such thing in nature
as a folio: the works of an age would be contained on a few shelves: not to
mention millions of volumes, that would be utterly annihilated."

Addison, Spect. No. 124. Here the whole sentence is divided into four parts by
colons: the first and last of which are compounded members, each divided by a
comma; the second and third are simple members.

When a semicolon has preceded, and a greater pause is still necessary; a colon
may be employed, though the sentence be incomplete.

The colon is also commonly used, when an example, or a speech is introduced.

When a sentence is so far perfectly finished, as not to be connected in
construction with the following sentence, it is marked with a period.

In all cases, the proportion of the several points in respect to one another,
is rather to be regarded, than their supposed precise quantity, or proper
office, when taken separately.

Beside the points, which mark the pauses in discourse, there are others which
denote a different modulation of the voice in corresponding with the sense.
These are The interrogation point, thus marked? The exclamation point,! The
parenthesis, ()

The interrogation and exclamation points are sufficiently explained by their
names: they are indeterminate as to their quantity or time, and may be
equivalent in that respect to a semicolon, a colon, or a period, as the sense
requires. They mark an elevation of the voice.

The par^nt^esis incloses in the body of a sentence a member me^t^d into it,
which is neither necessary to the ^en^ nor at all affects the construction. It
makes a moderate depression of the vo^, with a pause greater than a comma.

The End of the Second Part.

