A COLLECTION OF PAPERS: CONTAINING

The DECLARATION of the INDEPENDENCE of the United States of America, dated
July 4th, 1776. The TREATIES of ALLIANCE and COMMERCE, between the United
States of America and France, Feb. 6, 1778. Transcript of the TREATY between
France and the United States of America, July 16th, 1782; with the Ratification
thereof by Congress. The TREATY of AMITY and COMMERCE, between the States
General of the United Netherlands and the United States of America, dated
October 8th, 1782; with the Ratification thereof by Congress. The DECREE of the
Queen of Portugal for opening a Commercial Intercourse between her Subjects and
those of the United States of America, dated Febr. 13, 1783. TREATY of AMITY
and COMMERCE between his Majesty the King of Sweden, and the United States of
America, dated April 3, 1783; with the Ratification thereof by Congress.
DEFINITIVE TREATY of PEACE between the United States of America and his
Britannic Majesty, dated September 3d, 1783; with the Ratification thereof by
Congress. TO WHICH IS ADDED His Excellency General WASHINGTON's Circular Letter
to the different Governors of the respective States, dated June 11th, 1783.
NEW YORK: PRINTED BY SAMUEL LOUDON.

IN CONGRESS, JULY 4, 1776. A DECLARATION by the REPRESENTATIVES of the UNITED
STATES of AMERICA, in General Congress Assembled.
WHEN in the course of human events, it becomes necessary for one people to
dissolve the political bands which have connected them with another, and to
assume among the powers of the earth, the separate and equal station to which
the laws of nature and of nature's God entitle them, a decent respect to the
opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes which impel
them to the separation.

We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that
they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights, that among
these are life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. -- That to secure these
rights governments are instituted among men, deriving their just powers from
the consent of the governed, that whenever any form of government becomes
destructive of these ends, it is the right of the people to alter or to abolish
it, and to institute new government, laying its foundation on such principles,
and organizing its powers in such form as to them shall seem most likely to
effect their safety and happiness. Prudence indeed will dictate, that
governments long established should not be changed for light and transient
causes, and accordingly all experience has shown, that mankind are more
disposed to suffer, while evils are sufferable, than to right themselves by
abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed. But when a long train of
abuses and usurpations pursuing invariably the same object, evinces a design to
reduce them under absolute despotism, it is their right, it is their duty, to
throw off such government, and to provide new guards for their future security.
Such has been the patient sufferance of the colonies; and such is now the
necessity which constrains them to alter their former system of government. The
history of the present King of Great Britain, is a history of repeated injuries
and usurpations, all having in direct object, the establishment of an absolute
tyranny over these states. To prove this let facts be submitted to a candid
world.

He has refused his assent to laws, the most wholesome and necessary for the
public good.

He has forbidden his Governors to pass laws of immediate and pressing
importance, unless suspended in their operation till his assent should be
obtained; and when so suspended, he has utterly neglected to attend to them.

He has refused to pass other laws for the accommodation of large districts of
people, unless those people would relinquish the right of representation in the
legislature; a right inestimable to them, and formidable to tyrants only.

He has called together legislative bodies at places unusual, uncomfortable,
and distant from the depository of their public records, for the sole purpose
of fatiguing them into compliance with his measures.

He has dissolved representative houses repeatedly, for opposing with manly
firmness his invasions on the rights of the people.

He has refused for a long time, after such dissolutions, to cause others to be
elected; whereby the legislative powers, incapable of annihilation, have
returned to the people at large, for their exercise; the state remaining in the
mean time exposed to all the dangers of invasion from without, and convulsions
within.

He has endeavored to prevent the population of these States; for that purpose
obstructing the laws for naturalization of foreigners; refusing to pass others
to encourage their migrations hither, and raising the conditions of new
appropriations of lands.

He has obstructed the administration of justice, by refusing his assent to
laws for establishing judiciary powers.

He has made judges dependent on his will alone, for the tenure of their
offices, and the amount and payment of their salaries.

He has erected a multitude of new offices, and sent hither swarms of officers
to harrass our people, and eat out their substance.

He has kept among us, in times of peace, standing armies, without the consent
of our legislatures.

He has affected to render the military independent of, and superior to, the
civil power.

He has combined with others to subject us to a jurisdiction foreign to our
constitution, and unacknowledged by our laws; giving his assent to their acts
of pretended legislation,

For quartering large bodies of troops among us:

For protecting them, by a mock trial, from punishment for any murders which
they should commit on the inhabitants of these states:

For cutting off our trade with all parts of the world:

For imposing taxes on us without our consent:

For depriving us in many cases, of the benefits of trial by jury:

For transporting us beyond seas to be tries for pretended offenses:

For abolishing the free system of English laws in a neighboring province,
establishing therein an arbitrary government, and enlarging its boundaries, so
as to render it at once an example and fit instrument for introducing the same
absolute rule into these Colonies:

For taking away our Charters, abolishing our most valuable laws, and altering
fundamentally the forms of our governments:

For suspending our own legislatures, and declaring themselves invested with
power to legislate for us in all cases whatsoever.

He has abdicated government here, by declaring us out of his protection, and
waging war against us.

He has plundered our seas, ravaged our coasts, burnt our towns, and destroyed
the lives of our people.

He is, at this time, transporting large armies of foreign mercenaries to
complete the works of death, desolation and tyranny, already begun with
circumstances of cruelty and perfidy, scarcely paralleled in the most barbarous
ages, and totally unworthy the head of a civilized nation.

He has constrained our fellow citizens, taken captive on the high seas, to
bear arms against their country, to become the executioners of their friends
and brethren, or to fall themselves by their hands.

He has excited domestic insurrections among us, and has endeavored to bring
on the inhabitants of our frontiers, the merciless Indian savages, whose known
rule of warfare is an undistinguished destruction, of all ages, sexes and
conditions.

In every stage of these oppressions we have petitioned for redress, in the
most humble terms: Our repeated petitions have been answered only by repeated
injury. A Prince, whose character is thus marked by every act which may define
a Tyrant, is unfit to be the ruler of a free people.

Nor have we been wanting in attentions to our British brethren. We have warned
them from time to time of attempts by their legislature to extend an
unwarrantable jurisdiction over us. We have reminded them of the circumstances
of our emigration and settlement here. We have appealed to their native justice
and magnanimity and we have conjured them by the ties of our common kindred to
disavow these usurpations, which would inevitably interrupt our connection and
correspondence. They too have been deaf to the voice of justice and of
consanguinity. We must, therefore, aquiesce in the necessity which denounces
our separation, and hold them as we hold the rest of mankind, enemies in war;
in peace, friends.

We, therefore, the Representatives of the United States in General Congress
assembled, appealing to the Supreme Judge of the World, for the rectitude of
our intentions, do, in the name and by the authority of the good people of
these colonies, solemnly publish and declare, That these United Colonies are,
and of right ought to be, FREE and INDEPENDENT STATES; that they are absolved
from all allegiance to the British crown, and that all political connection
between them and the state of Great Britain, is and ought to be totally
dissolved; and that as free and Independent States, they have full power to
levy war, conclude peace, contract alliances, establish commerce, and to do all
other acts and things which Independent States may of right do. And for the
support of this declaration, with a firm reliance on the protection of Divine
Providence, we mutually pledge to each other our lives, our fortunes, and our
sacred honor.

Signed by Order and in Behalf of the Congress, JOHN HANCOCK, PRESIDENT.
Attest. CHARLES THOMSON, Sec'ry.

TREATIES between the THIRTEEN UNITED STATES of AMERICA and HIS MOST CHRISTIAN
MAJESTY.
TREATY of AMITY and COMMERCE. LOUIS by the Grace of GOD King of France and
Navarre,
To all who shall see these presents, Greeting:
THE Congress of the Thirteen United States of North America, having by their
Plenipotentiaries residing at Paris, notified their desire to establish with us
and our states, a good understanding and perfect correspondence, and having for
that purpose proposed to conclude with us a Treaty of Amity and Commerce: We
having thought it our duty to give to the said States a sensible proof of our
affection, determining us to accept of their proposals: For these causes, and
other good considerations us thereunto moving, we, reposing entire confidence
in the abilities and experience, zeal and fidelity for our service, of our dear
and beloved Conrad Alexander Gerard, Royal Syndic of the city of Strasbourg,
and Secretary of our Council of State, have nominated, appointed and
commissioned, and by these presents signed with our hand, do nominate, appoint
and commission him our Plenipotentiary, giving him power and special command
for us and in our name to agree upon, conclude and sign with the
Plenipotentiaries of the United States, equally furnished in due form with full
powers, such treaty, convention, and articles of commerce and navigation as he
shall think proper, willing that he act with the same authority, as we might or
could act, if we were personally present, and even as though he had more
special command, than what is herein contained; promising in good faith and on
the word of a king, to agree to, confirm, and establish for ever, and to
accomplish and execute punctually, all that our said dear and beloved Conrad
Alexander Gerard shall stipulate and sign, by virtue of the present power,
without contravening it in any manner, or suffering it to be contravened for
any cause, or under any pretext whatsoever; and also to ratify the same in due
form, and cause our ratification to be delivered and exchanged in the time that
shall be agreed on. For such is our pleasure. In testimony whereof we have
hereunto set our seal. Done at Versailles, this thirtieth day of January, in
the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and seventy-eight, and the
fourth year of our reign.

(Signed) (L. S.) LOUIS. (Underneath) By the King. GRAVIER de VERGENNES.


THE TREATY.
THE Most Christian King, and the Thirteen United States of North America, to
wit, New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York,
New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina,
South Carolina, and Georgia, willing to fix in an equitable and permanent
manner, the rules which ought to be followed relative to the correspondence and
commerce which the two parties desire to establish between their respective
countries, states and subjects; his most christian majesty and the said united
states have judged that the said end could not be better obtained, than by
taking for the basis of their agreement, the most perfect equality and
reciprocity, and by carefully avoiding all those burdensome preferences which
are usually sources of debate, embarrassment and discontent; by leaving also
such party at liberty to make respecting navigation and commerce, those
interior regulations which it shall find most convenient to itself, and by
founding the advantage of commerce solely upon reciprocal utility, and the just
rules of free intercourse; reserving withal to each party the liberty of
admitting, at its pleasure, other nations to a participation of the same
advantages. It is in the spirit of this intention, and to fulfill these views,
that his said majesty having named and appointed for his plenipotentiary,
Conrad Alexander Gerard, royal syndic of the city of Strasbourg, secretary of
his majesty's council of state; and the united states on their part, having
fully empowered Benjamin Franklin, deputy from the state of Pennsylvania to the
general congress, and president to the convention of the said state; Silas
Deane, late deputy from the state of Connecticut to the said congress, and
Arthur Lee, counselor at law: The said respective plenipotentiaries, after
exchanging their powers, and after mature deliberation, have concluded and
agreed upon the following articles.

Article 1. THERE shall be a firm, inviolable and universal peace, and a true
and sincere friendship between the most christian king, his heirs and
successors, and the united states of America, and the subjects of the most
christian king and of the said states, and between the countries, islands,
cities and towns situate under the jurisdiction of the most christian king, and
of the said united states, and the people and inhabitants of every degree,
without exception of persons or places, and the terms herein aftermentioned,
shall be perpetual between the most christian king, his heirs and successors,
and the said united states.

Art. 2. The most christian king and the united states engage mutually not to
grant any particular favor to other nations, in respect of commerce and
navigation, which shall not immediately become common to the other party, who
shall enjoy the same favor freely, if the concession was freely made, or on
allowing the same compensation, if the concession was conditional.

Art. 3. The subjects of the most christian king shall pay in the ports,
havens, roads, countries, islands, cities or towns of the united states, or any
of them, no other or greater duties or imposts, of what nature soever they may
be, or by what name soever called, than tho^^ which the nations most favored
are or shall be oblig^^ to pay; and they shall enjoy all the rights, liberti^^
privileges, immunities and exemptions in trade, na^^gation and commerce,
whether in passing from one po^^ in the said states to another, or in going to
and from the same, from and to any part of the world, which the sai^ nations do
or shall enjoy.

Art. 4. The subjects, people and inhabitants of the said united states, and
each of them, shall not pay in the ports, havens, roads, islands, cities and
places under the denomination of his most christian majesty, in Europe, any
other or greater duties or imposts, of what nature soever they may be, or by
what name soever called, than those which the most favored nations are or
shall be obliged to pay; and they shall enjoy all the rights, liberties,
privileges, immunities, and exemptions in trade, navigation and commerce,
whether in passing from one port in the said dominions in Europe, to another,
or in going to and from the same, from and to any part of the world, which the
said nations do or shall enjoy.

Art. 5. In the above exemption is particularly comprised, the imposition of
one hundred sous per ton, established in France on foreign ships, unless when
the ships of the united states shall load with the merchandise of France, for
another port of the same dominion; in in which case the said ships shall pay
the duty abovementioned, so long as other nations the most favored shall be
obliged to pay it; but it is understood, that the said united states, or any of
them, are at liberty, when they shall judge it proper, to establish a duty
equivalent in the same case.

Art. 6. The most christian king shall endeavor, by all means in his power, to
protect and defend all vessels and the effects belonging to the subjects,
people or inhabitants of the said united states, or any of them, being in his
ports, havens, or roads, or on the seas is near his countries, islands, cities
or towns; and to recover and restore to the right owners, their agents or
attorneys, all such vessels and effects which shall be taken within his
jurisdiction; and the ships of war of his most, christian majesty, or any
convoy sailing under his authority, shall upon all occasions, take under their
protection all vessels belonging to the subjects, people, or inhabitants of the
said united states, or any of them, and holding the same course, or going the
same way, and shall defend such vessels, as long as they hold the same course,
or go the same way, against all attacks, force or violence, in the same manner
as they ought to protect and defend the vessels belonging to the subjects of
the most christian king.

Art. 7. In like manner the said united states, and their ships of war sailing
under their authority, shall protect and defend, conformably to the preceding
article, all the vessels and effects belonging to the subjects of the most
christian king, and use all their endeavors to recover, and caused to be
restored, the said vessels and effects that shall have been taken within the
jurisdiction of the said united states, or any of them.

Art. 8. The most christian king will employ his good offices and interposition
with the king or emperor of Morocco or Fez; and the regencies of Algiers,
Tunis, and Tripoly, or with any of them; and also with every other prince,
state or power, of the coast of Barbary in Africa; and the subjects of the said
king, emperor, states and powers, and each of them, in order to provide as
fully and efficaciously as possible for the benefit, convenience and safety of
the said united states, and each of them, their subjects, people and
inhabitants, and their vessels and effects, against all violence, insults,
attacks or depredations, on the part of the said princes, and states of
Barbary, or their subjects.

Art. 9. The subjects inhabitants, merchants, commanders of ships, masters and
mariners of the states, provinces and dominions of each party respectively,
shall abstain and forbear to fish in all places possessed, or which shall be
possessed by the other party, the most christian king's subjects shall not fish
in the havens, bays, creeks, roads, coasts or places, which the said united
states hold, or shall hereafter hold; and in like manner the subjects, people
and inhabitants of the united states, shall not fish in the havens, bays,
creeks, roads, coasts or pieces, which the most christian king possesses, or
shall hereafter possess; and if any ship or vessel shall be found fishing,
contrary to the tenor of this treaty, the said ship or vessel with its lading,
(proof being made thereof) shall be confiscated; it is however understood that
the exclusion stipulated in the present article, shall take place only so long
and so far, as the most christian king or the united states shall not in this
respect have granted an exemption to some other nation.

Art. 10. The united states, their citizens and inhabitants, shall never
disturb the subjects of the most christian king in the enjoyment and exercise
of the right of fishing on the banks of Newfoundland, nor in the indefinite and
exclusive right which belongs to them on that part of the coast of that island
which is designed by the treaty of Utrecht, nor in the right relative to all
and each of the isles which belong to his most christian majesty, the whole
conformable to the true sense of the treaties of Utrecht and Paris.

Art. 11. The subjects and inhabitants of the said united states, or any one of
them, shall not be reputed Aubains in France, and consequently shall be
exempted from the Droit d' Aubaine, or other similar duty, under what name
soever; they may by testament, donation, or otherwise, dispose of their goods,
moveable and immovable, in favor of such persons as to them shall seem good,
and their heirs, subjects of the united states, residing whether in France or
elsewhere, may succeed them, ab intestat, without being obliged to obtain
letters of naturalization, and without having the effect of this concession
contested or impeded, under pretext of any rights or prerogatives of provinces,
cities, or private persons; and the said heirs, whether by such particular
title, or ab intestat, shall be exempt from all duty called Droit de
detraction, or other duty or the same kind; saving nevertheless the local
rights or duties, as much and as long as similar ones are not established by
the united states, or any of them. The subjects of the most christian king
shall enjoy on their part, in all the dominions of the said states, an entire
and perfect reciprocity, relative to the stipulations contained in the present
article: But it is at the same time agreed, that its contents shall not affect
the laws made, or that may be made hereafter in France, against emigrations,
which shall remain in all their force and vigor; and the united states, on
their part, or any of them, shall be at liberty to erect such laws, relative to
that matter, as to them shall seem proper.

Art. 12. The merchant ships of either of the parties, which shall be making
into a port belonging to the enemy of the other ally, and concerning whose
voyage and the species of goods on board her, there shall be just grounds of
suspicion, shall be obliged to exhibit, as well upon the high seas, as in the
ports and havens, not only her passports, but likewise certificates, expressly
showing that her goods are not of the number of those which have been
prohibited as contraband.

Art. 13. If by exhibiting of the abovesaid certificates, the other party
discover there are any of those sorts of goods which are prohibited and
declared contraband, and consigned for a port under the obedience of his enemy,
it shall not be lawful to break up the hatches of such ship, or to open any
chest, coffers, packs, casks, or any other vessels found therein, or to remove
the smallest parcels of her goods, whether such ship belong to the subjects of
France, or the inhabitants of the said united states, unless the lading be
brought on shore, in the presence of the officers of the court of admiralty,
and an inventory thereof made; but there shall be no allowance to sell,
exchange, or alienate the same in any manner, until that after due and lawful
process shall have been had against such prohibited goods, and the court of
admiralty shall, by a sentence pronounced, having confiscated the same, saving
always as well the ship itself, as any other goods found therein, which by this
treaty are to be esteemed free; neither may they be detained on pretense of
their being as it were infected by the prohibited goods, much less shall they
be confiscated as lawful prize; but if not the whole cargo, but only part
thereof shall consist of prohibited or contraband goods, and the commander of
the ship shall be ready and willing to deliver them to the captor who has
discovered them, in such case the captor having received those goods, shall
forthwith discharge the ship; and not hinder her by any means freely to
prosecute the voyage on which she was bound. But in case the contraband
merchandises cannot be all received on board the vessel of the captor, then the
captor may, notwithstanding the offer of delivering him the contraband goods,
carry the vessel into the nearest port, agreeable to what is above directed.

Art. 14. On the contrary it is agreed, that whatever shall be found to be
laden by the subjects and inhabitants of either party on any ship belonging to
the enemies of the other, or to their subjects, the whole, although it be not
of the sort of prohibited goods, may be confiscated in the same manner as if it
belonged to the enemy, except such goods and merchandise as were put on board
such ship before the declaration of war, or even after such declaration, if so
be it were done without knowledge of such declaration; so that the goods of the
subjects and people of either party, whether they be of the nature of such as
are prohibited or otherwise, which, as is aforesaid, were put on board any ship
belonging to an enemy before the war, or after the declaration of the same,
without the knowledge of it, shall no ways be liable to confiscation, but shall
well and truly be restored without delay to the proprietors demanding the same;
but so as that if the said merchandises be contraband, it shall not be any ways
lawful to carry them afterward to any port belonging to the enemy. The two
contracting parties agree, that the terms of two months being passed after the
declaration of war, their respective subjects, from whatever part of the world
they come, shall not plead the ignorance mentioned in this article.

Art. 15. And that more effectual care may be taken for the security of the
subjects and inhabitants of both parties, that they suffer no injury by the men
of war or privateers of the other party, all the commanders of the ships of his
most christian majesty and of the said united states, and all their subjects
and inhabitants, shall be forbid doing any injury or damage to the other side;
and if they act to the contrary they shall be punished, and shall moreover be
bound to make satisfaction for all matter of damage, and the interest thereof,
by reparation, under the pain and obligation of their persons and goods.

Art. 16. All ships and merchandise of what nature soever, which shall be
rescued out of the hands of any pirates or robbers on the high seas, shall be
brought into some port of either state, and shall be delivered to the custody
of the officers of that port, in order to be restored entire to the true
proprietor, as soon as due and sufficient proof shall be made concerning the
property thereof.

Art. 17. It shall be lawful for the ships of war of either party, and
privateers, freely to carry whithersoever they please, the ships and goods
taken from their enemies, without being obliged to pay any duty to the officers
of the admiralty, or any other judges; nor shall such prizes be arrested or
seized when they come to and enter the port of either party; nor shall the
searchers or other officer of those places search the same, or make examination
concerning the lawfulness of such prizes; but they may hoist sail at any time,
and depart and carry their prizes to the places expressed in their commissions,
which the commanders of such ships of war shall be obliged to show: On the
contrary, no shelter or refuge shall be given in their ports to such as shall
have made prize of the subjects, people, or property of either of the parties,
but if such shall come in, being forced by stress of weather, or the danger of
the sea, all proper means shall be vigorously used, that they go out and retire
from thence as soon as possible.

Art. 18. If any ship belonging to either of the parties, their people, or
subjects, shall, within the coasts or dominions of the other, stick upon the
sands, or be wrecked or suffer any other damage, all friendly assistance and
relief shall be given to the persons shipwrecked, or such as shall be in danger
thereof. And letters of safe conduct shall likewise be given to them for their
free and quiet passage from thence, and the return of every one to his own
country.

Art. 19. In case the subjects and inhabitants of either party, with their
shipping, whether public and of war, or private and of merchants, be forced
through stress of weather, pursuit of pirates or enemies, or any other urgent
necessity, for seeking of shelter and harbor, to retreat and enter into any of
the rivers, bays, roads, or ports belonging to the other party, they shall be
received and treated with all humanity and kindness, and enjoy all friendly
protection and help; and they shall be permitted to refresh and provide
themselves at reasonable rates with victuals, and all things needful for the
sustenance of their persons, or reparation of their ships, and convenience of
their voyage, and they shall no ways be detained or hindered from returning out
of the said ports or roads, but may remove and depart when and whither they
please, without any let or hindrance.

Art. 20. For the better promoting of commerce on both sides, it is agreed,
that if a war should break out between the said two nations, six months, after
the proclamation of war, shall be allowed to the merchants in the cities and
towns where they live, for selling and transporting their goods and
merchandises; and if any thing be taken from them, or any injury be done them
within that term, by either party, or the people or subjects of either, full
satisfaction shall be made for the same.

Art. 21. No subject of the most Christian King shall apply for or take any
commission or letters of marque for arming any ship or ships to act as
privateers against the said united states or any of them, or against the
subjects, people, or inhabitants of the said united states, or any of them, or
against the property of any of the inhabitants of any of them from any prince
or state with which the united states shall be at war; nor shall any citizen,
subject, or inhabitant of the said united states or any of them, apply for or
take any commission or letters of marque for arming any ship or ships to act as
privateers against the subjects of the most christian king, or any of them, or
the property of any of them, from any prince or state with which the said king
shall be at war; and if any person of either nation shall take such commission
or letters of marque, he shall be punished as a pirate.

Art. 22. It shall not be lawful for any foreign privateers, not belonging to
the subjects of the most christian king, nor citizens of the said united
states, who have commissions from any other prince or state, at enmity with
either nation, to fit their ships in the ports of either the one or the other
of the aforesaid parties, to sell what they have taken, or in any other manner
whatsoever to exchange their ships, merchandises or any other lading; neither
shall they be allowed even to purchase victuals, except such as shall be
necessary for their going to the next port of that prince or state from which
they have commissions.

Art. 23. It shall be lawful for all and singular the subjects of the most
christan king, and the citizens, people and inhabitants of the said united
states, to sail with their ships with all manner of liberty and security, no
distinction being made who are the proprietors of the merchandise laden
thereon, from any port to the places of those who now are or hereafter shall be
at enmity with the most christian king or the united states. It shall likewise
be lawful for the subjects and inhabitants aforesaid, to sail with the ships
and merchandises aforementioned, and to trade with the same liberty and
security from the places, ports and havens of those who are enemies of both or
either party, without any opposition or disturbance whatsoever, not only
directly from the places of the enemy aforementioned to neutral places, but
also from one place belonging to an enemy, to another place belonging to an
enemy, whether they be under the jurisdiction of the same prince, or under
several. And it is hereby stipulated, that free ships shall also give a freedom
to goods, and that every thing shall be deemed free and exempt, which shall be
found on board the ships belonging to the subjects of either of the
confederates, although the whole lading or any part thereof should appertain to
the enemies of either, contraband goods being always excepted. It is also
agreed in like manner, that the same liberty be extended to persons who are on
board a free ship, with this effect, that although they be enemies to both or
either party, they are not to be taken out of that free ship, unless they are
soldiers and in actual service of the enemies.

Art. 24. This liberty of navigation and commerce shall extend to all kinds of
merchandises, except those only which are distinguished by the name of
contraband, the under this name of contraband or prohibited goods shall be
comprehended arms, great guns, bombs with their fuses and other things
belonging to them, cannon ball, gunpowder, match, pikes, swords, lances,
spears, halberts, mortars, pedarts, grenadoes, saltpeter, muskets,
musket-ball, bucklers, helmets, brest-plates, coats of mail, and the like kinds
of arms, proper for arming soldiers, musket-rests, belts, horses with their
furniture, and all other warlike instruments whatever. These merchandises which
follow shall not be reckoned among contraband or prohibited goods; that is to
say, all sorts of clothes, and all other manufactures woven of any wool flax,
silk, cotton, or any other materials whatever, all kinds of wearing apparel,
together with the species whereof they are used to be made, gold and silver, as
well coined as uncoined, tin, iron, latten, copper, brass, coals; as also wheat
and barley, and any other kind of corn or pulse, tobacco, and likewise all
manner of spices, salted and smoaked flesh, salted fish, cheese and butter,
beer, oils, wines,, sugars, and all sorts of salts, and in general all
provisions which serve for the nourishment of mankind and the sustenance of
life; furthermore, all kinds of cotton, hemp, flax, tar, pitch, ropes, cables,
sails, sail-cloth, anchors and any parts of anchors, also ships-masts, planks,
boards and beams of what trees soever, and all other things proper either for
building or repairing ships, and all other goods whatever, which have not been
worked into the form of any instrument or thing prepared for war by land or
sea, shall not be reputed contraband, much less such as have been already
wrought up for any other use; all which shall be wholly reckoned among free
goods; as likewise all other merchandises and things, which are not
comprehended and particularly mentioned in the foregoing enumeration of
contraband goods, so that they may be transported and carried in the freest
manner by the subjects of both confederates, even to places belonging to an
enemy, such towns or places being only excepted, as are at that time besieged,
blocked up or invested.

Art. 25. To the end that all manner of dissentions and quarrels may be avoided
and prevented, on one side and the other, it is agreed, that in case either of
the parties hereto, should be engaged in war, the ships and vessels belonging
to the subjects or people of the other ally must be furnished with sea-letters
or passports, expressing the name, property and bulk of the ship, as also the
name and place of habitation of the master or commander of the said ship, that
it may appear thereby that the ship really and truly belongs to the subjects of
one of the parties, which passport shall be made out and granted according to
the form annexed to this treaty; they shall likewise be recalled every year,
that is, if the ship happens to return home in the space of a year; it is
likewise agreed, that such ships being laden are to be provided not only with
passports as above mentioned, but also with certificates, containing the
several particulars of the cargo, the place whence the ship sailed, and whither
she is bound, that so it may be known whether any forbidden or contraband goods
be on board of the same, which certificates shall be made out by the officers
of the place whence the ship set sail, in the accustomed form; and if any one
shall think it fit or advisable to express in the said certificates, the
person to whom the goods on board belong, he may freely do so.

Art. 26. The ships of the subjects and inhabitants of either of the parties
coming upon any coast belonging to either of the said allies; but not willing
to enter into port, or being entered into port and not willing to unload their
cargoes or break bulk, they shall be treated according to the general rules
prescribed or to be prescribed relative to the object in question.

Art. 27. If the ships of the said subjects, people or inhabitants of either of
the parties shall be met with, either sailing along the coasts or on the high
seas, by any ship of war of the other, or by any privateers, the said ships of
war or privateers, for the avoiding of any disorder, shall remain out of cannon
shot, and may send their boats on board the merchant ship which they shall so
meet with, and may enter her to the number of two or three men only, to whom
the master or commander of such ship or vessel shall exhibit his passport
concerning the property of the ship, made out according to the form inserted in
this present treaty, and the ship, when she shall have showed such passport,
shall be free and at liberty to pursue her voyage, so as it shall not be lawful
to molest or search in any manner, or to give her chase or to force her to quit
her intended course.

Art. 28. It is also agreed, that all goods, when once put on board the ships
or vessels of either of the two contracting parties, shall be subject to no
further visitation, but all visitation or search shall be made before hand, and
all prohibited goods shall be stopped on the spot before the same be put on
board, unless there are manifest tokens or proofs of fraudulent practice; nor
shall either the persons or goods of the subjects of his most christian majesty
or the united states, be put under any arrest or molested by any other kind of
embargo for that cause, and only the subject of that state to whom the said
goods have been or shall be prohibited, and who shall presume to sell or
alienate such sort of goods, shall be duly punished for the offense.

Art. 29. The two contracting parties grant mutually the liberty of having each
in the ports of the other, consuls, vice-consuls, agents and commissaries,
whose functions shall be regulated by a particular agreement.

Art. 30. And the more to favor and facilitate the commerce which the subjects
of the united states may have with France, the most christian king will grant
them in Europe one or more free ports, where they may bring and dispose of all
the produce and merchandise of the thirteen united states; and his majesty will
also continue to the subjects of the said states, the free ports which have
been and are open in the French islands of America, of all which free ports the
said subjects of the united states shall enjoy the use, agreeable to the
regulations which relate to them.

Art. 31. The present treaty shall be ratified on both sides, and the
ratifications shall be exchanged in the space of six months, or sooner if
possible.

IN FAITH WHEREOF the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the above
articles both in the French and English languages; declaring, nevertheless,
that the present treaty was originally proposed and concluded in the French
language, and they have thereto affixed their seals.

DONE at Paris, this sixth day of February, one thousand seven hundred and
seventy-eight. (L. S.) C. A. GERARD. (L. S.) B. FRANKLIN. (L. S.) SILAS DEANE.
(L. S.) ARTHUR LEE.


Form of the Passports and Letters which are to be given to the ships and
barques according to the twenty-fifth article of this Treaty.
To all who shall see these presents, Greeting.
IT is hereby made known, that leave and permission has been given to (...)
master and commander of the ship called (...) of the town of (...) burden
(...) tons or thereabouts, lying at present in the port and haven of (...) and
bound for (...) and laden with (...) After that this ship has been visited, and
before sailing, he shall make an oath before the officers who have the
jurisdiction of maritime affairs, that the said ship belongs to one or more of
the subjects of (...) the act whereof shall be put at the end of these
presents; as likewise that he will keep and cause to be kept by his crew on
board, the marine ordinances and regulations, and enter in the proper office a
lift, signed and witnessed, containing the names and sirnames, the places of
birth and abode of the crew of his ship, and of all who shall embark on board
her, whom he shall not take on board without the knowledge and permission of
the officers of the marine, and in every port or haven where he shall enter
with his ship, he shall show his present leave to the officers and judges of
the marine, and shall give a faithful account to them of what passed and was
done during his voyage, and he shall carry the colors, arms and ensign of the
king or united states during his voyage. In witness whereof we have signed
these presents, and put the seal of our arms thereunto, and caused the same to
be countersigned by (...) at (...) day of (...) anno Domini

TREATY OF ALLIANCE. EVENTUAL and DEFENSIVE. LOUIS by the Grace of GOD, King of
France and Navarre:
To all who shall see these Presents, Greeting,
THE Congress of the United States of North America, having by their
Plenipotentiaries residing in France, proposed to form with us a defensive and
eventual Alliance: willing to give the said States an efficacious proof of the
interest we take in their prosperity, we have determined to conclude the said
alliance. For these causes and other good considerations thereto moving, we,
reposing entire confidence in the capacity and experience, zeal and fidelity
for our service, of our dear and beloved Conrad Alexander Gerard, Royal Syndic
of the city of Strasbourg, Secretary of our Council of state, have nominated,
commissioned and deputed, and by those presents, signed with our hand, do
nominate, commission and depute him our Plenipotentiary, giving him power and
special command to act in this quality, and confer, negotiate, treat and agree
conjointly with the above mentioned Plenipotentiaries of the United States,
invested in the like manner with powers in due form to determine, conclude and
sign such articles, conditions, conventions, declarations, definitive treaty,
and any other acts whatever, as he shall judge proper to answer the end which
we propose; promising on the faith and word of a king, to agree to, confirm and
establish for ever, to accomplish and execute punctually whatever our said dear
and beloved Conrad Alexander Gerard shall have stipulated and signed in virtue
of the present power, without ever contravening it, or suffering it to be
contravened for any cause and under any pretext whatever; as likewise to cause
our letters of ratification to be made in due form, and to have them delivered
in order to be exchanged at the time that shall be agreed upon. For such is our
pleasure. In testimony whereof we have set our seal to these presents. Given at
Versailles, the thirtieth day of the month of January, in the year of grace one
thousand seven hundred and seventy-eight, and the fourth of our reign.

(Signed) (L. S.) LOUIS. By the King. GRAVIER de VERGENNES.

THE TREATY.
THE Most Christian King, and the Thirteen United States of North America, to
wit* New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York,
New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina,
South Carolina, and Georgia, having this day concluded a Treaty of Amity and
Commerce, for the reciprocal advantage of their subjects and citizens, have
thought it necessary to take into consideration the means of strengthening
those engagements, and of rendering them useful to the safety and tranquillity
of the two parties; particularly in case Great Britain, in resentment of that
connection, and of the good correspondence which is the object of the said
treaty, should break the peace with France, either by direct hostilities, or by
hindering her commerce and navigation in a manner contrary to the rights of
nations, and the peace subsisting between the two crowns. And his Majesty and
the said United States having resolved in that case, to join their councils and
efforts against the enterprises of their common enemy.

The respective plenipotentiaries empowered to concert the clauses and
conditions proper to fulfill the said intentions, have, after the most mature
deliberation, concluded and determined on the following articles:

ARTICLE I.

IF war should break out between France and Great Britain, during the
continuance of the present war between the United States and England, his
Majesty and the said United States shall make it a common cause, and aid each
other mutually with their good offices, their counsels and their forces,
according to the exigence of conjunctures, as becomes good and faithful allies.

Art. 2. The essential and direct end of the present defensive alliance is, to
maintain effectually the liberty, sovereignty and independence absolute and
unlimited, of the said United States, as well in matters of government as of
commerce.

Art. 3. The two contracting parties shall, each on his own part, and in the
manner it may judge most proper, make all the efforts in its power against
their common enemy, in order to attain the end proposed.

Art. 4. The contracting parties agree, that in case either of them should form
any particular enterprise in which the concurrence of the other may be desired,
the party whose concurrence is desired, shall readily and with good faith join
to act in concert for that purpose, as far as circumstances and its own
particular situation will permit, and in that case, they shall regulate by a
particular convention, the quantity and kind of succor to be furnished, and
the time and manner of its being brought into action, as well as the advantages
which are to be in compensation.

Art. 5. If the United States should think fit to attempt the reduction of the
British power, remaining in the northern parts of America, or the islands of
Bermudas, those countries or islands, in case of success, shall be confederated
with, or dependent upon said United States.

Art. 6. The Most Christian King renounces forever the possession of the
islands of Bermudas, as well as of any part of the continent of North America,
which before the treaty of Paris, in 1763, or in virtue of that treaty, were
acknowledged to belong to the crown of Great Britain, or to the United States,
heretofore called British colonies, or which are at this time, or have lately
been under the power of the King and Crown of Great Britain.

Art. 7. If his Most Christian Majesty shall think proper to attack any of the
islands situated in the Gulf of Mexico, or near that Gulf, which are at
present under the power of Great Britain, all the said isles, in case of
success, shall appertain to the crown of France.

Art. 8. Neither of the two parties shall conclude either truce or peace with
Great Britain, without the formal consent of the other first obtained; and they
mutually engage not to lay down their arms, until the indpendence of the United
States shall have been formally or tacitly assured, by the treaty or treaties
that shall terminate the war.

Art. 9. The contracting parties declare, that being resolved to fulfill each on
its own part, the clauses and conditions of the present treaty of alliance,
according to its own power and circumstances, there shall be no after claim of
compensation, on one side or the other, whatever may be the event of the war.

Art. 10. The Most Christian King and the United States agree, to invite or
admit other powers, who may have received injuries from England to make common
cause with them, and to accede to the present alliance, under such conditions
as shall be freely agreed to, and ^^^tled between all the parties.

Art. 11. The two parties guarantee mutually from the present time and for
ever, against all other powers, to wit, The United States to his Most Christian
Majesty, the present possessions of the crown of France in America, as well as
those which it may acquire by the future treaty of peace; and his Most
Christian Majesty guarantees on his part to the United States, their liberty,
sovereignty and independence, absolute and unlimitted, as well in matters of
government as commerce, and also their possessions, and the additions or
conquests, that their confederation may obtain during the war, from any of the
dominions now or heretofore possessed by Great Britain in North America;
conformable to the fifth and sixth articles above written, the whole as their
possession shall be fixed and assured to the said states, at the moment of the
cessation of their present war with England.

Art. 12. In order to fix more precisely the sense and application of the
preceding article, the contracting parties declare, that in case of a rupture
between France and England, the reciprocal guarantee declared in the said
article, shall have its full force and effect, the moment such war shall break
out; and if such rupture shall not take place, the mutual obligations of the
said guarantee, shall not commence until the moment of the cessation of the
present war, between the United States and England, shall have ascertained
their possessions.

Art. 13. The present treaty shall be ratified on both sides, and the
ratifications shall be exchanged in the space of six months, or sooner, if
possible.

IN FAITH WHEREOF the respective Plenipotentiaries, to wit, on the part of the
Most Christian King, Conrad Alexander Gerard, Royal Syndie of the City of
Strasbourg, and Secretary of his Majesty's Council of State, and on the part of
the United States, Benjamin Franklin, Deputy to the General Congress from the
State of Pennsylvania, and President to the Convention of said States; Silas
Deane, heretofore Deputy from the State of Connecticut; and Arthur Lee,
Counselor at Law, have signed the above articles both in the French and
English languages; declaring nevertheless, that the present treaty was
originally composed and concluded in the French language, and they have
hereunto affixed their seals.

DONE at PARIS, this sixth day of February, one thousand seven hundred and
seventy-eight. (L. S.) C. A. GERARD. (L. S.) B. FRANKLIN. (L. S.) SILAS DEANE.
(L. S.) ARTHUR LEE


The following is a correct Transcript of the TREATY between FRANCE and the
UNITED STATES of AMERICA, together with the RATIFICATION of the same by
CONGRESS.
THE United States, assembled in Congress, to all who shall see these Presents,
GREETING: WHEREAS, BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, our Minister Plenipotentiary, by virtue
of the full powers vested in him, has made, with CHARLES GRAVIER DE VERGENNES,
Counselor of the King in all his Councils, Commander of his Orders, Minister
and Secretary of State, vested also with full powers by his Most Christian
Majesty for that purpose, concluded and signed a contract between his said Most
Christian Majesty and the United States of North America in the terms following:

CONTRACT between the KING and the THIRTEEN UNITED STATES of NORTH AMERICA,
concluded by Mr. DE VERGENNES and Dr. FRANKLIN.
AS it has pleased the KING to comply with the requests made to him in the
name, and on the part, of the UNITED PROVINCES of NORTH AMERICA, by assisting
them in the war and invasion under which they have groaned during several
years; and his Majesty, after having concluded a Treaty of Amity and Commerce
with the said Confederated Provinces, on the 6th of February, 1778, having had
the goodness to succor them, not only by his sea and land forces, but also by
means of advancing them money as bountifully as in its consequence
efficaciously, at a time when their affairs were in a very critical situation;
it has been judged proper and necessary to fix the exact amount of these
advances, the conditions upon which the King has made them, the different
periods, at which the Congress of the United States has agreed to pay them into
his Majesty's Royal Treasury, and finally to regulate this matter so, that no
difficulties may hereafter arise to interrupt that good harmony which his
Majesty is resolved to support on his part with the United States. For the
purpose, therefore, of accomplishing so desirable an end, and with a view of
strengthening those Bonds of Amity and Commerce which subsist between his
Majesty and the United States: We Charles Gravier de Vergennes, etc. Counselor
to the King, in all his Councils, Commander of his Orders, Minister and
Secretary of State of his Command and Finances, vested with full powers by his
Majesty; And we Benjamin Franklin, Minister Plenipotentiary of the United
States of North America, vested equally with full powers by the Congress of the
said States, after having each communicated our respective powers, have agreed
upon the following articles:

ARTICLE I. It is agreed upon and certified, that the sums advanced by his
Majesty to the Congress of the United States, under the title of a loan, in the
years 1778, 1779, 1780, 1781, and (...) the present year 1782, amount together
to the sum of eighteen millions of livres, of French money, as appears by the
twenty-one receipts following, signed by the said Minister of the Congress, and
given by virtue of his full powers, namely, 1. 28 Feb. 1778. 750,000 2. 19 May
750,000 3. 3 Aug. 750,000 4. 1 Nov. 750,000 3,000,000 5. 10 June, 1779. 250,000
6. 16 Sept. 250,000 7. 4 Oct. 250,000 8. 21 Dec. 250,000 1,000,000 9. 29 Feb.
1780. 750,000 10. 27 May 750,000 11. 21 June 750,000 12. 3 Oct. 750,000 13. 27
Nov. 1,000,000 4,000,000 14. 15 Feb. 1781. 750,000 15. 15 May 750,000 16. 15
Aug. 750,000 17. 1 Oct. 1,00,000 18. 15 Nov. 750,000 4,000,000 19. 10 April,
1782. 1,500,000 20. 1 July 1,500,000 21. 5 3,00,000 6,000,000 Total 18,000,000

By which receipts, the said Minister has promised, in the name of the
Congress, on the part of the Thirteen United States, to cause to be paid and
reimbursed to the King's Royal Treasury, on the first of January 1788, at the
house of his principal banker at Paris, the above sum, with the interest due
thereon, at the rate of five per cent. per annum.

ART. II. Upon consideration, however, that the payment of so large a capital
at one stipulated period, namely, the 1st of January, 1788, may be exceedingly
inconvenient to the Finances of the Congress of the United States, and that it
might perhaps be even impracticable, it has pleased his Majesty on that
account, to release them from the tenor of those receipts given by their
Minister for the eighteen millions of livres Tournois, mentioned in the
preceding article; and he has consented that the reimbursement of the capital
in ready money to his Royal Treasury, shall be made in twelve equal payments,
of 1,500,000 livres each, and in twelve years, to begin the third year after
the peace.

ART. III. Although the receipts of the Minister of the Congress of the United
States mention, that "the 18,000,000 of livres above mentioned, shall be paid
into the Royal Treasury, with five per cent, interest. His Majesty, desirous of
giving a fresh proof to the said United States, of his friendship, has been
pleased to make them a present of the arrears of interest to this day, and also
to remit it from this time to the day of the date of the Treaty of peace; a
favor which the Minister of Congress acknowledges as proceeding purely from
the King's bounty, and which he accepts in the name of the United States with
the most profound and lively gratitude.

ART. IV. The payment of the said 18,000,000 of livres shall be made in ready
money to his Majesty's Royal Treasury at Paris, in twelve equal payments, and
at the period stated in the second article above. The interest on the said sum
at the rate of five per cent. to run from the date of the Treaty of Peace; the
payment of it shall be made at the time of each of the partial reimbursements
of the capital, and shall diminish in proportion with the reimbursements; the
Congress are nevertheless at liberty to free themselves from this obligation
sooner, by anticipated payments, in case the state of their finances should
permit.

ART. V. Although the loan of 5,000,000 of Dutch florins granted by the States
General of the United Provinces of the Netherlands, on the terms of the
obligation passed on the 5th of November, 1781, has been made in his Majesty's
name, and he has pledged himself for the payment of it; it is nevertheless
acknowledged by these presents, that the said loan has been made in reality on
account of, and for the service of, the United States of North America; and
that the capital, amounting, according to a moderate valuation, to the sum of
10,000,000 livres Tournois, has been paid to the United States, agreeable to
receipt given for the payment of the said sum by the undersigned Minister of
Congress, on the 7th of last June.

ART. VI. By the said convention of the 5th of November 1781, it has pleased
the King to promise and engage himself to furnish and to pay to the General
Office of the States General of the Netherlands, the capital of the said loan,
together with the interest at five per cent. without any charge or deduction
whatsoever to the lenders, so that the said capital be entirely reimbursed
within the space of five years, the payments to be made at ten equal periods,
the first to begin the sixth year after the date of the loan, and from that
time, during every year till the final payment of the said sum; but it is
likewise acknowledged by the present act, that this engagement has been entered
into by the King, on the entreaty of the underwritten Minister of the United
States, and upon the promise made by him in the name of the Congress, and on
the part of the Thirteen United States, to reimburse and pay into the Royal
Treasury of his Majesty at Paris, the capital, interest and expenses of the
said loan, agreeable to the conditions and terms fixed by the convention of the
5th of November, 1781.

ART. VII. It has been agreed upon and regulated in consequence, that the said
sum of 10,000,000 of livres Tournois, making, at a moderate estimate, five
millions of Dutch florins as abovementioned, shall be reimbursed and paid into
his Majesty's Royal Treasury, with the interest at five per cent. in ten equal
payments of one million each, and at the several periods, the first of which
shall be made on the 5th of November, 1787, and thus from year to year till the
final payments of the said sum of ten millions, the interest diminishing in
proportion, with the partial payments of the capital. But from the regard which
his Majesty bears to the United States, he has been pleased to take upon
himself the expense of the commission, and of banking, attending the said loan,
of which expense his Majesty makes a present to the United States; and their
underwritten Minister accepts, with thanks, in the name of the Congress, as an
additional proof of his Majesty's generosity, and of his friendship for the
United States.

ART. VIII. With respect to the interest on the said loan, as the King had
engaged to pay, during the five years preceding the first reimbursement of the
capital, four per cent. on the whole, into the General Office of the States
General of the Netherlands, annually, from the 5th of November, 1781, agreeable
to the convention entered into on that day, the Minister of Congress
acknowledges, that the reimbursements of the said interest is due to his
Majesty from the United States; and he engages, in the name of the said States,
to cause the payment thereof to be made at the same rate, into the Royal
Treasury of his Majesty; the interest of the first year to be paid on the 4th
of next November, and so on annually during to five years preceding the first
payment of the capital, fixed on as above, for the 5th of November, 1787.

The high contracting parties reciprocally bind themselves to the faithful
observance of this contract, the ratifications of which shall be exchanged
within the space of nine months from the date hereof, if possible. In faith of
which, we the said Plenipotentiaries of his Most Christian Majesty, and of the
Thirteen United States of North America, by virtue of our respective powers,
have signed these presents, and have thereto put the seal of our arms.

Given at Versailles, the 16th of July, 1782. (Signed) C. G. DE VERGENNES. (L.
S.) B. FRANKLIN. (L. S.)

Be it known to all and every one, that we the said United States assembled in
Congress, penetrated with the most lively ideas of the generosity and affect on
manifested by his Most Christian Majesty in the above contract, have ratified
and confirmed it; and by these presents we do ratify and confirm the said
contract, and every article and clause therein. And we do by these presents
authorize our Minister Plenipotentiary at the Court of Versailles, to remit our
present act of Ratification, in exchange for the Ratification of the said
contract on the part of his Most Christian Majesty.

IN FAITH OF WHICH we have caused our seal to be affixed hereunto, in presence
of his Excellency ELIAS BOUDINOT, President, this 22d of January, in the year
of Grace, 1783, and the seventh of our Sovereignty and Independence.


Authentic Copy of the DECREE of the Queen of Portugal, for opening a
Commercial Intercourse between her Subjects, and those of the United States.
PORTUGAL. Her Majesty has been pleased to order the following Decree to be
transmitted to her Royal Court of Exchequer, that publication may be made of
the same.
WHEREAS by the Declaration of the Independence of the United States of
North America, the object intended by the Royal Decree of the 4th of July,
1776, and the publication thereof, by 4th Court of Exchequer, on the 5th of the
same month, have ceased to operate, We are therefore pleased to abolish and
annul the Decree and publication aforesaid; and do hereby order, that free
entrance be granted in all the ports of our dominions, unto all ships and
vessels coming from North America, in the same manner as was formerly had in
the admission of those which arrived from the said colonies in the ports
aforesaid, and that all hospitality and favor be shown them, which is usually
done to other friendly nations.

Our Court of Exchequer will see this performed accordingly; and are ordered to
cause this Decree to be printed and set up in all public places of our city of
Lisbon, and of other ports of this kingdom and Algarve, that all persons may
have due notice thereof and none plead ignorance of the same.

GIVEN at Salvaterta de Magos, the 13th of February 1783, (Signed) With her
Majesty's Cipher.
And in order that all persons may have notice of this royal resolution of our
Lady a foresaid, we have caused these presents to be printed, and affixed at
all public places of this city and other parts of this kingdom, agreeable to
the tenor of the Decree above mentioned.

Lisbon, this 17th of February, 1783. (Signed) Gonsalo Jose da Silveira Preto,
Jose da Consta Ribeiro.




[Printed at Queen's Press.]

By the United States in Congress Assembled. A PROCLAMATION.
WHEREAS in pursuance of a Plenipotentiary commission, given on the
twenty-ninth day of December, one thousand seven hundred and eighty, to the
Honorable JOHN ADAMS, Esquire. a Treaty of Amity and Commerce between their High
Mightinesses the States General of the United Netherlands, and the United
States of America, was, on the eighth day of October, one thousand seven
hundred and eighty-two, concluded by the said JOHN ADAMS, with
Plenipotentiaries named for that purpose by their said High Mightinesses, the
States General of the United Netherlands: And whereas the said Treaty has been
this day approved and ratified by the United States in Congress assembled, as
the same is contained in the words following, to wit.
A TREATY of AMITY and COMMERCE, between their HIGH MIGHTINESSES the
STATES GENERAL of the UNITED NETHERLANDS, and the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, to
wit, NEW HAMPSHIRE, MASSACHUSETTS, RHODE ISLAND and PROVIDENCE PLANTATIONS,
CONNECTICUT, NEW YORK, NEW JERSEY, PENNSYLVANIA, DELAWARE, MARYLAND, VIRGINIA,
NORTH CAROLINA, SOUTH CAROLINA and GEORGIA.
THEIR High Mightinesses the States General of the United Netherlands, and the
United States of America, to wit, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island
and Providence Plantations, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania,
Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia,
desiring to ascertain, in a permanent and equitable manner, the rules to be
observed, relative to the commerce and correspondence which they intend to
establish between their respective States, countries and inhabitants, have
judged that the said end cannot be better obtained, than by establishing the
most perfect equality and reciprocity for the basis of their agreement, and by
avoiding all those burdensome preferences which are usually the sources of
debate, embarrassment and discontent; by leaving also each party at liberty to
make, respecting commerce and navigation, such ulterior regulations as it shall
and most convenient to itself, and by founding the advantages of commerce
solely upon reciprocal utility, and the just rules of free intercourse,
reserving withal, to each party, the liberty of admitting at its pleasure,
other nations to a participation of the same advantages.

On these principles their said High Mightinesses the States General of the
United Netherlands, have named for their Plenipotentiaries, from the midst of
their Assembly, Messieurs their Deputies for the Foreign Affairs; and the said
United-States of America, on their part, have furnished with full powers Mr.
John Adams, late Commissioner of the United States of America at the Court of
Versailles, heretofore Delegate in Congress from the State of
Massachusetts Bay, and Chief Justice of the said State; who have agreed and
concluded as follow, to wit:

ART. I. There shall be a firm, inviolable and universal peace and sincere
friendship between their High Mightinesses, the Lords, the States General of
the United Netherlands, and the United States of America; and between the
subjects and inhabitants of the said parties, and between the countries,
Islands, cities and places, situated under the jurisdiction of the said United
Netherlands and the said United States of America, their subjects and
inhabitants of every degree, without exception of persons or places.

ART. II. The said subjects of the States General of the United Netherlands,
shall pay in the ports, havens, roads, countries, Islands, cities or places of
the United States of America, or any of them, no other nor greater duties or
imposts, of whatever nature or denomination they may be, than those which the
nations the most favored are or shall be obliged to pay; and they shall enjoy
all the rights, liberties, privileges, immunities and exemptions in trade,
navigation and commerce which the said nations do, or shall enjoy, whether in
passing from one port to another in the said States, or in going from any of
those ports to any foreign port of the world, or from any foreign port of the
world to any of those ports.

ART. III. The subjects and inhabitants of the said United States of America,
shall pay in the ports, havens, roads, countries, islands, cities or places of
the said United Netherlands, or any of them, no other nor greater duties or
imposts of whatever nature or denomination they may be, than those which the
nations the most favored are or shall be obliged to pay; and they shall enjoy
all the rights, liberties, privileges, immunities and exemptions in trade,
navigation and commerce, which the said nations do or shall enjoy, whether in
passing from one port to another in the said States, or from any one toward
any one of those ports, from or to any foreign port of the world: And the
United States of America with their subjects and inhabitants, shall leave to
those of their High Mightinesses; the peaceable enjoyment of their rights in
the countries, islands and seas in the East and West Indies, without any
hindrance or molestation.

ART. IV. There shall be an entire and perfect liberty of conscience allowed to
the subjects and inhabitants of each party, and to their families, and no one
shall be molested in regard to his worship, provided he submits as to the
public demonstration of it, to the laws of the country: There shall be given
moreover liberty, when any subjects or inhabitants of either party shall die in
the territory of the other, to bury them in the usual burying places, or in
decent and convenient grounds to be appointed for that purpose, as occasion
shall require: And the dead bodies of those who are buried, shall not in any
wise be molested. And the two contracting parties shall provide each one in his
jurisdiction, that their respective subjects and inhabitants may hence forward
obtain the requisite certificates in cases of deaths in which they shall be
interested.

ART. V. Their High Mightinesses the States General of the United Netherlands,
and the United States of America shall endeavor, by all the means in their
power, to defend and protect all vessels and other effects belonging to their
subjects and inhabitants respectively, or to any of them, in their ports,
roads, havens, internal seas, passes, rivers, and as far as their jurisdiction
extends at sea, and to recover and cause to be restored to the true
proprietors, their agents or attorneys, all such vessels and effects, which
shall be taken under their jurisdiction: and their vessels of war, and convoys,
in cases when they may have a common enemy, shall take under their protection
all the vessels, belonging to the subjects and inhabitants of either party,
which shall not be laden with contraband goods, according to the description
which shall be made of them hereafter, for places with which one of the parties
is in peace, and the other at war, nor destined for any place blocked, and
which shall hold the same course or follow the same route; and they shall
defend such vessels as long as they shall hold the same course or follow the
same route, against all attacks, force and violence of the common enemy, in the
same manner as they ought to protect and defend the vessels belonging to their
own respective subjects.

ART. VI. The subjects of the contracting parties may on one side and on the
other, in the respective countries and states, dispose of their effects by
testament, donation or otherwise; and their heirs, subjects of one of the
parties, and residing in the country of the other, or elsewhere, shall receive
such successions even ab intestato, whether in person or by their attorney or
substitute, even although they shall not have obtained letters of
naturalization, without having the effect of such commission contested under
pretext of any rights or prerogatives of any province, city or private person;
and if the heirs, to whom such succession may have fallen, shall be minors, the
tutors, or curators, established by the judge domiciliary, of the said minors,
may govern, direct, administer, sell, and allienate the effects falling to the
said minors, by inheritance, and in general, in relation to the said
successions and effects, use all the rights and fulfill all the functions, which
belong by the disposition of the laws, to guardians, tutors, and curators:
Provided nevertheless, that this disposition cannot take place, but in cases
where the testator shall not have named guardians, tutors, curators by
testament, codicil, or other legal instrument.

ART. VII. It shall be lawful and free for the subjects of each party, to
employ such advocates, attorneys, notaries, solicitors or factors, as they
shall judge proper.

ART. VIII. Merchants, masters and owners of ships, mariners, men of all kinds,
ships and vessels, and all merchandises, and goods in general, and effects of
one of the confederates, or of the subjects thereof, shall not be seized or
detained in any of the countries, lands, islands, cities, places, ports,
shores, or dominations whatsoever of the other confederate, for any military
expedition, public or private use of any one, by arrests, violence, or any
color thereof: Much less shall it be permitted to the subjects of either
party, to take or extort by force, any thing from the subjects of the other
party, without the consent of the owner: Which however is not to be understood
of seizures, detentions and arrests, which shall be made by the command and
authority of justice, and by the ordinary methods on account of debts or
crimes, in respect whereof, the proceedings must be, by way of law according to
the forms of justice.

ART. IX. It is further agreed and concluded, that it shall be wholly free for
all merchants, commanders of ships and other subjects and inhabitants of the
contracting parties, in every place subjected to the jurisdiction of the two
powers respectively, to manage themselves, their own business: And moreover as
to the use of interpreters or brokers, as also in relation to the loading or
unloading of their vessels, and every thing which has relation thereto, they
shall be on one side and on the other, considered and treated upon the sooting
of natural subjects or at least upon an equality with the most favored nation.

ART. X. The merchant ships of either of the parties coming from the port of an
enemy, or from their own or a neutral port, may navigate freely toward any
port of an enemy of the other ally: They shall be, nevertheless, held, whenever
it shall be required, to exibit, as well upon the high seas as in the ports,
their sea-letters and other documents, described in the twenty-fifth article,
stating expressly that their effects are not of the number of those, which are
prohibited as contraband: and not having any contraband goods, for an enemy's
port, they may freely and without hindrance, pursue their voyage toward the
port of an enemy. Nevertheless it shall not be required to examine the papers
of vessels convoyed by vessels of war, but credence shall be given to the word
of the officer, who shall conduct the convoy.

ART. XI. If by exhibiting the sea-letters, and other documents described more
particularly in the twenty-fifth article of this treaty, the other party shall
discover there are any of those sorts of goods, which are declared prohibited
and contraband, and that they are consigned for a port under the obedience of
his enemy, it shall not be lawful to break up the hatches of such ship, or to
open any chest, coffer, packs, casks, or other vessel found therein, or to
remove the smallest parcel of her goods, whether the said vessel belongs to the
subjects of their High Mightinesses the States General of the United
Netherlands, or to the subjects or inhabitants of the said United States of
America, unless the lading be brought on shore, in presence of the officers of
the Court of the Admiralty, and an inventory thereof made, but there shall be
no allowance to sell, exchange, or alienate the same until after that due and
lawful process shall have been had against such prohibited goods or contraband,
and the Court of Admiralty by a sentence pronounced shall have confiscated the
same, saving always as well the ship itself as any other goods found therein,
which are to be esteemed free, and may not be detained on pretense of their
being infected by the prohibited goods, much less shall they be confiscated as
lawful prize: But on the contrary when by the visitation at land, it shall be
found there are no contraband goods in the vessel, and it shall not appear by
the papers that he who has taken and carried in the vessel, has been able to
discover any there, he ought to be condemned in all the charges, damages and
interest of them, which he shall have caused both to the owner of vessels and
to the owners and freighters of cargoes, with which they shall be loaded, by
his demerity in taking and carrying them in, declaring most expressly the free
vessels shall assure the liberty of the effects with which they shall be
loaded, and that this liberty shall extend itself equally to the persons who
shall be found in a free vessel, who may not be taken out of her, unless they
are military men, actually in the service of an enemy.

ART. XII. On the contrary it is agreed, that whatever ill all be found to be
laden by the subjects and inhabitants of either party, on any ship belonging to
the enemy's of the other, or to their subjects, although it be not comprehended
under the sort of prohibited goods, the whole may be confiscated, in the same
manner as if it belonged to the enemy, except nevertheless such effects and
merchandise, as were put on board such vessel, before the declaration of war or
in the space of six months after it, which effects shall not be in any manner
subject to confiscation, but shall be faithfully and without delay restored in
nature to the owners, who shall claim them or cause them to be claimed, before
the confiscation and sale, as also their proceeds, if the claim could not be
made but in the space of eight months, after the sale* which ought to be
public: provided nevertheless that if the said merchandises are contraband, it
shall by no means be lawful to transport them afterward to any port belonging
to enemies.

ART. XIII. And that more effectual care may be taken for security of subjects
and people of either party, that they do not suffer molestation from the
vessels of war, or privateers of the other party, it shall be forbidden to all
commanders of vessels of war, and other armed vessels of the said
States General of the United Netherlands, and the said United States of
America, as well as to all their officers, subjects and people, to give any
offense or do any damage to those of the other party: and if they act to the
contrary, they shall be upon the first complaint which shall be made of it,
being found guilty after a just examination, punished by their proper judges,
and moreover obliged to make satisfaction for all damages and interest thereof,
by reparation, under pain and obligation of their persons and goods.

ART. XIV. For further determining of what has been said, all captains of
privateers, or sitters out of vessels armed for war, under commission, and on
account of private persons shall be held before their departure, to give
sufficient caution before competent judges, either to be responsible for the
malversations which they may commit in their cruizes or voyages, as well as for
the contraventions of their captains and officers, against the present treaty,
and against the ordinances and edicts which shall be published in consequence
of, and conformity to it, under pain of forfeiture and nullity of the said
commission.

ART. XV. All vessels and merchandises of whatsoever nature, which shall be
rescued out of the hands of any pirates or robbers, navigating the high seas,
without requisite commissions, shall be brought into some port of one of the
two states, and deposited in the hands of the officers of that port, in order
to be restored entire to the true proprietor, as soon as due and sufficient
proof shall be made, concerning the property thereof.

ART. XVI. If any ships or vessels belonging to either of the parties, their
subjects or people shall within the coasts or dominations of the other, stick
upon the sands or be wrecked, or suffer any other sea damage, all friendly
assistance and relief shall be given to the persons shipwrecked, or such as
shall be in danger thereof; and the vessels, effects and merchandises, or the
part of them which shall have been saved, or the proceeds of them, if being
perishable they shall have been sold, being claimed within a year and a day, by
the masters or owners, or their agents or attorneys, shall be restored, paying
only the reasonable charges; and that which must be paid in the same case; for
the salvage, by the proper subjects of the country: there shall also be
delivered them safe conducts or passports for their free and safe passage from
thence, and to return each one to his own country.

ART. XVII. In case the subjects or people of either party with their shipping,
whether public and of war, or private and of merchants, be forced through
stress of weather, pursuit of pirates or enemies, or any other urgent
necessity, for seeking of shelter and harbor to retreat and enter into any of
the rivers, creeks, bays, ports, roads or shores, belonging to the other party,
they shall be received with all humanity and kindness, and enjoy all friendly
protection and help, and they shall be permitted to refresh and provide
themselves at reasonable rates, with victuals and all things needful for the
sustenance of their persons, or reparation of their ships; and they shall no
ways be detained or hindered from returning out of the said ports or roads, but
may remove, and depart when and whither they please, without any let or
hindrance.

ART. XVIII. For the better promoting of commerce on both sides, it is agreed,
that if a war should break out, between their High Mightinesses the
States General of the United Netherlands and the United States of America,
there shall always be granted to the subjects on each side, the term of nine
months, after the date of the rupture, or the proclamation of war; to the end
that they may retire with their effects, and transport them where they please;
which it shall be lawful for them to do, as well as to sell or transport their
effects and goods in all freedom, and without any hindrance, and without being
able to proceed during the said term of nine months, to any arrest of their
effects, much less of their persons; on the contrary, there shall be given
them, for their vessels and their effects which they would carry away,
passports and safe conducts, for the nearest ports of their respective
countries; and for the time necessary for the voyage, and no prize made at sea
shall be adjudged lawful, at least if the declaration of war was not or could
not be known, in the last port, which the vessel taken has quitted. But for
whatever may have been taken from the subjects and inhabitants of either party,
and for the offenses which may have been given, them, in the interval of the
said terms, a complete satisfaction shall be given them.

ART. XIX. No subjects of their High Mightinesses the States General of the
United Netherlands, shall apply for, or take any commission or letters of
marque for arming any ship or ships, to act as privateers, against the said
United States of America or any of them, or the subjects and inhabitants of the
said United States or any of them, or against the property of the inhabitants
of any of them, from any Prince or State with which the said United States of
America may happen to be at war; nor shall any subject or inhabitant of the
said United States of America or any of them, apply for or take any commission
or letters of marque for arming any ship or ships, to act as privateers against
the High and Mighty Lords, the States General of the United Netherlands, or
against the subjects of their High Mightinesses, or any of them, or against the
property of any one of them, from any Prince or State with which their High
Mightinesses may be at war: And if any person of either nation shall take such
commission or letters of marque he shall be punished as a pirate.

ART. XX. If the vessels of the subjects or inhabitants of one of the parties,
come upon any coast belonging to either of the said allies, but not willing to
enter into port, or being entered into port and not willing to unload their
cargoes or break bulk, or take in any cargo they shall not be obliged to pay
neither for the vessels, nor the cargoes, any duties of entry (...) or out, nor
to render any account of their cargoes, at least if there is not just cause to
presume, that they carry to an enemy, merchandises of contraband.

ART. XXI. The two contracting parties grant to each other mutually, the
liberty of having each in the ports of the other, Consuls, vice Consuls,
Agents, and Commissaries of their own appointing, whose functions shall be
regulated by particular agreement, whenever either party choose to make such
appointments.

ART. XXII. This treaty shall not be understood in any manner to derogate from
the ninth, tenth, nineteenth and twenty-fourth articles of the treaty with
France, as they were numbered in the same treaty concluded eluded the sixth of
February, 1778, and which makes the articles ninth, tenth, seventeenth, and
twenty-second of the treaty of commerce now subsisting between the United
States of America and the crown of France: Nor shall it hinder his Catholic
Majesty from acceding to that treaty, and enjoying the advantages of the said
four articles.

ART. XXIII. If at any time the United States of America, shall judge necessary
to commence negociations with the King or Emperor of Morocco and Fez, and the
Regencies of Algiers, Tunis or Tripoli, or with any of them, to obtain
passports for the security of their navigation in the Mediterranean sea; their
High Mightinesses promise that upon the requisition which the United States of
America shall make of it, they will second such negociations in the most
favorable manner, by means of their Consuls residing near the said King,
Emperor and Regencies.

ART. XXIV. The liberty of navigation and commerce shall extend to all sorts of
merchandises, excepting only those which are distinguished under the name of
contraband or merchandises prohibited: and under this denomination of
contraband and merchandises prohibited shall be comprehended only warlike
stores and arms, as mortars, artillery with their artifices and appurtenances,
fusils, pistols, bombs, grenades, gunpowder, saltpeter, sulphur, match,
bullets and balls, pikes, sabres, lances, halberts, casques, cutlasses, and
other sorts of arms: as also soldiers, horses, saddles and furniture for
horses. All other effects and merchandises, not before specified expressly, and
even all sorts of naval matters, however proper they may be, for the
construction and equipment of vessels of war, or for the manufacture of one or
another sort of machines of war, by land or sea, shall not be judged
contraband, neither by the letter, nor according to any pretended
interpretation whatever, ought they, or can they be comprehended, under the
notion of effects prohibited or contraband: So that all effects and
merchandises, which are not expressly before named, may without any exception,
and in perfect liberty be transported by the subjects and inhabitants of both
allies, from and to places belonging to the enemy, excepting only the places
which at the same time shall be besieged, blocked, or invested, and those
places only shall be held for such, which are surrounded nearly by some of the
belligerant powers.

ART. XXV. To the end that all dissension and quarrel may be avoided and
prevented, it has been agreed, that in case that one of the two parties happens
to be at war, the vessels belonging to the subjects or inhabitants of the other
ally, shall be provided with sea-letters or passports, expressing, the name,
the property and the burden of the vessel, as also the name and the place of
abode of the master or commander of the said vessel, to the end, that thereby
it may appear, that the vessel really and truly belongs to subjects or
inhabitants of one of the parties; which passports shall be drawn and
distributed according to the form annexed to this treaty: each time that the
vessel shall return, she should have such her possport renewed, or at least
they ought not be of more ancient date than two years, before the vessel has
been returned to her own country.

It has been also agreed that such vessels, being loaded ought to be provided
not only with the said passports or sea-letters, but also with a general
passport, or with particular passports or manifests, or other public documents,
which are ordinarily given to vessels outward-bound, in the ports from whence
the vessels have set sail in the last place, containing a specification of the
cargo, of the place from whence the vessel departed, and of that of her
destination; or instead of all these, with certificates from the Magistrates or
Governors, of cities, places and colonies, from whence the vessel came given in
the usual form, to the end, that it may be known whether there are any effects
prohibited or contraband on board the vessels, and whether they are destined to
be carried to an enemy's country or not. And in case any one judges proper, to
express in the said documents, the persons to whom the effects on board belong,
he may do it freely, without however, being bound to do it; and the omission of
such expression cannot and ought not to cause a confiscation.

ART. XXVI. If the vessels of the said subjects, or inhabitants of either of
the parties, sailing along the coast or on the high seas, are met by a vessel
of war or privateer, or other armed vessels of the other party, the said
vessels of war, privateers or armed vessels for avoiding all disorder, shall
remain without the reach of cannon, but may send their boats on board the
merchant vessels which they shall meet in this manner, upon which they may not
pass more than two or three men, to whom the master or commander shall exhibit
his passport concerning the property of the vessel according to the form
annexed to this treaty; and the vessel, after having exhibited such a passport,
sea-letter and other documents, shall be free to continue her voyage, so that
it shall not be lawful to molest her, or search her in any manner, nor to give
her chase, nor to force her to alter her course.

ART. XXVII. It shall be lawful for merchants, captains and commanders of
vessels, whether public, and of war, or private and of merchants, belonging to
the said United States of America, or any of them, or to their subjects and
inhabitants, to take freely into their service, and receive on board of their
vessels, in any port or place in the jurisdiction of their High Mightinesses
aforesaid, seamen or others, natives or inhabitants of any of the said states
upon such conditions as they shall agree on, without being subject for this to
any fine, penalty, punishment, process or reprehension whatever: And
reciprocally, all merchants, captains, and commanders, belonging to the said
United Netherlands, shall enjoy, in all the ports and places under the
obedience of the said United States of America, the same privilege of engaging
and receiving seamen, or others, natives or inhabitants of any country or the
domination of the said States General; provided, that neither on one side nor
the other, they may not take into their service such of their countrymen who
have already engaged in the service of the other party contracting, whether in
war or trade, and whether they meet them by land or by sea; at least, if the
captains or masters, under the command of whom such persons may be found, will
not, of his own consent, discharge them from the service, upon pain of being
otherwise treated and punished as deserters.

ART. XXVIII. The affair of refraction shall be regulated in all equity and
justice, by the Magistrates of cities respectively, where it shall be judged
that there is any room to complain in this respect.

ART. XXIX. The present treaty shall be ratified and approved of by their High
Mightinesses the States General of the United Netherlands, and by the United
States of America, and the acts of ratification shall be delivered in good and
due form on one side and on the other, in the space of six months, or sooner if
possible, to be computed from the day of the signature.

In faith of which, we the Deputies and Plenipotentiaries of the Lords the
States General of the United Netherlands, and the Minister Plenipotentiary of
the United States of America, in virtue of our respective authorities and full
powers have signed the present Treaty, and opposed thereto the seals of our
arms. Done at the Hague, the 8th day of October, 1782.
By the UNITED STATES in Congress Assembled. A PROCLAMATION.
WHEREAS in pursuance of a Plenipotentiary Commission, given on the 28th day of
September, 1782, to the Honorable Benjamin Franklin, a treaty of amity and
commerce between his Majesty the King of Sweden and the United States of
America, was on the 3d day of April, 1783, concluded by the said Benjamin
Franklin, with a Minister Plenipotentiary, named for that purpose by the said
King: And whereas the said treaty has been duly approved and ratified by the
United States in Congress assembled, and a translation thereof made in the
words following, to wit,
A TREATY of AMITY and COMMERCE concluded between his Majesty the King of
SWEDEN and the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
The King of Sweden, of the Goths and Vandals, etc. etc. etc. and the Thirteen
United States of North America, to wit, New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay,
Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, the Counties of
New Castle, Kent, and, Sussex, on Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina,
South Carolina, and Georgia, desiring to establish in a stable and permanent
manner, the rules which ought to be observed relative to the correspondence and
commerce which the two parties have judged necessary to establish between their
respective countries, states and subjects; his Majesty and the United States
have thought that they could not better accomplish that end, than by taking for
a basis of their arrangements the mutual interests and advantage of both
nations, thereby avoiding all those burdensome preferences, which are usually
sources of debate, embarrassment and discontent, and by leaving each party at
liberty to make, respecting navigation and commerce, those interior regulations
which shall be most convenient to itself.

With this view, his Majesty the King of Sweden has nominated and appointed for
his Plenipotentiary, Count Gustavus Philip de Creutz, his Ambassador
Extraordinary to his Most Christian Majesty, and Knight, Commander of his
orders; and the United States, on their part have fully empowered Benjamin
Franklin, their Minister Plenipotentiary to his Most Christian Majesty; the
said Plenipotentiaries, after exchanging their full powers, and after mature
deliberation in consequence thereof have agreed upon, concluded and signed the
following articles:

ARTICLE I.

There shall be a firm, inviolable and universal peace, and a true and sincere
friendship between the King of Sweden, his heirs and successors, and the United
States of America, and the subjects of his Majesty and those of the said
States, and between the countries, islands, cities and towns, situated under
the jurisdiction of the King and of the said United States, without any
exception of persons or places; and the conditions agreed to in this present
treaty, shall be perpetual and permanent between the King, his heirs and
successors, and the said United States.

Art. 2. The King and the United States engage mutually, not to grant hereafter
any particular favor to other nations in respect to commerce and navigation,
which shall not immediately become common to the other party, who shall enjoy
the same favor freely, if the concession was freely made, or on allowing the
same compensation, if the concession was conditional.

Art. 3. The subjects of the King of Sweden shall not pay in the ports, havens,
roads, countries, islands, cities and towns, of the United States or any of
them, any other nor greater duties or imposts of what nature soever they may
be, than those which the most favored nations are or shall be obliged to pay;
and they shall enjoy all the rights, liberties, privileges, immunities and
exemptions in trade, navigation and commerce which the said nations do or shall
enjoy, whether in passing from one port to another of the United States, or in
going to or from the same, from or to any part of the world whatever.

Art. 4. The subjects and inhabitants of the said United States shall not pay
in the ports, havens, roads, islands, cities and towns under the dominion of
the King of Sweden, any other or greater duties or imposts of what nature
soever they may be, or by what name soever called, than those which the most
favored nations are or shall be obliged to pay; and they shall enjoy all the
rights, liberties, privileges, immunities and exemptions in trade, navigation
and commerce, which the said nations do or shall enjoy, whether in passing from
one port to another of the dominion of his said Majesty, or in going to or from
the same, from or to any part of the world whatever.

Art. 5. There shall be granted a full, perfect and entire liberty of
conscience to the inhabitants and subjects of each party, and no person shall
be molested on account of his worship, provided he submits so far as regards
the public demonstrations of it to the laws of the country: Moreover liberty
shall be granted, when any of the subjects or inhabitants of either party die
in the territory of the other, to bury them in convenient and decent places,
which shall be assigned for the purpose: And the two contracting parties will
provide each in its jurisdiction, that subjects and inhabitants respectively
may obtain certificates of the death in case the delivery of them is required.

Art. 6. The subjects of the contracting parties in the respective States, may
freely dispose of their goods and effects either by testament, donation or
otherwise in favor of such persons as they think proper; and their heirs in
whatever place they shall reside, shall receive the succession even ab
intestato, either in person or by their attorney, without having occasion to
take out letters of naturalization. These inheritances, as well as the capitals
and effects, which the subjects of the two parties, in changing their abode,
shall be desirous of removing from the place of their abode, shall be exempted
from all duty, called "droit de detraction," on the part of the government of
the two States respectively. But it is at the same time agreed, that nothing
contained in this article shall in any manner derogate from the ordinances
published in Sweden against emigrations, or which may hereafter be published,
which shall remain in full force and vigor. The United States on their part,
or any of them, shall be at liberty to make respecting this matter, such laws
as they think proper.

Art. 7, All and every the subjects inhabitants of the kingdom of Sweden, as
well as those of the United States, shall be permitted to navigate with their
vessels in all safety and freedom, and without any regard to those to whom the
merchandise and cargoes may belong, from any port whatever, and the subjects
and inhabitants of the two states shall likewise be permitted to sail and trade
with their vessels, and with the same liberty and safety to frequent the
places, ports and havens of powers, enemies to both or either of the
contracting parties, without being in any wise molested or troubled, and to
carry on a commerce not only directly from the ports of an enemy to a neutral
port, but even from one port of an enemy, to another port of an enemy, whether
it be under the jurisdiction of the same or of different princes. And as it is
acknowledged by this treaty with respect to ships and merchandises that free
ships shall make the merchandises free, and that every thing which shall be on
board of ships belonging to subjects of the one or the other of the contracting
parties, shall be considered as free, even though the cargo or a part of it
should belong to the enemies of one or both; it is nevertheless provided that
contraband goods shall always be excepted; which being intercepted, shall be
proceeded against according to the spirit of the following articles. It is
likewise agreed, that the same liberty be extended to persons who may be on
board a free ship, with this effect, that although they be enemies to both or
either of the parties, they shall not be taken out of the free ship, unless
they are soldiers in the actual service of the said enemies.

Art. 8. The liberty of navigation and commerce shall extend to all kinds of
merchandises except those only which are expressed in the following article and
are distinguished by the name of contraband goods.

Art. 9. Under the name of contraband or prohibited goods shall be
comprehended, arms, great guns, cannon balls, arquebuses, muskets, bombs,
petards, grenades, saucisses, pitch, balls, carriages for ordinance, musket
rests, bandoliers, cannon powder, matches, saltpeter, sulphur, bullets, pikes,
sabres, swords, morions, helmets, cuirasses, balbards, javelins, pistols,
holsters, belts, bayonets, horses with their harness, and all other like kinds
of arms and instruments of war for the use of troops.

Art. 10. These which follow shall not be reckoned in the number of prohibited
goods, that is to say, all sorts of clothes, and all other manufactures of
wool, flax, silk, cotton or any other materials, all kinds of wearing apparel
together with the things of which they are commonly made; gold, silver coined
or uncoined, brass, iron, lead, copper, latten, coals, wheat, barley and all
sorts of corn or pulse, tobacco, all kinds of spices, salted or smoaked flesh,
salted fish, cheese, butter, beer, oil, wines, sugar, all sorts of salt and
provisions which serve for the nourishment and sustenance of man; all kinds of
cotton, hemp, flax, tar, pitch, ropes, cables, sails, sail cloth, anchors, and
any parts of anchors, ship-masts, planks, boards, beams and all sorts of trees
and other things proper for building or repairing ships; nor shall any goods be
considered as contraband, which have not been worked into the form of any
instrument or thing for the purpose of war by land or by sea, much less such as
have been prepared or wrought up for any other use. All which shall be reckoned
free goods, as likewise all others which are not comprehended and particularly
mentioned in the foregoing article; so that they shall not, by any pretended
interpretation be comprehended among prohibited or contraband goods: on the
contrary they may be freely transported by the subjects of the King and of the
United States, even to places belonging to an enemy, such places only excepted
as are besieged, blocked or invested, and those places only shall be considered
as such, which are nearly surrounded by one of the belligerent powers.

Art. 11. In order to avoid and prevent on both sides all disputes and
discords, it is agreed that in case one of the parties shall be engaged in a
war, the ships and vessels belonging to the subjects or inhabitants of the
other shall be furnished with sea-letters or passports, expressing the name,
property and port of the vessel, and also the name and place of abode of the
master or commander of the said vessel, in order that it may thereby appear
that the said vessel really and truly belongs to the subjects of the one or the
other party. -- These passports which shall be drawn up in good and due form,
shall be renewed every time the vessel returns home in the course of the year.
It is also agreed that the said vessels when loaded shall be provided not only
with sea-letters, but also with certificates containing a particular account of
the cargo, the place from which the vessel sailed and that of her destination,
in order that it may be known, whether they carry any of the prohibited or
contraband merchandises, mentioned in the 9th article of the present treaty;
which certificates shall be made out by the officers of the place from which
the vessel shall depart.

Art. 12. Although the vessels of the one and the other party may navigate
freely and with all safety, as is explained in the 7th article, they shall
nevertheless be bound at all times when required, to exhibit as well on the
high seas as in port, their passports and certificates abovementioned. And not
having contraband merchandise on board for an enemy's port, they may freely and
without hindrance pursue their voyage to the place of their destination.
Nevertheless the exhibition of papers shall not be demanded of merchant ships
under convoy of vessels of war, but credit shall be given to the word of the
officer commanding the convoy.

Art. 13. If on producing the said certificates, it be discovered, that the
vessel carries some of the goods which are declared to be prohibited or
contraband, and which are consigned to an enemy's port, it shall not however be
lawful to break up the hatches of such ships, not to open any chest, coffers,
packs, casks or vessels, nor to remove the smallest part of the merchandises,
until the cargo has been landed in the presence of officers appointed for the
purpose, and until an inventory thereof has been taken; nor shall it be lawful
to sell, exchange or alienate the cargo or any part thereof, until legal
process shall have been had against the prohibited merchandises, and sentences
shall have passed, declaring them liable to confiscation; saving, nevertheless,
as well the ships themselves, as the other merchandises, which shall have been
found therein, which by virtue of this present treaty, are to be esteemed free,
and which are not to be detained on pretense of their having been loaded with
prohibited merchandise, and much less confiscated as lawful prize. And in case
the contraband merchandise be only a part of the cargo and the master of the
vessel agrees, consents and offers to deliver them the vessel, that has
discovered them, in that case the latter, after receiving the merchandises
which are good prize, shall immediately let the vessel go and shall not by any
means hinder her from pursuing her voyage to the place of her destination. When
a vessel is taken and brought into any of the ports of the contracting parties,
if upon examination she be found to be loaded only with merchandises declared
to be free, the owner or he who has made the prize shall be bound to pay all
costs and damages to the master of the vessel unjustly detained.

Art. 14. It is likewise agreed that whatever shall be found to be laden by the
subjects of either of the two contracting parties on a ship belonging to the
enemies of the other party, the whole effects, although not of the number of
those declared contraband, shall be confiscated as if they belonged to the
enemy, excepting nevertheless such goods and merchandises as were put on board
before the declaration of war, and even six months after the declaration, after
which term none shall be presumed to be ignorant of it, which merchandises
shall not in any manner be subject to confiscation, but shall be faithfully and
specifically delivered to the owners who shall claim, or cause them to be
claimed before confiscation and sale, as also their proceeds, if the claim be
made within eight months and could not be made sooner after the sale, which is
to be public: provided nevertheless, that if the said merchandises be
contraband, it shall not be in anywise lawful to carry them afterward to a
port belonging to the enemy.

Art. 15. And that more effectual care may be taken for the security of the two
contracting parties, that they suffer no prejudice by the men of war of the
other party, or by privateers; all captains and commanders of ships of his
Swedish Majesty, and of the United States, and all their subjects, shall be
forbidden to do any injury or damage to those of the other party, and if they
act to the contrary, having been found guilty on examination by their proper
judges, they shall be bound to make satisfaction for all damages, and the
interest thereof, and to make them good, under pain and obligation of their
persons and goods.

Art. 16. For this cause, every individual who is dosirous of fitting out a
privateer shall, before he receives letters patent or special commission, be
obliged to give bond with sufficient sureties: before a competent judge, for a
sufficient sum to answer all damages and wrongs which the owner of the
privateer, his officers or others in his employ may commit during the cruise,
contrary to the tenor of this treaty, and contrary to the edicts published by
either party, whether by the King of Sweden, or by the United States, in virtue
of this same treaty, and also under the penalty of having the said letters
patent and special commission revoked and made void.

Art. 17. One of the contracting parties being at war, and the other remaining
neuter, if it should happen that a merchant ship of the neutral power be taken
by the enemy of the other party, and be afterward retaken by a ship of war or
privateer of the power at war, also ships and merchandises of what nature
soever they may be when recovered from a pirate or sea rover, shall be brought
into a port of one of the two powers, and shall be committed to the custody of
the officers of the said port, that they may be restored entire to the true
proprietor as soon as he shall have produced full proof of the property.
Merchants, masters and owners of ships, seamen, people of all sorts, ships and
vessels, and in general, all merchandises and effects of one of the Allies or
their subjects, shall not be subject to any embargo, nor detained in any of the
countries, territories, islands, cities, towns, ports, rivers or domains
whatever of the other Ally, on account of any military expedition, or any
public or private purpose whatever, by seizure, by force, or by any such
manner; much less shall it be lawful for the subjects of one of the parties to
seize or take any thing by force from the subjects of the other party, without
the consent of the owner. This, however, is not to be understood to comprehend
seizures, detensions, and arrests, made by order and by the authority of
justice, and according to the ordinary course for debts or faults of the
subject, for which process shall be had in the way of right, according to the
forms of justice.

Art. 18. If it should happen that the two contracting parties should be
engaged in a war at the same time, with a common enemy, the following points
shall be observed on both sides.

1st. If the ships of one of the two nations retaken by the privateers of the
other, have not been in the power of the enemy more than twenty-four hours,
they shall be restored to the original owner on payment of one third of the
value of the ship and cargo. If on the contrary, the vessel retaken has been
more than twenty-four hours in the power of the enemy, it shall belong wholly
to him who has retaken it.

2d. In case, during the interval of twenty-four hours, a vessel be retaken by
a man of war of either of the two parties, it shall be restored to the original
owner on payment of a thirtieth part of the value of the vessel and cargo, and
a tenth part of it has been retaken after the twenty-four hours, which sums
shall be distributed as a gratification among the crew of the men of war that
shall have made the recapture.

3d. The prizes made in manner abovementioned, shall be restored to the owners
after proof made of the property, upon giving security for the part coming to
him who has recovered the vessel from the hands of the enemy.

4th. The men of war and privateers of the two nations shall reciprocally be
admitted with their prizes into each others ports; but the prizes shall not be
unloaded or sold there until the legality of a prize made by Swedish ships
shall have been determined according to the laws and regulations established in
Sweden, as also that of the prizes made by American vessels, shall have been
determined according to the laws and regulations established by the United
States of America.

5th. Moreover the King of Sweden, and the United States of America, shall be
at liberty to make such regulations as they shall judge necessary respecting
the conduct which their men of war and privateers respectively shall be bound
to observe with regard to vessels which they shall take and carry into the
ports of the two Powers.

Art. 19. The ships of war of his Swedish Majesty and those of the United
States, and also those which their subjects shall have armed for war, may with
all freedom conduct the prizes which they shall have made from their enemies
into the ports which are open in time of war to other friendly nations, and the
said prizes, upon entering the said ports, shall not be subject to arrest or
seizure, nor shall the officers of the places take cognizance of the validity
of the said prizes which may depart and be conducted freely and with all
liberty to the places pointed out in their commissions, which the Captains of
the said vessels shall be obliged to show.

Art. 20. In case any vessel belonging to either of the two States, or to their
subjects, shall be stranded, shipwrecked, or suffer any other damage on the
coasts or unto the dominion of either of the parties, all aid and assistance
shall be given to the persons shipwrecked, or who may be in danger thereof, and
passports shall be granted to them to secure their return to their own country.
The ships and merchandises wrecked, or their proceeds, if the effects have been
sold, being claimed in a year and a day by the owners or their attorney, shall
be restored, on their paying the costs of salvage, conformable to the laws and
customs of the two nations.

Art. 21. When the Subjects and inhabitants of the two parties, with their
vessels, whether they be public and equipped for war, or private, employed in
commerce, shall be forced by tempest, by pursuit of privateers and of enemies,
or by any other urgent necessity, to retire and enter any of the rivers, bays,
roads or ports of either of the two parties, they shall be received and treated
with all humanity and politeness, and they shall enjoy all friendship,
protection, and assistance, and they shall be at liberty to supply themselves
with refreshments, provisions, and every thing necessary for their sustenance,
for the repair of their vessels, and for continuing their voyage; provided
always, that they pay a reasonable price, and they shall not in any manner be
detained or hindered from sailing out of the said ports or roads, but they may
retire and depart when and as they please without any obstacle or hindrance.

Art. 22. In order to favor commerce on both sides as much as possible, it is
agreed, that in case a war should break out between the said two nations, which
God forbid, the term of nine months, after the declaration of war, shall be
allowed to the merchants and subjects respectively on one side, and the other,
in order that they may withdraw with their effects and movables, which they
shall be at liberty to carry off or to sell where they please, without the
least obstacle; nor shall any seize their effects and much less their persons
during the said nine months, but on the contrary, passports which shall be
valid for a time necessary for their return, shall be given them for their
vessels and the effects which they shall be willing to carry with them. And if
any thing is taken from them, or if any injury is done to them by one of the
parties, their people and subjects, during the term above prescribed, full and
entire satisfaction shall be made to them on that account. The abovementioned
passports shall also serve as a safe conduct against all insults or prizes
which privateers may attempt against their persons and effects.

Art. 23. No subject of the King of Sweden shall take a commission or letters
of marque, for arming any vessel to act as a privateer against the United
States of America, or any of them, or against the subjects, people or
inhabitants of the said United States, or any of them, or against the property
of the inhabitants of the said States, from any Prince or State whatever, with
whom the said United States shall be at war. Nor shall any citizen, subject or
inhabitant of the said United States, or any of them, apply for or take any
commission on letters of marque, for arming any vessel to cruize against the
subjects of his Swedish Majesty, or any of them, or their property, from any
Prince or State whatever with whom his said Majesty shall be at war. And if any
person of either nation shall take such commissions or letters of marque, he
shall be punished as a pirate.

Art. 24. The vessels of the subjects of either of the parties coming upon any
of the coasts belonging to the other, but not willing to enter into part, or
being entered into port, and not willing to unload their cargoes, or to break
bulk, shall not be obliged to do it, but on the contrary shall enjoy all the
franchises and exemptions which are granted by the rules subsisting with
respect to that object.

Art. 25. When a vessel belonging to the subjects and inhabitants of either of
the parties, sailing on the high sea, shall be met by a ship of war or
privateer of the other, the said ship of war or privateer, to avoid all
disorder, shall remain out of cannon shot, but may always send their boat to
the merchant ship, and cause two or three men to go on board of her, to whom
the master or commander of the said vessel shall exhibit his passport, stating
the property of the vessel, and when the said vessel shall have exhibited her
passport, she shall be at liberty to continue her voyage, and it shall not be
lawful to molest or search her in any manner, or to give her chase or force her
to quit her intended course.

Art. 26. The two contracting parties granted mutually the liberty of having
each in the ports of the other Consuls, Vice Consuls, Agents and Commissaries,
whose functions shall be regulated by a particular agreement.

Art. 27. The present treaty shall be ratified on both sides, and the
ratifications shall be exchanged in (...) space of eight months, or sooner if
possible, counting from the day of the signature.

In faith whereof, the respective Plenipotentiaries have signed the above
articles, and have thereunto affixed their seals.

DONE at Paris, the third day of April, in the year of Our Lord, One Thousand
Seven Hundred and Eighty three. (Signed) GUSTAV. PHILIIP Compte de CREUTZ. L.
S. B. BRANKLIN. L. S.


SEPARATE ARTICLE.
THE King of Sweden and the United States of North America, agree that the
present Treaty shall have its full effect for the space of fifteen years,
counting from the day of the ratification, and the two contracting parties
reserve to themselves the liberty of renewing it at the end of that term.

DONE at Paris, the third of April, in the year of our Lord, One Thousand Seven
Hundred and eighty-three. (Signed) GUSTAV. PHILIP Compte de CRUETZ. L. S. B.
FRANKLIN. L. S.


SEPARATE ARTICLES.
Art. 1. His Swedish Majesty shall use all the means in his power to protect
and defend the vessels and effects belonging to citizens or inhabitants of the
United States of North America, and every of them which shall be in the ports,
havens, roads, or on the seas near the countries, islands, cities and towns of
his said Majesty, and shall use his utmost endeavors to recover and restore to
the right owners, all such vessels and effects, which shall be taken from them
within his jurisdiction.

Art. 2. In like manner, the United States of North America shall protect and
defend the vessels and effects belonging to the subjects of his Swedish
Majesty, which shall be in the ports, havens or roads, or on the seas near to
the countries, islands, cities and towns of the said States, and shall use
their utmost efforts to recover and restore to the right owners all such
vessels and effects which shall be taken from them, within their jurisdiction.

Art. 3. If in any future war at sea, the contracting powers resolve to remain
neuter, and as such, to observe the strictest neutrality, then it is agreed,
that if the merchant ships of either party, should happen to be in a part of
the sea where the ships of war of the same nation are not stationed, or if they
are met on the high sea, without being able to have recourse to their own
convoys, in that case the commander of the ships of war of the other party, if
required, shall in good faith and sincerity give them all necessary assistance,
and in such case, the ships of war and frigates of either of the powers, shall
protect and support the merchant ships of the other, provided nevertheless,
that the ships claiming assistance are not engaged in any illicit commerce
contrary to the principles of the neutrality.

Art. 4. It is agreed and concluded that all merchants, captains of merchant
ships, or other subjects of his Swedish Majesty, shall have full liberty in all
places under the dominion or jurisdiction of the United States of America, to
manage their own affairs, and to employ in the management of them whomsoever
they please; and they shall not be obliged to make use of any interpreter or
broker, nor to pay them any reward unless they make use of them. Moreover, the
masters of ships shall not be obliged in loading or unloading their vessels, to
employ laborers appointed by public authority for that purpose; but they shall
be at full liberty, themselves to load or unload their vessels, or to employ in
loading or unloading them whomsoever they think proper, without paying reward
under the title of salary to any other person whatever; and they shall not be
obliged to turn over any kind of merchandises to other vessels, nor to receive
them on board their own, nor to wait for their lading longer than they please,
and all and every of the citizens, people and inhabitants of the United States
of America, shall reciprocally have and enjoy the same privileges and liberties
in all places under the jurisdiction of the said realm.

Art 5. It is agreed that when merchandises shall have been put on board the
ships or vessels of either of the contracting parties, they shall not be
subjected to any examination; but all examination and search must be before
lading, and the prohibited merchandises must be stopped on the spot before they
are embarked, unless there is full evidence or proof of fraudulent practice on
the part of the owner of the ship, or of him who has the command of her. In
which case only he shall be responsible and subject to the laws of the country
in which he may be. In all other cases neither the subjects of either of the
contracting parties, who shall be with their vessels in the ports of the other,
nor their merchandises shall be seized or molested on account of contraband
goods, which they shall have wanted to take on board, nor shall any kind of
embargo be laid on their ships, subjects or citizens of the State whose
merchandises are declared contraband, or the exportation of which is forbidden,
those only who shall have sold or intended to sell or alienate such
merchandise, being liable to punishment for such contravention.

Done at Paris, the third day of April, in the year of our Lord one thousand,
seven hundred and eighty-three. (Signed) GUSTAV. PHILIP Compte de CREUTZ, L. S.
B. FRANKLIN, L. S.

NOW therefore, to the end that the said treaty may with all good faith be
performed and observed on the part of these States, all the citizens and
inhabitants thereof, and more especially all officers and others in the service
of the United States, are hereby enjoined and required to govern themselves
strictly in all things according to the stipulations above recited.

Done in Congress at Princeton, this twenty-fifth day of September, in the year
of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and eighty-three, and of our Sovereignty
and Independence the eighth. ELIAS BOUDINOT, President. CHARLES THOMSON,
Secretary.




By the UNITED STATES in Congress Assembled. A PROCLAMATION.
WHEREAS definitive articles of peace and friendship, between the United States
of America and his Britannick Majesty, were concluded and signed at Paris, on
the third day of September, 1783, by the Plenipotentiaries of the said United
States, and of his said Britannick Majesty, duly and respectively authorized
for that purpose: which definitive articles are in the words following:
In the Name of the Most Holy and Undivided Trinity.
IT having pleased the divine Providence to dispose the hearts of the Most
Serene and Most Potent Prince George the Third, by the Grace of God, King of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, Duke of Brunswick
and Lunenburgh, Arch Treasurer and Prince Elector of the Holy Roman Empire,
etc. and of the United States of America, to forget all past misunderstandings
and differences that have unhappily interrupted the good correspondence and
friendship which they mutually wish to restore, and to establish such a
beneficial and satisfactory intercourse between the two countries, upon the
ground of reciprocal advantages and mutual convenience, as may promote and
secure to both perpetual peace and harmony: and having for this desirable end
already laid the foundation of peace and reconciliation, by the Provisional
Articles signed at Paris on the 30th of November, 1782, by the commissioners
empowered on each part, which Articles were agreed to be inserted in, and to
constitute the Treaty of Peace proposed to be concluded between the Crown of
Great Britain and the said United States, but which Treaty was not to be
concluded until terms of Peace should be agreed upon between Great Britain and
France, and his Britannic Majesty should be ready to conclude such Treaty
accordingly; and the Treaty between Great Britain and France having since been
concluded, his Britannic Majesty and the United States of America, in order to
carry into full effect the Provisional Articles above mentioned, according to
the tenor thereof, have constituted and appointed, that is to say, his
Britannick Majesty on his part, David Hartley, Esquire Member of the Parliament of
Great Britain, and the said United States on their part, John Adams, Esquire late a
Commissioner of the United States of America at the Court of Versailles, late
Delegate in Congress from the State of Massachusetts, and Chief Justice of the
said State, and Minister Plenipotentiary of the said United States to their
High Mightinesses the States General of the United Netherlands; Benjamin
Franklin, Esquire late Delegate in Congress from the State of Pennsylvania,
President of the convention of the said State, and Minister Plenipotentiary
from the United States of America at the Court of Versailles; and John Jay, Esquire
late President of Congress, Chief Justice of the State of New York, and
Minister Plenipotentiary from the said United States at the Court of Madrid, to
be the Plenipotentiaries for the concluding and signing the present Definitive
Treaty; who after having reciprocally communicated their respective full
powers, have agreed upon and confirmed the following Articles:

Art. I. His Britannic Majesty acknowledges the said United States, viz.
New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island and Providence* Plantations,
Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia,
North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia, to be Free, Sovereign, and
Independent States; that he treats with them as such, and for himself, his
heirs and successors, relinquishes all claims to the government, property, and
territorial rights of the same, and every part thereof.

Art. II. And that all disputes which might arise in future, on the subject of
the boundaries of the said United States, may be prevented, it is hereby agreed
and declared, that the following are and shall be their boundaries, viz. From
the north-west angle of Nova Scotia, viz. that angle which is formed by a line
drawn due north from the source of St. Croix river to the Highlands, along the
said Highlands, which divide those rivers that empty themselves into the river
St. Lawrence, from those which fall into the Atlantic ocean, to the
north-western-most head of Connecticut river; thence down along the middle of
that river to the forty-fifth degree of north-latitude; from thence by a line
due west on said latitude, until it strikes the river Irriquois or Cataraqui;
thence along the middle of the said river into Lake Ontario; through the middle
of the said Lake until it strikes the communication by water between that Lake
and Lake Erie; thence along the middle of said communication into Lake Erie,
through the middle of said Lake, until it arrives at the water communication
between that Lake and Lake Huron, thence through the middle of said Lake to the
water communication between that Lake and Lake Superior; thence through Lake
Superior, northwards of the Isles Royal and Philippeaux to the Long Lake;
thence through the middle of said Long Lake and the water communication between
it and the Lake of the Woods, to the said Lake of the Woods; thence through the
said Lake to the most north-western point thereof, and from thence on a due
west course to the river Mississippi; thence by a line to be drawn along the
middle of the said River Mississippi; thence by a line to be drawn along the
middle of the said River Mississippi until it shall intersect the northernmost
part of the thirty-first degree of north latitude. South, by a line to be drawn
due east from the determination of the line last mentioned in the latitude of
thirty-one degrees north of the Equator, to the middle of the River
Apalachicola or Catahouche; thence along the middle thereof to its junction
with the said river; thence strait to the head of St. Mary's river; and thence
down along the middle of St. Mary's river to the Atlantic ocean. East, by a
line to be drawn along the middle of the River St. Croix, from its mouth in the
Bay of Fundy to its source, and from its source directly north to the aforesaid
Highlands, which divide the rivers that fall into the Atlantic ocean from those
which fall into the River St. Lawrence, comprehending all Islands within twenty
leagues of any part of the shores of the United States, and lying between lines
to be drawn due east from the points where the aforesaid boundaries between
Nova Scotia on the one part, and East-Florida on the other, shall respectively
touch the Bay of Fundy and the Atlantic ocean, excepting such Islands as now
are or heretofore have been within the limits of the said province of
Nova Scotia.

Art. III. It is agreed that the people of the United States shall continue to
enjoy unmolested the right to take fish of every kind on the Grand Bank, and on
all the other Banks of Newfoundland, also in the Gulf of St. Lawrence, and all
other places in the sea, where the inhabitants of both countries used at any
time heretofore to fish. And also, that the inhabitants of the United States
shall have liberty to take fish of every kind on such part of the coast of
Newfoundland, as British fishermen shall use (but not to dry or cure the same
on that island) and also, on the coasts, bays and creeks of all others of his
Britannic Majesty's dominions in America; and that the American fishermen shall
have liberty to dry and cure fish in any of the unsettled bays, harbors and
creeks of Nova Scotia, Magdalen Islands and Labrador, so long as the same shall
remain unsettled; but so soon as the same or either of them shall be settled,
it shall not be lawful for the said fishermen to dry or cure fish at such
settlement, without a previous agreement for that purpose with the inhabitants,
proprietors or possessors of the ground.

Art. IV. It is agreed that the creditors on either side shall meet with no
lawful impediment to the recovery of the full value, in sterling money, of all
bona fide debts heretofore contracted.

Art. V. It is agreed that Congress shall earnestly recommend it to the
Legislatures of the respective States, to provide for the restitution of all
estates, rights, and properties, which have been confiscated, belonging to real
British subjects; and also of the estates, rights and properties of persons
resident in districts in the possession of his Majesty's arms, and who have not
borne arms against the United States; and that persons of any other description
shall have free liberty to go to any part or parts of the Thirteen United
States, and therein to remain twelve months unmolested, in their endeavors to
obtain the restitution of such of their estates, rights and properties, as may
have been confiscated; and that Congress shall earnestly recommend to the
several States are consideration and revision of all Acts or Laws regarding the
premises, so as to render the said Laws or Acts perfectly consistent, not only
with justice and equity, but with that spirit of conciliation, which on the
return of the blessings of peace, should universally prevail: And that Congress
shall earnestly recommend to the several States, that the estates, rights and
properties of such last mentioned persons, shall be restored to them, they
refunding to any persons, who may be now in possession, the bona fide price,
(where any has been given) which such persons may have paid on purchasing any
of the said lands, rights, or properties, since the confiscation.

And it is agreed, that all persons who have any interest in confiscated lands,
either by debts, marriage settlements, or otherwise, shall meet with no lawful
impediment in the prosecution of their just rights.

Art. VI. That there shall be no future confiscations made, nor any
prosecutions commenced against any person or persons for, or by reason of the
part which he or they may have taken in the present war; and that no person
shall, on that account, suffer any future loss or damage, either in his person,
liberty or property: all that those who may be in confinement on such charges
at the time of the ratification of the Treaty in America, shall be immediately
set at liberty, and the prosecutions so commenced be discontinued.

Art. VII. There shall be a firm and perpetual peace between his Britannic
Majesty and the said States, and between the subjects of the one, and the
citizens of the other; wherefore all hostilities both by sea and land shall
from henceforth cease; all prisoners on both sides shall be set at liberty; and
his Britannic Majesty shall, with all convenient speed, and without causing any
destruction, or carrying away any negroes or other property of the American
inhabitants: withdraw all his armies, garrisons and fleets, from the said
United States, and from every post, place and harbor within the same, leaving
in all fortifications the American artillery that may be therein, and shall
also order and cause all archieves, records, deeds, and papers belonging to any
of the said states, or their citizens, which in the course of the war may have
fallen into the hands of his officers, to be forthwith restored, and delivered
to the proper state and persons to whom they belong.

Art. VIII. The navigation of the river Mississippi, from its source to the
ocean, shall forever remain free and open to the subjects of Great Britain, and
the citizens of the United States.

Art. IX. In case it should so happen that any place or territory belonging to
Great Britain, or to the United States, should have been conquered by the arms
of either from the other, before the arrival of the said Provisional Articles
in America, it is agreed that the same shall be restored without difficulty,
and without requiring any compensation.

Art. X. The solemn ratifications of the present treaty, expedited in good and
due form, shall be exchanged between the contracting parties in the space of
six months, or sooner, if possible, to be computed from the day of the
signature of the present treaty. In witness whereof we the undersigned, their
Ministers Plenipotentiary, have in their name, and in virtue of our full
powers, signed with our hands the present Definitive Treaty, and caused the
seals of our arms to be affixed thereto.

Done at Paris, this 3 d day of September, in the year of our Lord One Thousand
seven hundred and Eighty Three. (L. S.) JOHN ADAMS. (L. S.) DAVID HARTLEY. (L.
S.) B. FRANKLIN. (L. S.) JOHN JAY.


GEORGE R. George the Third, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, Duke of Brunswick and Lunenbourg,
Arch-Treasurer, and Prince Elector of the Holy Roman Empire, etc. To all to
whom those presents shall come Greeting.
WHEREAS for the perfecting and establishing the peace, friendship, and good
understanding, so happily commenced by the Provisional Articles, signed at
Paris, the thirtieth day of November last, by the Commissioners of us and our
good friends, the United States of America, viz. New Hampshire,
Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey,
Pennsylvania, the three Lower Counties on Delaware, Maryland, Virginia,
North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia, in North America, and for opening,
promoting, and rendering perpetual, the mutual intercourse of trade and
commerce between our kingdoms and the dominions of the said United States, we
have thought proper to invest some fit person with full powers on our part to
meet and confer with the Ministers of the said United States, now residing at
Paris, duly authorized for the accomplishing of such laudable and salutary
purposes. Now know ye, that We reposing special trust and confidence in the
wisdom, loyalty, diligence, and circumspection of our trusty and well-beloved
David Hartley, Esquire. (on whom we have therefore conferred the rank of our
Minister Plenipotentiary) have nominated, constituted, and appointed, and by
these presents, do nominate, constitute and appoint him our true, certain, and
undoubted Commissioner, Procurator, and Plenipotentiary, giving and granting to
him all and all manner of faculty, power, and authority, together with general
as well as special order (so as the general do not derogate from the special,
nor on the contrary) for us and in our name, to meet, confer, treat and
conclude with the Minister or Ministers furnished with sufficient powers on the
part of our said good friends the United States of America, of and concerning
all such matters and things as may be requisite and necessary for accomplishing
and completing the several ends and purposes herein before mentioned; and also
for us, and in our name, to sign, such Treaty or Treaties, Convention or
Conventions, or other instruments whatsover, as may be agreed upon in the
premises; and mutually to deliver and receive the same in exchange, and to do
and perform all such other acts, matters, and things, as may be any ways proper
and conducive to the purposes above mentioned, in as full and ample form and
manner, and with the like validity and effect, as we ourself, if we were
present, could do and perform the same; engaging and promising, on our Royal
word, that we will accept, ratify, and confirm, in the most effectual manner,
all such acts, matters, and things, as shall be so transacted and concluded by
our aforesaid Commissioner, Procurator, and Plenipotentiary; and that we will
never suffer any person to violate the same in the whole or in part, or to act
contrary thereto. In testimony and confirmation of all which, we have caused
our Great Seal of Great Britain to be affixed to these presents, signed with
our Royal Hand.

Given at our Palace at St, James's, the Fourteenth day of May, in the year of
our Lord one thousand se-hundred and eighty-three, and in the twenty-third year
of our reign. I David Hartley, the Minister abovenamed, certify the foregoing
to be a true copy from my original Commission, delivered to the American
Ministers this 19th day of May, 1783.

(Signed) DAVID HARTLEY.



The United States of America, in Congress Assembled.
To all whom these Presents shall come, send Greeting.
WHEREAS these United States, from a sincere desire of putting an end to the
hostilities between his Most Christian Majesty and these United States on the
one part, and his Britannic Majesty on the other, and of terminating the same
by a peace founded on such solid and equitable principles as reasonably to
promise a permanency of the blessings of tranquillity, did heretofore appoint
the Hon. John Adams, late a Commissioner of the United States of America at the
Court of Versailles, late Delegate in Congress from the State of
Massachusettes, and Chief Justice of the said State, their Minister
Plenipotentiary, with full powers general and special to act in that quality,
to confer, treat, agree, and conclude with the Ambassadors or Plenipotentiaries
of his Most Christian Majesty, and of his Britannic Majesty, and those of any
other Princes or States whom it might concern, relating to the re-establishing
of peace and friendship: And whereas the flames of war have since that time
been extended, and other nations and States are involved therein: Now know ye,
that we still continuing earnestly desirous, as far as depends upon us, to put
a stop to the effusion of blood, and to convince the powers of Europe, that we
wish for nothing more ardently than to terminate the war, by a safe and
honorable Peace, have thought proper to renew the powers formerly given to the
said John Adams, and to join four other persons in commission with him; and
having full confidence in the integrity, prudence, and abilities of the Hon.
Benjamin Franklin, our Minister Plenipotentiary at the Court of Versailles, and
the Hon. John Jay, late President of Congress, and Chief Justice of the State
of New York, and our Minister Plenipotentiary at the Court of Madrid, and the
Honorable Henry Laurens, formerly President of Congress, and commissioned and
sent as our Agent to the United Provinces of the Low Countries, and the
Honorable Thomas Jefferson, Governor of the Commonwealth of Virginia, have
nominated, constituted, and appointed, and by these presents do nominate,
constitute and appoint the said Benjamin Franklin, John Jay, Henry Laurens, and
Thomas Jefferson, in addition to the said John Adam, Benjamin Franklin, John
Jay, Henry Laurens, and Thomas Jefferson, or the majority of them, or such of
them as may assemble, or, in case of the death, absence, indisposition, or
other impediment of the other, to any one of them, full power and authority,
general and special, conjunctly and separately, and general and special command
to repair to such place as may be fixed upon for opening negociations for
peace, and there for us and in our name, to confer, treat, agree, and conclude
with the Ambassadors, Commissioners Plenipotentiaries of the Princes and States
whom it may concern, vested with equal powers relating to the establishment of
Peace; and whatsoever shall be agreed and concluded, for us, and in our name to
sign, and there upon make a Treaty or Treaties, and to transact every thing
that may be necessary for completing, securing, and strengthening the great
work of pacification, in as ample form, and with the same effect, as if we were
personally present, and acted therein, hereby promising in good faith that we
will assent, ratify, fulfill, and execute whatever shall be agreed, concluded
and signed, by our said Ministers Plenipotentiary, or a majority of them, or of
such of them as may assemble, or in case of the death, absence, indisposition,
or other impediment of the others, by any one of them; and that we will never
act nor suffer any person to act contrary to the same, in whole or in any part.
In witness whereof, we have caused these presents to be signed by our
President, and sealed with his seal*

Done at Philadelphia, the fifteenth day of June, in the year of our Lord one
thousand seven hundred and eighty-one, and in the fifth year of our
Independence, by the United States in Congress assembled. (Signed) SAM.
HUNTINGTON, President. CHA. THOMPSON, Secretary.

WE certify, the foregoing copies of the respective full powers to be authentic.

Paris, Sept. 3, 1783. (Signed) GEO HAMMOND, Secretary to the British
Commission. W. T. FRANKLIN, Secretary to the American Commission.




AND we the United States in Congress assembled, having seen and duly
considered the Definitive Articles aforesaid, did (...) a certain act, under
the seal of the United States, bearing date this 14th day of January, 1784,
approve, ratify and confirm the same and every part and clause thereof,
engaging and promising that we would sincerely and faithfully perform and
observe the same, and never suffer them to be violated by any one, or
transgressed in any manner as far as should be in our power: and being
sincerely disposed to carry the said articles into execution truly, honestly
and with good faith, according to the intent and meaning hereof, we have
thought proper by these presents, to notify the premises to all the good
citizens of these United States, hereby requiring and enjoining all bodies of
magistracy, legislative, executive and judiciary, all persons bearing office,
civil or military, of whatever rank, degree or powers, and all others the good
citizens of these States of every vocation and condition, that reverencing
those stipulations, entered into on their behalf, under the authority of that
foederal bond, by which their existence as an independent people is bound up
together, and is known and acknowleged by the nations of the world, and with
that good faith, which is every man's surest guide within their several
offices, jurisdictions and vocations, they carry into effect the said
Definitive Articles, and every clause and sentence thereof, sincerely, strictly
and completely

GIVEN under the Seal of the United States, Witness his Excellency THOMAS
MIFFLIN, our President, at Annapolis, this fourteenth day of January, in the
year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and eighty-four, and of the
sovereignty and independence of the United States of America, the eighth.
CHARLES THOMSON, Secretary.

His Excellency GENERAL WASHINGTON's Circular LETTER to the different GOVERNORS
of the respective STATES.
Head Quarters, Newburgh, June 11, 1783. SIR,
THE great object for which I had the honor to hold an appointment in the
service of my country being accomplished, I am now preparing to resign it into
the hands of Congress, and to return to that domestic retirement, which, it is
well known, I left with the greatest reluctance -- a retirement for which I
have never ceased to sigh, through a long and painful absence, and in which
(remote from the noise and trouble of the world) I meditate to pass the
remainder of life in a state of undisturbed repose: But before I carry this
resolution into effect, I think it a duty incumbent on me, to make this my last
official communication -- to congratulate you on the glorious events which
Heaven has been pleased to produce in our favor; to offer my sentiments
respecting some important subjects, which appear to me to be intimately
connected with the tranquillity of the United States; to take my leave of your
Excellency as a public character; and to give my final blessing to that
country, in whose service I have spent the prime of my life; for whose sake I
have consumed so many anxious days and watchful nights; and whose happiness
being extremely dear to me, will always constitute no inconsiderable part of my
own.

Impressed with the liveliest sensibility on this pleasing occasion, I will
claim the indulgence of dilating the more copiously on the subject of our
mutual felicitation. When we consider the magnitude of the prize we contended
for, the doubtful nature of the contest, and the favorable manner in which it
has terminated, we shall find the greatest possible reason for gratitude and
rejoicing: This is a theme that will afford infinite delight to every
benevolent and liberal mind, whether the event in contemplation be considered
as the source of present enjoyment, or the parent of future happiness -- and we
shall have equal occasion to felicitate ourselves on the lot which Providence
has assigned us, whether we view it in a natural, political, or moral point of
light.

The citizens of America, placed in the most enviable condition, as the sole
lords and proprietors of a vast tract of continent, comprehending all the
various soils and climates of the world, and abounding with all the necessaries
and conveniences of life, are now, by the late satisfactory pacification,
acknowledged to be possessed of absolute freedom and independency: They are
from this period to be considered as the actors on a most conspicuous theater,
which seems to be peculiarly designated by Providence for the display of human
greatness and felicity. Here they are not only surrounded with every thing
which can contribute to the completion of private and domestic enjoyment, but
Heaven has crowned all its other blessings by giving a fairer opportunity for
political happiness, than any other nation has ever been favored with. Nothing
can illustrate these observations more forcibly, than a recollection of the
happy conjuncture of times and circumstances, under which our republic assumed
its rank among the nations. The foundation of our empire was not laid in the
gloomy age of ignorance and superstition, but at an epoch when the rights of
mankind were better understood and more clearly defined than at any former
period; the researches of the human mind, after social happiness have been
carried to a great extent; the treasures of knowledge, acquired by the labors
of Philosophers, Sages and Legislators, through a long succession of years, are
laid open for our use, and their collected wisdom may be happily applied in the
establishment of our forms of government; the free cultivation of letters, the
unbounded extension of commerce, the progressive refinement of manners, the
growing liberality of sentiment, and above all, the pure and benign light of
revelation, have had a meliorating influence on mankind, and increased the
blessings of society. At this auspicious period the United States came into
existence as a nation, and if their citizens should not be completely free and
happy, the fault will be entirely their own.

Such is our situation, and such are our prospects; but notwithstanding the cup
of blessing is thus reached out to us; notwithstanding happiness is ours if we
have a disposition to seize the occasion and make it our own; yet it appears to
me, there is an option, still left to the United States of America, that it is
in their choice, and depends upon their conduct, whether they will be
respectable and prosperous, or contemptible and miserable, as a nation. This is
the time of their political probation; this is the moment when the eyes of the
whole world are turned upon them: This is the moment to establish or ruin their
national character for ever; this is the favorable moment to give such a tone
to our foederal government as will enable it to answer the ends of its
institution; or this may be the ill-fated moment for relaxing the powers of the
union, and annihilating the cement of the confederation, and exposing us to
become the sport of European politics, which may play one state against another
to prevent their growing importance, and to serve their own interested
purposes; for, according to the system of policy the states shall adopt at this
moment, they will stand or fall; and by their confirmation or lapse it is yet
to be decided, whether the revolution must ultimately, be considered as a
blessing or a curse -- a blessing or a curse, not to the present age alone, for
with our fate will the destiny of unborn millions be involved.

With this conviction of the importance of the present crisis, silence in me
would be a crime; I will therefore speak to your Excellency the language of
freedom and of sincerity without disguise; I am aware, however, that those who
differ from me in political sentiment may perhaps remark, I am stepping out of
the proper line of my duty, and they may possibly ascribe to arrogance or
ostentation, what I know is alone the result of the purest intention; but the
rectitude of my own heart, which disdains such unworthy motives, the part I
have hitherto acted in life, the determination I have formed of not taking any
share in public business hereafter, the ardent desire I feel, and shall
continue to manifest, of quietly enjoying in private life, after all the toils
of war, the benefits of a wise and liberal government, will, I flatter myself,
sooner or later convince my countrymen, that I could have no sinister views in
delivering, with so little reserve, the opinions contained in this address.

There are four things which I humbly conceive are essential to the well-being,
I may even venture to say, to the existence of the United States as an
independent power,

1st. An indissoluble union of the States under one foederal head.

2dly. A sacred regard to public justice.

3dly. The adoption of a proper peace establishment. And,

4thly. The prevalence of that pacific and friendly disposition among the
people of the United States, which will induce them to forget their local
prejudices and policies, to make those mutual concessions which are requisite
to general prosperity, and in some instances, to sacrifice their individual
advantages to the interest of the community.

These are the pillars on which the glorious fabric of our independency and
national character must be supported: Liberty is the basis; and whoever would
dare to sap the foundation or overturn the structure, under whatever specious
pretexts he may attempt it, will merit the bitterest execrations and the
severest punishment which can be inflicted by his injured country.

On the three first articles I will make a few observations, leaving the last
to the good sense and serious consideration of those immediately concerned.

Under the first head, although it may not be necessary or proper for me in
this place to enter into a particular disquisition of the principles of the
union, and to take up the great question which has been frequently agitated,
whether it be expedient and requisite for the states to delegate a larger
proportion of power to Congress, or not -- yet it will be a part of my duty and
that of every true patriot, to assert without reserve, and to insist upon the
following positions: That unless the states will suffer Congress to exercise
those prerogatives they are undoubtedly invested with by the constitution,
every thing must very rapidly tend to anarchy and confusion: That it is
indispensable to the happiness of the individual states, that there should be
lodged somewhere, a supreme power, to regulate and govern the general concerns
of the confederate republic, without which the union cannot be of long
duration: That there must be a faithful and pointed compliance on the part of
every state, with the late proposals and demands of Congress, or the most fatal
consequences will ensue: That whatever measures have a tendency to dissolve the
union, or contribute to violate or lessen the sovereign authority, ought to be
considered as hostile to the liberty and independency of America, and the
authors of them treated accordingly: And Lastly, that unless we can be enabled
by the concurrence of the States, to participate of the fruits of the
revolution, and enjoy the essential benefits of civil society, under a form of
government so free and uncorrupted, so happily guarded against the danger of
oppression, as has been devised and adopted by the articles of confederation;
that it will be a subject of regret that so much blood and treasure have been
lavished for no purpose, that so many sufferings have been encountered without
compensation, and that so many sacrifices have been made in vain. Many other
considerations might here be adduced to prove, that without an entire
conformity to the spirit of the union, we cannot exist as an independent power
-- it will be sufficient for my purpose to mention but one or two, which seem
to me of the greatest importance: It is only in our united character as an
empire, that our independence is acknowledged, that our power can be regarded,
or our credit supported among foreign nations. The treaties of the European
powers with the United States of America, will have no validity on a
dissolution of the union -- we shall be left nearly in a state of nature; or we
may find by our own unhappy experience, that there is a natural and necessary
progression from the extreme of anarchy to the extreme, of tyranny, and that
arbitrary power (...) most easily established on the ruins of liberty abused to
licentiousness.

As to the second article which respects the performance of public justice,
Congress have, in their late address to the United States, almost exhausted the
subject: -- They have explained their ideas so fully; and have enforced the
obligations the states are under to render complete justice to all the public
creditors, with so much dignity and energy, that in my opinion no real friend
to the honor and independency of America, can hesitate a single moment
respecting the propriety of complying with the just and honorable measures
proposed: If their arguments do not produce conviction, I know of nothing that
will have a greater influence; especially when we recollect that the system
referred to, being the result of the collected wisdom of the continent, must be
esteemed, if not perfect, certainly the least objectionable of any that could
be devised, and that if it should not be carried into immediate execution, a
national bankruptcy, with all its deplorable consequences, will take place
before any different plan can possibly be proposed and adopted. So pressing are
the present circumstances! and such is the alternative now offered to the
states!

The ability of the country to discharge the debts which have been incurred in
its defense, is not to be doubted -- an inclination, I flatter myself, will not
be wanting; the path of our duty is plain before us: Honesty will be found, on
every experiment, to be the best and only true policy; let us then as a nation
be just, let us fulfill the public contracts, which Congress had undoubtedly a
right to make for the purpose of carrying on the war, with the same good faith
we suppose ourselves bound to perform our private engagements; in the mean
time, let an attention to the cheerful performance of their proper business as
individuals, and as members of society, be earnestly inculcated on the citizens
of America; then will they strongthen the hands of government; and be happy
under its protection; every one will reap the fruit of his labors; every one
will enjoy his own acquisitions without molestation and without danger.

In this state of absolute freedom and perfect security, who will grudge, to
yield a very little of his property, to support the common interests of
society, and ensure the protection of government? Who does not remember the
frequent declarations at the commencement of the war, that we should be
completely satisfied, if at the expense of one half we could defend the
remainder of our possessions; Where is the man to be found who wishes to remain
indebted for the defense of his own person and property, to the exertions, the
bravery and the blood of others, without making one generous effort to repay
the debt of honor and of gratitude? In what part of the continent shall we find
any man, or body of men, who would not blush to stand up and propose measures
purposely calculated to rob the soldier of his stipend and the public creditor
of his due? And were it possible that such a flagrant instance of injustice
could ever happen, would it not excite the general indignation, and tend to
bring down upon the authors of such measures, the aggravated vengeance of
Heaven? If after all, a spirit of disunion or a temper of obstinacy and
perverseness should manifest itself in any of the states; if such an ungracious
disposition should attempt to frustrate all the happy effects that might be
expected to slow from the union; if there should be a refusal to comply with
the requisitions for funds to discharge the annual interest of the public
debts; and if that refusal should revive again all those jealousies, and
produce all those evils which are now happily removed. Congress who have in all
their transactions shown a great degree of magnanimity and justice, will stand
justified in the sight of God and man; and the state alone which puts itself in
opposition to the aggregate wisdom of the continent, and follows such mistaken
and pernicious councils, will be responsible for all the consequences.

For my own part, conscious of having acted, while a servant of the public, in
the manner I conceived best suited to promote the real interest of my country;
having in consequence of my fixed belief, in some measure pledged myself to the
army, that their country, would finally, do them complete and ample justice;
and not wishing to conceal any instance of my official conduct from the eyes of
the world, I have thought proper to transmit to your Excellency the enclosed
collection of papers relative to the half-pay and commutation granted by
Congress to the officers of the army; from these commutations, my decided
sentiments will be clearly comprehended, together with the conclusive reasons
which induced me, at an early period, to recommend the adoption of this measure
in the most earnest and serious manner. As the proceedings of Congress, the
army and myself, are open to all, and contain, in my opinion, sufficient
information to remove the prejudices and errors which may have been entertained
by any, I think it unnecessary to say any thing more, than just to observe that
the resolutions of Congress now alluded to, are undoubtedly as absolutely,
binding upon the United States as the most solemn acts of confederation or
legislation. As to the idea, which I am informed has in some instances
prevailed, that the half-pay and commutation are to be regarded merely in the
odious light of a pension; it ought to be exploded forever -- that provision
should be viewed, as it really was, a reasonable compensation offered by
Congress, at a time when they had nothing else to give, to the officers of the
army for services then to be performed -- it was the only means to prevent a
total dereliction of the service; it was a part of their hire; I may be allowed
to say, it was the price of their blood and your independency; it is therefore
more than a common debt: It is a debt of honor; it can never be considered as a
pension or gratuity, nor can be cancelled until it is fairly discharged.

With regard to a distinction between officers and soldiers, it is sufficient
that the uniform experience of every nation of the world, combined with our
own, proves the utility and propriety of the discrimination: Rewards in
proportion to the aids the public derives from them, are unquestionably due to
all its servants. In some lines, the soldiers perhaps have generally had as
ample a compensation for their services, by the large bounties which have been
paid to them, as their officers will receive in the proposed commutation: In
others, if besides the donation of lands, the payment of arrearages of
clothing and wages (in which articles all the component parts of the army must
be put upon the same footing) we take into the estimate the bounties many of
the soldiers have received, and the gratuity of one year's full pay, which is
promised to all, possibly their situation (every circumstance being duly
considered) will not be deemed less eligible than that of the officers; should
a farther reward, however be judged equitable, I will venture to assert, no one
will enjoy greater satisfaction than myself, on seeing an exemption from taxes
for a limited time (which had been petitioned for in some instances) or any
other adequate immunity or compensation, granted to the brave defenders of
their country's cause: But neither the adoption or rejection of this
proposition will in any manner affect, much less militate against the act of
Congress, by which they have offered five years full pay, in lieu of the half
pay for life which had been before promised to the officers of the army.

Before I conclude the subject of public justice, I cannot omit to mention the
obligations this country is under to that meritorious class of veteran
non-commissioned officers and privates, who have been discharged for inability,
in consequence of the resolution of Congress of the 23d of April, 1782, on an
annual pension for life; their peculiar sufferings, their singular merits and
claims to that provision, need only be known, to interest all the feelings of
humanity in their behalf -- nothing but a punctual payment of their annual
allowance can rescue them from the most complicated misery -- and nothing could
be a more melancholy and distressing sight, than to behold those who have shed
their blood, or lost their limbs in the service of their country, without a
shelter, without a friend, and without the means of obtaining any of the
necessaries or comforts of life, compelled to beg their daily bread from door
to door; Suffer me to recommend those of this description, belonging to your
state, to the warmest patronage of your Excellency and your Legislature.

It is necessary to say but a few words on the third topic which was proposed,
and which regards particularly the defense of the republic: As there can be
little doubt but Congress will recommend a proper peace establishment for the
United States, in which a due attention will be paid to the importance of
placing the militia of the union upon a regular and respectable footing -- if
this should be the case, I would beg leave to urge the great advantage of it in
the strongest terms: The militia of this county must be considered as the
palladium of our security, and the first effectual resort in case of hostility
-- it is essential therefore, that the same system should pervade the whole;
that the same formation and discipline of the militia of the continent should
be absolutely uniform, and that the same species of arms, accoutrements and
military apparatus, should be introduced in every part of the United States: No
one who has not learnt it from experience, can conceive the difficulty, expense
and confusion, which result from a contrary system, or the vague arrangements
which have hitherto prevailed.

If in treating of political points, a greater latitude than usual has been
taken in the course of this address, the importance of the crisis and the
magnitude of the object in discussion, must be my apology. It is, however,
neither my wish or expectation, that the preceding observations should claim
any regard, except so far as they shall appear to be dictated by a good
intention, consonant to the immutable rules of justice, calculated to produce a
liberal system of policy, and founded on whatever experience may have been
acquired, by a long and close attention to public business: Here I might speak
with the more confidence from my actual observations, and if it would not swell
this letter (already too prolix) beyond the bounds I had prescribed myself, I
could demonstrate to every mind open to conviction, that in less time, and with
much less expense than has been incurred, the war might have been brought to
the same happy conclusion, if the resources of the continent could have been
properly brought forth; that the distresses and disappointments which have very
often occurred, have, in too many instances, resulted more from a want of
energy in the continental government, than a deficiency of means in the
particular states; that the inefficacy of measures, arising from the want of an
adequate authority in the supreme power, from a partial compliance with the
requisitions of Congress in some of the states, and from a failure of
punctuality in others; while it tended to damp the zeal of those which were
more willing to exert themselves, served also to accumulate the expenses of the
war, and to frustrate the best concerted plans; and that the discouragement
occasioned by the complicated difficulties and embarrassments, in which our
affairs were by this means involved, would have long ago produced the
dissolution of any army, less patient, less virtuous, and less persevering,
than that which I have had the honor to command: But while I mention these
things, which are notorious facts, as the defects of our foederal constitution,
particularly in the prosecution of a war, I beg it may be understood, that as I
have ever taken a pleasure in gratefully acknowledging the assistance and
support I have derived from every class of citizens, so shall I always be happy
to do justice to the unparalleled exertions of the individual States on many
interesting occasions.

I have thus freely disclosed what I wished to make known before I surrendered
up my public trust to those who committed it to me. The task is now
accomplished, I now bid adieu to your Excellency as the chief magistrate of
your State: At the same time I bid a last farewell to the cares of office and
all the employments of public life. It remains then to be my final and only
request, that your Excellency will communicate these sentiments to your
Legislature at their next meeting, and that they may be considered as the
legacy of one who has ardently wished, on all occasions, to be useful to his
country, and who, even in the shade of retirement, will not fail to implore the
divine benediction upon it.

I now make it my earnest prayer, that God would have you, and the State over
which you preside, in his holy protection; that he would incline the hearts of
the citizens to cultivate a spirit of subordination and obedience to
government; to entertain a brotherly affection and love for one another, for
their fellow citizens of the United States at large, and particularly for their
brethren who have suffered in the field; and finally, that he would most
graciously be pleased to dispose us all, to do justice, to love mercy, and to
demean ourselves with that charity, humility, and pacific temper of mind, which
were the characteristics of the Divine Author of our blessed religion, and
without an humble imitation of whose example in these things, we can never hope
to be a happy nation.

I have the honor to be, with esteem and regard, Sir, Your Excellency's most
obedient servant, G. WASHINGTON


