A SERIOUS ADDRESS TO CHRISTIAN WORSHIPPERS, ON THE IMPORTANCE OF AN EARLY
ATTENDANCE UPON PUBLIC WORSHIP.

BY THE REV. S. ADDINGTON.

LONDON, Printed: BOSTON, Re Printed, by GREENLEAF and FREEMAN, North side the
Market, M, DCC, LXXX, V.

A SERIOUS ADDRESS.
THE religious observation of the Sabbath, in an holy abstinence from the
common business and amusements of life and a devout attendance upon Public
Worship, is strongly recommended by the command of God, and the practice of his
people; by many express assurances of his gracious approbation of those who
have so kept the day holy, -- and by solemn threatenings against such as
impiously profane it. Thus says the Lord, take heed to yourselves, and bear no
burden on the sabbath day, neither do ye any work, but hallow ye the sabbath
day as I commanded your fathers. Jer. xvii. 21, 22. If thou turn away thy foot,
on account of the sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and call the
sabbath a delight, holy of the Lord and honorable, and shall honor him, not
doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own
words, then thou shall delight thyself in the Lord, etc. Isaiah lviii. 13.
Whosoever does any work therein, that soul shall be cut off from amongst his
people. Exodus xxxi, 14.

The notorious profanation of the christian sabbath by persons that call
themselves christians, either in unnecessary business or journeys, carnal
pleasures or idle visits is a sad evidence of that infidelity and impiety which
neither fear God nor regard man: especially among a people upon whom the
sanctification of the sabbath, by refraining from these practices and attending
upon public worship, is strictly enjoined both by the laws of God and their
country. But I would hope better things of many into whose hands this address
may fall; that they neither openly profane the Sabbath, nor entirely forsake
the assembling of themselves together; nay that some of my readers, sincerely
concerned for the honor and success of divine ordinances, lament every
irregularity observable in those who attend upon them. And an irregularity they
must certainly acknowledge it is, to come late to the house of God. The
prevalence of this evil custom in some congregations has been long complained
of both by ministers and private christians: they are convinced of the
impropriety of the practice: they see and feel many inconveniences arising from
it: and are apprehensive it cannot but be displeasing in the sight of God. For
their sakes, and from a real regard to the best interests of all who may have
been affected by it, I beg leave, in the following pages, to recommend a more
exact and regular attendance.

I shall take it for granted that my reader acknowledges it his duty to attend
upon divine ordinances -- that hours of attendance are fixed, as convenient as
may be to the majority of those who usually meet at the same place; -- and that
methods are, or may be made use of by every one for ascertaining them. I cannot
likewise but believe that most serious christians as well as ministers
acknowledge the evil of coming late into the house of God, and lament and blame
the practice in others; nor should I suppose that any such would attempt to
justify it in themselves. To confirm such in so good a custom who have hitherto
maintained it, and to secure a more constant and serious attention to it in
others who have been remiss, I would remind them,

I. That an early attendance is decent and orderly. The apostle Paul has
enjoined it upon christians that "all things be done decently and in order," 1
Cor. xiv. 40. The precept ought to be attended to through life: even in the
common and less interesting concerns of it in the shop, in the field, and in
our own houses; but much more in the house of God, and in matters that respect
and decorum of divine institutions. And does it not appear to every one highly
proper and becoming that the same society, meeting together in the same place,
to engage in the same devotional services, should all enter upon the solemn
service together, and be able to continue in it without interruption? Is not
every one struck with the impropriety of a minister's being obliged to begin
with little more than half his congregation? Are not the laws of decency and
good order notoriously violated by those who are breaking in upon the worship
and assembly of the people of God five, ten, or fifteen minutes after the time
appointed? This is certainly indecent and disorderly, and ought therefore to be
avoided, especially as,

II. The whole service is of such importance that no part of it should be lost.
It is instituted for the good of souls: to fit them for an honorable and
useful discharge of all the duties of this life, and for joining the spirits of
just men made perfect in the devout, exercises of the temple of God above. He
that appointed the means knew our need of them; and, unless utter strangers to
our own hearts, we must know it ourselves. A wise concern, therefore, for our
best interest, will teach us to value those seasons and privileges which are
adapted to promote it, and make us unwilling to suffer delays by which it would
be in any measure injured.

III. By coming late, persons not only lose an important part of the service,
but are like to suffer disadvantage through the whole.

Whether the introductory part of divine service be singing, reading the
scriptures, or praying for a blessing on the whole, no one of these sacred
exercises can be neglected without suffering loss; and yet some persons, I am
sorry to say, are often too late for them all. Besides depriving themselves of
these, such forfeit that blessing, upon which the success of all ordinances
depend, when they neglect to unite with his people in asking it: and some are
hereby thrown into that hurry and discomposure of mind which must unfit them
for engaging with advantage on the subsequent part of the service. Thus are
they sinning against their own souls, and almost as effectually losing the
benefit of their sacred and most valuable privileges as if they entirely
neglected them. It may also be observed, that,

IV. The time usually employed in public worship, is short. I cannot expect
this consideration will be felt or even acknowledged by those who have no
relish for divine ordinances. They say, of every hour spent in the worship of
God, What a weariness is it! when will the Sabbath, when will the service be
over! But the devout mind must account all the hours of it short, not only in
comparison of the worship of heaven, where the servants of God are represented
as serving God day and night in his temple, but short likewise when compared
with the hours employed in worldly business, animal gratifications, and the
pursuit of temporary gain. The whole Sabbath is but one day in seven, and only
three or four hours of that are spent in public worship. And when we have not
more than one fortieth part of our time for so reasonable and important a
service, it would be equally foolish and ungrateful to suffer the least loss of
so small a proportion of our lives; especially considering the precarious
tenure upon which we hold these privileges. We may soon be confined from
ordinances; very soon be deprived of them, and that forever. Say not "you lose
little" -- out of a little, that little is too much to be lost; and remember
that evil habits grow. If you can satisfy yourself in losing five minutes now,
by and by you may be easy with the loss of ten; and it will be nothing strange
if, by growing indulgences of this sort, you become quite careless about the
time of coming, and ere long entirely absent yourself one part of the day, nay
at length quite forsake the assembly of God's people -- Many have run great
lengths in impiety from very small beginnings. -- It therefore concerns us, in
this case as in all others, to attend to the counsel of the apostle Paul,
Abstain from the appearances of evil. It is further observable, that,

V. The things which usually occasion delays can neither justify the
inregularity, nor make us amends for the loss sustained by it. The most
conscientious, regular, and zealous christians, may sometimes be unavoidably
late through the great distances of their habitations. Though it has been long
and generally observed that most of those who come from villages, two, three,
four, and five miles off, are more regular and early in their attendance, than
many who live within a few doors of the sanctuary. And I will beg leave to
carry the observation farther, as I have seen, and heard of, poor christians,
and even pious women who have been in their places in the house of God, after
toiling through foul weather and bad roads on foot, sometime before many of
their wealthy neighbors who have horses, and even carriages to conduct them
thither. Yet through distance, unfavourable seasons, and a difference of
clocks, persons may sometimes be not only innocently, but pitiably late. Bodily
infirmities or necessary engagements may detain some, and works of mercy
others. But little need be said upon this subject if these were the only
occasions of the irregularity long complained of in many of our religious
assemblies. Is it not often the consequence of lying unnecessarily and
unreasonably late in bed on the Lord's Day morning? Does not an undue attention
to dress, or too much concern about provisions for the body, often occasion
this symptom of indifference to the spiritual entertainments of the house of
God? Is not the true reason why some are no earlier there, that they have been
busying themselves needlessly and criminally in their own houses, nay in their
shops or in their fields? Are not others indolently sauntering away the hours
of public worship in idle amusements, or suffering themselves to be betrayed
into an indecency affronting to their Lord and his church, in complaisance to
the ill-timed intrusions of Company; who at such seasons should be dismissed
with the just apology and reproof of a previous and more important engagement?
Persons who suffer themselves to be thereby detained from the house of God,
seem afraid of being wearied with the length of the service, or want spirit and
management to contrive for it. No one will dare to offer such excuses as these
to the Master of assemblies; there are few but would be ashamed to urge them in
vindication of their conduct to their fellow worshippers. Whatever advantages
any may expect from trifling with ordinances on such considerations they will
find them a poor recompense for the loss of one single sabbath, or even the
least part of its sacred services. Need I remind my reader,

VI. That the spirit and practice of the people of God in all ages of the
Church is a farther recommendation of a diligent and regular attendance upon
divine ordinances. The devout Israelite, when confined from them, poured out
his soul in the most bitter lamentations, and made it his fervent prayer to be
restored to them. Psalm 42. "As the heart pants after the waterbrooks so
pants my soul after thee O God, my soul thirsts for God, for the living
God, when shall I come and appear before God? Ps, 63. O God, thou art my God,
early will I seek thee, my flesh longs for thee, in a dry and thirsty land
where no water is, to see thy power and thy glory so as I have seen thee in the
sanctuary." And again Ps. 84. My soul longs, yea even faints for the courts
of the Lord." -- That good man most thankfully embraced the privilege whenever
admitted to it, Psalm cxxii. "I was glad when they said unto me, let us go into
the house of the Lord."

And He who was at once the son of David and his Lord, even Jesus whom we also
profess to honor as our pattern, has recommended a decent regard to the
ordinances of God's house and a diligent attendance upon them by making it his
custom, as in Luke iv. 6. we are told he did) to go into the synagogue on the
Sabbath day. Nor let his followers in the present age forget the practice of
those their brethren in Christ Jesus, who, after their Lord's departure, on the
first day of the week, assembied together for divine worship. -- Among other
records preserved of them, that in Acts x. 33. ought by no means to be
overlooked or forgotten, where we find that, when Peter came into the assembly,
they had to say, Now are we all here present before God to hear all things that
are commanded thee of God. Our forefathers could frequently say the same when
they followed their teachers driven into corners, and had traveled many miles
in the night to secure opportunities of attending on their ministrations. The
word of the Lord was precious in those days; and they were unwilling to lose a
moment of those seasons of grace which they sought for their souls good at the
peril of their lives. Then were christians alive to God, and selt the power
while they kept up the form of Godliness. They went with pious zeal and eager
have to the house of God in company, in the spirit and language of the
recovered captives, asking the way to Zion with their faces thitherward, and
saying, "Come, let us join ourselves to the Lord in a perpetual covenant that
shall not be forgotten." Jer. l. 4.

I cannot forbear reciting in this connection a pleasing anecdote related of
the inhabitants of the parish of Dursley in Gloucestershire; when under the
ministerial care of the Rev. Mr. Joseph Woodward; a faithful and very zealous
preacher of the gospel at the time of Charles the second's restoration, and
who, with two thousand of his brethren, was ejected by the act of uniformity,
August 24, 1662. Dursley, when he came to it, was so very dissolute that it was
commonly called Drunken Dursly But it was much altered both in character and
circumstances by his labors. And (which is the fact I had chiefly in view)
instead of a contempt for the ministry and ordinances of Christ, and spending
their Sabbaths in alehouses as they had done before, after he had preached
awhile among them, such was their affection for him, for one another, and the
house of God, that he seldom went thither alone. For his house being distant
from the church the length of a long street, all got their families ready
standing at their doors as he came by, and so attended him and fell in with the
others that were following; so that he literally went with the multitude to the
house of God. Every one's zeal seemed inflamed by the flame he beheld in his
neighbor, and his was the most composed and affected congregation that could
any where be seen.

Noncomformist's Memorial. I must beg leave to urge, as a farther consideration,

VII. That coming late occasions great disturbances both to ministers and
fellow worshippers. The comfort of a minister's services to himself, and the
acceptance with which they are like to be attended to others, depend greatly,
under God, on the composure of mind with which he engages in them. We may
therefore urge this argument with our people both on their account and our own.
-- You respect your ministers, you would not do any thing that should hurt
them, or lessen their usefulness. You know they are thinking, and praying, and
laboring for you, in their retiremen's, between one sabbath and another. But
you have not perhaps considered a remiss and irregular attendance upon their
public ministrations as an ungenerous return for the thought and time they
employ, and the pains they take, both in the house of God and in their own, for
your salvation. -- You do not surely know, cannot conceive the confusion, the
hurry of spirits which coming late occasions them: how often they lose that
recollection and possession of themselves by it, which is ever of great
importance. You would feel the inconvenience yourselves if your domestics were
coming in continually while you were engaged in your family devotions; but
perhaps not half so much in your private dwellings and small households as
ministers do before many hundreds in public assemblies. Indeed all around are
immediately affected by this irregularity. Their hearing is interrupted, their
eyes attracted, their hearts grieved by and for their fellow-worshippers, and
consequently their attention drawn off, before they are aware, from subjects
upon which they ought and wished to have their minds steadily fixed: and thus
their souls are deprived of much of the pleasure of their most important
seasons. In this case therefore, as in all others, should we take care that we
give no offense to the church of God, 1 Cor. x. 32. I shall only urge one
consideration more, viz.

VIII. Coming late is an affront to the God we worship, and the Great Head of
the christian church upon whose ordinances we attend. The God who has
instituted public worship has assured his people of his presence in all places
where he records his name. Jesus, our exalted Lord, revealed himself to John
after his ascension, in these words, I am He that walks in the midst of the
golden candlesticks. Rev. ii. 1. meaning his churches: and when upon earth he
said to his disciples, Where two or three are gathered together in my name,
there am I in the midst of them, Mat. xviii. 20. In the midst of them, among
other purposes, to inspect their behavior. But how must the conduct of those
appear to him who betray so much indolence, and indifference to the honors and
privileges of his presence as to suffer almost every trifle to keep them away
from his house at the hour appointed? Do they not seem afraid of being too long
in his presence and engaged in his service? May he not from hence charge them
as he did an ancient people with saying, It is vain to serve God, and what
profit is it if we keep his ordinances? Mal. iii. 14. Indeed by shortening the
hours of divine worship they are robbing God, and that in such a sacrilegious
manner as must certainly be most displeasing to him, whose we are, and whom we
are bound to serve; besides, it betrays a degree of irreverence and disrespect
to the Majesty of Heaven that we should be ashamed of in our conduct toward an
earthly sovereign. Were we invited, with our brethren, at such an hour, into
the royal presence, and encouraged to present our petitions before the throne,
with assurances of a gracious audience and a merciful answer, we should not, we
could not suffer ourselves to be later than the time appointed. Nay we see men
of business esteem it a point of honor to be punctual to their appointments
one with another. And I am told that persons who frequent fashionable
entertainments usually take care to be in time there, nay that many go half an
hour, and sometimes more than an hour, before it begins, rather than lose any
the least part of a favorite amusement. I am sorry to have occasion to call
the thoughts of christians to the Exchange and the Playhouse to learn from
thence punctuality in their attendance on the house of God. I would much rather
charge it upon them by the love and esteem they bear for their Creator and
Redeemer, and the pious gratitude they owe for all the blessings of Providence
and Grace bestowed upon them; by the reverence they profess for divine
institutions, and by every wish and desire they entertain of the presence and
blessing of the Most High: that presence and blessing of his, to which
ordinances owe their efficacy, upon which we depend for the true enjoyment of
life in every connection and condition, and which is the joy and glory of
heaven. I would hope nothing more need be said to induce serious christians to
attend early upon public ordinances. But when any are unavoidably late I most
earnestly entreat and exhort them to use every possible precaution in their
manner of entering the place and going to their seats, that they may disturb
their minister and fellow-worshippers as little as possible. Some persons, by
the incautious manner in which they open and shut the doors of the place, hurry
to their seats, and run up the stairs into the galleries, add greatly to the
nuisance of their irregularity. As this is often observable of young people I
mention it that those who have the care of them may take proper methods with
them to prevent it. Nay I hope that my reader will also observe here, that what
has been said to enforce an early attendance at the house of God, may, and
ought to be considered as recommending a reverent and respectful behavior in
it -- as reproving drowsiness, and every mark of inattention there -- as
evincing the folly and sin of entirely forsaking the assembling of ourselves
together, or going to public worship only one part of a sabbath -- and as
capable of being urged with equal force and propriety against the practice of
running out before the conclusion of the service.

Every one may and ought to attend upon public ordinances where they are
administered in a manner that appears to him most agreeable to the word of God,
and for his spiritual edification. It is a christian's duty to Christ and his
own soul to seek such a privilege; and, when secured, whether near or at a
distance, carefully and thankfully to embrace and improve it. To attend
statedly and regularly there. Roving about from place to place, one sabbath, or
one part of the day, here, and another there, without fixing in any society,
indisposes men to serve the interest of Christ any where with spirit and
steadiness, unsettles the mind, and, by encouraging a taste for novelty,
diverts it from the most important and useful ends of hearing. Ministers cannot
well know their hearers, and therefore can neither pray properly for them, nor
speak suitable to them, when their congregations are thus fluctuating; and
though hearers may be sometimes struck with a new voice, language, and manner,
they can neither understand nor retain what they hear from various ministers so
much to their solid and lasting improvement, as from one with whose style and
method, by long use, they become familiarly acquainted. A tree often removed
bears no fruit.

But I proceed to offer some directions to render an early and regular
attendance upon public worship easy and profitable. --

These I shall only just mention, and that in as few words as possible.

I. Endeavor to get the time for beginning public worship fixed and properly
observed in the place where you attend. When it is seen that the minister, and
a respectable part of the congregation are punctual in their attendance, it may
be hoped that the good effects of such a regulation will soon be apparent on
the whole.

II. In order to ascertain the time exactly, keep your clocks or watches
regular; and see that they be rather too fast than too slow on the Lord's day
Morning. Those who have neither, may observe a sun-dial, or some well regulated
clock, in their neighborhood.

III. Rise early on the Lord's day Morning; especially if you are at any
considerable distance from the house of God, as you desire to be in time there,
to have opportunities of imploring the divine blessing, in your retirements and
families, upon the seasons and means of grace with which you are favored.

"Up, sleeper, from thy bed. At earlier hour,
"From sadder bed, for thee thy Savior rose."
IV. These who wish to be both able and disposed to rise at a proper time on
the Lord's day, and indeed to be sir, when they are up, for the sacred duties
of the sabbath, should retire early to bed the evening before; and endeavor to
disengage themselves as soon as possible on the saturday evening from the cares
and hurries of business, and household affairs, that they may have time for
those devout exercises which will be preparatory to a more comfortable and
profitable attendance upon public ordinances on the Lord's day.

V. Let not the precious hours of the Lord's day be spent, either in excessive
or delicate eating, or drinking, or in those needless ornaments of dress, by
attending to which the cultivation of the mind would be neglected for the sake
of that outward adorning of the body, which calls off the attention both of the
wearers and spectators from objects infinitely more worthy the notice and
regard of immortal, yet dying creatures, and the disciples of Christ.

VI. It may be a hint worth attending to by all, especially those who live at a
distance, that they would do well to set out in good time from their own
houses, so as to be in their places four or five minutes before public worship
begins; that by a short rest, recollection, and ejaculatory address to God,
they may be the better prepared for the solemn service: allowing likewise for
unexpected hindrances, and variation in clocks. If people only aim at being
present just at the time of beginning, they will often be too late.

VII. Above all let me entreat my reader to cultivate a reverence for
ordinances, and for him who has appointed them, together with a governing
regard to the important ends of these sacred institutions. The love of Christ
shed abroad in the heart; that zeal of the house of God which ate him up; a
lowly fense of our need of improvement, and a disposition like the apostle
Paul's, to press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus, would not need many arguments to recommend the means of grace, or
a regular and diligent attendance upon them.

It has been often observed, and it is matter of very serious and interesting
consideration to us, that societies, in this and many other respects, are as
their ministers. The general turn of a people becomes regular, devout, and
zealous by attending on the ministrations, and observing the spirit and walk of
a faithful and active servant of Christ, who lives the doctrine he preaches,
and appears, by the fervor of his prayers for them, and the assiduity of his
labors among them, to long after the people of his charge in the bowels of
Jesus Christ.

On the other hand, a formal, trifling, indolent minister, who discovers little
or no heart for his work, or concern for the souls committed to his care,
spreads a spirit of formality and lukewarmness all around him. They see him
indifferent to the power of Godliness in his own heart and life, it appears in
the strain of his public services, and the lifeless manner in which he performs
them: observing him negligent of the rules of good order in the house of God, a
spirit of indolence and inactivity spreads among them, and if they do not
expressly plead his example, it has its secret and powerful influence upon
them. In the case before us, if a minister be irregular and inaccurate in his
time of beginning public worship, his people not knowing when to come will be
more so in their attendance: when they have observed him half a quarter of an
hour too late one day, no wonder if they are a quarter the next.

And, if I might take the liberty of suggesting the farther hint, I would
remind my brethren with myself, that it becomes us to take heed that we do not
weary our hearers either by the unreasonable length of our services, the
unprofitableness of our matter, or the heaviness of our manner in the
performance of them, but endeavor to dismiss them continually under such
impressions as may tend to make the sabbath a delight, and the return of it
desirable. Amen.

FINIS.

