Repentance and Remission of SINS considered: OR AN INQUIRY CONCERNING
REPENTANCE. From the SCRIPTURES of the OLD and NEW TESTAMENT. ADDRESSED, I. To
the AUTHOR of a PAMPHLET, entitled, "Divine Glory in the Condemnation of the
Ungodly." II. To all for whom Christ died.

By SHIPPIE TOWNSEND.

HEARKEN unto me ye stout-hearted that are far from Righteousness. I bring near
my Righteousness: It shall not be far off, and my Salvation shall not tarry:
And I will place Salvation in Zion, for Israel my GLORY.

ISAIAH XLVI. 12, 13. BEHOLD the man whose name is the Branch. He shall bear
the GLORY.

ZECHARIAH VI. 12, 13. BUT now commands all men every where to repent.

ACTS XVII. 30. BOSTON: PRINTED by WARDEN and RUSSELL, for the AUTHOR, and sold
by him at his House in Cross Street, At E. HATTELLE's Book Store, State Street,
at ADAMS and NOURSE's Office, Court Street, and by the Publishers, at their
Office in Marlborough Street. M,DCC,LXXXIV.

AN INQUIRY, etc.
FREQUENTLY observing the doctrine of repentance treated of in such a manner as
is difficult to understand, in consistency with the gospel of divine grace; it
has often exercised my mind to enquire from the scriptures, after a
satisfactory view of it; and finding that after our Lord's resurrection, when
that event took place which explained the scriptures, he opened the
understanding of the disciples that they might understand them, and said unto
them, -- Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer and to rise
again the third day; as in Luke xxiv. 40.46. It is added in Verse 47, and that
repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all
nations beginning at Jerusalem.

In inquiring into the nature or meaning of repentance, it may assist me to
view every part of this passage. As,

What may I understand by repentance: What by remission of sins: What by its
being preached in his name: How it concerns all nations; and, Why it was to
begin at Jerusalem.

I. What may be understood by repentance.

Repentance is here brought in as that which the death and resurrection of
Christ prepared a way for the proclamation of: -- He said, Thus it is written,
and thus it behoved Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead the third day;
and that repentance etc. here is a connection between the sufferings and
resurrection of Christ, and the proclamation of repentance, as an act of grace
founded thereupon, and issued for the encouragement of the rebel to return; who
other ways could look for nothing but destruction. In this view it is the
gracious call of the offended Sovereign to his revolted creatures, to return to
him as their rightful owner and Lord. -- Isaiah xxxi. 6. Turn ye unto him, from
whom the children of Israel have deeply revolted.

II. What may be understood by remission of sins.

Sins or trespasses are called debts, Mat. vi. 12.15. When a person is in debt,
it is plain that law and justice demand remittance until full payment is made;
the payment of the debt is its remission, and this remission satisfies the
demands of law and justice, which were against the debtor: Here then remission
is full satisfaction to that law, of which sin is a transgression, and to that
justice which demands penalty of the transgressor; for unless law and justice
be completely satisfied, there is no remission.

III. What by its being preached in his name.

Why, surely there is no other name under Heaven given among men, whereby we
must be saved, either from the delusion, ignorance and darkness, whereby we
have forsaken the right way, or whereby we may be returned to our rightful
owner, or whereby law and justice are satisfied. So then he himself is
eminently the way in all these respects. Gallations iv. 4, 5. God sent forth
his Son made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were under the
law: The law had a demand of perfect obedience upon them that were under it,
which to them was impossible in their own persons; he as their head, and in
their stead, is brought in; in the volume of the book, saying, Lo! I come to do
thy will: So that whatever the law required, was perfectly obeyed by him who
did always the thing that pleased the father, who delighted to do his will, and
could not be convinced of sin, but could say, I was upright before him, I have
glorified thee on earth, and finished the work thou gave me to do; so that he
perfectly obeyed the law.

They that were under the law were under the curse, he as the Redeemer of them
that were under the law, was made a curse for us, so satisfied the penalty of
the law, which is manifest in his resurrection from the dead; for when law and
justice took hold of him as head of the human nature, (as if he were the only
transgressor) all being considered in him; he became our surety, and the Lord
laid the iniquities of us all upon him. Now unless law and justice have full
satisfaction, the surety is not discharged; but law and justice being fully
satisfied, he having made peace by the blood of his cross; it was not possible
he should be holden of death. -- Death has no more dominion over him. --
Therefore the surety is legally discharged.

Thus his resurrection from the dead evidences his accomplishment of what he
was made under the law for, i. e. To redeem them that were under the law; so
then the resurrection of Jesus Christ proves him our Redeemer. -- Whose
Redeemer? -- Them that were under the law. Then we belong to him by right of
redemption, and ought to return to him as our rightful owner, repenting of our
estrangement and alienation from him: But is there any encouragement hereunto:
May we be received into favor? Yes! -- Repentance and remission of sins.
Repentance with remission of sins is preached in his name, and because there is
full remission, there is the fullest encouragement to repentance. There is no
other name that repentance will do to be preached in; call a man to repentance
in the name of law and justice: Repent for the curses of the law, the wrath of
God, the demands of justice are against you, and will surely and suddenly
overtake you, except you repent; and it may drive him to endeavor to hide
himself as Adam among the trees of the garden, and when he finds he cannot, it
may drive him to despair; for repentance cannot satisfy law or justice, or
appease the divine anger: Neither is it in them to produce repentance, they may
stir up enmity, and drive to despair, while the gospel is out of sight. -- It
is the prerogative of our Redeemer that has fully remitted our sins. -- He is
exalted to give repentance and remission of sins.

Among all nations this is to be preached, Jews and Gentiles, for God has
showed me (says Peter) that I should call no man common or unclean; what God
has sanctified, that call thou not common. There is neither Jew nor Greek,
Barbarian, Cythian, bond or free, male or female that is excluded. Repentance
and remission of sins is to be preached among all nations: If there were not
full remission, how could it be preached, or how could they be called to
repentance? But there is. He that is truth has ordered it to be preached as a
truth among all nations; but as he was rejected at Jerusalem, are not they
excluded? No, Verily: It is to be preached among all nations, BEGINNING AT
JERUSALEM. What though they like fishes, do all they can to escape the gospel
net, will not he that made his Apostles fishers of men, so direct that net, as
finally to take them in, with the fullness of the Gentiles, so that all Israel
may be saved, as it written: It is written, therefore it shall be accomplished:
Compare Romans xi. 25, to 32, with the parallel passages in the prophet.

But we may enquire if this view of repentance be agreeable to the scriptures
of the old and new testament. --

We find when Solomon, in 1st of Kings, viii. 47, praying for the children of
Israel carried captive for their sins, says, if they shall bethink themselves,
and repent, and make supplication, and return with all their heart, etc. then
hear their prayer, etc. Verse 51 shows the ground of this prayer, for they are
thy people, and thine inheritance. -- The idea of their being his people, and
his inheritance, appears necessary to show the aggravations of their folly in
sinning against him and the necessity of repenting and returning to their
rightful owner. -- They are thine inheritance which thou had redeemed, Psalm
lxxiv 2. And when they are called to repentence in the prophet Joel, chap. ii.
13* it is turn to the Lord YOUR GOD. In Jeremiah xxvi. 13. (though a time of
the greatest degeneracy) they are thus called upon now amend your ways and
doings, and obey the voice of the Lord YOUR GOD: And in Isaiah lv. 7, Let the
wicked forsake his way* and the unrighteous his own imaginations, and return
unto the Lord, and he will have mercy, and to OUR GOD he will abundantly
pardon: And in Hosea xiv. 1, O Israel, return to the Lord THY GOD. When God by
the prophet Jeremiah in his 3d chapter, calls Israel and Judah to repentance,
verse 1, 7, 12, Return again to me, says the Lord. Turn thou unto me* Return
thou backsliding Israel says the Lord. In verses 14 and 22, their obligation
thereto, and the ground of their encouragement is mentioned: -- Verse 14,
Return for I am married unto YOU: -- Verse 22, Return ye backsliding children,
I will heal your backslidings, not and I will, as a condition (the and is there
supplied by the translators) but I will heal your backslidings. -- On this
encouragement, which is the only all-sufficient one, they are brought in saying
behold we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord OUR GOD. And in Isaiah xliv,
22, it is fully expressed in a similar manner to the passage in Luke xxiv. now
before us.

LUKE xxiv, 47, And that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in
his name.

ISAIAH xliv. 22, I have blotted out as a thick cloud thy transgressions, and
as a cloud thy sins: Return for I have redeemed thee.

But if it be said these passages of the Old Testament respect ancient Israel,
as God's peculiar people, not sinners of the Gentiles, -- in answer it may be
said, it has been shown it was to be preached as a truth among all nations; and
the Apostle's question is ready, Is he a God of the Jews only? Is he not of the
Gentiles also? Yes, of the Gentiles also: -- Are they blessed in Abraham so are
all the nations of the earth -- in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth
be blessed: -- Are they his inheritance, -- his possession; so are the
uttermost parts of the earth. It was the disposition that would confine the
divine favor to the Jews, and to the most esteemed among them, that the
preaching of John and of Jesus* under the law dispensation, called them to
repentance from, or called them to repent of, Matthew iii. 2. -- Repent for the
kingdom of Heaven is at hand: He preached thus in the wilderness of Judea,
among those that supposed the Messiah would raise their nation to great worldly
glory, and set them above other nations, and that the most esteemed among them
should be most promoted therein: He calls them to repent of their worldly
notions of Christ's kingdom: It was a kingdom of Heaven that was at hand, where
every one was admitted and promoted according to the good pleasure of the King
in virtue of his own righteousness, not according to their own supposed
personal characters: So those that were exalted in their own and others
apprehensions as mountains and hills, were brought low; and those depressed
with a sense of their own vileness and unworthiness, and who were justly
esteemed so by others, low as valleys, without any encouragement in themselves,
are exalted, agreeable to Isaiah's prophesy, chap. xl. 4, Every valley shall be
exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be brought low, the crooked shall be
made strait, and the rough places plain; and the glory of the Lord shall be
revealed, and all flesh shall see together, for the mouth of the Lord has
spoken.

Here we have a view of a perfect plain, where one should not obstruct or
overtop another, in viewing the object to be revealed. -- The glory of the
Lord: And as they all expected benefit in that kingdom from their own
characters; some expected to be foremost on account of their own supposed good
characters, and others depressed and despairing for want of such worthiness,
they are called to repent of their error and mistake, -- it was a kingdom of
Heaven that was at hand, where none were admitted or excluded on account of
their own personal character, but every one admitted on account of the perfect
character of the Messiah. -- The glory of the Lord shall be revealed -- the
glory of divine wisdom, justice, grace and mercy -- the glory of all the divine
attributes and perfections, harmonizing in the method of salvation, by Jesus
Christ, according to Psalm lxxxv. 10, 11, Mercy and truth are met together,
righteousness and peace have kissed: Truth shall spring out of the earth, and
righteousness shall look down from Heaven. Thus the glory of the Lord is
revealed in him who is the brightness of his glory, the light of the knowledge
of the glory of the Lord is in the face of Jesus Christ, in whom dwells the
fullness of the Godhead: In him, the glory of the Lord is revealed, and in his
time and way all flesh shall see together, for the mouth of the Lord has
spoken.

If what has been said of John's preaching "for the kingdom of Heaven is at
hand,' be agreeable to the scriptures, then we are to understand the preaching
of Jesus in Matthew iv. 17. "Repent for the kingdom of Heaven is at hand." And
Mark i. 15, "The time is fulfilled: The kingdom of Heaven is at hand: Repent ye
and believe the gospel, (The glad tidings, the good news of salvation by Jesus
Christ") and the preaching of the twelve that Jesus sent out two by two, Mark
vi. 12, who went out and preached that men should repent, -- in the same view.

When Jesus arose from the dead, evidencing the perfection of his character,
obedience and sacrifice; evidencing that justice was fully satisfied; then
repentance and remission of sins are preached in his name: There can be no
encouragement to repentance without remission of sins, if there be not full
remission in the perfect work of Christ, all is terror, despair, alienation and
enmity. I said there is no hope, no, for I have loved strangers, and after
them, will go, Jeremiah ii. 25. Let this truth, the doctrine of remission of
sins, be clear, and there are the highest motives, encouragmets and obligations
to repentance; there is room for it to be preached in the name of Jesus among
all nations, even beginning at Jerusalem: If we need any further, see Acts
xvii. 20. Though the times of ignorance God winked at, but now he has
commanded all men every where to repent. Now since his resurrection has he
commanded. Consider the dignity of the commander, and the authority of his
commands, Psalm xxxiii. 9. He spoke and it was: He commanded and it stood. The
Apostle pursues the thought from his resurrection to his exaltation, as we
read, Acts v. 30, 31. The God of our fathers raised up Jesus whom ye slew and
hanged on a tree, him has God exalted with his right hand, a Prince and a
Savior, to give repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins: And in Acts xi.
18. we have a specimen actually taking place: Then has God also to the
Gentiles granted repentance unto life. How is this evidenced? Why* they
received or believed the Apostles testimony concerning the way of acceptance
with God in every nation. It was according to the word which God sent to the
children of Israel, preaching peace by Jesus Christ who is Lord of all, his
being anointed with the Holy Ghost* going about doing good, his death and
resurrection, and the evidences of it, together with the testimony of the
Prophets concerning him, as we see in Acts x. 34 to 44. This preaching being
accompanied with the Holy Ghost, gained full credit on the minds of the
Gentiles, which when the church heard, they held their peace, and glorified
God, saying, then has God also to the Gentiles granted repentance unto life:
So that as soon as they believed the report of the Gospel concerning the life,
death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, -- by the first of which the precepts
of the law are perfectly oboyed; by the next the penalty of it is suffered, or
the debt to it remitted; and by the third, viz his resurrection we have the
full evidence thereof. As soon as this is believed* it is said, then has God
also granted repentance unto life, the immediate inseparable effect of
believing the remission of sins in his name

This is illustrated in the Thesselonians, when they believed the Apostles
testimony, in the 17th of Acts, he says, concerning them in his first Epistle,
Chap. 1.9. What manner of entrance we had unto you, and how ye turned to God
from idols, to serve the living and true God, and to wait for his Son from
Heaven, whom he had raised from the dead. To turn to God from idols is
repentance. This was in consequence of the entrance of the Apostles among them,
or of the Theselonians believing their report. What was their report among
them? See Acts xvii. 2.3. Reasoning with them out of the Scriptures, opening
and alleging that Christ must needs have suffered and risen again from the
dead, and that Jesus whom I preach unto you, is Christ, verse 4. Some of them
believed. Those believers composed the church of the Thesselonians, of whom it
is shown, how they turned to God from idols.

So in the 20th of Acts 21, the Apostle speaks of keeping back nothing that was
profitable, but, testifing both to the Jews, and also to the Greeks repentance
toward God, and (or I am informed the same Greek word which is translated and
is also translated even, as in the judgment of the translators was most
suitable to the passage.
even) faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ His preaching the faith as has been
above shown* was virtually preaching repentance, as it immediately called and
led thereto. Thus the old and new Testament jointly evidences the same truth,
that repentance and remission of sins is preached in the name of Jesus among
all nations, beginning at Jerusalem.

How can repentance be preached otherwise. If there be not remission in the
perfect work of Christ, he is not our Redeemer, and WE cannot be called upon,
when he says, return, for I have redeemed thee; but be not deceived evil
communications corrupt good manners. He IS risen from the dead, he IS our
Redeemer* we belong to him* and blessed be his name we are called to return,
for he has redeemed us. Who? Th^^ that we (...) under the law, all nations
even beginning at Jerusalem. What were we redeemed for? That repentance might
be preached to us in his name, that we might (...) to him, th^^ we might
receive the adoption of sons. Amazing grace indeed!

Objection. -- But there are two passages in the new testament that seem at
first view to mention repentance as a condition -- The first is Acts ii. 38.
Then Peter said unto them, repent and be baptized every one of you, for the
remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. But if it
be safe to understand this for etc. as the reason or ground of the call to
repentance, Repent, because of the remission of sins, the difficulty will
disappear, and the passage appear fully consistent with the other passages that
have been brought to view; and this view I think may be fairly gathered from
what the Apostle had before been preaching of the death and resurrection of
Christ, in which there is remission, and the evidence of it. But if it be still
urged as a condition, it can be no other ways, than as it cannot otherwise take
place in our minds, for though there is remission in the one sacrifice, -- and
so no more offering for sin as the Apostle expressed it, Hebrews x. 18, yet it
connot take place in the minds of any while they remain in unbelief and
impenitence: Yet their unbelief cannot make the truth of God of none effect.
While persons remain in unbelief they must remain in impenitence; for how can
any repent of being in a wrong way until they know Jesus who is the way; of
their being in error, until they know Jesus, who is the truth; and of their
being in a state of death, and all their works, dead works, until they know
Jesus, who is the life. Or how can any repent of their alienation and enmity
until they know God in Christ, the just God and the Savior -- their rightful
owner -- their Lord Redeemer.

It may be what is above said may help to illustrate the other passage in Acts
iii. 19, Repent ye therefore and be converted, that your sins may be blotted
out, when the times of refreshing shall come, from the presence of the Lord.

Repent ye therefore. -- Therefore refers to what went before; -- what the
Apostle had been preaching concerning the holy one, and the just -- the prince
of life, his death and resurrection, in which, as before, there was remission,
and the evidence of it; -- in which there was enough to furnish even those that
were charged with killing the prince of life with hope, -- with the
"Apprehension of the mercy of God in Christ," as even the Assembly's Catechism
expresses it -- so as to give them ground of encouragement to repentance.

Repent ye therefore and be converted; -- be turned from your error, alienation
and enmity, to allegiance to the prince of life, that your sins may be blotted
out: -- For as infidelity and impenitence are inseparable; so is faith,
repentance and allegiance: -- While the former continues, guilt, distress,
fear, horror and perplexity, remain on the mind.

When the knowledge of Christ, or faith, or the belief of the truth concerning
Jesus Christ It is the work of the spirit, for no man can say that Jesus is the
Lord, but by the Holy Ghost; and the Prophet Zecariah chap. xii, 10. expresses
it thus, I will pour upon the house of David, and on the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and supplications; and they shall look on me
whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his
only son, and be in bitterness as one is in bitterness for his first born. But
the spirit of God makes use of the truth of the gospel as a means hereunto; is
not this intimated in Isaiah xxx. 21. Thine ears shall hear a word behind thee,
For we are always looking the wrong way for remission of sins, until taught of
God.
This is the way* -- walk ye in it. Is not he the messenger, the interpreter,
one of a thousand spoken of, Job xxxiii. 25. To show unto man his uprightness;
the uprighteoness of Jesus Christ, through which, he is gracious to him, and
says, deliver him, for I have found a ransom; his flesh shall be fresher than
childhood, he shall return to the days of his youth, he shall pray unto God,
and he shall be favorable to him, and he shall see his face with joy. Compare
this with the description of the same person before he knew Jesus Christ as in
the 19, 20, 21 and 22 verses,
take place in the mind, repentance and conversion take place there also;
hereupon guilt, fear and terror are removed; -- that which was blotted out or
remitted before, in the perfect work of Christ, is also blotted out of the mind
and conscience; agreeable to Romans viii, 33, 34. It is God that justifies:
Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather* that is risen
again: -- And instead of looking for the appearing of Jesus Christ with terror
and amazement, it is waited for with hope, joy and consolation, in proportion
to the strength of faith, repentance and allegiance* agreeable to the
forementioned, 1st of Thessalonians i, 9, 10, They themselves show of us what
manner of entering in we had unto you: How ye turned unto God from idols, to
serve the living and true God, and to wait for his son from Heaven, whom he
raised from the dead, Jesus who delivers us from the wrath to come.

Thus have I pursued the inquiry concerning gospel repentance: -- And purpose
to close with an Address,

I. To the author of a pamphlet, entitled, "The glory of God in the final
condemnation of the ungodly." And,

II. To all for whom Christ died.

I. TO THE AUTHOR OF THE PAMPHLET.
DEAR SIR,
AS your pamphlet was probably the occasion of the foregoing reflections. I
have taken the freedom to address you on the subject. When I read your work, if
I recollect the idea the doctrine there advanced gave me, it was this, That
Christ died for all, to bring them into a salvable state, yet all would not be
saved, though they might, if they repented, consequently God's glory would
finally illustriously appear in the everlasting condemnation of the finally
impenitent.

And as the ear tries words, as the mouth tastes meats, I found it did not
sound like the report of the gospel, and on enquiring into the doctrine of
repentance, I have collected the thoughts which are presented to you, I hope in
love and faithfulness. The idea I received from the scriptures of the old
testament is, that he should finish the transgression -- make an end of sin --
make reconciliation for iniquity -- and bring in everlasting righteousness. The
new testament witnesses that he did. -- The testator appeals to the father -- I
have glorified thee on earth: I have finished the work thou gave me to do,
and cries out on the cross, It is finished, and seals it with his blood, and
witnesses it in his resurrection, when he shows himself alive to his chosen
witnesses, who testified to the same truth. -- One passage may suffice: In
Hebrews x, 11th the apostle speaking of the priesthood under the law, says, and
every priest stands daily ministering, and offering oftentimes the same
sacrifices, which can never take away sin, but this man after he had offered
one sacrifice for sins, forever sat down on the right hand of God. They stood
as those that had not done -- could not accomplish: But the High Priest Jesus
after he had offered one sacrifice sat down as having finished his work,
finished transgression -- made an end of sin -- made reconciliation for
iniquity -- and brought in everlasting righteousness. Verse 18th says, Where
remission of those is, there is no more sacrifice for sin.

Thus the scripture leads to full remission, when he had by himself purged our
sins, to a finished work.

But your doctrine appears to me to lead to an unfinished work, dependent on
the exercises, the exertions, in short, the will of the creature, and because
they will not come, that they might have life, he must glorify himself in the
destruction of multitudes for whom he died.

Let me ask you, Sir, How? Is his mercy glorified? -- Is his justice satisfied?
Is his power made manifest? Is he mighty to save? He will have all men to be
saved, not he would, but he will. Who has resisted his will? Is it the will of
the creature? Two Clergy men, converting together of the doctring of the final
universal salvation of all men, very much wondered at each other; -- one held
that all for whom Christ died should certainly be saved, but that he did not
die for all; -- The other that he died for all, but all would not be saved,
because they would not come to him. Said the latter to the former, I Am very
much astonished at you, that you do not embrace that doctrine -- For if I
believed as you, I should, for nothing is more clear from scripture, than that
Christ died for all: -- The former answered, I as much wonder at you, that you
do not embrace it. I am sure I should, if I believed as you, for if he died for
all there is no power on earth or hell can hinder their salvation* -- He cannot
be disappointed.
Cannot he make them willing in the day of his power? His people shall be --
And are not all his people for whom he died? But I forbear; wishing to say no
more than is sufficient to discharge my conscience in love and faithfulness to
you. But I cannot pass over your essay without taking notice of the title, to
compare it with the scriptures.

Scripture text, Romans iv, 5. He that justifies the ungodly. Romans v 6, Christ
died for the ungodly.



Your Title.

Divine Glory brought to view, in the condemnation of the ungodly. On enquiry,
How can this be in consistence with those scriptures? I answer, it can be no
other ways in a consistence with them, than in the fulfillment of Isaiah's
prophecy, chap. liii. 4, 5.6, Surely he has borne our griefs, and carried our
sorrows: Yet we did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted. But he
was wounded for our transgressions, bruised for our iniquities: The
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. All
we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way, and
the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all: -- So dying for the ungodly,
he justifies the ungodly, and the divine glory is brought to view illustriously
to eternity herein. For mercy is glorified -- justice is satisfied -- and he
speaks in righteousness, when he manifests himself mighty to save.

But view the title page as it appears intended, what consolation is their for
a poor, destitute, ungodly creature? Suppose him on a death bed, agonizing with
anguish of soul, nothing short of persuasion that there was an all-sufficient
remedy for his deplorable condition, could afford him the least comfort or
relief. Were you constrained in this sad hour to administer them from those
texts, in the belief of your title, would he not say, I am mocked? But perhaps
you might not offer them on such an occasion. Why? Are they not scripture
truths? Did not Christ die for the ungodly, and in proof, his dying for our
sins was accepted; he rose again for our justification, and is not the
knowledge of this truth all-sufficient to quiet the most guilty conscience, and
give hope toward God? Would it be safe to tell him the law of God stands in
full force against him, when Jesus came to redeem them that were under the law?
Would it not amount to denying that Jesus is come in the flesh? Would it be
safe to tell such a man to exert himself in any way, however described, as if
this was the last opportunity, and his all depended on it? It would indeed be
to mock him! when his all depends on what Jesus Christ finished, and the relief
of his mind on the knowledge of it.

Suffer me a little further, if in looking over this dreadful title, I express
my surprise that to it should be added in the title page, Search the
scriptures; when you attempt to illustrate it by reasoning, without producing
one text to show that the Ever-blessed speaks of condemnation as his glory.
When the scriptures speak of the divine glory as manifest in his grace, mercy
and forgiveness -- when Moses said in Exodus xxxiii. 18, I beseech thee show me
thy glory, the answer is, I will make all my goodness pass before thee, and
will be gacious to whom I will be gracious, and will show mercy on whom I will
show mercy: Here goodness, grace and mercy is his glory. In Proverbs xix. 11,
we read, the discretion of a man deferreth his anger, and HIS GLORY to pass
over a transgression. -- If we understand the proverb, and it, interpretation,
it doubtless refers to the man Christ Jesus, in whom we have the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God.

In Psalm cii. 16, it is said, When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall
appear in HIS GLORY. -- How is this made manifest? -- In regarding the prayer
of the destitute; in hearing the groaning of the prisoner, -- and saving the
sons of death, To declare his name in Zion, and his praise in Jerusalem: --
That is his name, Forgiving iniquity, transgression and sins, through the
surety whom he would by no means clear, for the Lord laid on him the iniquities
of us all, and spared not his own son, but delivered him up for us all, in whom
we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sin, according to the
riches of his grace: Riches of his grace; is not this his glory? Yes, verily;
the exceeding riches of his grace, in his kindness toward us through Christ
Jesus.

The angel of the Lord came upon the shepherds, in Luke ii. 9, And the glory of
the Lord shone round about them: How is this made manifest? Behold, says the
angel, I bring you good tidings of great joy which shall be to all people, for
unto you is born this day in the city of David, a Savior, which is Christ the
Lord: Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men.

I have briefly presented these few passages, wishing you to turn to the
scriptures, to view the divine glory, and if these texts, with what has been
brought to view (in page 8,) of the glory of the Lord being revealed, was
rightly understood by those that search the scriptures, I doubt not it would
lead into the understanding of many passages in the old testament, where the
glory of the Lord appeared in the cloud, -- filled the tabernacle, filled the
house, and the appearance of the likeness of the glory of the Lord, spoken of
by Ezekiel, and many other passages, that speak of the Divine Glory, as they
center in Jesus the antitype, the brightness of glory; in whom the riches of
his glory is made manifest, who came not to destroy men's lives, but to save
them; not to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved.
Indeed, Sir, if you think a few minutes, you cannot depise an invitation to
this contemplation, for it is the final happiness of those given to Jesus
Christ, to be with him -- to behold his glory.

I would just take notice of what you say in page 50. "I conceive therefore
that every honch man that disbelieves the sentiment, will be free to declare
it, and this plainly. I take liberty to add, that such a declaration will come
with peculiar propriety and weight from the pulpit Watchman, what of the night,
it is the language of the Almighty to gospel ministers."

"With particular weight from the pulpit." I conceive the weight of any
doctrine consists in the evidence of its truth and divinity, not in the place
where, or from whence it is delivered. Suppose a pulpit ornamented to such an
extravagant degree, that the first sight of it would strike ii. of Chronicles
xxxiii. 7, immediately into the mind: Or suppose the preacher so distinguished
in habit as immediately to bring to view the warning of Jesus Christ to his
disciples in Mark xii. 38, and Luke xx. 46, -- would it not tend to a greater
caution of mind about the doctrines they deliver, so that all hope of weight
and importance must come from the clear evidence of the truth, that it is
indeed the word of God which works effectually in them that believe, which is
the sword of the spirit, yea, quick and powerful -- sharper than any two-edged
sword.

"Watchman, what of the night, it is the language of the Almighty to gospel
ministers." However that may be, I am not able to say, but if it be so, gospel
ministers are messengers of peace, -- good news -- glad tidings: The founder of
the gospel was so. Isaiah lxi. 1, Luke iv. 18, he was anointed to preach the
gospel to the poor; and how beautiful upon the mountains, are the feet of him
that brings good tidings; that publishes peace; that brings good tidings
of good; that publishes salvation, that says to Zion, thy God reigns -- not
thy perverse will, nor thy adversary. The first preachers preached peace by
Jesus Christ; he is Lord of all; and gospel ministers have now nothing else to
bring to view but the preaching of Jesus and his apostles -- If that was to
publish peace and glad tidings of salvation, your doctrine of eternal
condemnation is its opposite, and cannot possibly bring peace or glad tidings
of salvation to any of the subjects of it: But seeing God was in Christ
reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, may
WE be reconciled unto God.

II. TO ALL FOR WHOM CHRIST DIED,
And blessed be God he tasted death for every man. For if there be any for whom
he did not die, it would be mocking them to preach the gospel to them, to tell
them that the law is answered, that justice is satisfied, and mercy flows
freely in a full consistency therewith, that the only living and true God is
the just God, and the savior, and there is none else, to tell them of
remission of sins, or call them to repentence, for certainly there could be no
hope, if their sins were not remitted they never can be, for Christ dies no
more, there is no more sacrifice for sin; but seeing the righteousness of God,
which is by faith, is unto all, as well as upon all that believe all may be
called to repentance. FIRST, Such as appear in a state of resolved infidelity
and impenitence, and chose to live in profaneness and immorality, to such
repentence and remission of sins, in the name of Jesus is preached: What though
they deride the messengers, and the message, they shall be brought hereto, for
First, Jesus Christ came to seek and save that which was lost* to call sinners
to repentence. The several passages where this is mentioned, viz. Matthew ix.
13, Mark ii 7, and Luke v. 32, have all referrence to publicans and sinners --
the phrase for abandoned characters among the Jews at that day: And were not
they, and are not the same characters now, though differently described, wrong;
are they not alienated from their rightful owner, are they not lost; -- if so,
Christ came to save them; are they not sinners, -- if so, he came to call them
to repentence.

Secondly, Jesus sent his disciples to preach it in his name. And as the rain
comes down, and the snow from Heaven, and returns not thither again, but
waters the earth* so shall my word be, says the Lord, by the prophet Isaiah,
chap. lv. 10, 11. That goes out of my mouth, it shall not return unto me void,
but it shall accomplish what I please, and prosper in the thing whereto I sent
it.

Thirdly, Now he has commanded all men every where to repent; and his commands
shall be obeyed, for Psalm cxlviii. he commanded, and angels, sun, moon and
stars, the Heavens, and the waters above them were created. 2 of Corinth. iv 6
-- He commanded the light to shine out of darkness. Psalm cvii. 25, He
commands and raises the stormy wind. Luke viii. 2, He commands even the
winds and the waters, and they obey him.

Fourthly, He is exalted, a prince and a savior, to give repentance to Israel,
and remission of sins. Prophesied of Isaiah xxx. 18, Therefore will he be
exalted that he may have mercy. But it was to give repentence to Israel. It was
not then fully manifested that they were to go to the Gentiles: But from the
time of Peter*s vision, he was taught to call no man common, or unclean; and
the Gentiles appeared to be fellow heirs, and of the same body; and that they
were to preach among them the unsearchable riches of Christ.

Fifthly, The long suffering patience of God is extended for this end 2. of
Peter, iii. 9, the Lord is long suffering to us ward, not willing that any
should perish* but that all should come to repentence, agreeable to Isaiah xxx.
18. and therefore will the Lord wait that he may be gracious. Now put these
things together, and shall the stout-heartedness and obstinacy of the
unbelieving impenitent and profane children of men, disappoint him. What will
they do? He is wise in heart and mighty in strength: None ever hardened himself
against him and prospered; there is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel
against the Lord, who would set the briars and thorns against him in battle, he
would go through them, and burn them together.

Perhaps they would fain flee out of his hand; but where will they flee from
his presence? What the Lord says by the prophet Amos, may be here brought to
view, Amos ix. 2. He that flees of them hall not flee away, and he that
escapes of them shall not be delivered; though they dig into hell, thence
shall mine hand take them; though they climb up into Heaven, thence will I
being them (...); and though they hide themselves in the top of Carmel, I will
search and take them out thence; and though they be hid from my sight in the
bottom of the sea, thence will I command the serpent and he shall bite them.
From hence it appears weak, fruitless and contemptible to set the obstinacy of
man against the end of the coming, the call, the command, the design of the
exaltation, and the long-suffering patience of Jesus Christ; especially if we
consider Isaiah xlv. 22, 23, where we have the divine oath that every knee
shall bow; it may be added,

Sixthly, It is the design of the second coming of Jesus Christ to convince all
that are ungodly, of all their ungodly deeds, and of all their hard speeches
which ungodly sinners have spoken against him, Jude 14, 15. Then every eye
shall see him, and they that pierced him and all kindred of the earth shall
wail because of him, as we read Rev. i. 7. Compare this with Zech. xii. 10, and
they shall look upon me, whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him,
as one mourns for his only son, and be in bitterness for him as one is in
bitterness for his first born Here is wailing, mourning and bitterness at the
sight of Jesus Christ, in the most expressive language we can imagine. See
Jeremiah ix. 10, 18, 19, which perhaps none can form an adequate idea of, but
such as have been called unto the described circumstances; which yet cannot be
viewed as the language of despair, for how then can we understand the following
words, even so amen. But if we may understand John as speaking of those who
pierced him being brought every knee of them to bow to him, with the wailing of
repentence, then the even so amen appears agreeable to the spirit of the
gospel. Undoubtedly then every mouth will be stopped, and all the world guilty
before God, which when the apostle mentions, in Romans iii. 19, he adds, in verse
21, But now the righteousness of God without the law is manifest, being
witnessed by the law, and the prophets, even the righteousness of God, which is
by faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all that believe; For there is no
difference, respecting the purchase of Christ, who died for all; and respecting
the divine will, who will have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge
of the truth, which agree^ with Romans xi. 32. he has concluded them all in
unbelief that he might have mercy on all. This doctrine must be shocking to
tradition, and no wonder, for O! the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God, how unsearchable his judgments, and his ways past finding
out. It appears to agree with the end and design of Christ*s prayer, for his
own immediate disciples, and for them that shall believe through their word, as
expressed John xvii. 21, 23. That they all may be one as thou father in me, and
I in thee; that they also may be one in us, that the world may believe that
thou have sent me. I in them and thou in me, that the world may know that thou
have sent me. The very circumstance that the disciples were in, (verse 8) and
have known surely, that I came out from thee, and they have believed that thou
did send me. The manifestation of this oneness I conceive to be what is
called the manifestation of the sons of God, which the earnest expectation of
the creature waits for. Every creature, both believers and unbelievers, are
in some way groaning and traveling together for this, as we see in Romans viii
32. For we know that the whole creation (in the Bible margin it is every
creature. I am informed it is the same word used in Ma^^ xvi. 15, Go preach the
gospel every creature) the whole creation, or every creature, groaneth and
traveleth in pain together. I know not of one of the human race that is not in
some way groaning under the bondage of corruption. Verse 23, And not only they*
but ourselves also, which have the first fruits of the spirit, even we
ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption, the redemption of
our body -- the whole body* of which Christ is the head. -- This agrees with
the design of Jesus being made under the law, that we might receive the
adoption of sons.

II. Those of opposite character, that thank God they are not as other men* but
pride themselves in their own religious characters, to the despising those
above mentioned. To such repentence and remission of sins are preached in the
name of Jesus. Alas, if they look for remission in their own name, or on
account of any distinction in them* it will disappoint them; for, says the
prophet, all our righteousness is as filthy rags: And Paul, speaking of his,
says, what things I counted gain those I count loss for Christ. But what has
been already said on John's preaching may suffice on this head.

III. Such as are distressed and perplexed for want of righteousness, wishing
for some inherent qualifications or to perform many external duties, to
recommend them to the divine favor, or are ready to wish they were as such and
such, who they apprehend to have high seize, and great characters for
piety, distressed with the anxious inquiry, wherewithal shall I come before
the Lord? Will he be pleased with costly sacrifices -- thousands of rams, or
ten thousand rivers of oil, or my first born for my transgression; -- the suit
of my body for the sin of my soul? -- He has showed thee, O man, what good is
the only all-sufficient one, to recommend thee to to the divine favor, in the
finished work of Jesus Christ, in which is full remission of sins, and a call
to repent of seeking it any other where. God is love, and in this was
manifested the love of God toward us, because God sent his only begotten son,
that we might live through him. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself, not imputing their (...) I passes unto them Only view the character of
the true God as manifested in Christ. (Elsewhere we cannot see him, for no man
has seen God at any time; the only begotten son, who was in the bosom of the
father, he has declar^^ him). Agreeable to Zechariah ix. 9, He is just and
having salvation. Isaiah xlv. 21, I the Lord, and none beside me, a just God,
and a Savior, and none beside. If justice and salvation is united in the
character of the only living and true God, and he calls to all the ends of the
earth to look to him, and be saved, if it be rightly understood, it is enough
to cheer the heart of the most forlorn and dejected in any corner of the earth.

IV. Those that believe that Jesus is the Christ, that he has fully obeyed the
precepts of the law, in his life* and suffered the penalty in his death, to the
satisfaction of justice, and thereby made full remission, as witnessed in his
resurrection, so that their minds are at peace and rest in his finished work
alone, as their only ground of hope -- are hereby called to repentance, as
those that are under the highest obligation thereunto, agreeable to Ezekiel. xvi.
63, That thou may remember, and be ashamed, and confounded, and never open
thy mouth any more because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee for
all that thou have done says, the Lord God. Every view of every time, place
and company, wherein they have spoken or done secretly or openly* those things
that were contrary to the law of God, or whereby they have been going about to
establish their own righteousness, in opposition to the righteousness of God,
is ever matter of shame and abhorrance, and of admiration of the grace that
appears in remission and reconciliation; and the law of love, that the gospel
binds on Christ's disciples to love one another, as he has loved them, must
ever open a source of repentance when their conduct is counter thereto.

How unsuitable is it for Christ's disciples to practice upon that old
Pharasaick tradition, thou shall love thy neighbor and hate thine enemy; when
Jesus reconciled them when they were enemies, and taught them to love their
enemies.

How unsuitable for those of them that have this world's goods, and see their
brethren in need, to shut up their bowels of compassion from them, when Jesus
though he was rich for our sakes became poor, that we through his poverty might
be rich; who has kindly told us, the poor ye have always with you, and
whenever ye will ye may do them good; Especially when he has said, whosoever
shall give you a cup of water, to drink in my name, because ye belong to
Christ, verily I say unto you, he shall not lose his reward; inasmuch as ye did
it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye did unto me.

How unsuitable to the abovementioned ground of satisfaction in the finished
work of Christ, is every branch of conduct and conversation unbecoming the
gospel, when it lays the believers of it under the most indispensible, eternal
obligations to look upon themselves, their time, talents, interest and
opportunities, as not their own, but belonging to their redeemer, and to be
ever employed to his glory. If these things be duly considered, with the
various thoughts they lead to, they will open up reasons for daily repentance
to the believers of the gospel, with a full conviction they can have no
confidence in the flesh, but their rejoicing must be in Christ Jesus alone, to
whom be glory forever.

AMEN.

