CONSIDERATIONS UPON THE PRESENT TEST-LAW OF PENNSYLVANIA: ADDRESSED TO THE
LEGISLATURE AND FREEMEN OF THE STATE.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY HALL AND SELLERS. MDCCLXXXIV.

Considerations, etc.
TO employ the pitiful invention of tyrants to support the freedom of republics
-- -- to introduce laws into the commonwealths of America, that have been long
reprobated by wise and good men in the monarchies of Europe -- to revive the
exploded doctrine and practice of tests -- marks such an extreme degree of
folly, that one would imagine men of common understandings would endeavor to
palliate the enormity of the act by the abolition of it, as soon as the cause
which gave rise to it had ceased to exist. Who, that had not consulted the
statutes of Pennsylvania, would believe that in a country, that had been for
upwards of a century the seat of liberty, science and religion, a law should
exist, that deprived nearly one half of its inhabitants of the privileges of
citizens; and this too in the second year after the peace, which confirmed the
liberties and independence of America?

Before I proceed to make any remarks upon this law, I beg leave to insert the
following copy of the test.

Test required by Act of Assembly, October 1, 1778.
"I, A. B. do solemnly and sincerely declare and swear, or affirm, that the
state of Pennsylvania is, and of right ought to be, a free, sovereign and
independent state. And I do for ever renounce and refuse all allegiance,
subjection and obedience to the King or Crown of Great Britain. And I do
further swear (or solemnly, sincerely and truly declare and affirm) that I
never have, since the declaration of independence, directly or indirectly,
aided, assisted, abetted, or in any wise countenanced the King of
Great Britain, his generals, fleets or armies, or their adherents, in their
claims upon these United States. And that I have, ever since the declaration of
the independence thereof, demeaned myself as a faithful citizen and subject of
this or some one of the United States. And that I will at all times maintain
and support the freedom, and sovereignty, and independence thereof."

By the act of October 1, 1779, all male white inhabitants of the state, who
had not taken the test required by the act of June 13, 1777, in due time, were
required to take the foregoing oath or affirmation within certain limited
times, viz. in Cumberland, Bedford, Northumberland and Westmoreland, on or
before the first day of December next ensuing; in Lancaster, York, Berks and
Northampton, within thirty-five days after the passing of said act; and in the
city of Philadelphia, and in the counties of Philadelphia, Bucks and Chester,
within twenty days after the passing thereof -- otherwise to be incapable of
electing or being elected into, or holding any office or place of trust within
the government, serving on juries, or keeping schools, except in private
houses. -- After the times above specified, they were for ever excluded from
taking the oath or affirmation, and were deprived of the privileges and
benefits of a citizen who complied with the said act.

The first objection that I shall make to this law is, that it is contrary to
the principles of free government. Liberty consists in being governed by laws
made by ourselves, or by rulers chosen by ourselves. This is the true
definition of liberty. The men who are disfranchised by this law are,
therefore, in a state of slavery. Representation and taxation should go hand in
hand. If this is not true, the late glorious revolution was a rebellion.

2d. This law (if, after what follows, it deserves the name of a law) is
contrary to the constitution of the state. A constitution is the palladium of
the liberty of a free country. It is the rule of legislators, as laws are the
rule of the people whom they govern. Every part of a constitution should be
sacred, and hence the constitution of Pennsylvania requires, that every member
of the Assembly, before he takes his seat, should subscribe the following oath:
I do swear or affirm, that, as a member of this Assembly, I will not propose or
assent to any bill, vote or resolution, which shall appear to me injurious to
the people, nor do or consent to any act or thing whatever, that shall have a
tendency to lessen or abridge their rights and privileges, as declared in the
constitution of this state; but will in all things conduct myself as a
faithful, honest representative and guardian of the people, according to the
best of my judgment and abilities.

But what says the test law? It is certainly an "abridgement" of the privileges
of nearly one half the inhabitants of the state. It is contrary to the 7th and
8th articles of the bill of rights, and to the 6th and 17th sections of the
constitution, which declare That all elections ought to be free, and that all
freemen having a sufficient common interest, and attachment to the state, have
a right to elect officers, and to be elected into office. That every member of
society has a right to be protected in the enjoyment of life, liberty and
property, and therefore is bound to contribute his proportion toward the
expense of that protection, and yield her personal service when necessary, or
an equivalent thereto (which the non-jurors have done by their double taxes and
militia fines) But no part of a man's property can be justly taken from him, or
applied to public uses, without his own consent, or that of his legal
representatives.

Every freeman of the full age of twenty-one years, having resided in this
state for the space of one whole year next before the day of election for
representatives, and paid public taxes during that time, shall enjoy the right
of an elector.

Representation in proportion to the number of taxable inhabitants is the only
principle which can at all times secure liberty, and make the voice of a
majority of the people the law of the land.

But further -- the constitution says, In all prosecutions for criminal
offenses, a man has a right to be heard by himself and his council, to demand
the cause and nature of his accusation, to be confronted with the witnesses, to
call for evidence in his favor, and a speedy public trial by an impartial jury
of the country, without the unanimous consent of which jury he cannot be found
guilty. -- Bill of rights, article 9th.

Now, if a man cannot be convicted of the most trifling offense, except by a
jury of twelve men, why should he be deprived of his liberty by an act of the
legislature? This summary mode of inflicting punishments is contrary to all our
ideas of a free government. I am persuaded, that if nine out of ten of the
non-jurors in Pennsylvania were to be tried by a jury of twelve of those men,
who passed the law of October 1, 1778, or who approved of it in the Council of
Censors, or who now continue it in force, by refusing to revise it, that they
would be pronounced not guilty, and restored to the rights of citizenship.
Hence arises the safety and the inestimable value of that mode of trial. I
honor the Censors for that construction of the constitution, which renders
Judges and Magistrates independent of the power of the Assembly, and amenable
only to a tribunal of twelve men. -- But is the character of a Judge or a
Magistrate of more consequence than the freedom of two-fifths of a state? --
Shall juries determine in the one case, and the Assembly in the other? -- I
cannot conceive of an idea more repugnant to the principles and honor of the
late revolution, than an Assembly taking away the liberties of several thousand
citizens, without the formality of a fair and impartial trial. Had these men
committed any crime? No. Had they created insurrections in any part of the
state? No. Why then should we inflict the heaviest of all punishments upon them
-- not banishment -- not death -- but SLAVERY.

Exclusive of the natural prejudices which many people have against oaths of
abjuration and allegiance in the time of war, there are two objections to the
present test, which effectually prevented its being taken by many people. It is
an oath requiring activity in support of the independence of America. This
could not be taken by those sects of christians who hold war to be unlawful, at
a time when arms were the only means of supporting our independence. And 2dly.
the oath had a retrospect to past actions. This was both impolitic and
tyrannical. There was a progress in the minds of most men upon the subject of
the late controversy. Some were roused into resistance by the apprehensions of
distant danger, while others did not decide in our favor, till they were
undeceived by witnessing British perfidy and barbarity. Now this law cut off
all such recruits to the American standard, many of whom, in our sister states,
have been the most determined and active foes to Great Britain. But again --
the law imposed restraints upon the consciences of those whose wishes were
favorable to the cause of America from the beginning. Could the whig, whom
fear, or the citizen, whom age, or sickness, or poverty, detained in the route
or society of the enemy, and who was compelled by contributions of provisions,
manufactures or quarters, indirectly "to aid, assist and abet the king of
Great Britain, etc." subscribe this test? No; he could not. Why then should
persons in this predicament be deprived of the privileges of citizens?

The limitation of the time given for taking this oath constitutes a material
part of its folly and injustice. It was passed in the middle year of the war,
at a time when its duration and issue were uncertain. It was a stroke that
severed one of the sinews of the slate. What should we think of part of a crew
in a leaky ship, in the middle of the Atlantic, who, out of resentment to one
half their ship's company for refusing to take their turn at the pump for one
night, should swear, that at no time during the remaining part of the voyage
they should take their turn at the pump, even though they repented of their
negligence, and showed a disposition afterward to share in the toils or danger
of the voyage? Certainly we should blame such conduct. But just so has the
state of Pennsylvania acted toward a great body of her citizens during the
late war.

The present test law was passed at a time when newspapers, the vehicles of our
laws, had a partial circulation through the state. The law for the gradual
Abolition of Slavery, passed March 1, 1780, allowed six months for all such
persons as owned Slaves to register them, otherwise, after the expiration of
that time, they were to be free. Notwithstanding the interest all Slave-holders
had in complying with this law, yet we find many hundreds of them lost their
slaves from their ignorance of it. Some of these Slave-holders lived within 12
miles of the city of Philadelphia. The news papers at that time circulated only
in the city.
It was passed too at a time when there were but few Magistrates, and those so
remotely situated, that it was in some cases difficult, and in most expensive,
to gain access to them. From these two causes, I am persuaded, there are
several thousand non-jurors in Pennsylvania, among whom are may valuable whigs.
I could mention some of these, who are officers in the militia, and who have
never declined duty or danger in the service of their country.

3d. The test law is highly impolitic. Montesquieu (whose writings are oracular
in all free countries) says, that "men who enjoy more, or who possess less
liberty than the rest of a community, are always the enemies of the liberty of
that community."

It is easy to conceive what must be the sentiments of the non-jurors, by
asking ourselves what our feelings would be in their situation. If they are not
the enemies of our government -- if they do not with hold their contributions
to the commerce and agriculture of the state -- if they do not sicken at its
prosperity, and rejoice in its misfortunes -- if they do not refuse to pay
taxes -- in a word, if they do not hate their usurpers and masters -- it is
because a great majority of them are under the influence of principles, which
render them as much the objects of affection and admiration to wise and good
men, as they are the subjects of hatred and oppression of our government.

It is incumbent upon a free people, to guard against the contagion of slavery.
Sights of distress, unrelieved, always harden the heart. Slaves living among
freemen will gradually lessen the horrors of slavery, and the charms of
liberty. Besides, who knows how long these people may endure their situation
with patience?

Lord Chatham repealed the American stamp act, by declaring that "three
millions of people, reduced to a state of slavery in America, would be fit
instruments for enslaving the whole of the British empire." Two-fifths of the
inhabitants of Pennsylvania may soon acquire such a majority, by the influence
of their arts or their wealth, as to enslave the rest of the state. It has been
thought, that the present race of British kings have been made more arbitrary,
by transferring the habits of government acquired in Hanover to the British
empire. The same men who rule slaves, should never make a law for freemen. The
absolute masters of the lives and properties of the non-jurors, are dangerous
legislators in a free country.

Friends and Fellow-citizens, think what you are doing, when you instruct your
rulers to continue the present test-law. The power of the state will not
divide, so as to gratify you all. Most of you will probably never rise beyond
the surface of private life. Why, then, should you risque your own liberty,
without the least chance of deriving any advantage from taking away the
liberties of other people? Extend liberty to your neighbors, as you wish to
preserve your own. Liberty differs from almost every thing else that is
precious, in this, that the more your neighbors possess of it, the more you
will enjoy yourselves.

From the constitution of Pennsylvania, which admits foreigners to a vote after
one year's residence, the continuance of the test law is big with evils of a
most alarming nature. The government, in a few years, must necessarily fall
into other hands. Men with European ideas of government will soon occupy the
seats of our present rulers. The British farmer, who paid his proportion of
taxes to carry on the late war against us, and even the British officer, who
assisted in desolating our country, will in a little while, by means of the
votes of their countrymen, supplant the American patriot and soldier, who
purchased our freedom with their fortunes or scars.

Rome was undone by strangers getting her government into their hands, and
introducing foreign prejudices, customs and vices among them. If our
constitution cannot be altered, let us remedy that defect in it, by admitting
the non-jurors to a share in the government, in order to balance the undue and
dangerous weight of foreigners. The non-jurors are attached to our soil by
birth, education and property, and (if they can be permitted) are willing to
add to these ties, the more sacred tie of an oath or affirmation of allegiance.
These men can have no interest unconnected with our own. Born under the
protection of the same laws with ourselves, educated in the same schools, and
connected with us by the ancient ties of friendship and business, they are our
natural friends and fellow-citizens. Our liberties, and the constitution of the
state, will therefore be safe in their hands.

By the ninth section of the test law, a non-juror cannot serve on juries. This
is an evil likewise, which has produced great mischief and danger to the state.
It throws an unequal share of the burden of government upon the jurors. It
delays, and thereby increases, the expenses of Courts, both to individuals and
the state. It moreover renders property less secure, and the decisions of
jurors less satisfactory, by obliging the Sheriffs, in some instances, to drag
jurymen into courts, who are not qualified, by knowledge or property, to decide
upon the liberties or property of their neighbors.

But there are other considerations which should have great weight with us, in
persuading us to revise our test-law. The Court of Britain is unfriendly to us.
Her power and interest in foreign Courts are employed to traduce our character
and forms of government. The Monarchs of Europe are collecting anecdotes of our
country, by means of their emissaries, in order to check the emigrations of
their subjects, by holding up the miseries and distraction of our republics.
Nor is this all. There is such a thing as emulation without jealousy, and
contention without strife. Our sister states have manifested both toward us
ever since the declaration of independence. They are bending their whole force
to rival and supplant us in trade, seaports, and inland navigation. Several of
them have already become respectable from their union. They bring the minds of
their citizens to a focus in all their laws. It is only by healing our
divisions, that we shall disappoint our foreign enemies, and it is only by
making every member of the state equally free and happy, that we shall recover
our ancient pre-eminence, as a state, in agriculture, commerce, wealth and
happiness.

Once more. The public debt contracted by the late war is still unfunded.
Whether it will be funded upon a continental impost, or upon state taxes, is
still uncertain. But can it be expected that the non-jurors will pay their
proportion of taxes, which amounts to two-thirds of the whole, (...) either
way, while they are unrepresented in our legislature? It is true, there is a
compelling power in government -- But tax-gatherers themselves have contracted
so much of the spirit of the peace, that they revolt at the idea of seizing
property for taxes. Besides, every one knows how easy it is to delay for years
the payment of taxes, without refusing them; and yet these delays materially
affect the credit and interest of the state.

Again. The exigencies of the state have been said to require paper money. To
introduce this money into general circulation, and to support its credit, the
concurrence of every member of the state, who handles money, is absolutely
necessary. Now, the non-jurors compose a large proportion of the merchants,
millers and traders of the state, who, it is well known, are that body of
people who give money its greatest circulation. Can it be expected, that these
men will receive this money? Can it be expected, that they will concur to
relieve the distresses of men who enslave them, or keep up the credit of a
government, in which they have no interest? If they do -- they must be more, or
less, than men.

The duties of the war have nearly worn out the jurors. It is high time to call
upon every citizen of the state, who is qualified by education or virtue, to
bear his part of the drudgery of government. While the jurors are serving their
country in the Assembly, upon juries, and in all the offices connected with the
collection of taxes, the support of the poor, and the care of the public roads,
the non-jurors are engaged in the pursuits of private interest, and amassing
wealth, the weight of which can never, in their present circumstances, be
thrown into the scale of government. It becomes us to consider what the
consequences may be, of their throwing it into the scale that is opposed to our
government.

Every body complains of the difficulty of borrowing money at the legal
interest. The Bank has been accused of being the cause of this difficulty, but
without foundation; for the difficulty was the same as it is at present before
the institution of the Bank. The true cause of this difficulty is to be sought
for in the test-law. The principal part of the specie of the state is in the
hands of non-jurors; for they possess two thirds, or perhaps more, of the
productive property of Pennsylvania. Now, can it be expected that these men
will lend money upon interest, when they have no share in our government, when
they have no vote to protect them against the operation of a tender law, and no
security against being precluded from recovering their debts by the ordinary
course of justice? I am not surprised at some of these people having lately
remitted their cash to Europe, and lodged it there, at an interest below the
legal interest of our state.

Every view we can take of the test-law, serves only to increase our
apprehensions from it to the liberties and prosperity of Pennsylvania.

I should like to believe that human nature was improving, from the lights
which religion, science, and the principles of liberty, have diffused over the
world. But I am afraid that mankind, in different ages, only change their vices
and follies. In vain do we boast of the toleration of all religious sects in
our government, while we persecute for opinions in politics. The same spirit
which excludes these sects from the privileges of citizens, would probably
revive the days of Archbishop Laud among us, if religious tenets were equal
obstacles to the power of the state, with the revision of the test-law.

But I will go further. -- The principal part of the non-jurors are Quakers,
Menonists, Swingfielders and Moravians, all of whom are principled against war.
The test-law, in its present form, therefore, is an invasion of the rights of
conscience, and a direct act of persecution for conscience sake. It is a
violation of the second article of the Bill of Rights, which says -- Nor can
any man, who acknowledges the being of a God, be justly deprived of any civil
right as a citizen, on account of his religious sentiments, or peculiar mode of
religious worship.

I know it has been said, that many of these people were tories during the war.
If they were after the passing of the law, I should not have been surprised at
it. For as they saw slavery before them in the journals of Pennsylvania, as
well as in the records of the British Parliament, I do not wonder that they
preferred foreign to domestic tyrants.

But I deny that this was the case. I believe that a greater proportion of
active whigs are to be found among them, than of tories. A great majority of
them were neutrals, and some of these so extremely ignorant of the nature of
the controversy, and of the events of the war, as to enquire, when they heard
of the victories or defeats of our Generals, to which side they belonged."
Compare the conduct of our non-jurors with the conduct of the tories in our
sister states. Have we ever heard of a single insurrection among them? Did
those of them, who remained in Philadelphia in the year 1777 and 8, address the
commanding officers of the British army? What proportion of new levies did they
draw from our populous state? While New Jersey furnished them with six
regiments, and North Carolina lent them one third of their state, they were
never able to muster more than 120 recruits in Pennsylvania. The spirit of the
non-jurors was hostile to nothing but war. They opened their houses alike to
the officers of the British and American armies. Their agriculture fed our
army, their taxes were at all times three-fourths of the whole contributions of
Pennsylvania, and their arts furnished a large proportion of those manufactures
which clothed our soldiers. In a temple so glorious as the fabric of liberty,
erected by means of the late war, the most trifling service performed to the
building should not be forgotten. If thanks are not due, certainly toleration
is, to every man who ploughed a furrow, or shod a horse, for the benefit of the
American army.

How dishonorable to Pennsylvania, after comparing the conduct of our
non-jurors with the conduct of the tories in our sister states, that
Pennsylvania is the only state in the union that has not revised or repealed
her test-laws! Even in North and South Carolina, where many of the tories
carried arms, the whigs have showed the magnanimity of conquest, as well as the
spirit of liberty and wise government, by admitting every man to equal
privileges in their states.

The Quakers were the original inhabitants of Pennsylvania. They encountered
all the hardships of settling on bare creation. They discovered a new art of
subduing savages, by the integrity of their intercourse with them. To their
wisdom, industry and benevolence, Pennsylvania, for half a century, owed all
her fame and happiness. Look at the charter composed by the founder of the
province, and examine the laws that were passed by the Quakers, while they
possessed all the power of Pennsylvania. In neither of them is a single article
or section to be found, which abridges any man of the rights of conscience. The
power and offices of the province were open alike to men of every nation and
sect, with themselves. When Massachusetts Bay refused to permit a crew of
distressed Irish emigrants even to land upon her shores, Pennsylvania opened
her arms to receive them. When a body of Germans met with unexpected
disappointments, after landing in New York, the Quakers gave them protection,
and thus afforded encouragement for thousands of their countrymen to follow
them to this land of liberty. Humanity would drop a tear, if the successors or
descendants of these men should be found to be among the most violent in
opposing the revision of the test-law, and thereby of restoring the Quakers to
the dignity and happiness of freemen -- But further, -- suppose we should
discover a great proportion of those people, who are opposed to the revision of
the test-law, to have alternately sworn allegiance to King George, and the
state of Pennsylvania, according as the arms of the one or the other prevailed
during the late war. I am able to produce a list of the names of these people,
and of the days on which they were transferred, backwards and forwards, to
their different masters. Do you think, my friends, to cancel your guilt in
these transactions, by persecuting the non-jurors? They certainly acted an
honest part, compared with the part you have acted. They deceived neither
party. America never counted them among the number of the militia, nor did
General How ever transmit their names to the Secretary of State, as converts
from rebellion to royalty.

I cannot help introducing a remark upon the test-law of Pennsylvania, in which
it differs from the test-laws of Great Britain and Ireland. By the former, the
door of office and power stands constantly open to the dissenters from the
established Church. By the latter, all the privileges of freemen are offered to
the Catholics, upon their abjuring the doctrines of the Church of Rome. All the
powers and arts of government have been employed to force these tests upon the
conscience. Here there was a mixture of mistaken benevolence with tyranny. But
the test-law of Pennsylvania holds out nothing but unmixed tyranny and
persecution. It bars the door for ever against repentance and conversion. It
proclaims perpetual war against uniformity in government, and thus renders the
standard of discord the true arms of the state.

There is another comparison of the test-law, which places it, if possible, in
a more odious light. It is with the law for abolishing slavery, passed March 1,
1780.

The spirit and letter of the constitution are preserved by this law. It does
not admit free Negroes, it is true, to the privilege of voting, but then it
exempts them from taxes A free Negroe is in a safer and more honorable
situation in Pennsylvania, than a Quaker who has not submitted to the test-law.
This fact should excite the more distress and shame, when we recollect, that it
was the example and publications of the people called Quakers, that
disseminated those principles of equal liberty and humanity through the state,
which at last produced that excellent law for the gradual abolition of slavery.

I know it has been urged, that if the non-jurors are restored to their rights,
they will combine, and restore the state back to Great Britain. The men who
urge this objection to the revision of the test-law certainly do not believe
it. The passive principles of the non-jurors forbid it. -- Can it be possible,
that societies, whom neither the threats nor persuasions of the principal
officers of the British army in the year 1777, after they had conquered the
city of Philadelphia, could prevail upon to contribute a single act of
friendship to them, or of hostility against the Americans, can be prevailed
upon to disturb the peace of a settled government, in order to bring about a
reunion with Great Britain? Common sense revolts at the idea.

Equally absurd and groundless is the fear, that the non-jurors will repeal the
law for putting an end to proprietary influence in Pennsylvania. Who began and
continued the controversies with the late Proprietaries about quitrents? -- The
Quakers. Who opposed them in all those encroachments and exactions, which have
lately been pointed out in one of the reports of the Council of Censors? -- The
Quakers. Who attempted to rescue the state from the dominion of the proprietary
family in the year 1764, and to place it under the protection of the Crown? --
The Quakers. Is it possible, that these people can so far forget their ancient
prejudices and principles, as to revive a power which they so long reprobated,
checked and opposed? I would as soon believe that Hannibal lived and died in
friendship with the Romans.

I was sorry to hear an argument against the revision of the test-law made use
of in the Assembly, in September last, which was exploded in our controversy
with Great Britain. We were told, "that the non-jurors were virtually
represented." This mode of representation was proved, in the years 1773 and
1774, to be virtual nonsense. What is there to prevent a non-juror from being
doubly taxed? -- Nothing. Who can plead his cause in the Assembly? -- No one.
He holds his property -- nay more, the remains of his liberty, and even his
life, at the mercy of the legislature.

But, as an apology for the continuance of the test-law, we are told, that the
non-jurors do not wish to have it revised or repealed. If this be true, the
state of Pennsylvania is in the last stage of political indisposition. A
physician always puts on a serious countenance, when a diseased limb loses its
power of feeling. The whole body, when this is the case, is in danger. If
two-fifths of the state are reconciled to slavery, the remaining three-fifths
hold their liberty by a precarious tenure. But I deny that the non-jurors are
satisfied with their present situation. They complain loudly since the peace,
and express the utmost anxiety to enjoy the privileges of freemen. Their
patient submission to the test-law during the war, arose from their
disinclination to share in government, while it was compelled to employ its
forces in a business that was foreign to their principles.

There is one more motive, I cannot call it an argument, in favor of the
continuance of the present test-law. It has been said that the jurors, by
defending the state with arms, have acquired an exclusive right to the power of
it. In answer to this, I might only say, that dominion founded in arms, or
rather in oaths, (for the most violent of the jurors never bore arms, except on
muster-days) is as absurd as dominion founded in grace. But I beg leave to ask
the people who urge this motive for continuing the test-law, whether any one of
them ever performed a tour of duty, or rendered any essential service to the
state, without being paid for it? -- and whether the money which paid them did
not come chiefly from the pockets of the non-jurors? -- Yes. Ask the
tax-gatherers, and they will tell you that two-thirds of all the effective
taxes that have been collected since the year 1779 have come from the
non-jurors. -- They will tell you further, that they have been collected with
the least murmuring and the most punctuality from these people. Now, if money
constitutes the sinews of war, then the non-jurors have sustained a material
part of the weight of the late revolution in the state of Pennsylvania. To
their industry and arts, the state owed a great part of the supplies which
supported the continental army for several years; and to their taxes, chiefly,
she owes the pre-eminence which she enjoys over her sister states in the
Continental Treasury. But again, -- if this motive is admitted, and the power
of the state is to be founded in whiggism, or arms, then a preference should
certainly be given to those men, who have done and suffered most for the state.
These men, every one must acknowledge, are the officers and soldiers of the
Pennsylvania line. No class of citizens, I am sure, will reprobate this idea
more sincerely than those officers and soldiers themselves. To their immortal
honor let it be recorded, that they are almost to a man strenuous advocates for
equal liberty to every member of the state. They have long ago forgiven and
forgotten the insults of the disaffected, and the neutrality of the non-jurors.
This conduct will convey their names with infinitely more honor to posterity,
than all the insignia of the order of Cincinnatus.

In small communities, unanimity is in some instances necessary. But in a state
so populous as Pennsylvania, it was not to be expected. If we look into the
histories of revolutions in other countries, we shall find none of them
conducted with so much unanimity as the late revolution in Pennsylvania.
Gustavus Vasa recovered the throne of Sweden with a handful of men, recruited
in a single day in the province of Dalcarlia. Not more than one fourth part of
the inhabitants of England took part in the civil war between King Charles and
his parliament. Even King William was brought to England by a small body of
men, and afterward placed upon the throne by a majority of only four votes.
The men who were opposed to his accession were not precluded, by any violent or
unnatural law, from a share in the government. Lord Halifax, who had the honor
of presenting the Crown to King William and Queen Mary, made use of the
following remarkable expressions, when an attempt was made to fix the stability
of the Throne upon a Test Law. As there is no real security (says he) to any
state by oaths, so no private person, much less Statesman, would ever order his
affairs as relying on it; for no man would ever sleep with open doors, or
unlocked-up treasure or plate, should all the town be sworn not to rob.
The consequences of this moderation were soon felt by the whole nation. The
Jacobites lent their money to the crown, and became in every respect such
faithful and peaceable subjects, that Bishop Burnet was forced to acknowledge,
that "the Whigs brought King William to the throne, but the Tories kept him
there."

In our ideas of tyranny, we are too apt to suppose that it can be derived only
from monarchy or aristocracy. But history shows us, that parties often enslave
each other. There can be no safety in a state to any man, where there is a body
of tyrants, and a body of slaves. Political liberty is the result of the
combined wills of every member of a community. Every species of democracy, not
founded in this principle, is a mock commonwealth, and must in a little while
end in anarchy and tyranny. Harrington, Government in a party, though all of
these were well affected, must be insecure and transitory, because it
wave^nature, to found itself in force. -- Political Aphorisms, p. 550.

Where a few men, not having the whole, or about two parts in three of the
whole land or territory, yet assume to themselves the whole power, there the
people are under privation of government, and this privation is called
Oligarchy.

Where the many, or the people, not having the whole, or two parts in three of
the whole land or territory, yet assume to themselves the whole power, there
the people are under privation of government, and this privation is called
Anarchy. This Tyranny, Oligarchy and Anarchy, cannot stand by any force of
nature, because it is void of any natural foundation, nor by any force of arms,
because it is not able to maintain an army, and so must fall away of itself,
through the want of a foundation, or be blown up by some tumult, -- System of
Politics, p. 498.499.


Milton, Needham, and all the best writers in favor of republican forms of
government, mention many arguments, from reason and history, in support of this
assertion.

I shall dismiss the defense of the claims of the non-jurors with the following
observations:

An industrious man, with frugality, who pays his taxes punctually, is at all
times a valuable member of a republic.

A man who manufactures and sells more than he consumes, adds to the wealth and
prosperity of his country.

A man with good morals, who peaceably submits to such laws of his country as
are not against the dictates of his conscience, let his political and religious
principles be ever so erroneous, is a better citizen than a man of dissolute
morals, with the purest principles in religion, and the freest in government.

The non-jurors in Pennsylvania are in general an industrious, frugal,
temperate body of people. Whatever their political principles may be, they are
for the most part genuine republicans in dress and manners. If they have erred
-- nay more, if they have sinned during the late war, we shall consult the
freedom and prosperity of the state by forgiving them. If we are wise, we shall
do more -- we shall protect and cherish them, as the surest resources of the
wealth and independence of the state.

If the enemies to the revision of the test-law believe in the divine authority
of the scriptures, I would beg leave to recommend to their serious
consideration those passages in the old testament, which contain such terrible
accounts of the judgments of God against oppressors. But if these examples are
supposed not to apply in modern times, let them consult the writings of our
Savior and his Apostles. In every page of these, they will find principles and
precepts repugnant to the spirit of the test-law. -- Where is the man that can
lay his hand on his heart, and say, that, by depriving the non-jurors of the
right of suffrage, "he does to others, as he would have them, in like
circumstances, do to him?" -- The words of our Savior, in his sermon upon the
mount, are calculated to beget forgiveness, by motives of the most interesting
nature. "If ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father
forgive your trespasses." -- Mat. vi. 14.

If there are any men who persevere in enforcing obedience to the test law,
after this quotation, I have only to recommend to them not to repeat the Lord's
Prayer, in their addresses to their Maker. It will be an insult upon the
Majesty of Heaven, to ask for the forgiveness of any one sin, while they refuse
to forgive their less offending brethren.

I pass over the disputes, delays and frauds, which the test-law has introduced
at elections in most of the counties of the state. I take no notice likewise of
the different interpretations which have been given of this law by different
parties, in their decisions upon controverted elections. These things have for
several years excited distress, shame, and the most painful apprehensions in
the breasts of every lover of Pennsylvania. TAXES, and a peaceable submission
to all such laws as are not contrary to the dictates of conscience, should
always be considered as the morality of citizenship. To connect the right of
suffrage with a certificate of an oath, or the records of a Magistrate's
office, without appealing to the Assessors books, is as absurd, as it would be
for a man to plead his title to the kingdom of Heaven, by producing at the
Supreme Tribunal nothing but a register of his baptism.

It must afford the liveliest pleasure to a truly good man, to contemplate the
effects of the late peace upon the human mind. The British and American soldier
now meet as friends, and talk over with pleasure the scenes of distress and
danger, in which they opposed each other in the field. The British and American
merchant exchange commodoties with each other, and mutually contribute toward
each other's wealth and happiness. The British and American sailor now hail
each other on the deserts of the ocean, and kindly relieve each other's wants
and distresses. The inflexible whig, and the once obstinate tory, now meet in
the same legislature in the southern and eastern states -- transact business in
the same committees -- and vie with each other in their exertions to support
the interests and independence of their respective states. Even the Indian
savage meets the American Commissioner at the same Council fire, smokes with
him the same pipe, and buries his hatchet, with the resentment of his former
enemy, in the same grave. In a word -- we every where hear the echo of the song
of the Angels at the birth of our Savior, "Peace on earth, and good will to
man." Every thing breathes reconciliation and brotherly love -- except the test
law of Pennsylvania.

I cannot help adding a thought here, which I am sure will have weight with all
good men.

The present feeble and partial operation of the gospel in the world renders
wars not only unavoidable, but lawful and necessary. But if we believe in the
prophesies of the Old and New Testaments, we must look for a time, when the
instruments of war shall be converted into the implements of husbandry, and
when the pacific principles of the gospel shall so far change the tempers and
manners of mankind, that even the beasts of prey shall learn from the human
species to put off their savage natures, and to live in harmony with each other.

In what manner this revolution (so long and so devoutly expected) shall be
brought about in the moral world, we know not, -- but most probably it will be
by natural means, and by causes of a progressive operation. Who knows whether
those sects of Christians, who so uniformly and steadily bear a testimony
against war, may not be intended by divine Providence as the receptacles of
those peaceful principles, which are finally to prevail over the whole earth?
Who knows, whether Heaven has not intended the progress of these principles to
be gradual? Christianity, we know, was once propagated gradually from the
little province of Judea, by a few fishermen, over every civilized part of the
globe. The seeds of the reformation were sowed in England by Wickliffe, in the
year 1362, nearly two hundred years before they spread themselves through every
part of the nation. But we have an example of the progressive operation of just
principles within the compass of our own knowledge, that applies directly to
the case in question. It is scarcely forty years, since a few men in
Pennsylvania, who were branded as enthusiasts, first bore a testimony against
the slavery of the Negroes. These principles spread gradually, and in the
course of a few years were adopted as part of the system of doctrines of the
people called Quakers. From them, and by their industry, they have been
propagated, by natural means, through all the middle and eastern states of
America. Pennsylvania has done homage to them in her sovereign and legislative
capacity. The slaves of the southern states feel a pleasure, when the name of
Pennsylvania sounds in their ears; and even the native African has learned to
except our state, from the execrations he pronounces against Christian tyrants
and man-thieves. These principles of equal liberty have not stopped in
Pennsylvania. They are traveling along the Chesapeake, and have found
advocates on the banks of Ashley and Cooper rivers, in South Carolina. In a few
years they will probably have their full operation upon the minds of our
southern brethren, and produce laws for the abolition of slavery similar to our
own. Now, may not the pacific principles of the Quakers be propagated in the
same manner, and with the same success, as their principles with respect to the
slavery of the Negroes? In order to favor the propagation and operation of
these pacific principles, it certainly becomes us to admit these people, in the
time of peace, to a share in our government. War is the business of savages. It
begets vice and debt in all civilized nations. It is agreeable to monarchs,
because they derive their glory and an increase of power from it. But PEACE is
the business and interest of republics. It favors liberty, promotes industry,
and is the parent of all political happiness. I do not wish to consider the
Atlantic Ocean as the barrier of our benevolence, when we wish for perpetual
peace, but I maintain that the love and spirit of peace are absolutely
necessary for the safety and prosperity of the United States. Those men will
make the wisest legislators for America, who oppose mistakes by negotiation,
and decide disputes by arbitration. In the present feeble state of the
confederation, I conceive there is nothing left to us, to render the union of
the states perpetual, but to call into our aid, in every way that we can, the
pacific principles of the Christian religion.

Freemen of Pennsylvania, consider what you are doing. The nations of Europe
are watching to see, whether, by adopting republican forms of government, we
have added to, or diminished, the happiness of mankind. The next seven years,
more than the last seven years, will determine their conduct, whether it will
be best to assert their freedom, or to prefer a less evil to a greater, by
submitting to the tyranny of monarchical government. The fate and liberty of
the world, perhaps, are now suspended by our example. If we trample on the
first principles of just government -- if we violate the most sacred parts of
our constitutions -- if we enforce laws that are impolitic and inhuman -- we
strengthen the chains of slavery in Europe -- we defeat the schemes of those
benefactors of mankind, who are now striving, by their writings, to shake the
thrones of tyranny, and thus check the last efforts of mankind, to restore
human nature to her natural and original dignity.

I beg pardon, if, in the course of these considerations, I have said any
thing, that has offended those members of the legislature who enacted the
present test-law, or who, by refusing to revise it in the two last sessions of
the Assembly, have continued it in force. The law was passed at a time when
clouds and darkness covered the state. The last year was devoted by the
constitution to enquiries, that were calculated to awaken jealousies, and
inflame the passions. It is now sunshine, and the passions of the state are
again hushed into repose. Let an act of amnesty then be passed in our minds, of
all the errors that have been committed in government by parties and
individuals. Let reconciliation, more refreshing than the dew of Hermon,
descend upon our mountains, and let brotherly love, more fragrant than the
ointment that was poured upon Aaron's head, flow down upon the skirts of the
state, and let us all once more embrace each other as friends and members of
the same political family.

I shall conclude with the following observation:

If neither a regard to the principles of free government, nor to our
constitution -- if neither policy nor humanity -- if neither interest, nor a
regard to the honor or safety of the state -- if the terrors of divine
judgments recorded in the old, and the precepts of benevolence and mercy
delivered in the new testament -- have no effect upon us in producing a
revision of the test law -- if a monopoly of the power of the state is a more
desirable object with any body or sect of our citizens, than the preservation
of its liberties -- I beg leave to suggest to these people, that their schemes
of ambition will certainly be disappointed; for the test law must necessarily
in a few years lose its effect. The sons of non-jurors, with the addition of
the sons of the moderate part of the jurors, increase in the ratio of three to
one above the sons of the present ruling party. These will, in a few years,
produce a new channel for the power of the state. But if human nature is the
same in Pennsylvania, as it is in the other states, the test-law will probably
repeal itself in a much shorter time. However steady the lust for power or
offices may be in the leaders of a party, the party themselves will not long be
actuated by that principle. Parties, like individuals, when left to themselves,
soften, after the gratification of resentment, into moderation and gentleness.
The intercourse and good offices produced among our citizens by means of
commerce will naturally spread more and more every day, and thus revive ancient
friendships and connections among us. The same men, who last year voted for
Assemblymen to oppose the revision of the test-law, may probably reject them
for continuing that law at the ensuing election.

I do not wish to see such frequent changes of our rulers, much less do I wish
to see those irremediable evils and irreconcilable animosities take place in
Pennsylvania, which must succeed the dissolution of the law in the manner that
has been mentioned. I can scarcely conceive of a more agreeable sight, than an
Assembly preferring what is just to what is popular -- restoring the
constitution of the state to its original and true meaning in all its parts --
burying in oblivion every cause of strife -- combining the strength and
affections of the state into a focus -- and, lastly, consenting to divide the
power and offices of the state equally among all societies.

Should the present Assembly yield to the voice of nature, reason and religion,
and open the doors of freedom in Pennsylvania to all her children, by revising
the test-law, they will acquire a pre-eminence for wisdom over all their
predecessors, and render their fame as extensive, and their names as immortal,
as it is now in their power to render the happiness and prosperity of
Pennsylvania.

FINIS.

