REMARKS ON A PAMPHLET, ENTITLED

"A DISSERTATION on the political Union and Constitution of the Thirteen United
States of NORTH AMERICA."

"By a CITIZEN of PHILADELPHIA."

With some brief OBSERVATIONS, Whether all the Western Lands, not actually
purchased or conquered by the Crown of GREAT-BRITAN, antecedent to the late
Cession, made to the Thirteen United States of NORTH AMERICA, ought not to be
considered as ceded to the Thirteen States jointly -- And whether all the
confiscated Estates of those People, by some termed Loyalists, are to be
considered as forfeited to the States in which they were resident, or to all
the States included in the Confederation.

By a CONNECTICUT FARMER.

PRINTED, M,DCC,LXXXIV.

To the Freemen and Citizens of the State of Connecticut.
GENTLEMEN,
THERE has lately appeared A Dissertation on the political Union, and
Constitution of the Thirteen United States of North America, written by a
Citizen of Philadelphia, which (for political reasons I conclude,) has been
reprinted in this state; which pamphlet contains maxims and sentiments
inconsistent with, and subversive of the sovereignty, freedom and independence
of these states, calculated to subvert our happy constitution, and to introduce
a system or form of government more sovereign, arbitrary and despotic. I have
waited with impatience for some abler pen to detect and expose the secret
designs of this author. None appearing, I now present you with the remarks I
made, when I first read that Dissertation.

But before I enter upon that subject I would just observe to you, that in
founding this new and rising empire, we ought carefully to avoid those errors
which have brought ruin on our Parent State.

The national (...) of Great Britain is become so immensely large, that it is
not in her power any longer to enslave us, or to tyrannize over the nations of
Europe; which has been accumulated by granting exorbitant salaries to the
officers of the crown, and supporting a host of placemen and pensioners, that
since the last war, the interest of the national debt will not admit of any
abatement of taxes; but on the other hand, new ones must be devised, or
additions made to former taxes for the support of government in peace, which
must distress the poor -- drive out many of their manufacturers and useful
members of society -- sink the value of their lands, if not bring on national
bankruptcy; and such as cannot seek an asylum elsewhere, must sink down into
the most abject state of vassalage and slavery -- And the same causes will
produce the same effects in every region under the sun.

In the first place therefore, if we would avoid their fate, let us carefully
avoid those measures which have brought on her ruin. -- Rome no sooner became
luxurious, but she lost her liberty, which was every thing worth preserving. --
High salaries and emoluments of office do not always convey wisdom, prudence,
and skill in the arts of government. -- Luxury in those who govern, will
contaminate the body of the people, and fraud, injustice and oppression will be
introduced among the common people, to supply the want of the revenues of
office among the great. -- In order therefore to prevent any further the
accumulation of our debt, contracted during the war, it would be more to the
honor of the states, to copy after the prudent economy of the States of
Holland while they were loaded with a heavy debt, than to mimic the pomp, or
assume the parade and pegeantry of the courts of Europe.

In the next place, if we would support our national credit abroad, and regain
that confidence which ought forever to be put in public credit at home, let us
be just -- do strict justice both to the officers and soldiers of our brave
army, who have fought, bled and suffered, in the cause of their country; make
speedy and ample provision for the payment of the interest, and sinking the
principle both of our national and internal debt, as soon as they can be
adjusted, and ascertained to satisfaction -- which will secure us the favor
and protection of heaven, and make us respectable both at home and abroad.

Our public debt although large, with proper economy may be discharged in the
compass of a few years, without distressing the states, provided the several
legislatures adopt measures to draw out their wealth, without disgusting them
to such a degree, as to refuse submission -- which will be the greatest
calamity that can befall us, which a careful examination of the expenditure of
public moneys, and strictly calling to account all public defaulters, will have
the greatest tendency to prevent. -- The consternation into which these states
were thrown, by this bloody, cruel and unnatural war, will and ought to be a
sufficient excuse for the expenditure of large sums to little or no profit. --
But all criminal defaulters, who have appropriated public moneys to their own
private advantages, or to the aggrandizement of their families, ought publicly
to be stigmatized with indelible reproach.

A late writer has justly observed, "That the art of supporting government, and
maintaining authority is a delicate art, and requires more circumspection than
is generally thought necessary: They who GOVERN are perhaps too much accustomed
to hold men in CONTEMPT, and regard them too much as slaves, subdued and bent
down by NATURE, while they are only so by HABIT; if you lay on a NEW LOAD, take
care they do not shake it off with FURY and with INTEREST, forget not that the
LEVER OF POWER, has no other support than OPINION; that the power of those who
GOVERN is in reality but the power of those who SUFFER GOVERNMENT. Remind not
people sleeping in their chains, to lift up their eyes to truths too terrible
for you; and while they are OBEYING, bring not to their remembrance their right
to COMMAND, when the moment of their rousing shall arrive; when they shall have
thought in earnest, that they are not made for their magistrates, but their
magistrates for them; when they shall once be able to bring themselves
together, to feel the communication of kindred minds; and to pronounce with a
voice unanimous, we will not have this law; this practice is offensive, medium
is no more; you must be constrained, by an unavoidable alternative, either to
punish or to yield; either to be tyrannical, or weak, and your authority thence
forward detested or despised." -- To which I would only add -- Human nature,
vi^e as it is, (mankind are so far convinced of the necessity of civil
government,) will submit to be governed by just and equitable laws, but will be
stubborn and fractious when they are unjust, unreasonable and oppressive -- and
in this consists the art of governing, more especially a commonwealth; and from
this quarter republican rulers may look out to prevent trouble in due season,
before it is too late. It is an old saying, but a true one, all men cannot
judge, but they can all feel. Nothing will produce a quicker sensation among a
free people, who have been accostomed to eating, drinking, and being clothed,
than to be abridged of those necessary articles, for the private emolument of a
few individuals.

It must be acknowledged the highest wisdom in these states, to encourage and
promote frugality, industry, agriculture, and our own manufactures; and to
suppress by every judicious measure, luxury and dissipation of every kind. To
accomplish these important views, I must for my own part highly approve of an
impost recommended by our honorable Continental Congress, in which each state
ought to be uniform as to the impost imposed. But whether such an impost laid
by Congress, and collected by officers by them appointed; or to be collected by
officers appointed by the authority of the state, accountable to our own
legislature, to be appropriated to the discharging our quota of the national
debt, as soon as the same shall be ascertained, or to be paid into the
Continental treasury, to be applied to such uses as they think proper, I must
submit to the good sense and integrity of the legislature of the state, on
which I think I can safely rely.

The necessaries of life are few and simple -- The conveniences of life many
-- The luxuries of life still more, and they are such as corrupt, the morals of
the people. -- Encourage industry, and by a sort of necessary consequence, you
make mankind frugal and virtuous. -- To discharge our quota of the national
debt by an impost on all goods or produce of foreign growth imported, every man
may choose how much of the national debt he will pay, which will be in exact
proportion, to the foreign articles of commerce which he purchases for his own
consumption: If my circumstances will permit, and my pride and vanity prompts
me to wear a cloth of 40s. per yard, I pay in that article four times as much
as my neighbor, who contents himself with a cloth of 10s. which will answer
all the purposes of life as well, and in some cases much better, than what cost
four times that sum. -- But at the same time, if the citizens of these states
are unwilling to pay our quota of debt, or to support government, by taxing the
luxuries of life, which will gradually and insensibly induce us to be frugal
and industrious, it will be to little purpose to enact laws for that end. -- To
enact laws one session of the assembly, to be repealed the next, only enervates
government, and renders the legislature contemptible. -- I should therefore
think it best, besure in democratical governments, before any new mode of
taxation is adopted by the legislature -- to print the bill designed to be
passed into a law, with the reasons on which it is founded, and to let the
people at large have an opportunity to weigh the reasons of it, before any
undue prejudices arise in their minds, or are excited by designing men, and
they generally will make a good judgment. But to frame a law, which will give a
general uneasiness and disgust, it will be impracticable to execute it. --
Perhaps this may be thought too much beneath the dignity of the legislature of
the state; but if my memory does not betray me, it has been, on some occasions,
practiced by the British parliament, and if it had always been practiced both
by them, and the several assemblies of these states, it would often have saved
them the trouble of frequent repeals. Paying of money, with the greater part of
the citizens of this state, is a very serious matter, and those who are best
able, are easier led than drove. -- It is firmly rivited on my mind, the body
of the freemen and citizens of this state are honest, and truly willing to pay
their quota of the public debt, justly due, and shall continue of that opinion,
until I see just grounds to alter my ^entiments; and for my own part, I am
desirous that they should choose the mode in which it shall be done. -- If the
landed interest of this state, choose their landed interest, stock, etc. should
be subjected to pay the public debt; -- from which we can scarcely obtain a
support for the real necessities of our families, I am content; provided we are
not subjected to an assessment, which would soon involve us in new troubles.
Should they rather prefer that mode pointed out by Congress, which certainly
will place the greatest burden on the rich and luxurious, I shall for my own
part perfectly acquiesce in their choice, provided the laws are so calculated,
as not to subject the private houses of citizens to search warrants, which
never ought to be permited in a free state, for any thing short of felony, as
it wears the highest badge of tyranny that can possibly be exhibited.

The citizens of this state have long been anxious for a new mode of taxation,
and I am for my own part willing that mode should be fairly left to their
option and choice. But am fully of opinion, a little calm reflection will
incline them to adopt an impost, which lays the greatest part of the burden on
the rich and luxurious, and has a natural tendency, to promote industry,
economy, and our own manufactures. The appropriation of which is the
prerogative of the authority that grants; the collecting the same authority
doubtless will retain in their own hands -- and the sooner we comply with it,
the sooner we shall be able to discharge our quota of the debt with honor to
the state. -- But creating many Continental offices and officers, with large
emoluments of office is diametrically opposite to the true spirit and genius of
a republican government, and tends to enlarge our debt. -- The more wheels or
springs in any machine, to perform the necessary movements, and the more
complicated the structure, the more easily put out of order, and the more
difficult to discover and repair the defect. -- It is the same with regard to
government. -- The ^ewer the laws -- the more simple the form of government the
better. -- The whole code of laws which related to the civil polity of the Jews
might be comprised in less compass than any one of the five books of Moses,
although they were as the stars of heaven for multitude, and as the sand on the
sea shore innumerable. -- Their Judges were the elders of their cities, who
held their sessions in their gates, and their causes determined without long,
tedious and expensive processes.

In the second place, if these states expect to maintain their sovereignty,
freedom and independence, they ought carefully and explicitly to instruct their
representatives to pay the strictest regard to the articles of our foederal
union, and to regulate all their public acts agreeable thereto, as they are the
palladium of all our civil rights and privileges, and the only band of our
union, which they should strictly keep inviolate, as we regard our PUBLIC
FAITH. And I submit it to the wisdom of the legislature of the state whether it
may not answer very salutary purposes that a constant correspondence be
supported between the several assemblies of the states, and a uniformity
maintained in their instructions to the Delegates of Congress upon any general
grand and important concerns which relate to all the states in the union.

Tyranny, oppression and arbitrary power, make their advances by slow
progressive measures, and often under the most specious pretenses. They never
recede, but keep gradually advancing. -- Every deviation therefore, or
extention of power, beyond the limits of our most happy constitution, will be
attended with the most dangerous consequences.

I will now advert to the remarks on the pamphlet lately published, which I
conceive to be of dangerous tendency; which I have attempted with a view to
prevent its taking effect, which I should have rejoiced to have seen done by
some abler pen. -- All I request is your acceptance of the sincere intentions of

THE AUTHOR.

Remarks on a Pamphlet, entitled, etc.
THE articles of our foederal union were drawn up by Congress, and adopted by
the states, amidst the confusions of a most bloody, cruel, and unnatural war,
when the attention of Congress who drew, and the states who adopted them, was
frequently drawn off by continual alarms, burning of towns, slaughter and
bloodshed: No marvel then that every inconveniency attending them when reduced
into practice, could not be foreseen, either by those who drew, or those who
adopted them; at which period, it would not have been well accepted, had any
one discovered, and had ventured to call into question, the propriety of any
one of the thirteen articles of our confederation.

It may therefore be advisable, now we are released from the distressing
scenes of war, deliberately to examine, revise, correct and amend them, in
every instance, in which when reduced into practice, they may be found --
inconsistent with each other -- not capable of being carried into execution --
or inconsistent with the general sense and understanding of those who adopted
them. And every man not an enemy to his country, who in any measure tenders its
peace and future happiness, will readily give his consent, if the present
articles of our foederal union are found on a fair trial, deficient, in either
of the foregoing particulars, that they should with care and due deliberation,
be revised, corrected, and amended. For, as a late writer observes, "No
government has the prerogative to be immutable -- No power how respectable
soever, created ^^^day, or a thousand years ago, which may not be abrogated to
morrow -- No government is authorized to regard the state as its property --
whoever thinks otherwise devotes himself, his family, and his childrens
children to misery, allowing, to his ance^^ors a right to stipulate for him,
when he did not exist, and arrogating to himself a right to stipulate for his
posterity before they ex^sted. -- All authority in this world began either by
the consent of the subjects, or the power of their master, in both the one or
the other they may justly end -- there being no prescription in favor of
tyranny against liberty."

The author of the dissertation on which I remark, has not proposed any one
alteration of the articles of our foederal union throughout his whole
dissertation, but what he proposes for the enlargement of the powers of
Congress, by which it is very evident he has high notions of prerogative in
those who govern, how much soever ^e may be concerned to maintain the natural
and constitutional rights of his fellow subjects; and rather seems to banter
than to support even their right to choose their own representatives, either in
the assemblies of the states, or delegates in Congress.

The Honorable Continental Congress having styled the Confederacy in the first
article, THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA; by the second they have taken due care
to secure the rights of the separate states in the following words:

"Each state retains its SOVEREIGNTY, FREEDOM, and INDEPENDENCE, and every
power, jurisdiction and right, not expressly delegated to the United States in
Congress assembled." Every power therefore not expressly delegated to Congress
by the articles of confederation, still remains to be exercised by the states
separately: and in this consists their sovereignty, freedom and independence.

It cannot be difficult to determine what powers the states have expressly
delegated to Congress, a careful review of the (...) article will solve the
difficulty, and if any thing is doubtfully expressed, they ought as soon as
possible to be explained to the sense and understanding which Congress had when
they draughted, and which the states had when they adopted them. Or if on a
f^ir trial it appears that Congress are not vested with all those powers
necessary to execute the grand and important ends and designs for which the
states entered into confederation, the powers of Congress most certainly must
be enlarged, with that care and caution necessary on so important occasion. --
But for Congress to assume, or for the states to submit, to any extension of
power, beyond the powers delegated to Congress, will have an effectual tendency
to subvert the constitution, and destroy what the states highly value, viz.
their own sovereignty, freedom, and independence.

The author of that dissertation on which I am about to remark, says, fol.5,
"The supreme authority" (by which he means Congress) "must have the power of
making war and peace. -- of appointing armies and navies." These powers by the
9th article are expresslyd elegated -- "of appointing officers civil and
military." Congress in draughting the articles of our foederal union, reserved
in their own hands the right of appointing the general officers of our armies.
-- The officers of our navies, when we have any in existence, and the states
have expressly delegated that power to them, to whom in fact it with great
propriety belongs, and could not be exercised in any other way but by the
supreme authority of the commonwealth. -- But it never entered into their minds
I presume, as it is not even suggested i^ the articles, their having any power
of appointing the civil officers of the states, which is a prerogative, I
presume, the states never will resign, so long as they have any desire to
retain their sovereignty, freedom, and independence. -- Indeed was the
bestowment of places of bonor and profit the gift of the supreme authority of
the states, let it be King, Congress, Stateholder, Regent, or Dictator, or by
what name soever called, they would (so long as mankind have any fondness for
honor, and the emoluments of office) have it in their power to bribe the
assembly of the states, and every one who oppose any usurped authority or undue
extension of power beyond the limits of the constitution by which they are
governed; but in a republican government it saps it to the very foundation. So
long as all public measures are open to the examination of the body of the
electors, and the bestowment of places of crust left to their representatives,
and the emoluments of office kept within reasonable bounds, so long a
commonwealth may be governed with safety, in peace and good order; but grant to
the supreme authority in any form of government whatever, the sole prerogative
of the bestowment of all places civil and military, the prerogative of annexing
the emoluments of office, and the bestowment of pensions, and their subjects
are slaves to all intents and purposes whatever. -- True it is a people may be
happy under any form of government, so long as good men govern, but whenever
they become corrupt -- if vested with the power of bestowing all offices civil
and military, and at the same time they hold the purse-strings, or which is the
same thing, have such grants of money settled for life as will enable the chief
magistrate, or supreme authority, to grant pensions, to such as will be the
tools and creatures of his court -- no matter what the form of government is,
or whether governed by a King or Congress, whenever the supreme authority
becomes corrupt, and are desirous of extending their power beyond the bounds
prescribed by the constitution, they always have it in their power to effect
it. This author proceeds and says. "They must have the power of making
contracts -- emitting, coining, and borrowing money -- of regulating trade, and
making treaties with foreign powers -- of establishing postoffices. -- These
powers Congress are already expressly vested with by the articles of
confederation; but these do not seem fully to satisfy the desire of this
author. He then proceeds and says, "In short of doing every thing, which the
well being of the commonwealth may require, and which is not compatible, to any
particular state, all which require money, and cannot be effected without it,
they must therefore of NECESSITY be vested with the power of TAXATION."

This author may remember the Honorable Continental Congress drew up the
articles of our foederal union, they doubtless well understood what powers were
necessary to be vested in their hands, "which the well being of the
commonwealth required, and which was not compatible to any particular state,"
at least they understood that matter as well as this author can be supposed to
understand it; at the same time they fully understood the foundation of our
opposition to the unconstitutional measures of the British parliament, and they
well knew the confidence placed in them by the states, as the guardians of all
our civil and natural rights, and they then retained in their own hands, by the
articles of our foederal union, all those powers they thought necessary to be
lodged in their hands, which we could with safety commit to them, and still the
states retain their sovereignty, freedom, and independence, and they are all
judiciously and very expressly pointed out in the 9th articles, viz. "The sole
and exclusive right and power of determining on peace and war -- of sending and
receiving ambassadors -- entering into treaties and alliances -- of
establishing rules for deciding in all cases, what captures on land and water
shall be legal, and in what manner prizes taken by land or naval forces in the
service of the United States shall be divided or appropriated -- of granting
letters of marque and reprisals in times of peace -- appointing cour^s for the
trial of piracies and felonies committed on the high seas, and establishing
courts for receiving and determining finally appeals in all cases of captures"
-- and have made Congress itself "the last resort on appeal in all disputes and
differences now subsisting, or that may hereafter arise between two or more
states concerning boundary, jurisdiction, or any other cause whatever;" and in
consequence of that authority reserved in their own hands, by public accounts,
they have already finally determined, that the state of Connecticut have no
just and legal claim, by virtue of their grant or charter by letters patent
from king Charles the second, extending its limits from Narraganset-bay on the
east, to the South Sea on the west) to hold any lands by virtue of said grant,
west of the state of New York -- although I conclude, it must be conceded, the
Susquehannah company made the first purchase of the right of soil from the
natives, who were heretofore reputed the lords of the sea, which is, in my
opinion, virtually denying, that the original natives have any right to the
lands of North America. -- In which judgment of our Honorable Continental
Congress I could however fully acquiesce, provided they proceed to judge, and
finally to determine, that all grants of lands, made by any of their most
gracious majesty's the KINGS of GREAT BRITAIN to any of their loving subjects,
shall not extend beyond what their majesty's had actually purchased or
conquered from the natives, antecedent to their several grants, or has since
been purchased by any of the subjects of these states, by virtue of a proper
license granted them for that end, and that all the lands, not as yet
purchased, or conquered by the joint efforts of the United States, and now
ceded by Great Britain to the Thirteen United States of North America, be
considered as the property of the aboriginal natives, who were the first
discoverers and have the right of prime occupancey, and that the right of
pre-emption of the soil from the natives, which was all that Great Britain
could cede to us, and that only to the exclusion of British subjects, might be
and remain the joint interest of the Thirteen United States of North America,
by virtue of the late treaty and cession, for I never yet could discover either
from reason or revelation, or from the laws of nature and nations, that the
kings of Great Britain had any more right to grant to any of his loving
subjects, all the lands lying between certain latitudes of North America, from
the Atlantic on the east, to the South-Seas on the west, which gave his
subjects a right to drive out the natives, the original proprietors of the
soil, because they did not practice agriculture and occupied an extent of
territory more than they judged necessary in order to support them by hunting,
than his SUBLIME HIGHNESS the GRAND SEI^NIOR at this present day has to re
grant the same lands to any of his loving subjects, not inhabited by the
subjects of any MOHAMMEDAN PRINCE, which would give them a right to drive us
back into the interior parts of this continent, because we have not the
knowledge of the culture of poppies, and the manufacture of opium, but instead
thereof make use of wine to the dishonor of their prophet Mahomet. -- This
right, power, or prerogative, call it what they please, claimed by the
Christian princes of Europe, I can by no means acknowledge, unless they are
able to show that North America was distributed to them, "when the Most High
divided unto the NATIONS their INHERITANCE when he separated the sons of ADAM."
-- But to return from this digression --

The states have likewise expressly delegated to Congress "the sole and
exclusive right of regulating the alloy, and value of coin struck by their own
authority -- fixing the standard of weights and measures -- regulating the
trade and managing all affairs with the Indians -- establishing and regulating
post-offices -- appointing all officers of the land forces in the service of
the United States, excepting regimental officers -- appointing all officers of
the naval forces, and commissioning all officers whatever in the service of the
United States -- making rules for the government and regulation of the said
land and naval forces, and directing their operations -- to appoint a committee
of the states -- and such other committees, and civil officers as may be
necessary, ^or the managing the general affairs of the United States, under
their direction -- to appoint one of their number to preside -- to ascertain
the necessary sums of money to be raised for the service of the United States,
and to appropriate and apply the same for defraying the public expenses -- to
borrow money, or emit bills on the credit of the United States, transmitting
every half years to the respective states an account of the sums of money so
borrowed or emitted -- to build and equip a navy -- to agree upon the number of
land forces."; -- These are all the prerogatives which the honorable
Continental Congress asked, or saw necessary to be vested in their hands, as
they had the general superintendency of all the United States; and indeed it
was all they judged the states could delegate with safety, and leave any
business for the several assemblies of the states to transact, except the
regulating of senses, restraining of ^wine, and preventing old women keeping
too many g^ese, to the nuisance of the public. The foregoing enumerated powers
the states have by the 9th article expressly delegated to Congress, and they
are as extensive as the prerogatives of ^he crown of Great Britain, about which
they make so much noise and bustle; excepting the appointing all officers civil
and military, which is a commonwealth would be altogether inconsistent, and for
that reason I judge, they did not think would have been prudent for them to
ask, or safe for these states to grant: in none of which enumerated articles of
delegated powers is the power of taxation once mentioned or even hinted at.
This power however this author says, "They must of NECESSITY be vested with."
However he honestly confesses, and says, fol. ^, "This is a most important and
weighty trust, a dreadful engine of OPPERSSION, TYRANNY and INJURY when ill
used; yet, from the NECESSITY of the case it must be admitted, for to give a
supreme authority, a power of making contracts, without any power of payment.
-- of appointing officers civil and military, without any money to pay them --
a power to build ships, without any money to do it with -- a power of emitting
money, without any power to redeem it -- or a power to borrow money, without
any power to pay it, etc. etc. such a solecism in government, (he thinks) is so
naturally abjurd, to offer further arguments on the subject, would be to insult
the understanding of his readers." This author ought to have known king George
the third, our late gracious sovereign, has all these prerogatives, and no
other I can now recollect, excepting the prerogative of appointing, all
officers civil and military, by which, together with a certain sum of money,
granted him by his first parliament for life, at the beginning of his reign,
which for many years has been usual, in order to gain the favor of their young
prince, and to enable him to grant it back into the pockets of his favorites
by pensions; by which two powerful arguments, the kings of England, for a
succession, of reigns, have gained a majority in the house of commons; or which
is the same thing, their ministers have gained it, "For ministers by kings
appointed,
are under them the Lord's anointed;
Therefore it is the self same thing,
to resist the minister or king.


By which they have wrecked the civil constitution of that kingdom, the work of
ages; and all their boasted liberties are sunk and ab^orbed by minist^rial
tools and hirelings corrupted by their own money, which has been purchase^ at
the expense of the best blood of that nation. No^withstanding this prince has
not in his power, to tax his subjects a single copper without the concurrence
of h^s parliament Nor have I ever seen, or read any speech, made to his
parliament, that he has ever moved to have the power of taxation, added to his
other royal prerogatives, which this patriotic author, says must of necessity
be vested in Congress, -- a power which Congress themselves never once
mentioned in the articles of our fo^deral union; which power, was it once
vested in Congress, they might have it in their power, to establish as many
pensioners as they please; and if the time should ever arrive when they should
aspire at greater powers than those with which they are already vested, it
would be in their power, as effectually to destory our present happy
constitution, as the nation from whom we derive our original have destroyed
their own -- and enslave a nation that a few individuals may not in luxury and
excess.

I would just recite a few passages from a late writer on the civil
constitution of England, who says, "The king of England has the prerogative of
commanding armies, and equipping fleets -- but without the concurrence of his
parliament he cannot maintain them -- he can bestow places and employments --
but without his parliament he cannot pay the salleries annexed to them -- he
can declare war -- but without his parliament it is impossible for him to carry
it on -- in a word, the royal prerogative, destitute as it is, of imposing
taxes, is like a ship completely equipt, but from which the parliament at
pleasure can draw off all the water, and leave it aground, or set it a^^oat, by
granting subsidies." Now let any one run the parallel between the prerogatives
of the King of Great Britain, and our Honorable Continental Congress, their
prerogatives are the same, with this exception, the King of Great Britain has
the prerogative of appointing all officers both civil and military, Our
Honorable Continental Congress thought proper only to retain the prerogative of
appointing a part, leaving the rest to the states, and I thing the division
judiciously made -- Congress have the prerogative to declare war -- but the
states, who most certainly have both a natural and constitutional right to
judge of the righteousness of it, may either grant or refuse to grant money to
carry it on. -- The several assemblies of the states by our constitution, in
many respects, stand in the some situation, and have the same restraint on
Congress that the parliament or rather the commons of England once had on the
crown; -- that authority which grants money, most certainly have a right to
refuse granting, when they can neither see the necessity or righteousness of
the measure for which it is to be granted -- This right originates from the
reason and nature of things, and is a self-evident truth. -- Again, Congress
are vested with power to build and equip a navy -- but we shall have little
need of a navy, if what this author says in fol. 4 is just, and I conceive in
this instance at least he judges right, viz. That these states "will command
respect; that our exports are either raw materials, or provisions, and their
imports mostly finished goods, our trade becomes a capital object, with every
manufacturing nation of EUROPE, and all the southern colonies of America, our
friendship and trade will of course be courted, and each power in ami^y with us
will contribute to our security." And if we take proper care not to intermeddle
in the politics and broils of Europeancourts, this doubtless will be our happy
situation for ages. -- This being our case and situation, may not the
assemblies of these states, with great propriety, consistent with the articles
of our foederal union, refuse to grant money for the building a navy in time of
profound peace, should Congress adopt such a measure, merely for the sake of
transporting our American Ambassadors to and from the courts of Europe, or with
a view to render ourselves respectable, as a maritime power, while we lie under
a heavy debt, both to our generous allies, as well as to domestic creditors?
They most certainly may, and ought to do it, under such circumstances -- and if
the assemblies of the states are warranted and justified in this case, they
certainly are in every case, where granting of mon^es is their right and
prerogative.

Although the king of England has not the power of taxation, he has made out,
not only to support the dignity of his crown, but to ^avage the ocean with his
fleets, and to carry fire and sword on to the continent, in support of his
German dominions, at the expense of the blood and treasure of the nation, in
which they are in reality, no more interested than America is in the quarrels
of the Nabobs of Asia; all which he has effected by his having the prerogative
of appointing all officers civil and military, and by means of a custom which
has long prevailed, that at the beginning of every reign, the parliament (to
court the favor of the young prince) grant him a fixed permanent revenue for
life, by which he is enabled to grant Pensions to so many of his parliament to
make them the creatures and tools of his power, as to obtain a majority, and by
that means to rule and govern the nation in as despotic a manner as the most
absolute monarch of Europe. This evil our patriotic Congress, who drew the
articles of our confederation, foresaw, in some future period might happen to
these states, and for that reason, no doubt, did not think the power of
taxation could safely be lodged in the hands of Congress, where the
representation is so small, the interests, tempers, and dispositions of the
states so diverse. -- Can this author, or any one else imagine the power of
taxation of this state could be safely lodged in the hands of two delegates,
was every member of Congress as upright as we can conceive it possible for the
human heart to be, in the present state of this world. -- For my own part I
respect and revere Congress, and am willing they should be vested with as many
hereditary duties as the crown of England, and i that will satisfy this author,
I am willing they should have the very same, viz. "A few hereditary duties on
the exportation of wool, a branch of which in the reign of George I. was fixed
at seven thousand pounds -- a duty of two shillings on every ton of wine
imported -- the wrecks of ships, the owners unknown -- whales and sturgeons
thrown on the coast -- swans swimming on public rivers -- and a few feudal
relics, compose the whole appropriated revenue of the crown of England -- and
if these will satisfy this author, without the power of taxation, for my own
part should be content they should be granted to Congress; that in no one
instance, either in point of prerogative, or appropriated revenues, they should
be less respectable than the monarch of Britain.

The King of England by having the right of nominating and appointing all
officers civil and military, and by a moderate grant of parliament of about a
million, sterling annually settled upon him during life, is enabled to grant so
many pensions as to purchase his parliament, and thereby to destroy the best
civil constitution, in many respects, that ever was composed and established on
this side Mount-Sinai -- an establishment from our peculiar circumstances, we
in these states cannot copy after or adopt, and therefore it is the duty of
every individual to guard against all innovations, or any infringements that
may be attempted to be made on our civil constitution, which the wisdom, of
Congress have devised and judiciously draughted, and the states solemnly
adopted, which we ought carefully to guard and maintain, otherwise our ruin
will be of ourselves.

This author does not even pretend we have already vested Congress with the
power of taxation, but says they must be vested with it from necessity, and
urges reasons to support that necessity; but there are others weak and silly,
enough to assert, they are already vested with that power, and found their
opinion on these words in the 9th article, "to ascertain the necessary sums of
money to be raised for the service of the United States, and to appropriate and
apply the same for defraying the public expenses." -- But whoever founds his
opinion on those words, must be ignorant of the true end and design of our
confederation, and the spirit and meaning of those words in the 9th article.

The true end and design of our confederation I take to be this, viz. To unite
the strength of the separate states under Congress as their general Head, and
to delegate to them the direction of the operations of our military and naval
forces against the power of Great Britain. -- And this I take it was the
general sense and understanding of the states who adopted the articles of our
foederal union, and the whole tenor of the articles themselves support this
opinion. -- Congress are to determine the number of troops necessary for the
service of the states. -- What service? The service of the war and general
defense -- and for that end they were to make requisition to each state for
their quota, "and to ascertain the necessary sums of money to be raised for the
service" of the war, and to appropriate and apply the same; that matter not
being compalible to any particular state, by constitution is vested in
congress, whose right it properly is, and is expressly delegated to them. --
But this our author cannot put up with, without their being vested with the
power of taxation: who says, fol. 6, "This would make all payments dependant on
THIRTEEN POPULAR ASSEMBLIES." And adds, "The present broken state of our
finances -- public debt, and bankruptcies -- enormous and ridiculous
depreciation of public securities, with a total annihilation of our public
credit -- prove beyond all contradi^^ion the VANITY of all recourse to the
several assemblies of the states -- the recent instance of the duty of 5 per
cent. on imported goods STRUCK DEAD, and the Bankruptcies which ensued, on the
single vote of RHODE ISLAND." What bankruptcies ensued on Rhode-Island's
negativing the impost act, which was to have been collected by officers
appointed by Congress, and applied at their discretion, in which the states
could have no power to appropriate to the payment of their quota of debt
contracted during the war, agreeable to the 8th article, the author can better
say than I can pretend -- but that the depreciation of bills -- failure of
public credit, and many bankruptcies ensued before the impost was asked for by
Congress, or denied by RhodeIsland, are facts that are notorious, which many
attribute to the want of seasonable and adequate taxation, which, creating a
demand, would at least have retarded the depreciation of our bills. Our author
however appears much out of humor with the state of Rhode Island for
preventing the operation of the impost act, and is desirous to enlarge the
powers of Congress to prevent the like mischief in future; but at the same time
seems desirous "to restrain them from doing any mischief in the exercise of
those VAST powers, with which he seems very sollici^ous Congress should be
vested. -- This he thinks the most difficult part of the weighty subject he had
undertaken," and puts up a short ejaculatory prayer; "That Almighty Wisdom
would direct his pen in the arduous discussion," fol. 12. And in truth and
reality, the framing a perfect and complete system of government for a rising
empire, is a most arduous and very important subject; and as he seems desirous
of Divine Aid, I would recommend it to him once more to consult his bible, and
duly weigh and consider the civil polity of the Hebrews, which was planned by
Divine Wisdom, for the government of that people although their territory was
small; by preventing an undue monopoly of lands by their reversion to the
original proprietors in the lineal descent of the families at the jubliee,
(which was every half century) it supported vast numbers of inhabitants within
very narrow limits -- their laws were few and simple -- their judges the elders
of their cities, well acquainted with the credibility of the parties and their
evidences -- they held their courts in the places of greater concourse, the
gates of the city, and their processes were neither lengthy nor expensive.

Our author having informed us with what powers the supreme authority ought to
be vested, in the next place has undertaken to let us know how this supreme
authority is to be constituted so as to do no mischief with that vast authority
with which he has clothed them: he carefully avoids using the word elected, as
he seems to have a mortal hatred of popular elections, in which process he is
very methodical and says, 1st. "The men who compose this important council must
be DELEGATED, not elected, from all the states, and it is to be wished, that
none might be APPOINTED, that were not adequate to this weighty business; but a
little knowledge of human nature, and a little acquaintance with the political
history of mankind, will soon teach us, that this is not to be expected. The
representatives appointed by POPULAR ELECTIONS, are commonly, not only the
LEGAL, but the REAL, SUBSTANTIAL representatives of their electors, i. e. there
will commonly be about the same proportion of GRAVE, SOUND, WELL QUALIFIED men
-- TRIFLING DESULTORY men -- WILD or KNAVISN schemers -- and DULL IGNORANT
^o^ls in the delegated assembly, as in the body of electors." What a motly
mixture this of which our supreme authority and the assemblies of the states
are composed! -- A most severe burlesque obEquely cast on our Honorable
Continental Congress, and the assemblies of the states, if the account given of
them by this author is just! What a pity it is we have made choice of a
democratical form of government, and that all our civil rulers were not made so
by birth, or hereditary right, and that kings, lords, dukes barons, carls, and
knights, were not the natural and spontaneous growth of North America; and all
their virtues such as knowledge, integrity, skill in the arts of government,
but above all, their exemplary piety, and firm attachment to the doctrines of
revelation, and the civil constitution of the Christian religion as established
by our ancestors; and that they were not all made hereditary to descend with
their lands to all generations. But what adds to our misfortune he says "he
knows no way to help this;" if that is truly the case, we are in a very
pi^iable situation truly! But for once I will just hint at a few things, which
if our legislatures should think worthy of a trial, I presume many advantages
will arise from them, and without some attention, to some or all of them, a
commonwealth never was, nor ever will be continued long, without intrigues,
cabals, and factions. In the first place, no office or place of trust should be
made lucrative, any further than to support the dignity of the station with
decency and honor, but not to enrich themselves or families, by the emoluments
of office. Secondly, Let all transactions of a public nature, both in Congress
and the assemblies of the states, be open to the free examination of all the
electors -- a printed journal both of Congress and the assemblies of the
states, with the yeas and nays to every interesting question that comes before
them -- No man is worthy of public trust that has not an opinion of his own, or
is afraid to let that opinion be known to his electors -- this will make him
careful, that he judges and acts according to TRUTH, of which the body of the
electors in this state besure, taken collectively, are better judges, both of
men and measures, than our author seems to imagine; only let them have the
means of knowledge, instead of being abused by bowing, cringing, fawning
courtiors, who are always of the opinion of the majority present, unless they
happen to mistake their numbers. -- There is not a single proposition in our
author's whole dissertation more just than this, "TRUTH loves LIGHT, and is
vindicated by it; WRONG shrouds itself in DARKNESS, and is supported by
DELUSION, Lastly; Let there be a regular account of the expenditure of all
public moneys, annually laid before Congress and the Assemblies of the states,
as those who pay money most certainly have a right to know how, and to what use
it is applied.

These means of knowledge, of men and measures, being afforded to the electors
of these states, I presume there are sufficient numbers in each state, who are
men of ability, integrity and dis^ernment, who can distinguish by those helps,
(which are in the power of the legislatlures to afford) "the grave, sound,
well-qualified men, from trisling, desultory men, and wild knavish schemers,
from dull ignorant fools:" who would be faithful to enlighten their less
discerning, but honest neighbors, and in that manner regulate their choice
better than the sly, insinuating, intriguing patriots of the present day do, by
the means of knowledge we enjoy in this state: and this I judge would be more
to the satisfaction of the freemen of this state, I may, perhaps, be told,
Congress do publish such a journal -- I would just ask for information, Has
that journal ever been (...) laid before the General Assembly (...) as we had
reason to expect by the 9th article? If it has not, at whose door does the
neglect lie?
and would have a greater tendency to serve the interest of the states, than
what he proposes under his second general head, viz. "That the Congress shall
consist of TWO CHAMBERS, an UPPER and LOWER HOUSE, or a SENATE and COMMONS,
with the concurrence of both necessary to every act, and that every state send
one or more delegates to each house." This he says, "will subject every act to
two discussions, before two distinct chambers of men, EQUALLY qualified for the
debate, EQUALLY masters of the subject, and of EQUAL authority in the
decision," and if equal in all respects I cannot at present see the necessity
of building two chambers to hold them. -- But another difficulty arises in my
mind, as our author has not as yet pointed out any new mode to constitute these
delegates, if elected in our present mode, they will still remain not only the
legal, but the real substantial representatives of their electors; so that I do
not see any real advantages obtained by the division, as both chambers it
seems, must be filled with men of equal abilities, and of equal authourity,
unless as they are equal in all respects, itmust be supposed the houses will be
complaisant to each other, and frequently change chambers, which will afford
some little amusement in time of peace, when but little business that is
urgent, will by our constitution, lie before them, and may prove salutary by
changing the air.

Our author under his second general head, it must be owned, manages the
division of Congress with some art; however he now and them a little drops his
mask. In page 15 he has found out Congress "will stand in need of much
information," and has devised a plan to furnish them with the "best and surest
information, and of that kind that may be most safely relied upon," which
information he thinks may be best made through the medium of certain ministers
of state which he has planned out; and first mentions a financier as being
uppermost on his mind, who manages the whole business of revenues and
expenditures, which high and important office, our author no doubt intends to
fill, as he tells us, fol. 7, he is about soon to publish an essay on finance,
on which subject doubtless he will shine, and it being attended with a decent
sallery, it must be supposed it would be agreeable to him to sit at the head of
the American treasury; but more especially, should the states be so happy as to
see with him, the necessity to vest Congress with the power of taxation, which
would save the states the trouble of collecting their own quota of the
continental debt, and fall directly into the continental treasury, under his
own immediate inspection.

He in the next place supposes a secretary of state would likewise be very
necessary to give information; who would have the knowledge of the general
policy, and internal government -- To these he adds a minister of war, who must
preside in the business of war and d^^ence -- of this minister however, by his
own account, we shall stand but in little need, as "all the manufacturing
rations of Europe, will court our friendship, and contribute to our security,"
for which reason it will hardly answer to maintain the dignity of that
minister, purely to conduct a war with the (...) of the interior parts of
America, who I fancy will stand in as much fear of the United States, as the
manufacturing nations of Europe (for their own advantage) will court our
friendship and contribute to our security" -- To these great ministers of
state, this author would have added JUDGES of LAW and CHANCERY -- All these
GREAT MINISTERS of STATE he would have to serve as ATTENDANTS on the two
chambers of Congress, to give them the best information in their several
departments of office, whose opinion he would oblige Congress always to take,
before they finally pass any bill, without which formality being duly attended
to, the act of Congress to be void. But at the same time he is so careful to
guard the dignity of the two chambers of Congress, as not to enable these great
ministers of state to negative any act of Congress, how contrary soever the
same may be to their opinion and advice -- so that these great ministers of
state are more for ornament, and to add to the dignity of Congress, than any
real utility, like the mantling to a ^oat of arms. Vid. fol. 16,17. And to fill
up the rear of these great ministers of state, he adds a chamber of commerce,
composed of merchants, to give information likewise to Congress, respecting
trade and commerce. So that in reality all these great ministers of state are
only to serve Congress in quality of INFORMING OFFICERS. And to this fabric of
his own structure, in fol. 24, he adds a COUNCIL of STATE, composed of all the
aforesaid GREAT MINISTERS of STATE; to which number it shall be the prerogative
of Congress to add three others, viz. one from the New England states, one from
the middle states, and one from the southern states; one of which three it
shall be the Prerogative of the president of Congress to appoint: "to all of
whom shall be committed the SUPREME EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY of the states, (all and
singular of them over accountable to Congress) who shall superintend all the
executive officers, who shall ^ver be accountable to, or removeable for just
cause by them, or Congress, i. e. either of them." This will keep this supreme
executive authority in due decorum, and oblige them always to do the thing that
is just and right, at least what shall be so judged by the council of state and
congress, both of whom will have the power to remove them for any malfeasances,
which will be a greater restraint than if they were chosen by popular elections.

Our author having displayed much skill in the arts of government, by the
addition of all these ministers and officers of state, to increase the dignity
and add importance to Congress; in the next place proposes measures to be
adopted to enforce the strictest obedience to the requisitions of Congress. In
fol. 24 he says, " "There remains one very important article to be discussed,
viz. What methods the constitution shall point out to ENFORCE the ^^s and
requisitions of Congress through the several states; and how the states which
REFUSE or DELAY OBEDIENCE to such acts or requisitions, shall be treated." This
he says, "is a particular of the GREATEST DELICACY, as well as the UTMOST
IMPORTANCE, and ought to be decidedly settled in our COOLEST HOURS." In this I
perfectly agree with our author; but great, delicate and important, as it
appears to him to be, he has undertaken the job; and in fol. 25 he says, "To
appoint a Congress with powers to do all acts necessary for the support and
uses of the union; and at the same time to leave al^ the states at liberty to
obey them or not with impunity, is in every view the (...) absurdity, worse
than a state of nature, without any supreme authority at all, and at best a
ridiculous ^ffort of childish nonsense; and of course, every state in the union
is under the highest obligations to obey the supreme authority, and in the
highest degree amenable to it, and subject to the highest censure for
disobedience; yet all this notwithstanding I think, the soul that sins should
die. The censure of the GREAT SUPREME POWER ought to be so directed, if
possible, as to light on those persons, who have BETRAYED their country, and
exposed it to DISSOLUTION, by opp^sing that supreme authority, which is the
band of our union, and from whence proceeds the principal strength and energy
of our government; I therefore propose that EVERY PERSON, whether in PUBLIC or
PRIVATE CHARACTER, who by PUBLIC VOTE, or other OVERT ACT DISOBEYS the SUPREME
AUTHORITY shall be amenable to Congress, shall be summoned and COMPELLED to
appear before Congress, and on due CONVICTION suffer such FINE, IMPRISONMENT,
or other PUNISHMENT as the SUPREME AUTHORITY shall judge requisite. It may be
objected here, (and I think very justly) that this will make a member of
assembly accountable in Congress for his vote in assembly; I answer, it does so
this case only, viz. When that vote is to DISOBEY the SUPREME AUTHORITY. -- No
member of assembly can have a right to give such a vote, and therefore ought to
be PUNISHED for to doing. -- A government which is but half executed, or whose
operations may be stopped by a SINGLE STATE, is the most dangerous of all
institutions -- I cannot therefore admit, that the great ends of our union
should lie at the mercy of a single state." -- What is got into the head of
this good citizen of Philadelphia? What does he make of our Honorable
Continental Congress who draughted the articles of our consederation, that they
should make such egregious blunders, as to form such a lax form of government?
Has he the vanity to think Congress who framed the articles of our foederal
union, could not have foreseen these intolerable blunders and defects in our
constitution, and provided a proper remedy? they certainly would. But this
supposed defect, is in reality our greatest safeguard: and if there is any
defect, it is in his own op^icks. He expressly owns, fol. 25, The supreme
authority are subject to passions like other lesser powers; they may, and often
are, HEATED, VIOLENT, OPPRESSIVE, and very TYRANNICAL; and seems disposed to
FENCE them out as far as possible, and to give the states as great a CHECK on
the supreme authority, as can consist with its necessary energy. -- This is the
very fence and check which Congress, in their wisdom, saw necessary to provide,
for the safety and security of the states, when framing our civil constitution;
and we greatly rejoice in their wisdom, prudence, and precaution: -- It is the
very same fence and check provided for the seven united provinces of Holland.
-- No state in the confederation, I presume, will oppose, or neglect to carry
into execution, any resolution of Congress which they judge to be for the
general good of the states included in the union; and until they can see it, he
cannot blame them if they oppose it; but especially if they judge such
requisition inconsistent with the articles of our foedral union, when he
himself owns the supreme authority may be, and often are, heated, violent,
oppressive, and very tyrannical. -- I cannot conceive why our author should be
so very fretful and out of humor with our present happy constitution; I fear
his expectations were too much raised as a financier; that the disappointment
occasioned by RhodeIsland's negativing the Impost Act in the very form pointed
out by Congress, has ruffled him too much; and that he did not write this part
of his Dissertation "in his coolest hours." I never yet have learned that the
state of RhodeIsland have ever refused to fund their quota of the national debt
and to make speedy and ample provision for the payment of the interest, and
gradual sinking of the principal, as soon as their quota is made our, agreeable
to the 8th article of the Confederation -- For my own part, it would greatly
affect me to see any member of our honorable Assembly dragged down to Congress,
with all the whole retinue of evidences pro and con, merely for denying the
authority of Congress, and voting accordingly, (when at the same time he
thought, and perhaps very justly, that Congress had no constitutional right to
make such a requisition) and be subjected to fine, imprisonment, and corporeal
punishment. This would make our worthy members awfully afraid to support our
own constitutional rights, our sovereignty, freedom, and independence, secured
to us by the second article of our foederal union, which we have not expressly
delegated to Congress by the ninth. Our author would have discovered more
lenity, and more of a christian frame and temper of mind, if he had been
willing to pass over such an error, (if, on strict scrutiny, it should prove to
be an error) to have the offender only publicly reproved by the speaker, from
his chair, for an error of that kind, committed through ignorance or
inadvertence; as he can be considered only as the legal, real and substantial
representative of the common herd of his electors: -- For which reason, in
behalf of such state offenders, I would humbly supplicate the several
legislatures of the states not to admit of such an alteration in the articles
of our foederal union, until our honorable Continental Congress shall discover
the necessity of such a measure, and recommend the same to be adopted by the
states.

Some have suggested, that this author may possibly be employed, by our
honorable Congress, to try how far the citizens of these states would submit to
such arbitrary and despotic measures: But such suggestions I reject with
contempt and disdain. It must be impossible that Congress, who drafted the
articles of our foederal union, and so carefully guarded the states against all
arbitrary and despotic measures, should so soon attempt so subvert our happy
constitution; much less would they improve so whimsical a writer as our author
appears to be, to effect the design; and that without ever once moving to the
assemblies of the states for any enlargement of their powers; which no doubt,
they would most readily comply with, if necessary. This state, in order to
enable Congress to proportion the quota of debt to each state, I am told, on
requisition, have already acceded to the alteration of the 8th article, The 8th
article of Confederation, originally adopted by the states, is, That in all
charges of war, and all other expenses incurred for the common de^ence, the
quota of each state was to be in proportion to the value of lands, etc. This
estimate would have been attended with great expense, and liable to exceptions;
-- Congress, therefore, moved to the states, That the quota of expense should
be in proportion to the number of white and other free inhabitants, and three
(...) of the slaves: Which alteration, in (...) am told, has been adopted by
the legislature of this state.
that speedy provision may be made for the payment of the interest, and gradual
sinking the principal, of our whole debt, contracted during the wa^. -- I
rather think him some gentleman of a sovereign, arbitrary, tyrannical turn of
mind, and unhappily vindictive; of which he has given a convincing evidence, in
fol. 27, in these words -- "Further, I propose, that if the execution of any
act or order of the supreme authority shall be opposed by force, in any of the
states (which God forbid) it shall be lawful for Congress to send into such
state a sufficient force to suppress it." -- Here, again, our author
interlardes this sanguinary proposal with a short ejaculatory prayer to
Almighty God; but then I do not understand him to mean to prevent the operation
of his proposal, but that God would forbid or Prevent any state from opposing,
by force, the execution of any act of Congress: Which, from the present views I
have of the temper and disposition of any of our states, there is not the least
danger of; before so long as they regulate their requisitions by the articles
of our foederal union; which Congress themselves drafted, and which the states
have solemnly adopted. But should Congress ever make any resolutions contrary
to the articles of our foederal union, through inadvertence; as this author
says, fol. 24, "I know that supreme authorities are LIABLE to err as well as
lesser ones;" or should they, from lust of power, and spirit of domination,
become "overheated, violent, oppressive, and very tyrannical," (as in fol. 26
he owns they may) I should think it their indispensible duty to resist all
unconstitutional extension of power; although not unto blood. But should the
states adopt this sanguinary proposal of our author, Congress would
constitutionally be vested with power to enter with an armed force, and shed
the blood of any of our sister states, merely for supporting the constitutional
rights of the states. As Congress have wisely avoided all sanguinary measures,
in drafting the articles of our union, I should not think it below the dignity
of their high station, to manifest their disapprobation of so sanguinary a
proposal.

This proposal gave me a more violent shock, as I happened to read it just as
the news arrived, that 1500 of our continental troops, with a proper train of
artillery, were on full march for Philadelphia to suppress the turbulent
behavour of a part of the Philadelphia line of the army, and to protect the
honorable Continental Congress from their insults. If the form of civil
government in that state is so lax, and their citizens not disposed to support
it against insults; as the officers of that state are on half pay during life,
and they can support a body of troops with a small additional expense, it may
be well for them to take that method to do it; but I do not think it advisable
or necessary for the states to support an army for that purpose: A mild
administration rarely wants an armed force to support it: The rectitude of the
measures of Congress, and the Assemblies of the states, will always afford them
the surest protection; and wherever the civil power of a state cannot support
itself from insult, without a military force to awe their subjects into
submission, there is much reason to fear either their civil constitution is
deficient, or something is wrong in the administration. -- Standing armies may
be necessary to support tyranny, oppression, and arbitrary government; but to
have recourse to arms in a civil government, is shocking to humanity! -- They
may be necessary with a felon, an individual; but with a sister state, a whole
community of the same family, the bare mentioning of arms presents to my view
the bloody scenes in which we have been involved by our parent state! -- The
unhappy effects of which, time itself will not repair, or obliterate from our
minds.

I think none who duly attends to the whole scope and drift of this author, but
will easily discover his design is to subvert our present constitution, and to
introduce in its room, a government more arbitrary, sovereign, and despotic.
His dividing Congress into two Chambers, he seems to think, will make them
wonderful wise; and is much better disposed toward them than when in one
house, and subjects of popular elections. However, he finds some difficulty
even then: He has found out these two Chambers, equal, in all respects, may
"grow jealous and ill-natured, and after all their information and advice, grow
out of humor and insincere, and no concurrence can be obtained." But he has
luckily found out a remedy even in that case, viz. "Sit still, and do nothing,
till they get into better humor." This I think as bad a situation, as to have
the proceedings of Congress suspended a small period by the vote of a single
state. But before he arrives to the bottom of page 22, he has discovered a
remedy for to cure the two Houses of their ^ulky humor: They must first agree
to come into one house, and lovingly choose "A DICTATOR, who shall have and
exercise the whole power of both Houses, till such time as they shall be able
to concur in displacing him; and that the whole power of the two Houses be
suspended in the mean time." (Fol. 22.) Here our author has wholly dropped his
mask: The two Chambers being furnished with A DICTATOR by the joint election of
both Houses, he is to remain Dictator until the Houses can agree to displace
him; which period, I presume, will never arrive; for he is to be vested with
the power of both Houses, so long as they remain out of humor; of course the
power of taxation will be his exclusive prerogative; by means whereof, he will
have it in his power to keep the two Houses out of humor, until he makes
himself a PERPETUAL DICTATOR. There is no chimera in all this -- our author is
consistent in his own plan -- and his views are apparent -- to reduce us to an
ABSOLUTE MONARCHY; and his plan, carried into execution, will effect the thing.

I trust an absolute monarch is not what would be the choice of my fellow
citizens: It most certainly would not be my choice, unless I could be assured
always of a wise and good Prince. In a commonwealth, if small, and the electors
personally acquainted with public characters, the people may enjoy great
happiness; but when a commonwealth becomes numerous -- their concerns great and
important -- the desire of riches, honors and power increasing with their
numbers, -- if the electors have not the means to obtain the knowledge of the
public characters of rulers, by their votes given when acting in their public
character, the choice of the electors (which, in general, in these northern
states, is the main body of the citizens) will be very precarious and
uncertain: Discontent and uneasiness will ensue -- factions form and increase
-- frequent alterations and change in civil rulers will ensue; -- the greatest
calamity that can befall an elective state, or commonwealth, as no man, fit to
rule or govern, will suffer himself to be mob'd in, and mob'd out, according as
the several parties and factions succeed by their intrigues in courting the
populace, and imposing on the credulity of their electors: And what will next
ensue, courts of justice may, in the same manner, be contaminated, -- which
must complete their ruin. An open line of conduct in a commonwealth, subject to
the examination of the electors, is the only barrier against tyranny, -- which,
in a commonwealth, is the most cruel and oppressive of any species of tyranny
whatever.

The form of government planned by Congress, and adopted by the states, is the
only form we could adopt under our circumstances: And the honor and digni^y of
Congress, as a private citizen, I am determined to support, as much as the
sovereignty, freedom, and independence of the states, and every power,
jurisdiction and right, which they have not expressly delegated to Congress.
But as every deviation from the articles of our foederal union makes a
dangerous precedent in future, the defects in the articles of confederation can
be known only by practice: And it is time enough to make alterations in our
system of government, when the defects are made evident.

I must now revert to some things said by this author, which I have passed
over, before I conclude these remarks. He says, (fol. 9,) "Another great object
of government, is the apportionment of burdens and benefits, -- and that an ill
apportionment will be an everlasting source of uneasiness and discontent." --
Again, "The value of lands may be a good rule, but the ascertainment of that
value is impracticable; no assessment can be made which will not be liable to
exceptions and debates."

This observation of our author is doubtless right; the same objections arose
in my mind when I first read the 8th article of our foederal union. And our
author says, in fol. 10, viz. "That the number of living souls, or human
persons, of whatever age, sex, or condition, will afford us a rule which will
forever increase or decrease with the real wealth of the states; and, of
course, will be a perpetual rule, not capable of corruption by any
circumstances of future time."

This mode of proportioning the quota of debt first suggested to the public by
this author, is since recommended by Congress, with this alteration, viz. Two
fifth parts of the slaves to be exempted from the capitation; the reasons of
which exemption do not at present occur to my mind. If I mistake not, Congress
have laid a prohibition on the importion of African slaves; but this exemption
seems rather an encouragement to the owners to progagate them in preference to
horses or other stock; and they are improved for the same purposes in tilling
ground in the southern, as oxen are in the northern states, and supported at
less expense through our long and tedious winters: And at present I cannot see
the reasons of the exemption of two fifth parts from the capitation; but
otherwise, this proposal of our author, I acknowledge, would be perfectly
reasonable, was all the lands ceded by the late treaty, which were not actually
purchased or conquered by the Crown antecedent to the cession, to be considered
as the joint interest of all the states in the confederation: But if the
western lands ceded by the late treaty, not purchased or conquered by the Crown
^ncecedent to the cession, are to be considered as belonging to those states,
by virtue of their ancient grants from the Crown; I cannot as yet discover
either the justice or equity, that those states which are circumscribed on
every side by the adjoining states, whose lands are all located and fully
settled, should pay, by that mode of computing the quota, for so large an
extent of territory, gained and defended at the joint expense of all those
states, who have not gained one foot of land by the cession; -- much less can I
see what ^^guht the King of Great Britain had to grant to the Virginia and
Plymouth companies, all the lands lying between certain latitudes in
North America, from the Atlantic Ocean on the east, to the South Sea on the
west, not inhabited by the subjects of any christian prince; when the
aboriginal natives were the first discoverers, and had the right of prime
occupancy; who they do not seem to consider as having any more right to the
soil than the moose, deer, bears and foxes which range the forests.

I well know the Princes of Europe have come into some compacts, that when the
subjects of any Prince make a discoverty of lands heretofore unknown to the
nations of Europe, whether inhabited by any of the human race or not, they take
possession of it, in some formal manner, for their Prince; either by giving it
some christian or saint's name, setting up a crucifix, etc. Such sort of
compacts, made by the Princes of Europe, may be binding on them on the eastern
side of the Atlantic, but do not appear in the same light to the Americans,
who, heretofore, have been wont to believe, "That God has made of one blood,
all nations of the earth, and has determined the bounds of their habitation:"
And many of us, to this day, think the natives who were the first discoverers,
and had the right of prime occupancy, unless they have sold the same, or that
it has been justly conquered, are still vested with the right of soil; and that
a patent from the Crown will not justly give us a right to drive them from
their habitations. I well know it is said, here was vacant territory of which
they stood in no need: bu^ as they lived by fishing, fowling, and hunting, and
not furnished with the best conveniences of taking game, they only are the
proper judges of the extent of territory necessary for grazing. By the same
rule of reasoning, the Americans may say, that Britons are chiefly
manufacturers, and ought to be cooped up within narrower limits; and may as
justly seize on their parks and open fields, and (...) them thereof, as to
dispessess the Sa^^ems of America of their hunting ground, and knock their
brains out it they (...) to quit the soil -- which people, at least man of
them, (...) as just notions of right and wrong. as the (...) pean Princes. If
this reasoning is just, (and at least it appear^ so to me) no state has a right
to one foot of lands, beyond what was purchased or conquered by the Crown
antecedent to the cession, -- and that cession means no more than ceding to the
states the right of pre-emption from the natives ^s it is termed) to the
exclusion of British subjects. Whether that cession is made to the Thirteen
States as joint tenants, or to Congress to hold the same in trust for the
confederate states, as I have not seen the Definitive T^^ary, I cannot say, --
or whether Congress are already vested with power, by the articles of our
foederal union, to make a disposition of the same, I shall leave to civilians
to judge. But when this author says (fol. 10,) such states as by treaty have
gained large extent of territory, "ought either to make grants to the
commonwealth of such tracts of desended territory, or sell as much of it as
will pay its proper (...) of defense, and pay such sums into the public
treasury;" (^f what I have urged on that head has any weight, it is the joint
interest of all the states already) to use his own expression is "the grossest
absurdity, and at best a ridiculous effort of childish nonsense."

The same may with great justice be said with regard to the forfeited estates
of loyalists; the crime of which they were guilty, was not a crime committed
against any state separately, but against all the states included in the
confederation; otherwise how we in this state have seized the estates of
loyalists belonging to the states of New York and Boston, and consiseated the
same, or by what rule of right it could be done, un^ets the crime is considered
as a crime committed against the confederation, and not against this state
individually, I known not; which forfeitures I could wish might be appropriated
to repair the losses that individuals have sustanied by the burning of towns on
our sea coasts by Britons, and the (...) on our frontiers by their Indian
allies. Which thought I humbly submit to the wisdom of Congress, and to the
justice and compassion of the several assemblies of the states.

As for those unhappy people termed Loyalists, who have shed the blood of their
country, and robbed, plundered and distressed their friends, their estates are
but an inconsiderable compensation for their repeated outrages, they never
ought to be permitted to reside among us, and I leave them to be punished by
their own reflections. But all such as went over to our enemies from principles
of the Christian religion believing it unlawful to resist the civil magistrate,
and all such as through fear of the power of Britain, and from a consciousness
of the inability and unpreparedness of the states to resist, went within their
lines, but have neither shed blood, nor aided and assisted the enemy, (of which
I make no doubt there are many) I could wish (I write it openly and freely)
that their property may be restored, and their persons protected; and I think I
may be countenanced in this sentiment from a sentence in that form of prayer
prescribed by the Savior of the world, which from the phraseology, it appears
to have been the design of the Divine Author, that daily use should be made of
it by all his followers.


