CURSORY OBSERVATIONS, RELATIVE TO THE MOUNTING OF CANNON IN A NEW WAY, AND TO
NAVAL WAR.

NEW YORK: Printed by E. OSWALD, for ELIZABETH HOLT.

M,DCC,LXXXV.

To the PUBLIC.
WHEN the design of any performance is imperfectly understood, it is natural
for people to mistake the intention of the author; and to form erroneous
opinions of the performance itself. This is the case at present in regard to
the improved, or newly invented, gun carriage, as it has been improperly
called, which has been lately constructed in this city. To rectify such errors,
and to show the real design of the carriage in question, and the ends to which
the author meant to apply the principles that construction was contrived to
demonstrate, he respectfully submits the following observations to his fellow
citizens. The ideas he has thrown out, will probably occasion some alteration
in the established system of naval war; and may deserve some attention on that
account. -- However that may be, they point out very powerful and very
practicable means of defending harbors against ships of war. As the securing
of this and other maritime cities in the United States, from the depredations
of naval armaments, is an object of importance; so it was the principal motive
to his taking up the subject at this period: not doubting, that if the means he
had to suggest, were to be judiciously employed, but this and most other
harbors may be rendered impregnable to ships of war.

CURSORY OBSERVATIONS, RELATIVE To the MOUNTING OF CANNON in a new WAY, AND To
Naval WAR.
IT has been a generally received opinion, that in the moment of the explosion
of cannon, there is a tremulous motion in the metal; that such tremulous motion
would violently jar, or somehow dangerously affect a person who should then
touch the piece; and that it was therefore dangerous for a person to be in
contact with the piece when it was fired. It has also been generally thought,
that a person could not bear to recoil on the carriage with the piece. Hence it
is, that in every construction of gun carriages, and in every mode of firing a
piece of cannon, which have hitherto been invented, the person who fires it,
stands at a distance from it. These apprehensions, however, are ill founded,
except in cases where the Gun is improperly made, or injudiciously managed.

I have clearly proved, that a man can safely, and without inconvenience, bear
to be in contact with the piece in the moment of explosion; that he can safely
and easily bear the velocity and other supposed dangerous circumstances of the
recoil; and that, if a suitable mechanism is employed for the purpose, he can
point and fire a piece of cannon in any direction, with nearly as much ease and
expedition as he does a musket. The establishing these principles, opens a new
field in artillery. By a judicious application of them, cannon may be so
mounted, either for sea or land service, that they may be worked with greater
facility, and fired with greater certainty of hitting the object, than can be
done in the common way. The carriage or construction that is exhibited, was
chiefly intended to demonstrate these particulars; not as a model for actual
service: And is such, as a variety of embarassing circumstances led me, or
rather obliged me to adopt. I beg that gentlemen will keep this distinction in
mind, and not draw erroneous inferences from this rude performance, against the
advantages which may be derived from a proper application of the principles
themselves.

In the above mentioned construction, the stocking of the gun is done merely
for the purpose of fixing the transverse piece of iron, which acts as
trunnions, in its proper place. But this end may be better answered by fixing
artificial trunnions to a piece already made, or by placing the trunnions
properly in casting a gun; either of which, besides rendering the stocking of
the gun unnecessary, would considerably lessen the height at which the gun
stands, facilitate its motion, and make the work much stronger. The stocking
and fixing the gun in the present way, is attended with many inconveniences and
disadvantages. Among others, it increases the quantity of workmanship and the
expense; renders the construction weaker and much heavier; and will not admit
of the same facility of motion as if the gun was supported by real trunnions
properly placed. For, as in a considerable elevation or depression of the
piece, the center of gravity falls before or behind the center of motion, there
is necessarily a great weight to overcome in making those movements, which
would not happen in the other case. The rest of the work is also adapted to the
occasion, and is executed without regard to the proportion which should obtain
between the several parts, or between them and the gun itself. I beg therefore,
once more, that it may be remembered, that the whole construction, taken
together, is not offered as a model, either for land or sea service; but is
chiefly intended to demonstrate the principles above mentioned.

Rough and rude however as the present construction is, if it were only reduced
in length and weight, which it will well admit of, it could be used without any
very great inconvenience, and with great advantage, in the sea service, or in
land batteries against ships. The principal inconvenience on shipboard would
be, that it will take up more room than the common carriage; but in return for
this, the gun could be worked with fewer men, with greater expedition, and be
fired with greater certainty of hitting the adverse ship, or any capital part
of her which one would wish to strike. Laying aside all the other parts of the
construction, were a gun, with trunnions properly placed, to be mounted in a
swivel fixed in a common carriage or one similar to it, in the same manner as
is done in the present construction, the gunner to point, fire, and recoil, as
in that -- there is no doubt but a vessel armed with a set of guns mounted in
that way, would be more powerful than if the same guns were mounted altogether
in the common way. This simple improvement will admit of great freedom and
facility of motion, in point of elevation, depression, and lateral direction;
and procure the party the advantage of firing with much greater certainty of
hitting the object than in the usual way: in other respects, it will have many
of the disadvantages attending the common carriage.

A cannon mounted in the common way, may not improperly be considered, so far
as relates to its being fired at a moving object, as a fixed body. You must
wait till the object comes into your line of fire, before you can fire at it.
If that moment be lost, you fire in vain. You cannot, as the sportsman on shore
does, follow your object with the piece, till you get a fair opportunity to
fire at it. This is the case in firing from land batteries against a ship under
sail. The uncertainty of hitting the object in this mode of firing, is evident
from repeated experience. You yourselves remember the very little injury which
the British ships sustained in passing and repassing our range of batteries on
Yellow Hook, Powles Hook, Governor's Island, and the forts and batteries from
thence to Fort Washington inclusively. The French fleet under Count d'Estaing,
passing the British batteries on Rhode Island without receiving any material
injury, is another conclusive instance of that uncertainty. But if this is the
case where cannon are fired from firm ground, at an object moving in smooth
water, how much greater must the chance be of missing the object in sea fights,
where the piece is fired from a body which is in motion itself, at another body
which is also in motion; where both are not only in progressive motion, but
each is constantly, though gradually, changing its level, and also the elevation
and depression of its guns, from the rising or falling of the waves. If the
side of the ship rises or sinks but only an inch, the direction of the gun
changes with it: and it is well known, that an alteration of only one inch at
the muzzle, will make the shot go very wide of the object at a mile's, or even
half a mile's distance. These circumstances however generally obtain, in a
greater or less degree, between ships at sea, and must of course often
frustrate the intended effect of the shot. Considering these circumstances, it
is not surprising that engagements at sea have continued a long while, and that
many hundred shot have been fired on each side, with inconsiderable damage to
either; though it is plain, from some instances of very close engagements, that
were a few discharges from these tremendous machines to hit a vessel, they
would create great havoc and destruction. Thus in most of the battles fought
between fleets in the late war, some of which were said to be severe, there
were seldom more than 20 men killed on board a ship whose compliment consisted
of 5 or 600: a striking proof of the great uncertainty there is of hitting so
large an object as a ship of the line, in the common way of mounting and firing
cannon. -- Experience, as well as reason, shows that in that mode of firing,
the dismasting, or otherwise crippling a ship, is the effect of chance, not of
judgment.

Since then the hitting from a battery on shore, a ship sailing in smooth
water, within 2 miles distance, is so very uncertain, it follows, that if a
mode could be discovered of firing with greater certainty of hitting the
object, that a battery furnished with guns fitted in that manner, would, in
point of real force and execution, be to one with guns mounted in the common
way, as the certainty of hitting in one case is to the uncertainty of hitting
in the other, according to the number of guns in each battery. Suppose, for
instance, that from the range of batteries before mentioned, 100 shot were
fired at the British ships, and that one in 25, which is much more than is
commonly imagined, hit the vessel: Suppose also, all other circumstances being
alike, that there were only 20 shot fired from the other battery, and that only
four of them took effect; it follows, that a battery of 20 such guns is as good
as one of 100 in the common way. This reasoning will hold good, whatever may be
the exact proportion of the certainty of hitting in one way, to the uncertainty
of hitting in the other. At present, let us confine ourselves to generals: We
have not sufficient data or grounds to ascertain matters with precision. But as
the uncertainty of hitting moving objects, at long shot, is still greater at
sea, from the causes already mentioned, than in the case just stated of firing
from batteries on shore, it is evident that a vessel armed in the improved
manner, would have still greater advantages, at long shot, over one armed in
the common way. We just now observed, that there have been smart engagements at
sea, as they were called, in which there was great firing on both sides, and
yet but little damage done. A great many shot therefore must have been spent in
vain. Consider, a moment, the proportion of the balls which missed, to those
which hit. State it as low as you can, it will yet be prodigiously great. It
has been computed, that at sea, at from half a mile's to a mile's distance, not
above one shot in forty takes effect; Some say not above one in fifty; others
have made the proportion still greater; and all very justly ascribe it to the
causes before mentioned. Firing against an object at sea, in the common way, is
pretty much upon the same principles, and just as wisely contrived, as if a
sportsman, in order to shoot a duck on the river when the water was a little
rough, was to get into a small canoe or wherry whose sides were so low as to be
but a little above the level of the water, lay his fowling piece horizontally
over the side, fasten it immovably there, order the man at the paddle or oars
to work the boat so as to bring the gun to bear on the bird, then place himself
aside of the piece, and fire it in that position, with a match, when he thought
he had a good opportunity of hitting the bird. At a very moderate distance, how
often would he miss, to once that he would hit the object?

Let us now reason from small things to great. We are sensible, if the
sportsman were to loosen his gun, to move it as he pleases, and fire it when he
pleases, that he would seldom miss the object. If we can loosen the cannon,
move it with facility and expedition in any direction, and fire it when we
please, may we not hope, considering the comparative magnitude of the object to
the cannon, to do it with similar success? It is upwards of 20 years ago, that
in a voyage to Europe, the circumstances attending the firing a cannon loaded
with ball at another vessel, suggested these reflections to me, and made the
matter an object of subsequent attention.

But to return to the subject; it has been computed, I say, that at long shot,
at sea, but one ball in forty takes place; that is, in other words, that a
cannon mounted in the common way, hits once in forty times. It is reasonable to
think that one fixed on the present principles will miss much seldomer. But let
us suppose that it will hit but four times in forty: then the advantage of the
one gun over the other will be as four to one, that is, that ten guns fixed on
the new principles are equal, at long shot, to forty guns mounted in the common
way.

Plain and clear as this reasoning is, when we apply the conclusion to naval
war, it holds out such great and unexpected advantages, that we are struck with
surprise, and immediately imagine we have reasoned on false principles.

If, as we have just now been led to believe, 10 guns in this way, are equal,
at long shot, to 40 in the old way, then a ship of 10 guns, in this way, is
equal to one of 40, of the same weight of metal, in the other; and one of 20 to
one of 80. This calculation, however, is not strictly accurate; but it is
sufficiently so to illustrate the advantage of the proposed mode over the
common one. Let us abate 1-4, and rate the advantage at three to one -- then a
ship of 30 guns will be equal to one of 90. It is obvious, that the larger ship
will be a better mark in all respects, as to hull and rigging, to the smaller
ship, than the smaller ship will be to her. It is also obvious, that the larger
vessel will much better bear the effect of the shot, than the smaller will do.
This last circumstance is of no great consequence in our plan, and I only
mention it to show that it has not been overlooked in considering the subject.

The new frigates of 40 guns, carry 28 eighteen pounders on the main deck; the
rest are quarterdeck and forecastle guns. A vessel of the same dimensions, and
without quarterdeck and forecastle guns, which are of little or no use on the
plan I shall mention, will carry 28 twentyfour pounders. If that plan is kept
in view in building the vessel, she may be so formed and finished abaft, as to
fight, with ease, 4 stern chases occasionally.

According to the calculation just now, of three to one, a ship of 28
twenty-four pounders, mounted in the proposed way, is equal to one of 84 guns
of the same weight of metal mounted in the common way. It is not worth while to
attend to the difference which the different weight of metal that a ship of
that rate carries, would make in this calculation. It is also supposed, that
the ships are at long shot, broadside to broadside, and firing at each other in
that position: That no step is taken, or maneuver made, to give the small
vessel an opportunity of availing herself of her capacity of firing with
greater certainty on the enemy; and at the same time of lessening the chance of
her being hit by the enemy.

But let us reverse the matter. Let us suppose that prudence and skill are
added to the advantage of firing with greater certainty. Let the smaller vessel
be provided to fire 4 stern chases. Let her, on falling in with a ship of the
line, feign to run away, and endeavor to steer such a course in her pretended
flight, that the enemy can bring only his bow chases to bear upon her. This is
bringing the guns in action nearer to an equality in point of number, while the
smaller vessel possesses the advantage of firing with greater certainty. It is
moreover very probable, that a ship of the line would be deceived by the
seeming inferiority of the smaller vessel, and not fire her bow chases, lest it
might retard her own sailing: by which means she might be cripled in her
rigging by the lesser vessel, and the latter receive no damage at all.

To illustrate still further the superiority of a vessel carrying guns mounted
in the proposed way, over the other, I must point out another advantage arising
from that mode of mounting cannon.

It is impossible, with guns mounted in the common way, either on batteries on
shore, or on board a ship, to fire several pieces of cannon, or even two, in
the same instant of time, against a moving object that is less than the space
between the embrasures of a land battery, or between the ports of a ship, for
instance, against the mast of a ship under sail. For it being impossible to
move a cannon, mounted in the common way, at will, as we do a musket, by what
rule can we previously point two guns, which are to be fired in the same
moment, so that the balls will meet in a distant invisible point or angle to
which the mast may possibly come? On the other hand, a platoon of any number of
muskets may be progressively leveling at any moving object, and at a signal or
word of command, be fired in the same instant against it. In like manner,
several pieces of cannon, mounted on the proposed principles, may be levelled
and fired at a mast or other moving object, in the same moment; and
consequently with a greater probability of carrying it away, than if each were
to be fired separately at it. The principal ropes in a ship come near each
other about the upper part of the masts where the lower yards are slung. A
platoon of 4 twenty-four pounders fired at that spot, is likely to do
considerable injury. Such a platoon frequently repeated, could scarcely fail of
maiming that part of the mast, or otherwise cripling the ship, so as to retard,
if not stop her way. It is at least very probable, that before she could come
near enough to fire with certainty into the other vessel, she would meet with
some such disaster. As soon as that happens, her fate may be said to be
decided; the blow may be easily and speedily followed up, till she is unable to
work any way without great difficulty. The lesser vessel may then safely take
her station off her bow, her quarter, or her stern, and with little risk or
injury to herself, complete the victory. Besides, there are places in the hull
of a ship, where a blow or shot is more destructive, and more difficultly to be
come at and repaired, than in others: And commanding our guns as we do, it is
in our power to strike such places.

All that we have hitherto said upon this subject, is founded on the superior
certainty of hitting the object with guns fixed in the proposed way, to that of
hitting with guns mounted in the common way. But an addition may be made to the
proposed improvement, which, in all cases whatever, will render a vessel of 28
twenty-four pounders superior to a ship of the first rate armed in the common
way; and perhaps to any force in the common way, that can be brought against
her.

If improvements in the military art, which increase the destruction of
fighting men, tend, as has been thought, to lessen the calamities of war by
putting a speedy end to it; and upon that principle to save rather than destroy
men, the ideas I am going to suggest, will be an advantage rather than an evil
to mankind. It is evident that improvements of the kind are only useful to
those who first employ them; and as long as they are kept secret. It is also
evident, if such improvements are very considerable; if they will give one
party a great advantage over the other, and are made a prudent use of, that
they may decide the event of a war before an enemy can acquire a competent
knowledge of them.

The destruction of men and ships, has long been attempted by combustibles and
fire. -- Powder-flasks, stinck-pots, fire balls, etc. were contrived to effect
the former, but are only of use in boarding or very close fighting. Fire arrows
and red hot bullets have been employed for the latter. Fire arrows were found
ineffectual: And the difficulty and danger attending the preparing and loading
red hot shot at sea, seem to have had greater weight than any other cause in
occasioning their being laid aside. Few people who frequent the sea, and have a
competent knowledge of the aranagement of things in a ship, understand the
construction of furnaces; and few who understand the latter, know any thing of
the former. The loading a piece of cannon, mounted in the common way, with red
hot ball, is difficult and dangerous. The wad used on those occasions, is
troublesome and hazardous. As soon as the ball is in, the gun must be fired,
lest the ball should fire the powder. There are methods, however, to lessen the
difficulty and danger. A gun mounted in the proposed way, can be more easily
loaded with red hot shot, than one in the common way: And as to the necessity
of immediately firing the gun, lest the red hot ball should fire the powder, it
can very easily be avoided. There is a method of preparing wads for loading
with red hot balls, which so effectually guards against that inconvenience,
that we may, if we please, let the ball remain in the gun till it is cold.
Besides these improvements, shells and carcasses may be very advantageously
used at sea: they can be fired from cannon, though not to so great a distance
as red hot shot.

If a vessel, such as I have stated before, were to be armed with 28
twenty-four pounders mounted in the proposed way; and to be furnished with in
apparatus for firing red hot ball, shells and carcasses, what would she have to
fear from any force whatever, in the common way of sighting at sea, that could
be brought against her? -- Though a ship of the line should escape being
crippled in her rigging by the maneuvers before mentioned, and should approach
her; is it not probable that a few broadsides of such materials would soon
decide her fate, and make her expire in an awful blaze or tremendous blast?

Let us apply what has been said to our situation in the late war. To equip a
few vessels of that force, and in that manner, would have been no difficult
task, if the measures that it was in our power to take, had been taken. The
vessels could have been built and equipped with ease. -- I knew how to make
cannon of any size. I had been at the pains in Europe to make myself master of
that art, and some other things in the mechanical way appertaining to the
military and naval business, in order to be of more extensive utility in this
country. To arm the vessels in the proposed manner, I depended on no one's
knowledge or information. I could direct, and, with common artificers,
accomplish the whole. If the cannon, for the sake of concealing the design,
were cast of the common form, I could, with a few workmen, and an apparatus
that is not difficult to be prepared, have fixed artificial trunnions to them
on board a hulk in the river, which should have a proper guard on board, and no
communication with the shore, but in a way that would prevent any information
being given of what was doing on board. The swivels for the guns could be made
on board. So much of the carpenters work as would not lead to a discovery,
could be done on shore, the rest could be completed on board. When the ships
were ready, and the crew on board, the guns and what belonged to them might be
taken in. The workmen, who should be previously selected with that view, should
also be carried on board, the apparatus in the hulk destroyed, the furnace for
heating the shot be erected, and the vessel then sail on her destined errand,
taking the pilot with her. As cannon mounted in the proposed way, require but
half the hands to work them that are necessary in the common way; and as no
hands would be wanted to man prizes, a much less crew would be sufficient than
would be otherwise necessary. The ships might therefore be victualled for a
longer time, and be under no necessity on that account of going into port for
many months.

Admitting, that a few vessels so equipped and armed were at sea; that proper
care had been taken to exercise and accustom the people to work and fight the
guns before they attempted to seek the enemy; that they were ordered to sink or
burn whatever fell in their way: a horrid task indeed! which nothing but
necessity could justify, or prompt men to execute, what effect would such
unexpected, and to the enemy long unknown destruction, have had on their
military operations by sea and land? What effect would it have had in
preventing the distresses and disgraces we suffered in our own military
operations, in our finances and in our trade? What effect would it have had in
distressing the enemy, and bringing the war to a speedy conclusion?

By what strange fatality is it, that a mind which had been long and
successfully employed in cultivating the arts of peace; and particularly a
science devoted to relieve the distresses of human nature, should become the
author of ways and means to increase destruction and desolation among mankind!
There is no doubt, had the plan above mentioned been executed, but it would
have proved fatal to numbers of the British seamen. There is another measure,
from which, were it to have been conducted with the greatest humanity, we
should have derived great advantage; and the enemy have suffered great injury.
But were the same measures to have been carried to the extreme of military
severity, it would have made people of all ranks in that infatuated nation,
feel the horrors of war in their own country; and awakened them to a sense of
the desolution which their troops were wantonly committing in this. Painful as
such measures are to the feelings of humanity, they became necessary evils in
our situation. In war, there should be no triflling; and in a war, such as we
have concluded, the fate of a few thousands of adversaries should not be put in
competition with the liberty, safety, and happiness of a whole people, or
perhaps with the existence of liberty itself. You, my countrymen, were solemnly
declared Rebels; unconditional submission, that is, in other words, a surrender
at discretion, of liberty, life, and property, were demanded of you; and in
case of refusal, you were doomed to the pains and penalties denounced by law
against persons of that description. In England, I felt for you; I felt for
that country too. I labored to reconcile matters as long as there was the
least prospect of effecting it: and I flatter myself, it will be found, that in
the measures I took for that purpose, I consulted the dignity of Britain, the
honor of my country, and the interest and happiness of both people.
Independently of these considerations, it appeared to me, that the great cause
of liberty was at stake; that it depended on the issue of the controversy,
whether that invaluable blessing should be preserved and extended among
mankind; or universal despotism be established on its ruins.

Harbors which are of easy approach from the sea, and have deep water in them,
are generally fortified against ships of war. -- Harbors which have shallow
water, and those of difficult approach on account of bars, sands and shoals,
are not fortified at all, or but slightly; because no ships of force can get
into the former, or choose to risk getting into the latter. These circumstances
are deemed a sufficient security against an enemy. This idea has long
prevailed; and is a remarkable instance of our being sometimes so much governed
by long received, but nevertheless ill-founded opinions, as not to see what
observation, and plain unbiassed reason, clearly point out. Because ships of
war, which require deep water, cannot get into such harbors, does it follow
that an enemy cannot enter them, approach the cities on their shores, destroy
the shipping, and lay the cities under contribution or in ruins, by means of
vessels of considerable force, But so constructed as to draw but little water?
Look over the charts of the sea ports in England, Scotland and Ireland, and you
will find many such harbors in them. Is it not a little extraordinary that
none of their European neighbors ever thought of visiting them in the way, and
for the purposes just mentioned? Is it not a little extraordinary; that the
British themselves, who are so expert in naval matters, who by threatening
accessible cities with their ships, have compelled the sovereigns of them to a
neutrality, should not have thought of employing some such measures against
Amsterdam and Rotterdm, and thereby prevented or put an end to the Dutch war?

Such enterprises might easily have been executed by us on the principles laid
down. I have observed that shells and carcasses may be fired from cannon as
well, though not to so great a distance, as we do shot. With a couple of
vessels of the force before mentioned, but drawing little water; and a smaller
one armed in the common way, for the sake of treating with the enemy on shore,
without risking a discovery of the nature of our armament and force, we might
have struck several very capital strokes. Many vessels might have been
destroyed or ransomed in the harbors, and considerable contributions levied on
the towns.

The preceding observations will explain to the gentlemen who were in Congress
some years ago, why I then took so much pains to call the attention of that
honorable body to naval affairs.

To judge rightly of things, it is some times necessary to place them in
different points of view. In the present case, we may perhaps form a truer
estimate of the ideas that have been held out, if we were to consider how it
would have affected ourselves and our allies, had they been employed against
the common cause in only an instance or two.

While I was in England in 1782, a fleet was preparing, and did sail under Lord
How to relieve Gibralter. The combined squadron of France and Spain were
stationed to receive him. The British fleet consisted of about 45 sail of the
line: the combined squadron of about 60 sail of the line. Such, to my
knowledge, are the conveniences that can be had for the purpose in England,
that there would have been no difficulty to arm, in less than three weeks, half
a dozen ships of 74 guns in the way proposed. Considering the great superiority
of a ship armed in that way, over one armed in the common way, it is very easy
to conceive what the consequence would have been to the combined squadron, had
such a formidable force, a force the more dangerous because unknown and
unsuspected, been under the direction of a man of Lord Howe's abilities.
Whether the British would have made use of red hot shot, shells, or carcasses,
on such an important and decisive occasion, let every man judge for himself;
but I believe no man will doubt, but if six sail of the line had been allowed
to play that game with cannon fixed on the proposed principles, the destruction
of the greater part of the combined squadron would have been inevitable.

Amsterdam and Rotterdam carry on almost all the foreign trade of the United
Provinces. Their harbors are shallow and unfortified: nor is there a
fortification that need be dreaded in any part of the approach to them. They
depend, like some of their neighbors, on their sands and shoals for
protection. At the above period, the Dutch fleet of 12 sail lay in the Texel.
In England, large vessels may readily be had, that with some alteration would
draw no more water than we have mentioned. I submit it, whether two sail of the
line and four such smaller vessels, all armed in the way we have proposed, and
allowed to use red hot shot, shells, and carcasses, could not have destroyed
the Dutch fleet: Whether the smaller vessels could not have got up to Amsterdam
and Rotterdam, two to each place, have compelled the Dutch to give up the
alliance and make peace, or else have laid those cities in ashes, destroyed the
shipping in the harbors, and thereby have disabled the United Provinces from
carrying on the war to any effect.


