AN ADDRESS TO THE ASSEMBLY OF PENNSYLVANIA, ON THE ABOLITION OF THE BANK OF
NORTH AMERICA.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by ROBERT AITKEN, at Pope's Head, in
Market-Street. M.DCC.LXXXV.

TO THE HONORABLE THE REPRESENTATIVES OF PENNSYLVANIA IN GENERAL ASSEMBLY.
GENTLEMEN,
WHETHER the Bank shall be abolished or established, is one of those important
questions which will in course attract your notice. The heat of disputation
will then give birth to many arguments. But disputants do not always convey
information. There is (no doubt) a great majority of members who will vote
according to their dispassionate judgment; and such men will naturally wish to
form opinions on plain reason plainly delivered. To them therefore this paper
is addressed. And, in order that we may have a clear view of the object, let us
consider (first) whether admitting the institution of the Bank to have been
pernicious, a law to abolish it would be wise, and (secondly) whether it is
really a pernicious institution.

First then, admitting the institution of the Bank to have been pernicious,
would a law to abolish it be wise. The answer to this question depends on two
points. First, whether such a law would be effectual; and secondly, whether it
would be prudent. An enquiry whether the law would be effectual, involves a
doubt of your power, and may therefore offend the weak or illiberal, but wise
representatives of free citizens, will listen with candor and form a
dispassionate judgment. They know that the boasted omnipotence of legislative
authority is but a jingle of words. In the literal meaning it is impious. And
whatever interpretation lawyers may give, freemen must feel it to be absurd and
unconstitutional. Absurd, because laws cannot alter the nature of things;
unconstitutional, because the constitution is no more, if it can be changed by
the legislature. A law was once passed in New Jersey which the judges
pronounced to be unconstitutional, and therefore void, surely no good citizen
can wish to see this point decided in the tribunals of Pennsylvania. Such power
in judges is dangerous; but unless it some where exists, the time employed in
framing a bill of rights and form of government was merely thrown away.

The doubt which arises on this occasion, as to the extent of your authority,
is not founded on the charter granted by Congress: but supposing the
incorporation of the Bank to have been the same in its origin as that of a
church, we ask whether the existence and the rights acquired by law, can be
destroyed by law. Negroes have by law acquired the right of citizens, would a
subsequent law take that right away? It is not true that the right to give,
involves the right to take. A father (for instance) has no power over the life
of his child, nor can a felon or traitor pardoned by act of grace, be by repeal
of that act condemned and executed. Should an act be passed to cancel the
public debts, would that act be valid? Where an estate has been granted by law,
can it be revoked by a subsequent law? Could the lands forfeited and sold, be
resumed and conveyed to the original owners? Many such questions might be put,
and a judicial decision (either affirmative or negative) would be inconvenient
and dangerous. Look then to the end ever you commence the labor.

Secondly, admitting your power, ought it (in prudence) to be exercised. You
will certainly consider, that (as a violation of private property) it must
sully the reputation of the state. Good men are careful of their own
reputation, and protect that of their country, from sentiment. Wise men are
confirmed in this sentiment, by reflection and information. Facts are sometimes
better than arguments. It is then a fact, that applications made by citizens of
Pennsylvania to borrow money in Holland, have been defeated by those attacks
already made on the Bank. It is also a fact, that the credit of our merchants
has been greatly injured (in foreign countries) from the same cause. This is
the argument which foreigners use. If your government so little respects the
property of their own citizens as to overturn an institution like the Bank, how
can our property be safe among you? It will not be easy to answer that
question, and you know gentlemen that your merchants cannot give credit, unless
they can get credit; and you know also how important credit is to the frontier
inhabitants at least, if not to those of the more settled country.

Deeply therefore are we interested in preserving unsullied fame. But if this
consideration has not sufficient weight, reflect on the domestic consequences
of abolishing charters. What is practice today, becomes precedent tomorrow.
And sure it is worth some serious thought, whether this dangerous practice
shall be introduced. Every man is interested in the establishment of such
precedent, as a member of some religious society, or of particular corporations
for the promotion of science, or the purposes of humanity. Attention to the
changes of human affairs, like meditation among the tombs, teaches solemn and
affecting lessons of wisdom and moderation. Look back to the disputes which
convulsed this commonwealth twenty years ago. Mark the succeeding revolutions.
See how friendships and how enmities have changed. See how power has been
wrested from one, and grasped by another. This generation will soon pass away.
Who can designate the men that will sit in seats of authority twenty years
hence? or five? or one? You are here today, and gone tomorrow. Beware then
how you lay the foundation for future encroachments. While justice is the
principle of government, to be innocent is to be secure. Be not then seduced by
the momentary bauble of power; for place it where you will it is dangerous, and
the tyrannous use of it is always tyranny. Those who live by the sword shall
die by the sword. The violent must, of necessity, become victims of violence.
Should the next election give power to those who may now be oppressed, what
bounds shall be set to unbridled resentment? May not all charters be at once
laid low, by a general law declaring the existence of corporations to be
incompatible with the public welfare? Since, then, these consequences may
follow, we may reasonably doubt whether a law to abolish the Bank would be
wise, even if the institution had been pernicious. But is it really a
pernicious institution?

This question is of great magnitude. Some objections against the bank may
perhaps be well founded. Let us examine them. They are first, that it enables
men to trade to their utter ruin by giving them the temporary use of credit and
money. Secondly, that the punctuality required at the Bank, throws honest men
into the hands of usurers. Thirdly, that the great dividend on bank stock
induces monied men to buy stock rather than lend on interest. Fourthly, that
rich foreigners will (for the same reason) become stockholders so as that all
the property will finally vest in them. Fifthly, that the payment of dividends
to foreigners will be a constant drain of specie from the country. Sixthly,
that the Bank facilitates the exportation of coin? Seventhly, that it injures
the circulation of bills of credit. Eighthly, that the wealth and influence of
the Bank may become dangerous to the government. Ninthly, that the directors
can obtain unfair advantages in trade for themselves and their friends. And
tenthly, that it is destructive of that equality which ought to take place in a
free country.

These objections, though artfully made and industriously circulated, do not
consist very well together. For if it be true that the Bank enables men to
overtrade themselves, by the use of money at an easy rate; it cannot be true
that it throws men into the hands of usurers, who exact for the use of money an
exorbitant rate. If it be true, that foreigners will buy out stockholders (even
as is said at fifty per cent advance) so as to become proprietors of the whole;
it cannot be true that the money of our rich citizens will be vested in bank
stock, and none remain for loans. If it be true, that the Bank facilitates the
exportation of coin; it cannot be true that it injures the circulation of bills
of credit, which bills are always expressly emitted to supply the real or
supposed want of specie. If it be true, that the use of money obtained by
discounts at the Bank ruins the trade; it cannot be true that the directors and
their friends would gain any advantage by it. If it be true, that the Bank has
a tendency to lock up in its vaults the money of rich citizens; it cannot be
true that it facilitates the exportation of coin. If it be true, that
foreigners will continually bring in money to buy the principal of the stock;
it cannot be true that the country will continually be drained of specie by
paying the dividend on that principal. If it be true, that the funds of the
Bank must finally vest in foreigners; it cannot be true that it is destructive
of equality among the citizens.

Thus much in general. Let us next consider each objection by itself; and
first, that it enables men to trade to their utter ruin, by giving them the
temporary use of money. It is true that the Bank has given great facility to
commercial people, of which some have made an imprudent use, by engaging in
rash and ruinous enterprises. But this abuse of commercial advantages cannot be
prevented, otherwise than by the destruction of commerce itself, or by
confining the trade (as in China) to an exclusive company. Neither of these
modes would suit the genius and temper of Pennsylvania. We must therefore (as
in former times) leave the foolish to suffer the consequence of their folly,
and not punish (for their sakes) the sober and discreet. The convenience
merchants derive from being able to obtain money for short periods, and on easy
terms, is of the greatest consequence to them. And it would be a mavelous
thing indeed, if the use of water were prohibited, because some people choose to
drown themselves.

Secondly, It is said that the punctuality required at the Bank throws honest
men into the hands of usurers. This objection will admit of nearly the same
answer with the last. If men who borrow for a short term, will engage the funds
borrowed in long speculations, thereby depriving themselves of the means of
payment, who is to blame? Is it the benevolent lender, or the foolish and
dishonest borrower? Why did he incur the debt and undertake the payment? or why
divest himself of the means? But say, that a man is (by misfortune) in want of
a considerable sum, without which his credit would suffer. The Bank advance the
sum for forty days, and save him from ruin. If within that period he collects
his funds, and repays the advance, has he derived no benefit from the Bank? If
at the end of forty days he should be unable to pay, is the situation worse
than it was? If in that case the Bank renew the discount for forty days more,
(which has usually been done) is not the benefit increased? And if after all
(when they will trust him no longer) he apply to usurers, (which he must
otherwise have done in the first instance) is the Bank to blame? But the man it
seems has been unfortunate, and is ruined, which ruin the Bank did delay, but
could not prevent. Now what is the conclusion drawn from these premises, and
how is it drawn? Why thus. Misfortune is the cause of loss. Imprudence is the
source of disappointment. Loss and disappointment demand supplies of cash.
Usurers exact enormous interest. Bad voyages, wild speculations, mismanagement,
and usurious interest, produce ruin. Therefore the Bank must be destroyed. It
must be destroyed, because it would not continue to trust men who were no
longer trust worthy. Before this objection be repeated, let these men, or at
least one of them, be openly named; so that the directors may have an
opportunity fairly to combat the charge: and then, if they do not show that the
party received every indulgence he had any right to claim, expect, or even hope
for, let the charge be established. But until this opportunity be given, let
not the voice of slander be heard in the sanctuaries of legislation.

Rely on it, Gentlemen, that however calumny may cast the aspersion, no proof
will ever be adduced. It might therefore be abandoned to the merited contempt.
But since such pains have been taken to inculcate a false idea that the Bank
promotes usury, let us recur to facts. Before the establishment of the Bank,
usury had been carried to an alarming degree. Men of the greatest property, who
happened to be here from the neighboring states, were forced to pay as high as
ten per cent. for one month's anticipation of their remittances; merchants who
met with misfortune were driven to the greatest distress, and the public could
not obtain advances upon any terms. Under these circumstances, the Bank was
instituted; and there are many in this city and elsewhere whom it saved from
destruction. The number of usurers and the rate of usury, were soon diminished.
But as there still remained some objects whose distresses the Bank could not
relieve, because most of its funds were employed in the public service, so
there still remained some usurers to prey on those distresses. In proportion as
the number who want money is increased, or (which comes to the same thing) as
the means of obtaining money are diminished, in the same proportion will usury
abound and flourish. This the usurious know, and therefore they have never
intermitted their efforts to destroy the Bank, as the sure means of increasing
and securing their unrighteous gains. Beware then, Gentlemen, that ye be not
dupes to the artifice of such wretches. It is indeed but a slender and
despicable artifice. A poor attempt to persuade you, that an institution which
lends for one half per cent. per month, drives folks to borrow at ten per cent.
And on this ground they suggest, that the best mode of preventing men from
giving ten per cent. for a month's use of money, is to disable them from
obtaining it on any other terms.

Thirdly, It is said the dividend on bank stock induces monied men to buy it
rather than lend on interest. The object of this assertion is to persuade you,
that the difficulty of borrowing money arises merely or chiefly from the Bank;
which is not true. For first, it is notorious that few stock holders are of
that class who were in the habit of lending on interest. Such as are foreigners
or inhabitants of the neighboring States (and these it is said own half the
stock) would not lend their money in Pennsylvania, even if circumstances
favored such loans. A considerable part of the remaining half belongs to small
stock holders, who would not send their money into the country. And a far more
considerable part is the property of merchants, who would be obliged
immediately to employ their funds in their own business, if deprived of those
facilities which the Bank affords. After making these deductions from the
capital of the Bank, the remainder (belonging to those who would and could
lend) will be inconsiderable. But such as it is, to whom would it be lent? Not
to farmers who pay interest irregularly, and from whom the principal cannot
always be recovered without legal process. No, it would be lent to merchants,
and the greater part to such as (through necessity) give more than legal
interest. Can it be believed, while usurers get ten per cent. per month for the
use of money, and pledges in hand for security, that the twenty or thirty
thousand dollars (now vested in bank stock) which belong to men not engaged in
active business, would be lent on bonds and mortgages for six per cent per
annum? It is true that money cannot be borrowed, and it is also true that the
purchase of bank stock is more profitable than lending on interest. But trace
the evils complained of to their true sources, and it will be found that they
flow from that usury which has been occasioned by the peculiar circumstances of
the times, and from that opposition which has been excited against the Bank.
Why is money scarce and not to be borrowed? Why is it so desirable to own bank
stock? An answer to these two questions will lead to the solution of a third.
How is money to be made more plenty, and to be obtained with more ease?

First then, why is money scarce and not to be borrowed. It is a melancholy
truth, that during the late war many were ruined by payment of their debts in
paper greatly depreciated. Some who received the paper while it was valuable,
put it in the loan office. Some purchased land. And some kept it till it was
good for nothing. It is evident, that these persons (who before the war were
lenders of money) have no money to lend now; and that every shilling so paid
and disposed of, must be deducted from the sum formerly at interest in
Pennsylvania. The remainder of that sum, is still in the hands of those who
borrowed it ten years ago, and cannot be lent before it be paid. It may perhaps
be said, that some merchants made money during the war. But it will be found
that the gainers were few, the losers numerous; and that taking the merchants
collectively as a body, it is poorer by millions. The reason therefore why
money is not to be borrowed is that no one has money to lend, and even
admitting that there should be a few who can lend, there are none who will; for
the following reasons: Those who want are always willing to borrow, but those
who owe are not always willing to pay. If therefore the laws of a country, or
the administration of those laws, countenance unreasonable delays of payment,
the owners of money (or any thing else) will not dispose of their property on
credit, unless they be tempted by great interest, or great profit. And such as
disdain usurious dealing, will not be tempted at all. A prudent peaceable man
would rather buy stock in the British funds, and receive regularly but five per
cent, than take a mortgage at six, on the best estate in Pennsylvania. Because
he may suffer for years, a detention of both interest and principal, and
because he apprehends some things which have happened already, and may
therefore happen again -- For instance, he trembles lest a long train of paper
emissions, with a legal tender at the tail of them, should cancel his debt for
a tenth of the value. He fears also, that a tax on his bond may reduce the
precarious interest of six per cent to four, and even oblige him to pay the two
per cent tax, though he cannot recover the six per cent interest. Thus we find,
on fair investigation, that money is scarce, because (in one way or other) it
has been taken or withheld from the owners. And that money is not to be
borrowed, from a well grounded apprehension that (when due) it will not be
repaid.

Let us then, in the second place, enquire why it is so desirable to own bank
stock. Three causes present themselves. First, that the dividend gives
something more than legal interest, although by extension of the capital, and
contraction of the business, it yields less than formerly. Secondly, that this
dividend is payable with rigid punctuality at the end of every half year, so
that the proprietors can count with certainty on their income, to defray their
expenses. Thirdly, that in case of unforeseen demands, the stockholder can (for
legal interest) command a temporary accommodation; and if unfortunate events
should oblige him to collect all his resources, he can speedily sell and
thereby command the value of the stock. To these three reasons, which strike
every person at first sight, must be added a fourth as applying more directly
to the charge, that the benefits of bank stock incline men to purchase it
rather than lend. After the peace, when the advantages of the Bank had been
felt, and the property of stock had become secure, an opposition was raised by
some of the same persons who are now the opposers, but on ground somewhat
different. For then, instead of considering a Bank as pernicious, it was
declared to be so highly beneficial that they must needs have two. They did
indeed complain of the old Bank. But for what? Not because the capital was so
large as to threaten general ruin, but because the directors would not open a
subscription to make it larger. And what was the modest request of that day?
Why truly such an extension of the capital, as might enable those who had
waited for events in perfect ease and safety, to enjoy the same advantages with
those who had borne the burden, and ran the risque of the contest. It was
indeed a hard case, that many worthy gentlemen who would not have given a
shilling to save the state, should be obliged either to pay five hundred
dollars for a share in bank which had cost but four, or to lend their money on
bond and mortgage to the farmers of Pennsylvania. A very hard case! And so
loudly did they complain of it, that at last many sensible members of Assembly
were prevailed on to believe it would be a good thing to have two Banks. Two
shops to go to; for that was the fashionable phrase. And they were the more
easily led into this opinion, because it was laid down by some in high station
for whose sentiments they had acquired an habitual respect. But that respect
may perhaps be diminished, if those who pronounced decisive judgment two years
ago that two Banks were necessary, should now as positively ^^onounce that no
Bank at all is necessary; and (wonderful to relate) go cackling round the
country, that one Bank is pregnant with ruin to the State. The language of
truth is uniform, and these sudden changes of hasty opinion, show so great a
want of temper and knowledge, that those who really mean the public good will
quit such blind guides, and think for themselves. The consequence of the noise
made at that time must be well remembered. The Assembly were plagued with long
arguments on both sides, which might as well have been spared, and then all at
once the thing was hushed up and accommodated. Because such of the promoters of
the new Bank as had money, found out that most of their new friends had none.
Because they all found out, that the scheme did not promise so much either of
profit or security as was imagined. And because they had not too much
confidence in each other, being (like Nebuchadnezzar's image) composed of
discordant materials. They agreed, therefore, to abandon their project, on
certain conditions acceded to by the old Bank, one of which was to extend the
subscription; and this it is which has converted all the surplus money of the
State into bank stock. For otherwise, let the price of a share have risen ever
so high, nay had it gone to four thousand instead of four hundred dollars; not
one penny would have been added to the bank capital. But in proportion as stock
rose, the dividend would have been less valuable, till at length it would have
been more profitable to lend at six per cent, than to purchase bank stock. For
instance, if the dividend on a share of four hundred dollars had continued to
be forty dollars, and the price of such a share had risen to be eight hundred
dollars, then the purchaser would have got only five per cent for his money,
instead of six.

Thirdly, then, let us inquire how money may be rendered more plenty and easier
to be obtained. And first, the surest way to render money plenty is to bear the
evils of scarcity. To make it plenty (according to the desire of some) would
be, as in the continental times, to make it no money at all. For when it can be
obtained without labor, and found without search, it is of no use to the
possessor. Those nice politicians, therefore, who try to make money so plenty
that people may get it for nothing, will find that their money is good for
nothing. The scarcity constitutes the value. And when that scarcity is such
that men will do a great deal for a little, it will become plenty; for those
will always have most money, who will give most for it. The complaint that
money is scarce, is generally made by the idle or the unfortunate; by those who
will not, or those who cannot give any thing in exchange for money, except bare
promises which they cannot or will not perform. Now such men would suffer more
from the want of cash in Amsterdam or London, where it is most plenty, than in
any part of the state of Pennsylvania. If folks are idle they must be relieved
by labor, and if poor by charity. Till this be done, the complaint that money
is scarce will continue, and though very loud will not be very just. There was
(for instance) a grievous complaint of the want of money at the close of the
war; and yet every man who had a bushel of wheat could get eight or nine
shillings for it. People in general plunged into extravagance, and laid out
their coin for foreign fripperies, and the merchants (unable to remit for
payment of these things in produce, except on ruinous terms) sent away the
coin; so that in two years there has been more money exported from this country
(in which a scarcity was then complained of) than is necessary for a
circulating medium. The several states are now issuing paper, that what little
specie is left may also be exported, instead of the wheat, corn, rice, tobacco,
etc. Flour has long been cheaper in London than in Philadelphia. We buy fine
coats, and handsome buckles, and a thousand other handsome fine things in
London, and then when called on to pay, though our barns be full of wheat, we
will not sell it as formerly for five shillings the bushel, but sit down and
cry because money is scarce. The wagon is in the mud, and we beg Hercules to
pull it out without putting our own shoulders to the wheel. The legislature
must relieve us, for we will not relieve ourselves. And against what do we want
to be relieved? Why against our idleness, extravagance and folly.

But, secondly, another means of making money plenty is to render it less
necessary. For this purpose enforce the punctual payment of debts, so that
those who trust can be sure of recovering, in season, from those whom they have
trusted. This will produce two happy consequences. First, that men will no
longer run in debt for idle gewgaws, which they must pay for with their
substance when pay day comes. Executions for debt will then be as wholesome
warnings to the extravagant, as executions for crimes are to the profligate.
Secondly, a man who wants to buy land or needful goods on credit, will then
obtain the credit desired. The punctuality of his payments will extend his
credit. Those payments will also enable the merchant to comply with his
engagements, which will (in like manner) extend his credit at home and abroad.
In proportion to the punctuality of remittances, the merchant will get longer
credit, and on better terms; and thus money will be plentier because the
trading people (who have always a preference in such things) will be relieved
from the necessity of borrowing.

Thirdly, another means of making money plenty, is to enforce a collection of
taxes, make solid provision for paying the interest of our debts in coin, and
introduce order and economy into the administration of affairs. This will
restore the public confidence, and then the value of certificates will rise,
and the possessors be able to dispose of them for cash. Thousands will thereby
be relieved who are now in great want of money, and under the dire necessity of
getting it from usurers, or going to gaol.

Lastly, these plain and simple measures will make money not only plenty but
easy to be obtained. Because industry and frugality (which want but little)
will thereby be introduced; and we can always command money when we are not in
want of it. As to those blades who must forever want, because they spend their
time in streets and taverns, and occupy themselves with state affairs, instead
of their own affairs, and who dress and feast and will not work, but wish to
borrow; let them meet the rebuff given by an old philosopher to one of their
predecessors. Friend borrow of thy back and belly, they will never ask thee for
the money, but I should be very troublesome.

A fourth objection made against the Bank is that rich foreigners will be
induced to become stockholders, so as that all the property will finally vest
in them. This objection has some weight, and if it be allowed to operate as a
bar to measures of public utility, will save a deal of time and trouble to the
government, though it may not conduce to the prosperity of the state, and must
prove injurious to those by whom it is made. People in general seem now to
expect some permanent provision for the interest of the public debts, and if
that should happen, foreigners will purchase a considerable share. The Dutch
are said to hold about thirty millions sterling in the British funds, bearing
an interest of four per cent. and they lent five million guilders to Congress
at five per cent. when no funds were provided, and during the war. Hence we may
with certainty infer, that they will buy up the certificates bearing six per
cent. when placed on a solid footing. Is that a sufficient objection against
providing for the public creditors? And if not in one case, why in the other?
The practice some men have of affirming today, and denying tomorrow, is
neither decent nor becoming. A grievous complaint is made of the want of money,
and yet as grievous a complaint of the only means to obtain any. We have it not
at home, and we must not receive it from abroad. Do these gentlemen suppose it
will rain money now, as it did manna of old? And because they have the same
perverseness with the children of Israel, do they expect the same miracle? To
experience a want of public credit is (they say) terrible, but to destroy the
only means of supporting public credit, is (they say) desirable. Let us appeal
to facts. No country on earth enjoys extensive credit which has not a public
Bank. We have ourselves experienced its good effects, when we were in the
greatest distress. And shall we now be told that the Bank must be destroyed,
and yet public credit be supported? People who speak in this way show great
ignorance, or something worse. They ask how a Bank contributes to public
credit; and (if no reply be made) think they have gained a victory, when they
have puzzled an opponent. For the sake of those who love truth, and not with
any hope of making such men sensible either to shame or conviction, their
question shall be answered. The Bank may be likened to that which bears the
same name, a bank or dam for collecting the waters. After a head is raised,
some part turns the wheels of the mill, and some part waters the adjacent
grounds. Take the bank away, and the water will still flow, but not with the
same beneficial effect. If revenues were appropriated to the interest of the
public debt, and other important objects of government; should any delay take
place in collections, a similar delay of payment would also happen. The want of
punctuality, would lessen the value of stock. And, on the other hand, if
collections were more rapid than the payments, much money might be taken out of
circulation, and lodged in the public coffers. The consequence would be, either
that commerce must suffer (as at present) for the want of it, or that the state
must procure more money than is necessary; which might not be very easy, if we
may judge from past experience. But with the aid of a Bank, the same stream
turns the wheel, and fertilizes the ground; being prudently applied to either
purpose as occasion requires. And so the same sum of money, will not only
supply the business of the merchant and of the state, but the funds proceeding
from trade, and those arising from taxes, will (when thrown into the same mass)
mutually aid the operations of each, and jointly secure the objects of both.
Nor is there the least danger that foreigners will hold even a great proportion
of the bank stock. Bank stock will always be most useful for the mercantile man
who lives on the spot. Because he (and he alone) can at once receive the
dividend, and when occasion requires have (by loan for a short time) the use of
his money: So that he will naturally outbid the foreigner. And as the object of
the foreigner must be to secure a certain annual income from his funds, make
but the interest of the public debt as regular and safe as the bank dividend,
(which by means of the Bank is easily done) and the foreigner will as naturally
wish to change bank stock, for an amount of funded loan office certificates
yielding more annual interest, as the merchant will to change such an amount of
certificates for bank stock. And so far from any danger to the State, by the
interest of foreigners in their funds, there is a great security. Every foreign
creditor is an advocate for us with his own government, in times of public
calamity, and is induced to lend more, as the means of securing what has been
already lent; especially if he has been regularly paid the interest of his
capital.

The next objection against the Bank is, that the payment of the dividend to
foreigners will be a drain of specie from the country. This has already been
answered in part, but farther; a man who has bought a piece of ground, wants to
borrow money for the purpose of clearing, fencing, draining and cultivating it.
He would not relish the advice of a neighbor who might tell him not to borrow,
lest the payment of interest should drain him of cash. He might indeed be glad
to get the money at a low interest, or for no interest, but he would certainly
get it if he could; and by industrious attention, and a prudent application of
it, he would pay both principal and interest from the profits of his farm. And
thus by degrees a wilderness is converted into beautiful cultivation. From the
discovery of America to the present hour, we have been paying interest for what
we owe on the other side of the Atlantic. Our debt and our prosperity have gone
hand in hand. And yet when people now complain of the difficulty of borrowing
money, they must be told it is for their advantage not to obtain the principal,
because they will not (in that case) be obliged to pay the interest. If a
farmer in Pennsylvania has to pay annually five pounds for the use of a hundred
pounds borrowed, is it of any consequence to him whether the lender lives in
Philadelphia, New York, Boston, London, or Amsterdam? Twenty bushels of wheat
do the business. And when he has parted with them, whether they are eaten in
Philadelphia, or sent to Lisbon, is none of his affair. On the large scale,
indeed, it might be convenient that wealthy men should cross the Atlantic to
become citizens of Pennsylvania; and so they will, if equal just laws, and a
mild firm administration give that security to property without which it is a
curse instead of a blessing. But if bad laws be made, or the good laws be badly
executed, and if solid establishments can be overturned by every capricious
breath, the wise and the good will avoid us as they would the pestilence. Then
indeed there will be a constant drain of wealth, for none will leave property
in a country where it is insecure.

But farther, though we admit that borrowing does every year carry a sum out of
the country for payment of interest, it will not follow that the country is
impoverished by the amount of that sum. When a farmer wants necessaries, and
has not cash, he must either take them on trust, or borrow money on interest.
Every body knows that the difference between buying with ready money, and
buying on credit, is much greater than the interest on the price of the goods,
and therefore it is cheaper for the farmer to borrow, than to run in debt at
the store. Just so it is with the country. Most of the articles we want (when
purchased at the first hand) must be immediately paid for; and when merchants
abroad lay out their cash to buy goods, and after sell them to us on credit, we
pay (in the price of such goods) not only an interest on the purchase money,
but for the trouble foreign merchants take, and the risque they run. To all
this is added a handsome commission, and then a round profit into the bargain.
Thus, for instance, since it has been the practice to buy tea with cash at the
first hand, we get that article for nearly one half of what it used to cost.
Let any man therefore calculate the difference between paying fifty pound per
annum instead of a hundred, in price, and six per cent (or even ten per cent)
per annum for interest on the fifty, and he will be convinced that we are
recompensed five fold for the dividend paid abroad. On the whole, the matter
stands thus. The merchant whose business it is, and who must for that reason be
the best judge, tells you that the advance of money by foreigners for bank
stock, and the facility which the Bank can thereby give to commercial
operations, enable him to carry on business more advantageously though he sells
imported commodities lower, and buys produce higher, than before the war. The
farmer (who perhaps neither comprehends nor cares for the reasons on which this
assertion may be founded) prudently brings it to the test of experience. The
tree (says he) is known by its fruits. Let me examine the facts. He does so,
and finds that most of the articles imported can be purchased for much less
than formerly and that he can get half as much again for his wheat. So that
duties properly laid on articles, the consumption of which is chiefly
unnecessary, and sometimes pernicious, would pay the interest of the public
debts and not cost the consumer more than before the war. Thus, without
imposing new burdens, full relief may be given to the public creditors, and
they be thereby enabled more cheerfully and more easily to sustain their share
of such burdens as circumstances may hereafter require. All which advantages
we must (it seems) forego, and preclude ourselves from the possibility of
establishing public credit, lest foreigners should derive an interest on
lending us money. Overturn the Bank say they and perhaps you may get a little
of their money. Kill the goose that lays golden eggs, and you may wear her
feathers.

Sixthly, it has been said that the Bank facilitates the exportation of specie.
Of all the charges in the world, this is the last which one would have
expected. The operations of the Bank depend (as every body knows) on the
quantity of specie in their vaults. When that is gone, the Bank is done, just
as the mill stands still when the pond is dry. And therefore to suppose the
directors would facilitate the exportation of coin, is the most absurd of all
suppositions. Truth is, the directors of the Bank are extremely solicitous to
prevent the exportation of coin, and happily for the state, have the means in
their power. The Bank capital is about a million of dollars, part of which is
in their vaults, and the remainder lent for short periods. The amount of their
loans is supposed to be twice as much as their capital. A part of the sum lent
is in bank notes, the remainder in coin. Now therefore when the directors find
that cash is exported (which they do at once, by perceiving that any
considerable sum goes out of the Bank in a week more than is received) they are
not merely led by inclination, but driven by necessity, to lessen or to stop
their discounts, according to the nature of the case and the degree of the
evil. This stoppage has the effect; for not only the money is prevented from
going abroad, but if the stoppage continue, it is brought in from every
quarter. The operation is so powerful, that on one occasion many thousand
dollars were brought to the Bank, and there taken out of those packages in
which they were (next morning) to have been shipped to London.

In this place it may be proper to notice the strange opinion, that in the
present state of trade a bank is injurious. This opinion seems to have been
founded on the idea, that because money is collected in the Bank it may easily
be taken out of the Bank. And so indeed it might by an armed force, but those
who have tried the experiment in any other way have been disappointed. The
money is collected in bank it is true, but how is a man to get it out? Either he
must sell property for the purpose, and then it is of no consequence whether
the payment comes out of the Bank, or out of the Treasury, or where it comes
from. The owner may dispose of it as he thinks meet; and we might as well say
that David Rittenhouse, Esquire. facilitates the exportation of money, when he pays
for arms or clothing to a merchant who sends it to Europe, as lay that blame on
the Bank. The other mode of getting at money in bank, is by borrowing for the
short period of forty days, and if the borrower ships it off, he will be
obliged (when the forty days expire) to hunt for it, and will sometimes pay
dearly for his trick. Perhaps it will be found on examination that some of
those who complain of being driven to deal with usurers, had been dabbling in
this way, and proved too cunning for themselves, as cunning men generally do.
So far is the Bank from being injurious to the present state of trade, that the
converse of the proposition is true, viz. that the present state of trade is
injurious to the Bank. And it would have been ruinous to the commonwealth, but
for the seasonable checks given by the Bank, which checks are among the causes
of the present complaints. They say the Bank facilitates the exportation of
coin, and that therefore they complain; but in truth the Bank prevented them
from exporting the coin, and therefore they complain. While a man spends more
than he earns, his coin must go to pay the difference, and he will have less of
it when the year ends than when it began. Just so it is with a country. We
import great quantities of goods, we either cannot or will not give produce on
moderate terms to pay for them, and yet we grumble that our cash runs low. We
will not acknowledge our own imprudence, but accuse the Bank, which has alone
resisted the general torrent; by which means Pennsylvania is better off than
any of the neighboring states.

A seventh objection against the Bank is that it injures the circulation of
bills of credit. This is a popular argument and therefore it is made. But as to
the truth of the assertion, the authors do not trouble their heads about it.
Their maxim is, Let us lay it on and let them take it off as they can. Some
will stick. Suppose this kind of morality were extended a little, and when
these charitable kind hearted people walk the streets one of their proselytes
should bedaub them with the contents of the kennel, hugging himself in the idea
that some will stick, would they not find the practice of their own principles
rather unpleasant? Pray how has the Bank injured the circulation of paper
money? Why the paper is not received in bank as specie. And did ever any man
suppose it would, or could, be so received? If it had, would not the directors
have been guilty of an infamous breach of trust? Could they have excused
themselves to those of whose specie they had the custody? The Bank might indeed
have given currency to the bills, as long as their coin lasted, by exchanging
one for the other; and no one can doubt that in this case the coin would, as fast
as exchanged, have been packed up and sent to our good friends and favorites in
London. Under such circumstances, those candid Gentlemen who prayed and voted
for paper currency, and afterward refused to receive it, would perhaps have
played their patriotic game quite through. And we may reasonably suppose too,
that when the coffers of the Bank were filled with their emissions, they would
have found as good reasons to abolish the paper, as they now do to abolish the
Bank. If a refusal to give money for bills of credit be an injury, what shall
be said for those who (though patrons of the plan) would neither give money nor
any thing else for the bills. It would be difficult to make an apology, if the
generality of the refusal were not a sufficient reason for each individual. Let
us then be candid, and far from reprehending the practice, calmly seek the
cause. Paper can only circulate on a par with specie, from a general belief
that it is equal to specie. The faith makes the thing. If there be not such a
general belief, it cannot be equal to coin, because it will not so generally
answer the pu^^^^e. The holder may think (as in the continental times) that his
three pound bill is worth eight dollars, and be very angry that his neighbor
is not of the same opinion. But unless he can persuade the person whose goods
he wants, that the paper is really equal to the silver, his own conviction will
be of small avail. Admitting then, for argument sake, that every merchant in
Philadelphia did really and truly believe the new bills to be worth what they
specify; still they could do nothing with them, unless the farmers (whose
produce they want to purchase) had the same belief, and would sell that produce
for paper as freely as for gold. Because the merchants being either in debt, or
wanting to purchase goods, in foreign countries, can make no other use of the
paper than to buy such things as may be sent abroad. And further, they must be
able to buy not only such things, but at such prices, as may answer in foreign
markets. If, therefore, the country Gentlemen will agree to sell wheat for five
shillings the bushel in paper money, merchants will be as solicitous to
receive, as they are now to avoid paper. But while produce continues at the
present prices, wise merchants will not sell but for specie, which they can
export safely, because they must lose by sending away produce; a practice which
some have pursued to their ruin. Having thus hinted at the true means to give
paper a brisk and lively circulation, candor requires that a few words be said
in favor of the landed interest, on whom the blame might otherwise be thrown.
Supposing, therefore, the charge to be made against an honest farmer, he would
perhaps make the following reply -- How can it be expected that I should repose
confidence in government, who for eight years past have been the victim of that
confidence? A piece of my land was sold for continental bills; these are all
sunk in the gulf of depreciation. Part of my property was seized by officers
of Congress, and part was sold to officers of the state. For all this I have
nothing but useless certificates. When every body had grown sick of the old
money, Congress issued new, and though experience was against the measure, yet
(relying on their wisdom) I took the new bills cheerfully; but found, to my
sorrow, that the new traveled in the same road with the old, and the only
difference was that they traveled faster. The bills issued (about that time)
by the state, had what they call funds for redemption, but they soon fell to
six for one. I have observed too, that when these bills become of little value,
the government joins in and agrees to the depreciation; so that every one who
receives them is sure to suffer in the end. Now, therefore, until I have eight
years experience that government may safely be trusted, I cannot forego the
benefit of that experience which I have bought so dear. By trusting government,
one half my substance is gone; the other half must be kept to provide for my
family.

These reasons, or reasons like these, are not confined to any one body of men,
either merchants, husbandmen or manufacturers. They pervade all ranks and
degrees. The citizens of Pennsylvania will not give free circulation to the
state paper, because they have not confidence in the government. We know that
confidence cannot otherwise be established, than by the steady pursuit of just
measures, for a number of years. It is self evident, and every man must feel as
well as see it. Every man therefore can judge of the excellent sense of those
who cry, down with the Bank if you could give circulation to the bills. Break a
promise made three years ago, by way of inducing men to rely on the promise you
make now.

But eighthly, it is said that the wealth and influence of the Bank may become
dangerous to the government. It is a political monster whose property may be
ten millions of dollars, whose duration is perpetual. These circumstances are
so terrible, that some are for putting the poor monster to instant death, while
others (in their great goodness) would only give him a hectic which should work
his dissolution in a dozen years. Of each in turn, but first of those who would
limit the duration of the Bank to a few years, and limit the capital to what
suits their own ideas of propriety. These are really the worst of the two, for
their half way conduct, would be every way wrong. Such a law would be as
unjust, and have every essential circumstance of violence, with the immediate
dissolution of the charter. And however they may deceive themselves into an
opinion of their own lenity, not a man among them would either as juryman or
judge, admit it to be a good defense against a charge of murder that the act
had been performed by a slow poison. Public credit must suffer alike in both
cases, for in both the rights of private property will be alike violated. What
then are the advantages held out? Why it seems, that if the charter be limited
to a short period, the legislature can (at the expiration) renew it on such
terms and conditions as may to them seem meet. And these terms or conditions
must of course be some benefit to the commonwealth, which could not otherwise
have been obtained. And to prove these things, the Bank of England is quoted.
But the choice of an example is rather unlucky, for that limitation of their
charter which one cunning minister introduced, other cunning ministers have at
different times taken advantage of, till at last all the substance of the Bank
has been squeezed out. And for what purpose? Was it to open navigations? To
clear new roads? To extend a lucrative commerce? No it was to support the power
of the minister for the time being, and feed the expense of those ruinous wars,
which the people would not otherwise have borne. Standing then on the ground of
their experience, let us look forward to the probable consequence of such a
limitation in Pennsylvania. Suppose the period arrived when the charter is to
expire. Is it certain the state would then want aid from the Bank? If not, the
object of the limitation is gone. But even supposing the state should stand in
need, what temptation could they offer to obtain relief? Not a prolongation of
the charter, because the supposition implies a breach of the contract made when
the Bank was first instituted, and therefore no reliance could be placed on any
subsequent contract. For if the Bank should lend to the government, then the
cancelling of that debt would be an additional motive for dissolving the Bank.
Nor is this suspicion injurious, for one act of moral turpitude is always the
prelude of another. But admitting that the Bank would purchase a few years
existence; from whom would the purchase be made, and for what price? The
directors of that day, would naturally cast their eyes on the leading members
in Assembly, and open the negotiation with them. Men of great wealth and
influence (should any such arise) would make use of the Bank to extend and
increase their authority. They would watch this moment to obtain seats in
Assembly. And if a majority could be prevailed on to vote with such leaders,
the purchase would be made of them, and the price would be some private gain,
and no the public good. In like manner, if the capital be limited, it is not
the state but great men in the state would receive the benefit of an
enlargement. And why should the capital be limited within narrower bounds than
at present? It is notorious that if the directors had not been under compulsion
they would not have extended the subscription beyond the first four hundred
thousand dollars. It is notorious also, that every addition to the number of
shares lessens the value of each. And therefore we have the best security in
the world, (the interest of the proprietors themselves) against an increase of
the capital. In like manner there is every reason to believe that the Bank will
continue to afford that aid to government, which has never yet been withheld
when it could with propriety be granted. And if they should extend their
capital (a thing so contrary to their interest) it can only be on some trying
occasion, to support the government of which they are citizens, and preserve
the ship in which all are embarked. The charter being held sacred (as chartered
rights ought ever to be) applications for aid by the state, will be plain and
manly transactions, not dirty jobs. The Bank will heartily state their means,
the extent to which they are willing to go, and the security they are willing
to accept. They will perhaps (on such an occasion) point out the ill treatment
they have received when funds appropriated by the Assembly to payment of a
former loan, were diverted to another object: and in their quality of citizens
as well as that of directors, they will perhaps go a little farther, and state
with becoming firmness the dangers which must ensue if any individual shall
dare to alter appropriations of public money made by legislative authority. But
surely this can do no harm. Calm reflection will therefore convince a candid
man, that the wealth and influence of the Bank can only become dangerous to the
state, by laying it at the mercy of great men in the state. For it is utterly
inconceivable that four or five hundred stockholders, (of all ranks, parties
and denominations) should join in choosing directors who would attempt to
overturn the government. On the contrary it is a truth vouched by uniform
experience (from the earliest ages) that the monied interest of a country will
ever oppose, check, and counteract, all changes and convulsions of government;
because that interest is sure to be the victim of confusion and disorder. This
last consideration applies forcibly also to the arguments of those who would
now dissolve the charter. Let them further consider, that the business of
banking is not (of necessity) to be carried on by public Banks alone. One or
more individuals may form a banking company, whose operations will be extensive
and lucrative, in proportion to the degree and extent of their credit and
connections. Over such a Bank (or such Banks) there can be no control. The
citizens of Philadelphia will have no vote in choosing directors, nor will any
person be particularly interested in observing their conduct. Dissolve the
national Bank in March, and by the first day of May a private Bank will rise on
its ruins. The merchants of Philadelphia will pour in their coin, with as much
confidence as they now do into the national Bank; and experience has so clearly
shown the advantages of such an institution, that they will not, cannot, be
without it. If therefore the enemies of the Bank will look round, and see who
are the men that will probably set up such a private Bank, it may do more
toward bringing them to a right judgment, than the most conclusive arguments.

The ninth objection is, that the directors can obtain unfair advantages in
trade for themselves and their friends. And it must be owned, that there is
some force in this objection. But it cannot be alleged that the supposed
advantages are unfair. Some advantages are necessarily attendant on the place
of a director, and some inconveniences are as necessarily the appendages.

It is not possible that things should be otherwise, and the only check is in
the annual election, by which the stockholders have an opportunity of
testifying their sense of each director's conduct. This will always prevent any
great mischief. For the Bank being an institution in which the money of many
acts for the benefit of all, by being jointly applied to each in his turn;
every stockholder is a sentinel, bound by his private interest to discover
unfair practices, and sound the alarm, when undue advantages are obtained.
Because the preference of one, must operate the exclusion of another. After
all, however, we must acknowledge, that this evil will in some degree prevail;
for we know that nothing on earth is perfect. But must we forego a great
advantage to all, because a greater advantage will result to a few? We might as
well object to the existence of government, because it must be administered by
fallible men, and confer on them superior eminence and authority; or to the use
of money, because it is sometimes applied to vile purposes, as object to a
money government or bank, because the labors of a director are compensated (or
more than compensated) by commercial advantages.

Lastly then, let us consider whether the Bank be destructive of that equality
which ought to take place in a free country. And the first question is, whether
by equality is meant equality of property, or equality of rights. If it be the
former, then it may perhaps be doubted whether the opposers of the Bank would
themselves agree to an equality (that is to say, a general division) of
property among all the citizens of Pennsylvania. This might suit eight or ten
thousand gentlemen who came over last year, from Ireland and Germany to give us
the honor of their good company. But will the substantial freeholder, or
wealthy mechanic, be willing to pay for that good company such an exorbitant
price? We have in general (it must be confessed) been ready enough to give a
preference to strangers, over our own brethren and countrymen, but there is
reason in every thing. If an equality of rights be meant, then the objection
vanishes, for any man may purchase the right of a stockholder in the Bank, for
less money than he can purchase a farm, even in the back counties: So that he
may be a stockholder, on easier terms than he can be a freeholder. And if it
suits one man to be a stockholder and the other to be a freeholder, neither
ought to grumble at the rights or possessions of the other. But, if (which is
most likely) the objectors mean here under a plausible cry raised about equal
rights, to cover the dictates of envy at superior fortune and success in the
world, then they had best consider again, whether by overturning the public
Bank they would not assist in setting up a private Bank. And whether such
private Bank, would not bring very great accessions of wealth to those whom
they particularly dislike.

You, gentlemen of the assembly, who are the guardians of Pennsylvania, and
bound by every principle which can actuate honest men, to promote her welfare
and prosperity, it is with you to consider this great object in all its lights.
The objections raised will doubtless be varied. The answers given will
certainly be disputed. Perhaps the arguments in support of the Bank, are not so
strong as the advocates believe. One thing however is certain, that
consequences of the last importance to your constituents, must follow from your
decision. If therefore the event be doubtful, nay if the destruction of this
charter should not be absolutely necessary, pause a moment and consider most
deeply what you are about to do. How can we hope for public peace and national
prosperity if the faith of government so solemnly pledged, can be so suddenly
violated? If private property can be so lightly infringed? Destroy this prop,
which once gave us support, and where will you turn in the hour of distress? To
whom will ye look for succor? By what promises or vows can you hope to obtain
confidence? This hour of distress will come. It comes to all, and the moment of
affliction is known to him alone, whose divine providence exalts or depresses
states and kingdoms. Not by the blind dictates of arbitrary will. Not by a
tyrannous and despotic mandate. But in proportion to their obedience or
disobedience of his just and holy laws. It is he who commands us that we
abstain from wrong. It is he who tells us, " do unto others as ye would that
they should do unto you."

PRINTING WORK,

Done with expedition and in the best manner, by R. AITKEN, at Pope's Head,
Market-Street.


