THE BOOK OF DISCIPLINE, Agreed on by the YEARLY MEETING of FRIENDS for
New England. CONTAINING Extracts of Minutes, Conclusions and Advices, of that
Meeting; and of the Yearly-Meetings of London, Pennsylvania and New Jersey, and
New York; from their first Institution. ALPHABETICALLY DIGESTED.

PROVIDENCE: Printed by JOHN CARTER. M,DCC,LXXXV.

PREFACE.
THE yearly meeting in 1783, having a concern for the revisal of our
discipline, committed the important work to the meeting for sufferings, who,
after waiting for a right qualification, proceeded on the business; and having
the revisal of the London discipline of 1782, with those of our neighboring
yearly-meetings as well as our own to compare, have with much labor and close
attention, in the ability afforded, performed the same, which being laid before
the last yearly meeting, a large committee, consisting of friends from each
quarter, were appointed to join the meeting for sufferings in examining the
same, who being met accordingly, were favored after several sittings to go
through the work; and the whole, as contained in the following pages, was
agreed to; and the yearly meeting having committed to the meeting for
sufferings the further care of communicating the same to the several quarterly
and monthly-meetings, they have thought fit to direct a suitable number of
copies to be printed for that purpose, in order,

1st. That every quarterly and monthly meeting may be furnished with a fair and
correct collection of the minutes and advices which have been agreed to, for
regulating the affairs of the society.

2dly. "That these minutes and advices being more generally received, may be
more uniformly observed and put in practice, that order, unity, peace and
harmony, may be preserved throughout the churches."

3dly. "That in an especial manner the youth of the present and succeeding
generations may not only be early and more fully instructed in our religious
principles, but in the nature and design of our Christian discipline; and
through divine assistance be enabled to adorn our holy profession, by a
consistent conduct and circumspect conversation in all godliness and honesty,
thereby avoiding the reproach which many, through a defection in principle, or
a degeneracy in practice, have brought upon themselves, and the body of which
they profess to be members."

4thly. "That the unfaithful, the immoral, and the libertine professors, may be
seasonably reminded of their danger and of their duty, as well as of the great
labor, which, in much gospel love, has been from time to time bestowed for
their help and recovery; and that such as continue to despise and reject the
convictions of truth, and the counsel of their brethren, and refuse to be
reclaimed, may be made sensible that they themselves are the cause of their
separation from our religious fellowship and communion: For when any, by their
inconsistent and disorderly conduct, or by imbibing and adopting principles or
practices contrary to the doctrine which we have received, have first
manifested their disunity with the society, it is but just and requisite, that,
after endeavoring and waiting to restore them without effect, the body should
testify its disunity with such erring and refractory members; at the same time
earnestly desiring that they may be convinced of the error of their ways, and
that through unfeigned repentance, and a consistent orderly conduct in future,
they may be reunited to the body. This being the utmost extent of our
discipline respecting offenders, it is very evident, that, from the right
exercise thereof, no degree of persecution or imposition can be justly
inferred; for the imposition rests entirely on the part of those who insist on
being retained as members, whilst at open variance with the body, either in
principle or practice."

We are not however without a clear sense that this publication will prove
insufficient to produce the desired effect, unless we are very careful to move
and act under the immediate influence of the Spirit of Christ, in the pure love
of the Gospel.

"And whilst we are earnestly recommending this work to the notice and regard
of friends, we cannot omit to press upon them a diligent reading of the Holy
Scriptures, as superior to all other writing for instruction; and (...) must
yield great satisfaction to observe how consonant these advices are to the
doctrine and precepts of Christ and his apostles."

Although this collection is printed solely for the use of our own society,
yet, should it get abroad and meet the public eye, it is not doubted but every
serious and candid reader will observe, throughout the whole, the constant and
earnest endeavors of the society for the promotion of virtue and religion.

MEETING FOR SUFFERINGS, the 9th of the 7th Month, 1785.
ADVERTISEMENT.
IT is to be observed, that the dates at the end of the minutes and advices,
denote the years in which they were issued by the yearly meeting from whence
they were taken.

The book is printed with blank pages, and bound with blank leaves, for the
purpose of making future additions, which are to be inferted in the manner, and
in the page, in which they will be directed to be placed by the yearly meeting.
No other additions are to be made.

INDEX.
A
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS to be received by the meeting that disowns, Page 98 Accounts,
to be frequently settled, 118, 145. Administrators. See Orphans Wills, etc.
105. Answers, to queries, to express the name of the meeting friends are gone
to or come from, 11 Apparel. See Plainness, 111. APPEALS, mode of proceeding
in, 1. Apprentices. See Removals and Settlements, 123. See Parents and
Guardians, 107. ARBITRATION, 3. Friends refusing to submit differences to
arbitration, to be testified against, 3. Method of proceeding to be observed in
arbitration, 6. Not to trouble ministering friends with, 4. See Law, 55. Arms.
See War, 147. Audit, to settle accounts, to be appointed by each monthly
meeting, 114. See Stock, 137. Awards, friends refusing to comply with to be
disowned. 4. Assistance, of superior-meetings to be applied for and afforded,
40.
B
Bankruptcy. See Trade, 143. Backbiting, to be avoided, 31. Bible. See
Scriptures, 129. Births. See Records, 121. Bond. See Arbitration, 3. BOOKS.
Regulations respecting the printing and distribution of, 9. Such as are
printed, in answer to adversaries, to be distributed in due time, 9. Advice
against reading improper books, 9. Parents to restrain their children from
reading (...) Books of record to have alphabets, and (...) bound, 121. Book of
discipline to be (...) at meetings of business, 98. And (...) a^^ when solid
friends advise to it, 98. Burials, 51. Persons to be appointed to attend them,
51. See Records, 121. Burial-Grounds. See ditto. Business, those who launch
into, beyond their ability to manage in the truth, to be timely labored with,
118.
C
CERTIFICATES, such as remove to have them, 11. Certificates of ministers who
travel to be called for, 85. To be granted to ministers with caution, 86.
Certificate in the case of marriage, 66, 67. See Records, 121. See Removals and
Settlements, 123. Charities. See Records, 121. See Wills, etc. 105. See
Liberality to the Poor, 57. CHILDREN, 13. To be restrained, 44. To be brought
up in a diligent attendance of meetings. See Books, 9. Education, 43.
Plainness, 111. Records, 21. Removals, 123. Schools, 127. Scriptures, 129. To
be admitted members at the discretion of monthlymeetings, 14. Christ. Faith in
him exhorted to, etc. 80. Books tending to lessen the true faith in Christ to
be discouraged, 9. Committee, to have the care of marriages, to attend after at
the house, 68. CIVIL GOVERNMENT, 15. Advice to friends respecting their conduct
toward those in authority, 16. Clerks, of the yearly meeting, how to be
chosen, 154. Commerce. See Trade, 143. Collections. See Stock, 137. CONDUCT and
CONVERSATION, 19. General advices relating to, 19. Controversies See Appeals,
1. Arbitrations, 3. CONVINCED PERSONS, to be visited, 21. How to be initiated,
and not too hastily, 21. CORRESPONDENCE, 23. See Meeting for Sufferable, 77.
COVETOUSNESS, 25. Such as covet to be rich warned against, 25. Customs, Duties,
and Excise, friends cautioned against the non-payment of, 17. The unfaithful to
be testified against, 17. See Queries, 107.
D
DAYS and TIMES, 27. Advice against the superstitious observation of, and
giving improper names to, 27. Dealing. Mode of. See Monthly-Meetings, 96. See
Discipline, etc. 137. Debts. Those deficient in the payment of, to be labored
with, 118. DEFAMATION and DETRACTION, 31. Mode of proceeding against persons
charged with, 32. Defamation not subject to be arbitrated, until the injury be
proved, 7. Defamatory writings to be discouraged, 33. See Ministers and Elders;
84. Denied Persons, to stand disowned till reinstated, or the denial reversed
by a superior meeting, 96. How to be reinstated, if removed, 97. DIFFERENCES.
Advices respecting, 35. See Appeals, 1. Arbitrations, 3. Covetousness, 25.
DISCIPLINE, and MEETINGS for DISCIPLINE, 37. Disowning, etc. to be recorded,
37. See Monthly-Meetings, 39. Right discipline the Lord's work, and to be done
as in his sight, 40. Diversion. See Conduct and Conversation, 19. Education,
43. Parents and Guardians, 107. Plainness, 11. Dress. See Plainness, 111.
Parents and Guardians, 107. Youth, 155. DONATIONS and SUBSCRIPTIONS, of whom to
be received, 41. How to be applied, 106. Drowsiness, and a lukewarm Spirit,
etc. exhortation against, etc. 80.
E
EDUCATION, 43. Of poor friends children to be under the care of monthly and
quarterly-meetings, 113. See Parents and Guardians, 107. Plainness, 111.
Schools, 127. Poor, 113. Elders. Monthly-meetings to appoint saithful friends
as elders, and their duty, 83. To watch over the stock, 24. To help and inform
the weak, 87. Advice to elders, 83, 95. See Ministers and Elders, 83. Queries
of Ministers and Elders, 94. Monthly-meetings, 96. EPISTLES, from the
yearly meeting, to be recorded by the clerk, 45. When received by the
quarterly-meetings, to be entered in fair books, 116. Executors. Excused from
referring matters, not their own property, to arbitration, 5. To take
inventeries seasonably, 105.
F
Failures. See Trade, 143. Faith, in Christ, exhortation to, 80. FAMILIES, 47.
Monthly-meetings to appoint suitable friends to visit families, 98, 47. To be
called together to wait on the Lord, 107. Fashions. See Conduct and
Conversation, 19. Education, 43. Parents and Guardians, 107. Plainness, 111.
Fasts. See Days and Times, 27. FREE-MASONS. Meetings or public entertainments
of, not to be joined with, 49. Funerals, 51. See Mourning Habits, 99. Records,
121.
G
Gaming-Places. See Youth. 155. Government. See Ci^^l Government, 15. Goods,
those that run, buy or vend them, to be dealt with, 17. GRAVE-STONES, 51.
Gravity of deportment exhorted to, 80. Guardians. See Parents and Guardians,
107. Guardians, who consent to, or encourage marriage contrary to our rules, to
be dealt with, 70. See Marriage, 63. With, etc. 105.
H
HIRELING MINISTRY and their WORSHIP-HOUSES. Friends not to contribute to the
support thereof, 53.
I
Impost Duties and Excise to be paid, 16. Such as have scruples against, how to
conduct, 17. Impostors, pretending to the ministry, to be discouraged, 85.
Immoral transgressors, to be dealt with, 19. Infidelity, books promoting, to be
guarded against, 10. Indecent Behavior, in meetings, discouraged, 19.
Intemperance, advised against, 19. Inns. See Conduct and Conversation, 19.
Moderation and Temperance. See Liberality to the Poor, 57. Plainness, 112.
Conduct and Conversation, 19.
L
Language. See Plainness, 111. Parents and Guardians, 107. Days and Times, 27.
Languages. Friends children to be instructed in the modern, 43. LAW, 55.
Friends not to sue one another at law, 5. Exception, 5, 55. See Sufferings,
139. Learning. See Education, 43. Legacies. See Orphans, Wills, etc. 105.
Queries, 117. LIBERALITY to the POOR, 57. Charity recommended, 57. Assistance
to be afforded in sickness or searcity. The rich warned and advised to
communicate, 57. LOVE and UNITY, 59. See Differences, etc. 35. Lotteries, 61.
M
Manuscripts, to be viewed by meeting for sufferings. MARRIAGE. General advice
relating to, 63. Not to proceed under twelve months after decease of former
companion, 65. Rules for proceeding in relation to marriage, 65. Marriage to be
laid before women's meetings, 66. They as well as men appoint committees to
enquire into clearness, 66; and to attend at the marriage. 67. The proceedings
of such as apply for marriage, not to be objected to on account of offenses
before unnoticed, 96. Persons who endeavor to entangle the affect ons of young
women, without the consent of parents and guardians, not allowed to proceed
until the offense be acknowledged and condemned, 63. Rules against marrying
with persons near of kin, 64. Persons taking each other without consent of
their monthly meeting, to be disowned, 70, 71. Rules respecting such as many
contrary to the established rules of the society, 69. See Records, 121.
Queries, 117. Removals and Settlements, 123. MASTERS, MISTRESSES, and SERVANTS,
73. Meetings for discipline, 37. Meeting Houses, 75. MEETINGS of MINISTERS and
ELDERS, 83. Their queries, 94. To annually choose or re-appoint a clerk, and
keep records of their proceedings, 84. MEETING FOR SUFFERINGS, 77. To be
consulted by friends under sufferings, 77 To take the care of printing and
distributing friends books, 9. To have the direction of the yearly-meeting's
stock, 77. To see epistles duly forwarded, and the books and papers c^rried to
yearly meeting, 45. MEETINGS for WORSHIP, 79. To be attended in due time, and
not kept out of season, 79. Nor ended too soon, or unbecomingly, 82. Caution
about behavior after, 19, 82. Exhortations to attend those on week days, 81.
Persons professing with us, who absent themselves from our religious meetings,
to be dealt with, 82. Persons living at a distance, reminded to keep meetings
in their families, 79. See Ministers and Elders, etc. 83. MEETING HOUSES, 75.
See Records, 121. Membership. See Children, 14. See Monthly-Meetings, 96. See
Removals and Settlements, 123. Convinced Persons, 21. MILITIA. See War, 147.
Ministers. Advice to, 92, 93. Who are members of the meetings for ministers and
elders, 83, 84. Young ministers, when approved, to be reported to their monthly
and quarterly-meetings, 84. Ministers to be troubled as little as may be with
being arbitrators, 4. To avoid being entangled in the affairs of this life, 8^.
To be cautious of spreading reports to the disadvantage of any, 86. To shut
their ears against all private information, 86. Such only to be permitted to
travel, as are approved by their own monthly or quarterly-meetings, 8^. Their
certificates to be called for, 85. Those who are engaged to visit foreign
parts, advised to propose their concern to the yearly meeting of ministers and
elders, 94. To be ready to receive advice as well as teach and instruct, 87.
Ministry not to be judged of hastily, but the hearers own spirit to be first
watched over, 87. All public opposition to ministers who are not disowned, to
be avoided, 91. None to impose themselves as preachers who are not faithful in
observing the various branches of our testimonies, 86. Mode of dealing with
such as friends are not satisfied with, 91. Readmission of such as are
disowned, 91. Advices to ministers, 85, 88. To return to their habitations as
soon as their service is over, 88. See Meetings of Ministers and Elders, 83.
Ministers and Elders. See Meetings of Ministers and Elders, etc. 83. Living in
neglect of attending meetings, to be visited and dealt with, 90. Moderation,
exhortation to, 57. See Plainness, 111. Months. See Days and Times, 27.
MONTHLY-MEETINGS, 96. Not to divide into two separate meetings, without the
consent of the quarterly meeting, 39. To appoint elders and overseers, to stir
up deficient parents to duty, 14. To appoint friends to visit families, 98.
Their judgment may be appealed against, 1. Monthly meetings, what they consist
of, 38; who refuse to comply with the judgment of the quarterly meeting, must
appeal to the yearly meeting, or may be dissolved by the quarterly meeting,
115. To take off one or two books newly printed, 9. To encourage setting up
schools, 127. What to record. See Records, 121. See Law, 55. MOURNING HABITS,
99. Friends not to imitate the vain custom of wearing or giving; extravagant
expenses about burials, 99. Minutes of the yearly meeting to be carefully
preserved and recorded, 121.
N
Names of Days, etc. to be called numerically, 27. NEGROES and SLAVES. Friends
not to reap the unrighteous profits of slavery, 101. Such as have been held in
slavery to be encouraged in religious and virtuous lives, 101.
O
OATHS, not to be taken on any occasion, 103. Not to be administered by friends
in office, 103. Offenders, how to be dealt with, 96. Mode of dealing with such
as remove, 97. ORPHANS, WILLS, EXECUTORS, etc. 105. Overseers, to be chosen by
each monthly meeting, 39. See Monthly-Meetings, 96. Overseers of the Poor, to
be annually appointed, and their duty, 114.
P
Papers, to be examined before read up, with some exception, 154. PARENTS and
GUARDIANS. General advice to, 107. To provide suitable schoolmasters, 108. To
be exemplary, 108. To put their children apprentices to honest friends, 108. To
be stirred up to their duty by monthly-meetings, 14. Such as consent to or
encourage marriages contrary to our rules, are to be dealt with, 70. To
instruct their children, 13. To keep their children to a seasonable and
constant attendance of meetings, 79. Not to place those under care from among
friends, without consent of the monthly meeting, 109. When friends want
apprentices, to seek our own members, 109. PLAINNESS, 111. See Conduct, etc.
19. Education, 43. Parents and Guardians, 107. POOR. Poor friends to be
maintained by the society, 113. Not to be refused relief on account of offenses
unnoticed by monthly-meetings, 96. Their children to be educated by
monthly-meetings, 113. See Schools, Liberality to the Poor, 114. Removals and
Settlements, 123. Preparative-Meetings, 38. Prayer, caution to ministers
therein, 93. Prisoners. See Sufferings, 139. Prize Goods. See Queries, 118.
Public Houses, 118. Public Gifts, to be ^^ly applied, 118.
Q
QUARTERLY-MEETINGS, 115. What they consist of, 38. Select meetings how made
up, 83, 84. To be hold the day before the quarterly and yearly-meetings, ^^. To
enter all minutes and written epi^^^^ from the yearly meeting, in fair books,
116. To hold meetings for divine worship, on the first day of the
quarterly meeting, 116. Time when and place where each quarter is held, and of
what monthly-meetings each is composed of, 116. To appoint representatives to
the yearly meeting, 153. Their judgment may be appealed from, 115. Not to be
set up, or divided into two, but by the yearly meeting, 39. See Correspondence,
^3. Records, 121. Di^ap^^n^, 37. May u^^^ the i^ (...) members of two or more
monthly-meetings into one select meeting, 84. QUERIES, 117. To be considered
and answered, 84. Select queries, 94. See (...) Meetings, 151. (...)-Meetings.
(...) them must be plain and explicit, and (...) by, and signed in and on
behalf (...) quarterly meetings, 153.
R
RECORDS, 121. To be open, and to whom, 39. See Epistles, 45. What to be
recorded, 121. Evil reports to be examined into before reported again, 34. And
not on hearsay, 92. Re^^^ers. See Records, 121. REMOVALS and SETTLEMENTS, 123.
None to ^^move without certificate, 123. Repentance, of disorderly walkers to
be recorded in monthly and quarterly meetings. See Records, 121. None after
repentance to be reproached with their transgressions, 37. See
Monthly-Meetings, 96. Representatives, 39. Meetings for Discipline, 39.
Yearly-Meetings, 153. Revenues. See Customs, 16. Riches. See Covet^^sness, 25.
Education, 43. Liberality to the Poor, 57. Parents and Guardians, 107. Run
Goods, 16. See Yearly-Meeting's Queries, 117.
S
SALUTATIONS, un^^^^ng gestures by way of, to be avoided, 125. Subordination of
meetings, 39. SCHOOLS, 127. Schoolmasters and mistresses of honest friends to
be encouraged. 127. Poor children to be educated, 127. School committee to be
appointed 127. No friends children to be sent to schools not of our society,
but by the approbation of the school committee, 128. Scandal. See Defamation
and Detraction, 31. SCRIPTURES. Duty of friends to cause their children to read
them, 129. Books tending to corrupt the minds of youth to be discouraged, 129.
See Children, 13. Education, 43. Parents and Guardians, 107. Schools, 127.
Queries, 117. S^^^^^^s. See Masters, See. 73. Removal and Settlements, 123.
Sick, to be visited, 47. And assisted, 57. Silent humble dependence on the Lord
exhorted to, 88. Simplicity. See Plainness, 112. S^ips. See War, 147. Queries,
117. S^^p Doors, etc. not to be shut on fast or feast-days, 27. Slaves. See
Negroes and Slaves, 101. SLEEPING IN OUR RELIGIOUS MEETINGS, 131. Such as
continue therein not to be employed, 131. SPIRITUOUS LIQUORS, 133. The use of
them advised against (except as medicine) 133. Speech. See Plainness, 112.
Parents and Guardians, 107. Days and Times, 27. SPORTS and GAMING, advice
against, and transgressors to be d^alt with, 135. STOCK. How to be raised, and
at whose disposal, 137. SUFFERINGS, 139. See War, 147. Superficial
acknowledgments not to be accepted, 71. Swearing. See Oaths, 103.
T
Taverns, not to be frequented unnecessarily. See Queries, 117. Tale-bearing.
See Defamation and Detraction, 31. Queries, 117. Taxes mixed, the payment or
non-payment of, not to be consured, 148. Such as pay those expressly for war to
be dealt with, 149. Testimonies of Denial to be recorded. See Records, 121.
Memorials, 141. Testimonies of deceased friends, who were truly pious, to be
collected and recorded, 141. Testimonies of denial to be publicly read, with
some exceptions and what, 141. To be signed by the clerks of the respective
meetings they did belong to, 151. Titles of Meeting Houses, etc. to be duly
inspected and secured, 75. Treasurer, to be appointed in each meeting, and the
treasury open to women's meetings as well as men's, 114. Tombs. See Grave-Stones,
51. TRADE, general advices to those concerned in, 143. Such as fail of paying
their just debts, to be dealt with, and how, 144. Moderation in trade
recommended, ^44. Those unable to comply with their contracts, to call their
creditors in time, 144. And not to pay one creditor in preference to another,
145. See Covetousness, 25. Trading in slaves not allowable. See Negroes, 101.
Families suspected to be going backward in estate to be visited, 143. Trustees,
excused from referring matters, when the property is not their own, to
arbitration. See Arbitrations, 5. Wills, etc. 106.
U
Visitors of Families, to be appointed, 47. The sick to be visited, 47. See
Monthly-Meetings, 96. Unity. See Love and Unity, 59. Queries, 117.
W
WAR, our testimony respecting, 147. Rates or assessments for advancing the
hire of soldiers or for military men, and those expressly for war, to be
refused, 148, 149. Caution against letting temporal interest induce any to
contribute to war, 148. Whispering, backbiting and detraction discouraged, 32.
Wills, to be made in health, 105. And according to justice and equity, 105,
118. See Orphans, Wills, etc. 105. WOMEN'S MEETINGS, to be upheld and
encouraged, 151. To appoint representatives, 151. To proceed as the men's
meetings are advised under queries, 117. Monthly-meetings, 96.
Quarterly-meetings, 115. And yearly-meetings, 153. How the labors of men and
women are to be united, 151.
Y
YEARLY MEETING. Its institution and design, 153, 38. Manner of conducting the
business, 153. To nominate committees of appeals and when, 1. The clerk to
record epistles, etc. 121. YOUTH, caution and counsel to, 155. See Discipline
and Meetings for Discipline, 37. Children, 13. Education, 43. Parents and
Guardians, 107. Plainness, 111.
APPEALS.
IF any person or persons shall think themselves injured or aggrieved by the
judgment of any monthly meeting, of which they were a member or members, such
person or persons may appeal to the quarterly meeting, to which the said
monthly meeting does belong; provided notice be given of such intended appeal,
in three months after such judgment is given; and the appeal must be lodged in
such quarterly meeting, within six months after such notice.

If any persons be dissatisfied with the judgment of any quarterly meeting,
they may appeal from such judgment to the yearly meeting; the appellants giving
notice to the said quarterly meeting of their intentions to appeal, within six
months after the judgment of such quarterly meeting is given; and such appeal
must be brought to the next quarterly meeting, if it may with convenience, or
to the next following.

If any appellant or appellants do not bring his, her or their appeal to the
yearly meeting next ensuing, due notice once given, then, if such appellants
continue their appeal, notice shall be repeated in writing to the meeting
against which they may appeal, at least three months preceding the
yearly meeting. 1745.

And when any persons manifest their intention of appealing from the judgment
of a monthly or quarterly meeting, that such meeting appoint a suitable number
of friends to attend the superior meeting, with a copy of their doings signed
by the clerk, there to manifest the reason upon which such judgment was
founded; which superior meeting is to take said appeal into consideration, and
determine thereon, by a committee to be appointed for that purpose. All appeals
to be attended upon on the seventh day of the week, in which the yearly meeting
begins.

(...) ARBITRATION.
AGREED, that the choosing of arbitrators is proper in cases of difference
about a man's property. 1684.

Whereas it sometimes happens, to the hurt of truth, and grief of many
friends, that differences do arise amongst some professing truth, about outward
things; it is therefore by this meeting thought convenient, and advised, that
when any friend or friends shall hear of any such difference betwixt any
friends in that meeting to which they do belong, that they forthwith speak to,
and tenderly advise, the persons between whom the difference is, to make a
speedy end thereof; and if that friend or those friends do not comply with
their advice, that then they take to them one or two friends more, and again
exhort them to end their difference; and if they or either of them refuse, then
to let them know, that it is the advice and counsel of friends, that they
should each choose an equal number of indifferent, impartial and judicious
friends, to hear and speedily determine the same; and that they do bind
themselves to stand to their award and determination, or the award and
determination of the major part of them, that shall be made and signed by the
arbitrators.

Also this meeting does advise, that if any person professing the truth among
us, and esteemed a friend, shall refuse speedily to end the difference, or
refer it as before advised, complaint be made of that person or persons, unto
the monthly meeting to which he does belong; and if after admonition he shall
refuse so to refer his case, that then the meeting do testify against such
person, and disown him to be of our society, until he shall comply with the
equal methods and agreements of our society, and by such his compliance does
declare that he is for peace, and does seek and desire it: And when any person
so refusing is testified against by the meeting, and disowned, the other person
may have his liberty to seek his remedy against him at law. 1697.

Advised, that in all cases of controversy and difference, the persons
concerned therein either speedily compose the difference between themselves, or
make choice of some faithful friends to determine the same; or otherwise, if
they cannot agree upon the choice, to submit to the monthly-meeting's choice of
certain persons meet to inspect and determine the controversy, and to stand to
their award and final determination thereof; that such controversies may not be
continued, to cause a reproach. 1692.

And it is the advice of this meeting, that persons differing about outward
things do, as little as may be, trouble public ministering friends with being
arbitrators in such cases. 1697.

And that all persons differing be exhorted by the monthly meeting to which
they belong, when their cases are referred, and judgment and award made, signed
and given thereupon, as aforesaid, to stand to and perform the said award,
which they have bound themselves to perform: And if any shall refuse so to do,
that then the monthly meeting to which such person does belong, upon notice
thereof to them given, shall appoint a suitable committee to labor with him,
and if he do not make it evident, that there is manifest error or injustice,
they admonish him thereunto; and if after admonition he persist to refuse, then
the meeting to testify against him as before; but if such error or injustice be
made to appear, then the matter be reconsidered by the same or other
arbitrators, as in the judgment of the monthly meeting may appear best, and
such correcting judgment be final. And the bonds of arbitration are not to be
considered binding and final, where evident error or injustice is made to
appear, and it is advised that bonds be written accordingly; but where this is
not manifest, such bonds be conclusive and final.

It is the sense and judgment of this meeting, that if any person professing
truth with us shall arrest, sue, or implead at law, any other of our members,
before he has proceeded in the methods herein before recommended, that such
person does therein depart from the principle of truth, and the known way
thereof, and acts contrary thereunto, and ought to be dealt with by the meeting
he belongs to for the same; and if he shall not give satisfaction to the
meeting for such his disorderly proceeding, by condemning it, and himself
therein, that then he be disowned by the meeting. 1697. 1692.

And if the party so sued or arrested taking with him, or if under confinement,
sending one or two friends to the person who goes to law, shall complain
thereof, the said person shall be required immediately to stay proceedings; and
if he does not comply with such requisition, the monthly meeting to which he
belongs shall disown him, if the case require it. 1782.

So much of the minute as does relate simply to the entering into bonds, and so
far as arbitrations may be refused on account of disputes and questions in law,
relating to executors or trustees, where the property is not their own, in both
these cases, that there be a particular and special regard had to the nature
and circumstances of things, it not being either now, nor at the time of making
the said minute, the intent of this meeting, in the above described or other
cases, to lay any unwarrantable burden upon any brother, nor upon the church
of God. 1720.

The following Method is to be observed in proceeding in Arbitrations.

1. Each party having chosen one or two indifferent, impartial and judicious
friends, those so chosen are to agree upon a third or a fifth friend, unless
the parties first agree in the nomination, whose name shall be inserted with
the others in the bonds of arbitration, or other written agreement.

2. The arbitrators should not consider themselves as advocates for the party
by whom they were chosen, but men, whose incumbent duty it is to judge
righteously, fearing the Lord. They should shun all previous information
respecting the case, that they may not become biassed in their judgments before
they hear both parties together.

3. The parties to enter into written engagements or bonds, if either of them
require it, to abide by the award of the arbitrators, or a majority of them, to
be made in a limited time.

4. Every meeting of the arbitrators must be made known to the parties
concerned, until they have been fully heard, nor shall there be any separate
private meetings between some of the arbitrators, or with one party separate
from the other, on the business referred to them; and no representation of the
case of one party, either by writing or otherwise, be admitted, without its
being fully made known to the other, and, if required, a copy to be delivered
to the other party.

5. The arbitrators are to hear both parties fully, in the presence of each
other, whilst either has any fresh matter to offer, until a certain time, to
be limited by mutual agreement. Let no evidence or witness be withheld or
rejected.

6. If there should appear to the arbitrators, or any of them, to be any
doubtful point of law, they are jointly to agree upon a case, and consult
council thereupon.

The arbitrators are not required to express in the award their reasons for
their decision. One writing of the award is to be delivered to each party.

It is recommended to arbitrators to propose to the parties, that they should
give an acknowledgment in writing, before the award be made, that they have
been heartily and fully heard.

Matters of defamation are not subjects to be arbitrated, until the defamation
is proved, and that some injury is sustained by the defamed in his trade,
calling or property; and in that case the damage should be submitted to
arbit^^^^^^ 1782. But where damage is not proved to be sustained, the pe^^^n
defaming is liable to be dealt with, as provided under head defama^^n.

(...) BOOKS.
AGREED that the meeting for sufferings take care to the inspecting, ordering
and regulating the press, and printing of books; and that no manuscripts be
printed without their approbation.

Recommended that each monthly meeting take off two books of a sort newly
printed, if under the price of six shillings; and one book to each meeting, if
the value is more; and that one book of a sort be kept in each
quarterly meeting. 1695.

That friends be diligent in spreading friends books, which are answers to
adversaries, and to ger them exposed to sale, where the adversaries books are
sold; and this to be done in due time, and not delayed till the service may be
partly over. 16^^.

It is agreed that the meeting for sufferings do distribute friends books in
such manner, and to ^^ch parts of the world, as they think proper. 1732.

The families of poor friends to be provided with friends books, particularly
such as are adapted to the instruction and edification of their children. 1754.

This meeting considering that some in the present age do endeavor, as well by
certain books, as a licentious conversation, to lessen and decry the true faith
in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, even that precious faith once delivered
to his faints, which by the mercy of God is also bestowed upon us, do therefore
earnestly advise and exhort all parents, masters and mistresses of families,
and guardians of minors, that they prevent, as much as in them lies, their
children, servants, and youth, under their respective care and tuition, from
the having or reading books or papers that have any tendency to prejudice the
profession of the Christian religion, to create in them the least doubt or
question concerning the truth of the Holy Scriptures, or those necessary and
saving truths declared in them; lest their infant and feeble minds should be
poisoned thereby, and a foundation laid for the greatest evils. 1723.

Under a consideration of the hurtful tendency of reading plays, romances,
novels, and other pernicious books, it is earnestly recommended to every member
of our society to discourage and suppress the same. And friends are desired to
be careful of the choice of all books, in which their children read, seeing
there are many under the specious titles of religion and morality, containing
sentiments repugnant to the truth, as it is in Christ Jesus. 1764.

CERTIFICATES.
FRIENDS removing from the compass of one monthly meeting to another, to have
certificates. See poor, removals and settlements, preachers and marriages.

It is advised that in answering our eleventh query, where there appear any
come to or gone from any monthly meeting, the name of the meeting such came
from, or are gone to, be mentioned in the answer; and in order for an early
care to send forward certificates, all friends who may be acquainted with any
such case or cases, are desired to give notice thereof, to the first
monthly meeting to which they belong, after such knowledge; and the meeting are
desired to pay a careful attention to their duty in such cases, either by
sending certificates, or laboring with their members as our discipline
requires.

(...) CHILDREN.
INASMUCH as we have a large body of youth growing up, the offspring of
friends, these call for our special care and concern, that they may be
preserved in the way of truth, in which our forefathers walked; and in order
thereto, we tenderly recommend to all parents and guardians, first, that they
take heed to themselves, that their own spirits be rightly seasoned and
directed, for the help and good government of their children; and then, that
they have a constant watchful eye in love over them for their good, and keep
them as much as possible within their notice and observation; for this we are
sensible of, that the miscarriages of youth have very much proceeded from their
being imprudently indulged or left to themselves, by which means they become
exposed to the danger of evil examples on the one hand, and vicious corrupt
principles on the other, with which the world too much abounds; and therefore
we earnestly and tenderly advise all parents and guardians to be watchfully
concerned in this respect, and that they take all proper occasions, both by
example and instruction, to help their children; and that mothers of children
as well as fathers, as they have frequently the best opportunities, would take
particular care to instruct them in the knowledge of religion, and the Holy
Scriptures; because it has been found by experience that good impressions early
made on the tender minds of children, have proved lasting means of preserving
them in a religious life and conversation. This practice was enjoined strongly
upon the people of Israel by Moses and Joshua, the servants of the Lord, w^^
required them to read or repeat the law to their children; and the apostle Paul
takes notice of Timothy's being well instructed in the Holy Scriptures from a
child, and of the unfeigned faith which dwelt in his grandmother Lois, and his
mother Eunice, 2 Timothy i. 5, who no doubt had a religious care of his education.

But when parents or guardians are deficient in such their care, we recommend
to monthly-meetings, that they stir them up thereto, either by visiting them in
their families, or in such manner as in the wisdom of God they may see meet;
that so the doctrines of the gospel, and a conversation agreeable thereunto,
may be maintained unto all generations. 1732.

It is the sense and judgment of this meeting, that children of such parents as
are married among friends shall be looked upon as members, and the children of
such parents as become members by request, and are born afterward, shall
likewise be looked upon as members, as also their children born before, if
their parents apply on their behalf, and the monthly meeting think they are
suitable; and that where but one of the parents is a member, either father or
mother, become so by application or otherwise, their children shall not be
looked upon as members, unless their father or mother professing with us make
application to the monthly meeting on account of their children; and then the
monthly meeting judge whether such children be suitable to be admitted as
members or not.

And it is advised that where but one of the parents are members of our
society, that they endeavor to bring up their children agreeable to truth as
far as is in their power, and when they think it suitable for them to be
members, not to neglect asking the care of friends in their behalf. 1774.

CIVIL GOVERNMENT.
IT is our principle, and has ever been our practice, to be subject to
whatsoever government is set over us, either by doing or suffering. 1660,
renewed in 1782.

This is our principle, and has ever been our practice, to obey authority by
doing or suffering, not disputing whether the authority in itself be absolutely
of God or not, yet being an authority over us, we are to obey it either by
doing or suffering, because it is an authority. 1661, renewed 1782.

Advised to walk wisely and circumspectly toward all men, in the peaceable
spirit of Christ Jesus, giving no offense or occasions to those in outward
government, nor way to any controversies, heats, and distractions of this
world, about the kingdoms of it; but to pray for the good of all, and submit
all to that divine power and wisdom, which rule over the kingdoms of men. 1689.

This meeting was well satisfied, and very glad of the sense they had of the
innocence and peaceableness of the body of friends in general toward the civil
government under which we live, and enjoy our present liberty in the peaceable
exercise of our tender consciences toward Almighty God, to whom we are humbly
thankful for the same, being obliged to demean ourselves not only as grateful
people, but as a Christian society, to live peaceably and innoffensively under
the present government, as we have always done under the various revolutions of
government, ever since we were a people, according to our ancient Christian
principle and practice; in which we hope we shall ever persevere, according as
we are enjoined by our peaceable Savior Jesus Christ, and the Christian advice
of his faithful servants and ministers among us: We being a people clear, in
the sight of God, from all evil designs, plots, and conspiracies whatsoever,
and hope we shall continue a people always quiet in the land, having nothing
but love and good will to all men.

Persuaded this our ancient Christian testimony, publicl^ owned among us, none
can gainsay, nor any faithful friends can ever decline, being assured, that the
Lord will, in his own due time, remove all offenses and causeless jealousies
and reproaches, tending to cloud our innocence, and will set his own power and
the peaceable kingdom of his dear Son over all. 1692.

We cannot for conscience sake actively comply with some things enjoined by
human laws, yet the principles we profess, as well as the Holy Scriptures,
require that we should "render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's," and
be punctual in the payment of every tribute, which we can justly do, without
acting in opposition to that sacred illumination bestowed upon us by the Father
of Lights, not only to teach, but also to enable us to perform every duty with
uprightness and integrity, both to God, and to those who, in the course of his
providence, are placed in authority. 1757.

For the preservation of our fellow members, it appears necessary for this
meeting to issue forth the following advices, viz.

That they strictly adhere to our long professed and invariable principle,
against being concerned in pulling down and setting up, or bringing about
revolutions in outward government, by outward force, human policy or
contrivance; and also that they be not deceived with the flattering prospect of
being clothed with secular authority, either legislative, judicial or
executive, knowing these things have a tendency rather to brace the mind with
pride, and expose to various temptations, than to humble the creature;
therefore shun temptation, seek humility, the way to be clothed with authority
in the truth, and be contented with the honor and dignity thereof. 1782.

It is our sense and judgment that no friend can, consistent with our Christian
testimony, run, or make, or countenance on his behalf to be made, any short
entries of goods, wares or merchandise, imported, on which the government have
laid any impost, duties or excise; but that a true and honest manifest thereof
be exhibited to the proper office for receiving the same; and if there should
be any who have a conscientious scruple against the payment of such impost,
duties or excise, which may now or hereafter be required, they acquaint the
officer or he government therewith, who we doubt not will be tender in that
respect; as we, as a people, mean to be subject to the laws passively, where
our consciences restrain from active compliance therewith.

And if any of our members should act inconsistently herewith, or should buy or
vend any goods, knowing them to be run or short entered, that monthly-meetings
deal with such as disorderly walkers.

(...) CONDUCT and CONVERSATION.
WE earnestly beseech all friends, and the youth especially, to avoid all such
conversation as tends to draw out their minds into the foolish and wicked
pastimes with which this age abounds; particularly balls, gaming-places,
horse-races and play houses, those nurseries of debauchery and wickedness, the
burden and grief of the sober part of other societies, as well as of our own,
practices wholly unbecoming a people under the Christian profession, etc.

And where any professing with us are found transgressing this advice, or are
in the practice of any immoralities, or other reproachful conduct, that the
monthly meeting where such transgressors belong deal with them.

It is earnestly recommended to all friends, resorting to our annual or other
public assemblies, to be very careful at their inns, or other places where they
may lodge or converse, to be prudent in all manner of behavior, both in public
and private; avoiding all intemperance in eating and drinking, and likewise
foolish jesting, or any undue liberty whatsoever; that our conversation,
seasoned with the fear of God, may appear correspondent to our profession, and
answer the witness of God in others. 1739.

It is the sense of this meeting, that chewing tobacco, and taking of snuff,
unnecessary going out of our religious meetings, laughing and other indecent
behavior therein, and frequent or unnecessary conversation at the breaking up
thereof, are practices inconsistent with Christian gravity, and unbecoming the
solemnity of the occasion; and friends are desired to labor to suppress the
same, and where any, contrary to the Christian advices of their brethren or
sisters, continue therein, it i^ recommended to the meetings they belong to, to
deal with them as with those who refuse the advice of their friends.

(...) CONVINCED PERSONS.
WE esteem it very necessary and requisite, that young convinced and well
inclined persons be early visited in the love of God, by faithful friends, for
their encouragement, help, and furtherance in truth. 1710.

We earnestly entreat that an holy care may rest upon all professors of truth,
to walk circumspectly as good examples; that in a particular manner the
ministers and elders may carefully watch that their conduct may be to the
edification and strength of the (...), though sometimes weak, enquirers. 1753.

Agreed, for initiating convinced persons into membership amongst friends, That
they first apply to a preparative-meeting, and in person request to come under
the care of friends: If the preparative-meeting approve the same, that they
acquaint the monthly meeting thereof, and the person so requesting to attend at
that time, and signify his or her desire to be taken under their care;
whereupon the monthly meeting shall appoint some suitable friends to enquire
into the person's life and conversation, and also to take a solid opportunity
of conference with the petitioner, in order the better to understand whether
their motives for such request be sincere, and from the bottom of true
conviction, and make report of their suitableness to become members
accordingly; which, if satisfactory to the meeting, that a minute be then made
thereon, signifying their accepting such a person into membership with us.

But, in all such cases, friends are desired carefully to attend to the advice
of the apostle, viz.

"Lay hands suddenly on no man." 1760.

(...) CORRESPONDENCE.
AGREED that this meeting continue, as heretofore, the practice of annual
corresponding with our brethren of the yearly-meetings of London, Pennsylvania
and New Jersey, and of New York; and that the meeting for sufferings
correspond, as occasion offers, with the several meetings for sufferings
belonging to them, or any other.

(...) COVETOUSNESS.
LET none strive nor covet to be rich in this world, in these changeable things
that will pass away; but let your faith stand in the Lord God, who changes not,
that created all, and gives the increase of all. 1676.

We do, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, warn and charge all that profess
the truth amongst us, to take heed and beware of covetousness, overreaching,
oppressing and defrauding of any, from whence strife, contention and lawsuits,
do often arise; and if any difference about these things do happen among you,
to stop and suppress it. 1697.

As our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ exhorted and warned to take heed and
beware of covetousness, which is idolatry, we are concerned that all professing
Christianity among us may take heed of pride, covetousness, and hastening to be
rich in the world, which are pernicious and growing evils; let them be watched
against, resisted and suppressed, in the fear and dread of Almighty God, and
have no place or countenance in his camp. O ye grave elders, both men and
women! be careful and watchful against these evils, and over the youth in these
cases. 1720.

We beseech you to stand upon your guard against the allurements and temptation
of this evil world; and beware of an ambitious and covetous spirit, by which
many are ensnared in too eager a pursuit of earthly enjoyments; the danger of
which is thus described by the apostle Paul: "They that will be rich, fall into
temptation and a snare; and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown
men in destruction and perdition: For the love of money is the root of all
evil, which while some coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and
pierced themselves through with many sorrows."

Beware therefore, dearly beloved, lest you also, being led aside by the love
of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches, fall from your own
stedfastness. 1740.

(...) DAYS and TIMES.
ADVISED that friends keep to their wonted example and testimony, against the
superstitious observation of days. 1691.

That all friends be careful, on occasion of general fast-days, feast-days,
(called thanksgivings) and also on occasion of fast-days (pretended
humiliations) not to imitate the common custom of refraining from their labor,
in husbandry or otherwise, but proceed with their business as it falls in
course, as if it were another day, and not in contempt, or only in opposition,
but in humility; and that friends do no^ shut their shop-doors or windows, or
any part of them, but endeavor as much as possible with convenience, according
to the ancient testimony of friends, to keep them open upon such occasions; and
also in all other things wherein truth's testimony is or may be concerned, that
friends come up clearly, and not flinch or baulk their testimony. 1709.

That all friends keep to the simplicity of truth, and our ancient testimony,
in calling and writing the months and days by scripture names (that is
numerical) and not by heathen. 1697.

And that you may the more clearly discern the importance of that Christian
testimony borne by our predecessors in this case, we recommend what follows to
your serious consideration, viz.

(...) babble, that the method of distinguishing the months by their numerical
order only was the most ancient as it is the most plain, simple and rational.

As the idolatrous Romans thus gave names to several of the months in honor of
their pretended deitics; so the like idolatry prevailing among our Saxon
ancestors, induced them to call the days of the week by the name of the idol
which on that day they peculiarly worshipped. Hence the First day of the week
was by them (...) led Sunday, from their accustom^^y adoration of the sun upon
that day.

The Second day of the we^^ they called Monday, from their usual custom of
worshipping the moon on that day.

The Third day of the week they named Tuesday, in honor of one of their idols
called Tuisco.

The Fourth day of the week they called Wednesday, from the appellation of
Woden, another of their idols.

The Fifth day of the week was called Thursday, from the name of an idol called
Thor, to whom they paid their devotions on that day.

The Sixth day of the week was termed Friday, from the name of Friga, an
imaginary goddess by them worshipped.

The Seventh day of the week they styled Saturday, as is supposed from Saturn,
or Seater, by them then worshipped See Verstegan and Sheringham.


In the ages of Popish superstition, not only the use of such heathenish names
and customs was indulged, but also other unsound and unscriptural practices in
religion were invented and introduced. For when the profession of the Christian
religion became national, multitudes of the heathen priests, whose interest lay
in the performance of rites, ceremonies, and sacrifices, embraced prevailing
Christianity with selfish views, and labored early, with too much success, to
find employment for themselves, by imposing on the people a new set of
ceremonies and sacrifices, bearing some resemblance to those, which in their
former state of heathenism they had been accustomed to. From this corrupt
source sprang the Popish sacrifice of the mass, the celebration of which, at
particular times, and on particular occasion (...) rise to the vulgar names of
Michaelmas, Martinmas, Christmas, and the ^ik.

Seeing therefore that these appellations and names of days, months, and times,
are of an idolatrous or superstitious original, contrary to the divine command,
the practice of good and holy men in former ages, and repugnant to the
Christian testimony borne by our faithful friends and predecessors in the
truth, for the sake of which they patiently endured many revillings; let
neither the reproach of singularity, nor the specious reasonings of such as
would evade the cross of Christ, turn you aside from the simplicity of the
gospel, nor discourage you from keeping to the language of truth, in
denominating the months and days according to the plain and scriptural way of
expression, thereby following the example of our worthy elders, and coming up
in a noble and honorable testimony against these, and all other remains of
idolatry and superstition.

From the meeting for sufferings in London, the sixth day of the seventh month,
1751.

DEFAMATION and DETRACTION.
ADVISED to watch against all tale-bearing and defaming friends or others, or
evil-speaking tending thereunto; and shut out all occasions of offenses,
contentions and divisions, and to put a speedy stop thereto, passing righteous
judgment upon all, who appear instruments of divisions and offenses, contrary
to that peaceable truth and gospel we profess to be guided by. Be kind and
tenderhearted one to another, earnestly laboring for universal love, union,
and peace in our religious society.

But when any has received offense from another; let him first speak privately
to the party offending, and endeavor reconciliation between themselves, and
not to whispher, or aggravate matters against one another, behind their backs,
to the making parties, and the breach wider. 1692.

Let those just and ancient commands of God be observed, Levit. xix. 16, "Thou
shall not go up and down as a talebearer among thy people;" and Exodus xxiii.
1, "Thou shall not raise a false report." In the fear of the Lord stand against
all whisperers, backbiters, tale-bearers, defamers and slanderers, and against
all whisperings, backbitings, tale-bearing, reproaching, and slandering, and
put a speedy stop thereto as much as in you lies, for such works of darkness
and envy tend to division and discord, and the righteous law of God goes
against both the authors, fomenters, receivers and encouragers thereof. 1695.

Be careful to avoid all backbitings, whisperings, and tale-bearings; for "The
words of a talebearer," says the wise man, "are as wounds," Prove. xviii. 8,
tending to the defamation and lessening the characters one of another. Be not
therefore like those of whom the prophet complains, "Report, say they, and we
will report;" but when you hear a thing tending to the defamation of any,
enquire of the reporter, whether he has acquainted the person affected thereby
with such a report; if not, caution him to forbear spreading the same, lest the
reputation of the innocent be injured thereby. Endeavor to put a speedy stop
to all such wicked practices, and works of darkness, justly condemnable, not
only in the authors, but the encouragers thereof. "He that works deceit,"
says the Royal Psalmist, shall not dwell within my house; he that tells lies
shall not tarry in my sight, Psalm. ci. 5, 7. 1738.

We remind you to stand upon your guard against all whispering, backbiting and
detracting spirits, who busy themselves in spreading evil surmisings one of
another, and to discourage every practice of that nature, observing the advice
of the apostle, Let all bitterness, wrath, and anger, and clamor, and
evil-speaking, be put away from you, with all malice; be ye kind one to
another, tender hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake
has forgiven you, Ephesians. iv. 31, 32. Always mindful of the precept of our Lord,
Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them, Mat.
viii. 12. 1748.

And in order to put a stop to all tale-bearing and slandering, friends would
do well to manifest their aversion to such a practice. The north wind, says
Solomon, drives away rain; so does an angry countenance a backbiting tongue,
Prove. xxv. 23. 1733.

It is the advice of this meeting, that any person charged with defamation or
scandal, ought to be proceeded against in the manner and by the several steps
following: First, the person defamed, or supposed to be defamed, in his own
person, or any other to whom the knowledge of the case shall come, to go to the
accused and tell him his fault, or supposed fault, between them alone, and by
the best method he is capable of to labor to convince him of it, in order to
his acknowledgment of the truth and repentance, if he appears to be guilty. But
if the accused shall appear, either through ignorance not to apprehend the
validity of the proof, or through wilfulness not to yield to it, or being
convinced, shall refuse to make such satisfaction as the nature of case
requires (that being the consequence of true repentance) in such case the
accuser to take with him one or two more of the monthly meeting the accused
belongs to, if it may be conveniently done, and if the accused thinks fit, he
may bring with him one or two friends also of the same monthly meeting, if it
may be conveniently done; and they together, in the wisdom of God, to endeavor
to obtain the true knowledge of the case, by hearing witnesses, if there be
occasion. And if they all judge him guilty, and he does not make satisfaction;
or if they do not all agree that he is innocent; in either of these cases
happening, the person charging is at liberty to bring the matter before the
church, who are the only judges now remaining, both of the nature of the fact,
and the validity of the proof of it; and they, in the wisdom of God, which we
hope will not be wanting to his church, as they humbly wait on him for it, to
deal with him for the good ends before mentioned, and as they see cause, upon a
mature and deliberate consideration, to justify or condemn him. And if the
church shall see meet to commit the consideration of a case of this nature, for
better dispatch, to certain persons of their own body, we recommend it as our
tender advice, in case the accused shall object against one or more of the
friends so chosen, that the church have a due regard to such objection, and set
aside the person or persons so objected against, and substitute another or
others in his or their room, provided such objection does not extend to the
major part of the friends so chosen; and in general we desire all tenderness
and regard may be had to a person under such circumstances; and that friends,
in a spirit of love and condescension, should be ready to make him as easy as
they can, provided they keep up the authority of their meetings.

Nameless books, pamphlets, and papers, reflecting darkly on friends, are
testified against; and it is desired that no such book, pamphlet or paper, be
written, printed, published, or privately handed about, by any under our
profession, for the time to come. 1718.

If you hear a report of a friend (to his disadvantage) be careful not to
report it again, but go to the person of whom the report is, and enquire if it
be true; then deal with such a person for it, according to the doctrine of
Christ, Mat. xviii. 16, 17; but if false, then endeavor as much as in you lies
to stop such report: For, as Solomon says, A good name is rather to be chosen
than great riches, Prove. xxii. 1. 1719.

Whereas it may happen, that some friends may suffer much in their reputation
and character, by a detracting spirit, which too much prevails among some
bearing our name, who shelter themselves under a pretense that they say no more
than they have heard from others, but will not discover who they are;
wherefore, to prevent this evil of reporting and tale-bearing, it is agreed,
that such reporters or tale-bearers shall either discover their authors, or be
dealt with, and testified against, as the authors thereof. 1744.

DIFFERENCES and DISPUTES.
ADVISED that friends be tender to the principle of God in all, and shun the
occasion of vain disputes and janglings, both amongst themselves and others;
for this many times is like a blustering wind, that hurts and bruises the
tender buds of plants. 1676.

Seeing our comfort, as a people, depends upon our care to maintain peace and
fellowship amongst brethren, in all our services, we earnestly recommend an
humble and condescending frame of spirit unto all; that with godly fear, wisdom
and meekness, we may be so ordered in all our respective services, that every
high and rough thing may be laid low, that all occasions of striving may be
prevented, and the peace of the church of Christ preserved and increased
amongst us.

And to this purpose it is tenderly advised, that we diligently and carefully
observe the comely and blessed gospel order, so long known and in practice
amongst us, in the spirit of meekness and of a sound mind, which is the way to
crush all differences in their infancy, and suppress the rise as well as stop
the progress of every thing that is unseemly, and inconsistent with the
testimony of the precious truth. 1699.

Advised that a spirit of love and humility may more and more diffuse itself
among us, and influence the hearts of all, so that every one may come to seek
peace and pursue it; and that none be apt to take offense; but each, in his own
particular, be more careful to rectify his own failings and imperfections, than
curious in observing, censuring and aggravating, those of others. This will
lead to the exercise of mutual forbearance and forgiveness one of another, by
which the occasions of contention will be avoided, and the church preserved in
a state of peace and tranquillity. 1736.

(...) DISCIPLINE, AND MEETINGS for DISCIPLINE.
ADVISED that the church's testimony and judgments against disorderly and
scandalous walkers, as also the repentance and condemnation of the parties
restored, be recorded in a distinct book in the respective monthly and
quarterly-meetings, for the clearing of truth, friends, and our holy
profession; to be produced and published by friends for that end and purpose,
so far only as in God's heavenly wisdom they shall see needful.

And it is also our advice in the love of God, that after any friend's
repentance and restoration, he abiding faithful in the truth that condemns the
evil, none among you so remember his transgression, as to cast it at him, or
upbraid him with it; for that is not according to the mercies of God. 1675.

Earnestly recommended, whatever your places and stations in the church may be,
that in the most weighty and serious manner you often call to remembrance, in
all humility of mind, what it was that brought us to be a people; and what is
and will be that which will preserve us such: That the foundation on which a
true Christian is built, is the spirit of Christ; let this therefore direct you
in all things, both respecting your private conversation, and whatever you do
for God in his church: This is the only true means to preserve you holy and
blameless in the one, as well as serviceable and useful in the other; in this
every one will have a single regard to the service that comes before him, in
monthly and quarterly-meetings, without partiality or respect of persons.

Hear the causes between your brethren, and judge righteously between every man
and his brother, and the stranger that is with him: Ye shall not respect
persons in judgment; but you shall hear the ^^a^l, as well as the great: You
shall not be afraid of the face of man, for the judgment is God's, Deuteronomy. i. 16,
17. And in the management of such affairs, they will find their own spirits
rightly seasoned and prepared for every work and service to which they may be
called; and all disorderly proceedings, arising from the heat of our own
spirits, will thereby be shut out; and thus the church will be preserved, on
her ancient, solid, and permanent foundation, to the glory of God, and her own
quiet and comfort. 1726.

And in order for the regular and easy proceeding in the service and discipline
of the church, meetings have been by divine assistance, as above hinted, set up
and established, serviceable and subordinate one unto another as preparative,
consisting of friends belonging to one or more meetings particular for worship:
Monthly, consisting of as many preparatives as may most usefully compose the
same: Quarterly, to consist of as many monthly-meetings as are thought useful
to constitute the same, to meet together once in three months: Yearly,
consisting of all the quarterly-meetings in New England, to meet annually the
fifth day before the second sixth day, in the sixth month, on Rhode Island, for
a great and weighty oversight and Christian care of the affairs of the
churches, pertaining to our holy profession and Christian communion; that good
order, true love, unity and concord, may be faithfully followed and maintained
among all of us as a peculiar people, called and chosen out of the world, and
the errors and corruptions thereof. And as it has been experienced, that in
those meetings great comfort and satisfaction have been received and enjoyed,
when the members have attended them in awe, humility and love, with no other
views but the service of God, and the help and assistance one of another; this
meeting does therefore, in brotherly love, exhort all friends carefully to
gather in uprightness and singleness of heart, suitable to our calling, and the
dignity of that power, that as we behave wisely and meekly, will preside and
govern in all our meetings: This will divest us of partiality and stiffness of
opinion, and all high thoughts of ourselves, and (...) in us patience and
condescension, according to that excellent admonition of our blessed Lord, that
he that is greatest amongst you be your servant.

Agreed that no quarterly meeting be set up divided into two, or discontinued,
but by the yearly meeting; no monthly meeting, but by the quarterly; no
preparative or meeting of worship, but by (...) monthly meeting, which is the
lowest meeting that has the right of disowning members. These meetings are to
continue subordinate and accountable thus: The preparative to the monthly, the
monthy to the quarterly, and the quarterly to the yearly meeting; so that if at
any time the yearly meeting be dissatisfied with the proceedings of any of the
said meetings, or the quarterly meeting with the proceedings of any of the
monthly-meetings, or the monthly meeting with the proceedings of any of the
preparative-meetings within its limits, such meetings ought with readiness and
meekness to render a satisfactory account accordingly; and that our records be
open to any of our meetings, particular members, and to such others as the
respective monthly-meetings may think necessary, for the ascertaining of
marriages, births or other rights.

That each monthly meeting choose two or more sober and judicious men friends,
and two or more women friends, to be overseers in each preparative-meeting,
which overseers are to render account of their service to the monthly meeting
at least once a quarter, and to be annually appointed or re-chosen.

That there be a sufficient number (at least two) of friends appointed by each
monthly meeting, as representatives to attend the service of the
quarterly meeting to which they belong; such as are qualified for and whose
business it is to attend to the seasonable dispatch and completion of the same;
they taking with them what may be specially committed to them by the
monthly meeting, which should be in writing; and in like manner the
quarterly meeting is to appoint at least four representatives to the
yearly meeting, who are to make report to the meeting that appoints them, that
full endeavors be used in every monthly meeting to (...) that come before
them; and where any such meeting needs assistance, to the due accomplishment
thereof, they apply to superior meetings for their advice, assistance or
determination therein, as the nature of the case may require; and, in like
manner, after due care and endeavors are used, to end any matter before a
quarterly meeting, they apply to the next yearly meeting.

Let a necessary enquiry be raised in the minds of all members of the church,
who have had any part of the Lord's work upon them, how they have acquitted
themselves therein, and discharged themselves in the sight of God; forasmuch as
a day comes on apace, in which an account of our stewardship will be required
at our hands. The discipline of the society, in some places at a low ebb, would
again be revived and strengthened, if this awful sense of rendering an account
of our trust, and the importance of being clear from the blood of all men, were
enough impressed upon all minds. And, dear friends, as it is the Lord's work,
let it be done as in his sight. Let all our answers to the queries be plain and
explicit. Let a due sense of the state of the church prevail on your minds,
rather than an unwillingness to appear deficient among your brethren. May a
suitable engagement of mind prevail on all the active members of the church to
acquit themselves with faithfulness, that they may at last receive the crown of
righteousness, which will never fade away. 1760.

DONATIONS and SUBSCRIPTIONS.
AS to subscriptions, collections and donations, for public uses, it is our
sense and judgment, they ought to be taken and received from members of our
society; or, in their behalf, of such whose families, or part thereof, are
members, and no others; except such donations, etc. be made in and by a last
will and testament.

(...) EDUCATION.
ADVISED that friends who are of ability, and have the prosperity of truth at
heart, would in the education of their children take care, as suitable
opportunities and occasions may offer, to let them be instructed in some modern
tongues, as French, High and Low Dutch, Danish, etc. that so when they are
grown up, as it shall please the Lord to dispose and incline them, they may be
of service to the church. 1737.

As the right education of children, and the nurture of youth, is of very great
consequence to them, and to the succeeding generation, we pressingly exhort all
parents, and heads of families, to procure such useful learning for their
children, as their abilities will admit; and to encourage them, as well by
example as precept, to the frequent reading of the Holy Scriptures; and that
they begin, as early as possible, to instill into their tender minds the
principles of truth and virtue; and instruct them in the nature and necessity
of being born from above, without which, our Lord declared, no man shall see
the kingdom of God; and, in order hereunto, that they labor to bring them
acquainted with the holy seed, which is sown by the divine hand in every heart
for that gracious end; that they may, through the Lord's blessing of such pious
and paternal endeavors, be induced to place their affections upon it, and
cleaving thereto in faithful obedience, come to experience it to be unto them
Christ within the hope of their glory.

The importance of an early instruction in the law of God, is set forth with
peculiar strength, clearness, and solemnity, in Deuteronomy. vi. 4, etc. Hear, O
Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord. And thou shall love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. And these words
which I command thee this day shall be in thine heart, and thou shall teach
them diligently unto thy children, and shall talk of them when thou sit in
thine house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and
when thou risest up. It is requisite also that restraint be added to
instruction, it being much easier, as well as more prudent, to be exercised
upon the first appearances of an inclination to dangerous or hurtful liberties,
than afterward; for where children, through the prevalence of fond affection,
have been accustomed to improper indulgences, when they are grown to such a
dangerous degree of ripeness, that the exertion of authority has become
absolutely necessary, the strength of their passions so habituated has often
proved unconquerable, or very difficult to overcome, to the great hurt of the
unhappy youth, and the unspeakable grief of the imprudently indulgent parents.
1760.

EPISTLES.
AGREED the clerk of the yearly meeting shall record all epistles sent from
thence, with the other doings thereof, as soon as may be after the rising of
said meeting; and then lodge them with the meeting for sufferings, who are
desired to see that all epistles from the yearly meeting to foreign parts are
duly forwarded, and such as are received from thence seasonably delivered; also
that the yearly meeting book, with other papers necessary, be forwarded to the
next yearly meeting.

(...) FAMILIES.
FORASMUCH as a godly care is growing among friends in many places, that all
things which are unsavory and hurtful may be removed, so that all who profess
the precious truth with us, may come up together in the good order of the
gospel, for the furthering of which, and encouraging thereto, it is recommended
that weighty and sensible friends, of unblameable conversations, be chosen in
the wisdom of God to visit the families of friends in his love; and they are
desired to advise and admonish, in the peaceable spirit of truth, as occasion
may offer. 1708.

And we beseech you, brethren, let the tender advice of such as shall undertake
so brotherly an office, meet with a kind and open reception, that in the mutual
giving and receiving of wholesome counsel and advice, you may cooperate to the
help and furtherance of each other's faith, and the reviving our ancient
Christian testimony. 1752.

Let the Christian duty of visiting the sick be timely remembered and
practiced, it having often left comfort, ease and sweetness, upon the spirits
of many to their very end. 1710.

A weighty concern being livingly impressed on our minds in this meeting, that
good service may arise from visiting the families of our brethren, by rightly
concerned friends, we are engaged to recommend it to the sensible members of
the body, and to monthly and quarterly-meetings, to feel deeply after the
pointings of truth; and that as this divine principle opens their way, they may
promote this useful service in their respective meetings, by appointing
suitable friends, of either or both sexes, who are desired to proceed therein
in the love of the gospel, and under the tendering influence thereof; which we
have good cause to hope may thus be attended with beneficial effects to the
visited, and with solid satisfaction, and additional experience in the work of
truth, to those who may be engaged therein. 1773.

(...) FREE-MASONS.
AS to the consistency of the members of our society joining themselves in the
meetings or public entertainments of those called free-masons, we have
deliberated upon, and, according to our present judgment, think it is not
consistent with our religious profession; and advise that quarterly and
monthly-meetings dissuade their members therefrom; and if any do join
therewith, contrary to the advice herein contained, that they be dealt with as
such who refuse the advice of friends.

(...) GRAVE-STONES.
THIS meeting being informed, that friends in some places have gone into the
vain and empty custom of erecting monuments over the dead bodies of friends, by
stones, inscriptions, tomb-stones, etc. and being very desirous friends should
keep a commendable plainness and simplicity in this, as well as other respects;
it is therefore the advice of this meeting, that all such monuments as are
already in being over dead bodies of friends, should be removed, as much as may
be with discretion and convenience; and that none be any where made or set up,
near or over the dead bodies of friends or others, in friends burying-places,
for time to come. 1717.

And whereas at some burials, when people come from far, there may be occasion
of some refreshment, yet it is advised that it be done with moderation,
avoiding that indecent and unbecoming practice of using spirituous liquors; and
that the behavior of all friends be with such gravity and sobriety as becomes
the occasion; and if any appear otherwise, let such be reproved and dealt with
as the case may require.

And it is advised that friends carefully keep to the time appointed for
burials, and not wait for such as may come unseasonably. And that none erect
grave nor tomb-stones. But it is recommended to friends, as much as may be, to
get into the practice of burying our dead in rows; grown people by themselves,
and children by themselves, without any distinction of families or relatives.

And in order that burials be commendably and decently accomplished, agreeable
to the above directions, as well as for the assistance of those immediately
concerned, monthly-meetings are advised to appoint some solid friends to attend
thereat.

(...) HIRELING MINISTRY, AND THEIR WORSHIP-HOUSES.
OUR ancient testimony against an hireling ministry, or any contributions to
the maintenance and support thereof, being founded on the example and precepts
of our Lord, and his primitive followers and disciples; it is the sense of this
meeting, that friends be careful to support the same by a faithful testimony
against contributing toward their salaries, by tax or otherwise, and against
the building or repairing their meeting houses.

(...) LAW.
WHEREAS some persons, professing with us, have proved so base and unworthy, as
when they have run themselves into debt, to remove themselves, or their
effects, to prevent justice; whereby those creditors, who are friends, have
been deprived of an opportunity of the common method of friends, specified in
the minute of 1697, respecting arbitrations; it is hereby declared, that the
last paragraph of said minute, which prohibits friends to sue or arrest one
another, is not intended to prevent such evil persons in those practices from
being dealt with by a legal process, as the nature of the case may require: Of
which circumstance the monthly and quarterly-meetings are the proper judges; so
it is not doubted but they will do justice to the parties concerned therein.
And this meeting does request every monthly meeting to appoint and depute
proper persons out of their several meetings, for such friends as have occasion
to advise with, in the intervals of monthly-meetings, and, if they see cause,
to give liberty to recover as above. 1720.

And as it may happen, that by sudden losses, or unforeseen accidents, or
otherwise, a friend may be reduced, and unable to pay all just debts, and his
creditors falling suddenly upon him by suits or attachments, foreclose a due
proportion of a just debt due to a friend, if the advice specified in the
minute of 1697 respecting arbitrations be strictly attended to; it is therefore
to be understood, that, in all such sudden or extraordinary occasions, friends
are left to their liberty to secure their just debts in a legal manner;
provided they, in all cases, submit the attachment to come into a general
average, upon a just settlement with all the other equitable demands, and to
receive their dividends, according to their demands, with all the rest.

(...) LIBERALITY to the POOR.
It is desired that such among friends as are endowed with plenty of outward
substance, be timely and tenderly advised to do good therewith, in their day
and generation, especially with regard to the poor; that the tokens of your
charity may commend your memorial, and be good precedents to generations to
come. 1696.

We find ourselves at this time engaged to request, that where provisions and
the necessaries of life are dear and scarce, or sickness does remarkably
afflict, friends would in proportion to such scarcity and affliction exert
their charitable assistance to the poor, which is our Christian duty, as
stewards of the mercies wherewith the Lord has entrusted us. 1729.

"Let your moderation be known unto all men." "Warn those that are rich in this
world, that they trust not in uncertain riches," nor apply them to the
indulging their appetites in pleasure and vanity; but that they "be ready to do
good, and to communicate" to the relief of those who are in necessity.

The principal if not only satisfaction a man of a truly Christian disposition
can have in the affluence and increase of the things of this world, must arise
from the opportunities put into his hands, and the doing good therewith. 1741.

LOVE and UNITY.
IT is our earnest desire, that, above all, friends hold fervent charity in the
body; that will keep the members together in a blessed concord and communion,
which is esteemed by the apostle the more excellent way, excelling other gifts,
which pass away; but charity, that is the love of God (from which our Christian
and brotherly affection springs) shall endure forever: This envieth not,
vaunteth not, boasts not itself, and seeks not its own; but is patient,
bears all things, suffers all things, and watches not with an evil eye,
no, nor thinks ill, but is kind; in which blessed love, dear friends, hold
your fellowship one with another, which was the character of the primitive
Christians. 1705.

Among the gospel precepts, we find not any thing more strongly and frequently
recommended by our Lord Jesus Christ and his apostles, to the primitive
believers, than that they should love one another: And as we are sensible that
nothing will contribute more to the peace and prosperity of the church than a
due regard to this advice, so we earnestly desire that it may be the care and
concern of all friends every where to dwell therein, and, in the unity of the
Holy Spirit, to maintain love, concord and peace, in and among all the churches
of Christ. 1730.

By accounts received, it appears that, in general, love and concord are
maintained, and that friends in diverse places are under an earnest concern for
the promotion of peace, and for the suppressing and guarding against every
occasion of strife and discord, tending to divide and scatter the flock of
Christ: For strengthening this concern, and promoting this Christian
disposition of love wheresoever it appears, we remind you of the benefits
thereof, expressed in Psalm cxxxiii. Behold how good and how pleasant it is for
brethren to dwell together in unity! As the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that
descended upon the mountains of Zion; for there the Lord commanded the
blessing, even life for evermore. Be ye also mindful of the saying of our
blessed Lord himself, John xiii. 35, By this shall all men know that ye are my
disciples, if ye have love one to another. 1752.

LOTTERIES.
THIS meeting being under a weighty concern, on account of the prevailing evil,
amongst diverse professing with us, of being concerned in lotteries; do
earnestly recommend to the several quarterly and monthly-meetings, that they
advise such of their members who have been concerned therein, that they desist
for the future; and if, after such brotherly advice, any continue therein, they
be dealt with as disorderly walkers. 1760.

(...) MARRIAGE.
WE do exhort friends every where, that in the great concern of marriage,
whereon much of the comfort and happiness of life depend, they be mindful to
proceed in the fear of the Lord, and have an eye to him for counsel and
instruction in their choice; the neglect of which has been the ruin of many.
1734.

Parents, who have children to dispose of in marriage, are tenderly advised not
to make it their first or chief care to obtain for them large portions or
settlements of marriage; but rather be careful that their children be joined in
marriage with persons of religious inclinations, suitable dispositions, temper,
sobriety of manners, and diligence in business (which are things essentially
necessary to a comfortable life in a married state) and carefully to guard
against all mixed marriages, and unequal yoking of their children therein. 1722.

We being sensible of the hurt that may happen by persons under our profession
drawing out the affections of one another, without the knowledge or consent of
parents or guardians, do, for preventing such mischief, deliver it as our sense
and judgment, that in case any member of our society shall make application to
any woman, being also a member, with intention or endeavors to entangle her
affections, or make suit in order to marriage, without the privity and consent
of her parents or guardians first had and obtained, or shall countenance or
admit of such suit or application, whether such parents or guardians be friends
or not; such persons ought not to be allowed or permitted to proceed in any
meeting of friends, in order to the accomplishing such intended marriage, until
they shall have removed the offense, and given satisfaction both to such
parents or guardians, and to the meeting of friends where they belong, by an
open and due acknowledgment of the offense, and condemnation of themselves
therefore, and shall have obtained the consent of (...) parents or guardians;
unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the monthly meeting to which they
belong, that such parents or guardians have not sufficient reason for
withholding his, her or their consent, in which case the meeting, having due
regard to the rights of parents and children, is to proceed therein as best
wisdom may direct.

And it is further advised, that after parents and guardians have suffered
their children to engage one another in affections, they do not break off upon
any worldly account, but that they wait upon and seek the Lord for their
children in proposals of marriage, before they give any encouragement
thereunto. 1707.

It is our sense and judgment, that it is inconsistent with the leadings of
truth, for brothers children, sisters children, half brothers children, or half
sisters children, to marry together, and for any to marry a first cousin's
child, or any person nearer than a second cousin; and if any notwithstanding
should proceed in marriage together, nearer than a second cousin, being
previously cautioned and advised against it, that the monthly meeting where
such may belong give forth a public testimony against them, and not receive
such into unity again, until such meetings are well assured that they have
found a place of sincere repentance, and are received in the truth. 1772.

It is our sense and judgment, that no friend be allowed to marry with a
deceased wife's sister, or deceased husband's brother: That friends be careful
to give timely advice and admonition against such proceedings; and if any
should be reluctant thereto, and proceed in marriage, that they be without
delay testified against, and be not admitted to membership again in society,
until friends be well assured that they are received in the truth. 1773.

And we do also, in the name of the Lord, advise and exhort all young and
unmarried people among friends, that they do not make or admit any motion or
procedure one with another, upon the account of marriage, without first
acquainting their parents or guardians therewith, and duly waiting upon them
for their consent and agreement therein. And we also advise, that, in the first
place, all young persons concerned seriously wait upon the Lord for counsel and
clearness in this weighty concern, before they make or admit any motion or
procedure with any, in order to marriage; that the Lord may be in their eye, so
as they may not be led by any forward, brittle, or uncertain affections, in
this great concern, to their own hurt, grief of their friends, and dishonor of
truth; and let it be the godly concern of both monthly and quarterly-meetings
to be careful and mindful of the preservation and good of children in this
matter, as here proposed and signified, and not to omit giving due and faithful
warnings and admonitions in this great and weighty concern. 1690.

We having considered what time shall be held to be too early for proposals of
marriage, after the decease of former husband or wife; it is our sense and
judgment, that it is not advisable for any friend to make or admit of
proposals of marriage in less than twelve months. 1778.

The prudent and Christian care that has been maintained amongst us, in
relation to marriage, ever since we were a people, having obtained a good
report, it is become afresh the concern of this meeting, that the reputation of
our religious society, and the cause of truth herein, may still be kept up; and
that not only the several weighty advices of this meeting, in respect to the
proceedings of the parties concerned, and the conduct of their parents and
guardians, may be observed, but likewise that as little diversity as may be may
appear amongst us in regard to the form and manner of solemnization.

In order therefore that the general practice of the society in respect to
marriage may be uniform, it is agreed, that the following directions be sent to
the several quarterly-meetings, to be by them communicated to the
monthly-meetings, as the rule of their proceedings, viz.

1. The parties intending to join in marriage, having first notified their
intentions to the preparative-meeting, who are to notice the same to the
succeeding monthly meeting as business, are to declare their intention to the
monthly meeting whereof they are members (when the business comes in course,
both meetings of men and women appointing two suitable friends to attend the
parties to each meeting, at which time orderly persons, not members, may be
admitted to attend that part of the business by the consent of the meeting) in
terms of the following import, viz.

The man; That be intends to take A. B. to be his wife, if the Lord permit. The
woman; That she intends to take B. C. to be her husband, if the Lord permit.

2. These declarations are to be made, first before the women's meeting, and
then before the men's meeting. If they have parents or guardians present, they
are to declare their consent; if absent, a certificate or certificates are to
be produced, signifying, that it is with their consent the parties do proceed
to accomplish their intended marriage, previous to the declaration of the
parties.

After which declaration, no objection appearing, the meeting is to acquaint
them, that notice will be taken thereof, and that they may come to the next
monthly meeting for an answer. An entry is then to be made in both the men's and
women's meeting, and two friends out of each to be appointed to enquire into the
conversation and clearness of the parties; and if there are children by a
former marriage or marriages, to see that their rights are duly and legally
secured, and to make report to the next monthly meeting.

When, if no objection has appeared, the parties are to declare before the
women's and men's meeting the continuance of their intention of marriage; and if
nothing yet appears to obstruct, liberty is then to be granted them to
solemnize the same, according to the good order used among us.

But if the parties are of different monthly-meetings, the man is first to
propose the matter to the monthly meeting to which he belongs, desiring their
certificate, signifying his clearness to proceed in marriage with A. B. a
member of monthly meeting; whereupon the meeting are to appoint two friends to
make enquiry therein, and to report to the next monthly meeting; when, if
nothing appears to prevent his having such certificate, he is to be recommended
to the meeting to which the woman belongs, by a certificate, signifying his
right of membership, clearness as aforesaid, and consent of parents or
guardians, to be produced at the first monthly meeting where he lays his
intentions.

For solemnizing the marriage, a meeting may be appointed on some convenient
weekday, as the elders and overseers of the marriage may think proper, of
which due notice is to be given; but unless some special circumstances make it
necessary, it is advised to solemnize our marriages at the usual weekday
meeting, at the meeting house to which the woman belongs, unless leave has
been obtained of the monthly meeting to solemnize the marriage in some other
meeting house, and the consent of that meeting likewise procured.

And it is earnestly recommended, that the consummation be performed decently,
gravely and weightily; and in order thereto, and for the assistance of the
parties immediately concerned, the monthly meeting where the marriage is
allowed is to appoint two judicious, grave and weighty men, and two such women
friends, to attend the same, and to sit with the parties in the meeting for
worship, and in a proper time, toward the conclusion of the meeting, speak to
the parties to proceed, who are then to stand up, and taking each other by the
hand, declare in an audible and solemn manner to the following effect; the man
first, viz. Friends, I take this my friend A. B. to be my wife, promising
through divine assistance to be unto her a loving and faithful husband, until
it shall please the Lord by death to separate us. And then the woman in like
manner: Friends, I take this my friend C. D. to be my husband, promising
through divine assistance to be unto him a loving and faithful wife, until it
shall please the Lord by death to separate us.

A certificate, in the following form of words, is then to be audibly read by
some proper person, the express names and description of the parties being
first inserted: They are then to sign the same the man first, the woman
assuming the name of her husband; and such others present at the solemnity as
are thought proper.

The Form of the Certificate. (As near as circumstances will admit.)

A. B. of (...) son of D. B. of (...) in the country of (...) and State of
(...) and E. his wife, and S. T. daughter of M. T. of (...) in the county of
(...) and M. his wife, having declared their intentions of taking each other in
marriage, before several monthly-meetings of the people called QUAKERS, in the
county of (...) according to the good order used among them; their proceedings,
after due enquiry and deliberate consideration thereof, were allowed by the
said meetings; they appearing clear of all others, and having consent of
parents (or guardians) (...) concerned.

Now these are to certify all whom it may concern, that for the full
accomplishing of their said intentions, this (...) day of the (...) month, in
the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and (...) they the said A. B.
and S. T. appeared at a public assembly of the aforesaid people and others, in
their meeting house in (...) and he the said A. B. taking the said S. T. by the
hand, did openly declare as follows: Friends, I take this my friend S. T. to
be my wife, promising through divine assistance to be unto her a loving and
faithful husband, until it shall please the Lord by death to separate us. And
the said S. T. did then and there in like manner declare as follows: Friends,
I take this my friend C. D. to be my husband, promising through divine
assistance to be unto him a loving and faithful wife, until it shall please the
Lord by death to separates us. Or words of the like import.

And the said A. B. and S. T. as a further confirmation thereof, have hereunto
set their hands: She, after the custom of marriage, assuming the name of her
husband.

A. B.

S. B.

And we, whose names hereunto subscribed, being present with others at the
consummation of their said marriage, as witnesses thereunto, set our hands the
day and year above written.

The committee appointed are to take the certificate, and lodge it with the
clerk, to be recorded in a book for that purpose; and after attending at the
house where the parties retire, to make report to the next monthly meeting.

Agreed that it be recommended to the quarterly-meetings, that according to the
ancient decent practices among friends, they take care that such men and women
friends, as do make suit or concern themselves in proposals of marriage, one to
the other, do not dwell in the same house, from the time they begin to be
concerned, until their marriage is consummated. 1714.

In order to put a stop to an undue liberty in contracting marriages with such
as are not of our society, it is advised, that all parents and guardians of
children do take especial care, as much as in them lies, to prevent their
children from running into such marriages; and that the friends of each
particular meeting, as also of the monthly meeting to which such persons
belong, do in the wisdom and power of truth use their endeavors to put a stop
to the said evil, by admonishing such as may attempt to marry as aforesaid to
desist from accomplishing the same; but if they refuse to take counsel, or
privately go to marry as aforesaid, that then such persons be dealt with
according to the good order of truth, and judgment fixed upon all who take such
undue liberty. 1719.

This meeting having deliberately considered the great exercise brought upon
our society, by diverse in profession with us, who contrary to our known
principles, and the wholesome discipline established among us, are joined in
marriage by the priest, with persons either of our own or other persuasions, do
earnestly advise, that all friends use their utmost endeavors to prevent such
marriages, whenever the parties inclinations may come to their knowledge.

And it is the sense and judgment of this meeting, that where any do marry by
the priest, or in any other manner, contrary to the established rules of the
society, they shall be dealt with in a spirit of Christian love and tenderness,
agreeable to our known discipline; and that, after the commission of such
offense, their collection shall not be received, nor shall they be relieved in
the manner of poor friends, nor be admitted to sit in meetings of discipline,
until they are restored into unity with the monthly meeting to which they
belong.

And we earnestly advise all friends, that you watch diligently over one
another for good, and that you deal in due time with such offenders, and all
others that walk disorderly, endeavoring to reclaim and restore them by
brotherly admonition and counsel; but where, after patient waiting, you find
that your continued labor of love has not its desired effect, that you
neglect not to testify against and disown such persons; thereby preventing the
reproach and dishonor which might be brought on our holy profession through
their misconduct, and that the end and design of friends in settling a
wholesome discipline among us may be answered. 1744, 1783. But as express
directions cannot be given for each particular case that may arise, the several
monthly-meetings are at liberty to judge how often such offenders are to be
visited and dealt with, and in what manner they are to be proceeded against.
Likewise monthly-meetings are to judge of the sincerity of such acknowledgments
as may be offered to them, and to accept or reject, as in true wisdom may seem
meet. 1768.

This meeting being sorrowfully affected, under the consideration of the great
exercise brought on friends by diverse in our society entering into marriage
with such as are not of our society, or, being in profession with us, are
married contrary to our established rules; to prevent which, many minutes
directing dealing with such offenders have from time to time been made, but it
does not appear that said minutes extend to parents and guardians, that may be
consenting to or encouraging such marriages; it is therefore the direction of
this meeting, when that appears to be the case, that such parents or guardians,
so offending, be dealt with in a spirit of Christian love and meekness; and
unless satisfaction be given to the monthly meeting in which such circumstance
may fall out, that a testimony do go forth for the clearing of truth against
such offenders. 1752.

We also recommend the good order of friends relating to marriage, that it be
carefully preserved and daily maintained in the first and earliest proceedings
leading thereunto, as well as the orderly solemnization thereof; and if any
persons, contrary to the repeated advice and established order of friends,
shall, under any pretense whatsoever, presume to take one another in any
meeting for worship, without the consent of the monthly meeting to which they
belong, such proceeding being of a clandestine nature, tending to make void the
just care of friends in that case, we advise that the monthly meeting do not
fail to testify against the practice, as well as against the persons concerned
therein. 1730.

And as we have great cause to believe, that remissness in dealing, and
weakness in some monthly-meetings in accepting superficial and insincere
acknowledgments, have had a great tendency to promote such marriages, we
earnestly advise, that monthly-meetings be very careful not to accept
acknowledgments without full satisfaction of the sincere repentance of such
transgressors, manifested by a conduct circumspect and consistent with our
religious profession. 1783.

(...) Masters, Mistresses, and Servants.
ADVISED that servants professing the truth behave themselves in due
subjection, humility and plainness, as becomes their profession and places: And
likewise, that masters and mistresses behave themselves toward their servants
according to the apostle's direction, Ephesians. vi. 5, 6, 9. Col. iv. 1. 1 Timothy vi.
1, 2. Titus ii. 9, 10. 1 Pet. ii. 18, 19, 20. 1703.

A religious care is recommended toward our servants, that all appearance of
pride, idleness and vain conversation, in them may be discouraged; and that
they may be exhorted to attend first and weekday meetings, and have a sense of
God's love upon their spirits, and therein partake with us of the sweetness of
truth; and in the discharge of their duty to God, and to their masters and
mistresses, know peace in themselves. 1718.

And it is further advised, that all parents and masters of families do use
their utmost care and endeavors to keep their youth duly to meetings, and to
prevent the indecent straggling abroad of their children and servants,
especially on the first days, and other times allowed them to attend meetings,
and to keep them out of all tumultuous crowds or gatherings of rude people.
1726.

(...) MEETING HOUSES.
ADVISED that friends, in the several quarterly and monthly-meetings, take
special care that the titles of friends meeting houses and burial-grounds be
made secure, according to law. 1703.

It having been represented to us, that in diverse parts losses have been
sustained by our society, by not timely looking into and securing the titles of
meeting houses, burial-grounds, and charitable bequests; we have to recommend
to quarterly and monthly-meetings, to make timely and careful inspection into
what hands and trusts the same are secured; and if they find occasion, by the
death of any friend or otherwise, to add some others to the trust, or make any
alteration, so that friends may not be deprived of the benefit of such
meeting houses, burial-grounds, and charitable bequests; and that the quarterly
and monthly-meetings keep exact records of all such trusts and conveyances.
1737.

(...) MEETINGS for SUFFERINGS.
THIS meeting being under a weighty concern for friends who are or may be under
sufferings and difficulties, on account of our religious testimony, do appoint
a meeting for sufferings, consisting of twenty-five members, who are desired,
with diligence, caution and due care, to proceed in such weighty matters as may
come before them, humbly waiting for the influence of divine wisdom to direct
their minds from time to time, so that their results may tend to their own
peace, and welfare of our religious society. They are desired to take
cognizance of all grievances arising amongst us, wherein any friend or friends
may be affected in his person or property, or in regard to our Christian
testimony, to advise, counsel and assist, as best wisdom may direct; and any
aggrieved friend or friends may apply to them, either in a collective or
separate capacity, as the circumstance of the case may require.

That the said meeting view manuscripts proposed to be printed, and correspond
with the meeting for sufferings or yearly-meetings of London, Philadelphia or
elsewhere, to represent the state of the affairs of friends here, or as
occasion may require; and in general to represent this meeting in all cases
where the reputation and interest of truth and our religious society are
concerned, provided they do not meddle with matters of faith and discipline not
already determined in the yearly meeting: And that at least there be ten
members present to constitute a meeting, who should concur on all occasions,
and that in matters of great importance notice be given as far as may be to all
the members. The said meeting is to draw on the treasury of this meeting in
their recess, for the money lodged therein from time to time as occasion may
require; being accountable for the same, and keeping records of all their
proceedings, which are annually to be laid before this meeting, or such
committee as they may appoint to inspect or view the same. 1775, 1776, 1783.

(...) MEETINGS for WORSHIP.
AS it has been our care and practice from the beginning, that an open
testimony for the Lord should be borne, and a public standard for truth and
righteousness upheld in the power and spirit of God, by our open and known
meetings, against the spirit of persecution, that in all ages has sought to
lay waste God's heritage; and as only through faithfulness, constancy and
patience, victory has been and is obtained; so it is our advice and judgment,
that all friends gathered in the name of Jesus, keep up these public
testimonies in their respective places, and not decline, forsake or remove
their public assemblies, because of times of sufferings, as worldly fearful and
politic professors have done, because of informers and the like persecutors;
for such practices are not consistent with the nobility of the truth, and
therefore not to be owned in the church of Christ. 1675.

Let every one be watchful against an earthly spirit, for that w^^^ (...) ^he
good seed, and bring forth a slighting or neglecting your testimony in your
first day and weekday meetings, and bring a decay of your ^trength and zeal
for God, and his truth, and bring a weakness upon you, by reason whereof you
will not be able to stand in an hour of temptation. 1689.

Agreed that friends, that live distant from meetings, be reminded to keep
meetings in their families, to wait upon God, that their children and families
may come to be seasoned in their spirits by the truth and the Lord's power, and
that they may have his blessing upon their families. 1696.

Advised that all friends be careful to attend meetings for worship and
business at the times and hours appointed, and not to detain meetings out of
season. 1715.

Advised that friends keep their children to a constant, seasonable and or^^^ly
frequenting, as well of week day as of first day meetings, instructing them to
have their minds stayed in the divine gift, to wait upon the Lord therein, to
receive a portion of his spiritual favor; that they, from the tendering virtue
of the Holy Spirit, may be engaged in heart and mind to walk worthy of so great
grace, and in a holy zeal to honor God, submit to bear the cross, endure the
shame, and become public witnesses for him amongst the sons of men. 1723.

And we earnestly exhort that you hold fast the profession of faith in our Lord
Jesus Christ, without wavering, both in respect to his outward coming in the
flesh, his sufferings, death, resurrection, ascension, mediation and
intercession at the right hand of the Father; and to the inward manifestation
of his grace and Holy Spirit in our hearts, powerfully working in the soul of
man, to the subduing of every evil affection and lust, and to the purifying of
our consciences from dead works, to serve the living God; that through the
virtue and efficacy of this most holy faith, ye may become strong in the Lord,
and in the power of his might, which will enable you to worship God in spirit
with acceptance, and preserve you in a lively frame of mind, from a drowsy and
lukewarm spirit, which in all our religious assemblies ought to be guarded
against with the utmost care and circumspection. In this lively faith and pure
life of Christ you will have victory over the world, over your desires after
the grandeur and perishing things thereof, and over all corrupt customs and
fashions, which are contrary to the purity of the gospel, and our ancient
Christian testimony. 1736.

In all your religious meetings for the worship of Almighty God, let your minds
be seasoned with an awful sense of real and true devotion, and be ye exemplary
to the flock of Christ. Let the solemn gravity of your deportment be such as
may demonstrate to others, that you are in earnest in the great duty of waiting
upon and worshipping God in spirit; that serious and tenderhearted enquirers
may be encouraged to come and partake in your assemblies of that inward and
spiritual consolation and refreshment, which the Lord is graciously pleased to
impart to the souls of such as are humbled in his sight, and approach his holy
presence with reverence and fear.

Take care, we beseech you, in this day of ease and liberty, lest a spirit of
lukewarmness and indifferency prevail over you, to the stopping up the streams
of the water of life, and rendering you like the barren heath in the desert,
which knows not when good comes. We entreat you to be especially watchful in
this behalf, that an indolent and sluggish disposition appear not among you, to
the stumbling of such serious enquirers as may attend our meetings, in
expectation of that life and power, which the observation of your indifference
and unconcernedness may give them too just cause to suspect that ye yourselves
are strangers to. 1741.

Let not the smallness of your numbers discourage you from constantly attending
those meetings, inasmuch as the words of Christ remain unchangeably true and
steadfast, Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in
the midst of them, Mat. xviii. 20. But it has been justly observed, that where
remissness and neglect of attending meetings for worship have prevailed, it
has been too often an inlet to further declension, and such other undue
liberties as truth and its guidance do by no means admit of. 1754.

We therefore tenderly exhort such as, through fear of neglecting their
temporal concerns, or other considerations, are kept from a due attendance of
these meetings, seriously to consider that gracious promise left upon record;
Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things
shall be added unto you. Some of us have to testify, by blessed experience,
that our outward affairs have not suffered, by giving up our time, the few
hours set apart for religious worship; but, on the contrary, our minds have
been thereby greatly strengthened to come up with propriety in the duties we
owe to God, to our families, and to all mankind. 1758.

As it has pleased divine goodness clearly to manifest amongst us the way of
life and salvation, and to instruct us where and how to wait for him, prize, we
beseech you, these precious privileges; keep all your meetings in the name of
the Lord, and let your minds be established in an humble waiting upon him with
reverence and fear; so shall strength be added to strength, and being more
closely united to him, you will experience the indwelling of his blessed
Spirit. 1761.

When gathered in your religious assemblies, be truly concerned to retire to
the divine and heavenly gift, which will minister to every state and condition,
though you may have no outward teaching, and will direct you to wait, without
being restless or uneasy, till it be a proper time to break up your meeting
with that decency and solemnity which should attend our minds in such service;
for want of which some forward spirits, who have been destitute of the right
and true feeling of that spirit, in which such service should be performed,
have broke up meetings in an unbecoming manner, to the sorrow and pain of mind
of such as have been truly concerned for the good and prosperity of Zion
[1755]: And be not apt, as the manner of some is, at the close of your
meetings, hastily to enter into discourses about the affairs of this life, much
less the vain amusements thereof; a practice inconsistent with the Christian
gravity which at such time ought, in an especial manner, to season the minds of
persons so lately assembled for the worship of God, in spirit and in truth.
1748.

Persons professing with us, who absent themselves from our religious meeting,
either on first or other days of the week, and disregard the repeated (...) and
^ndeavours of friends to stir them up to this necessary duty, are (...) with by
the monthly meeting to which they belong, even to dif^^^^ (...) requires it.
1770.

Ministers and Elders, and Meeting of Ministers and Elders.
IT is recommended that one or more faithful friend or friends, of either or
both sexes, be appointed out of each particular meeting as standing elders by
the monthly meeting, whose duty is to help young ministers, and give advice to
all others as occasion may require; to encourage our youth and others in
virtue, and in a reverent and early attention to and belief in the divine
appearance and operation of the spirit of Christ in their own hearts, and in a
venerable esteem of the Holy Scriptures, and a frequent reading and meditating
therein; and to that plainness, moderation and simplicity, which is becoming
our holy profession; to stir up those who are or may be deficient in the due
attendance of our meetings, and in general to watch over the flock of Christ;
being themselves examples in faith, meekness and charity. 1709, 1728, 1760.

As these are officers of the church at large, let the monthly meeting, after
they have approved such as they adjudge duly anointed and qualified for that
service, acquaint the quarterly meeting therewith, who after solidly waiting
for their concurring unity, and finding nothing to hinder, are to minute the
same, and acquaint the select-meeting thereof; who are also to enter the
appointment and concurrence on their minutes, and the friend so appointed may
then sit in any of our meetings of ministers and elders. And information of
such appointments is to be given by the quarterly and select-meetings to their
respective yearly-meetings, and their names when approved to be also entered on
the yearly-meeting's record. And where any friend appearing in public ministry,
whose conversation be clean and blameless, and the elders of the
monthly meeting he or she belongs to are convinced that the Lord has called
them to that weighty work, after duly waiting for due proof thereof, they
signify their unity with his or her gift in the ministry to the
monthly meeting, who after weightily feeling after the mind of truth therein,
and being united in approving him or her as a minister in the church, the same
be entered and sent forward in like manner as in the case of elders.

The ministers and elders so approved, within the compass of each
monthly meeting (or where the quarterly meeting should think best to unite the
members of two or more meetings in one) meet by themselves once in three
months, and after solidly waiting to feel their minds seasoned with the virtue
of truth, are to proceed to read and consider the queries, and how their
purport is answered by their members; tenderly advising and assisting one
another as the nature of the case may require; and form such answers to the
queries as are agreeable to their states, which are to be signed by their
clerk, and two or more friends are to be appointed as representatives, who are
to take the answers, and assembling together previous to and at the place of
holding the quarterly meeting, do, with the assistance of other select members
within the compass of each quarter, compose a select quarterly meeting, where
the queries are again to be read, and the state of the meeting enquired into,
and such advice and assistance afforded the lower meetings thereto belonging,
by advice or committees, as occasion may require. And once a year preceding the
yearly meeting, general answers in writing to be drawn up and transmitted to
the yearly select-meeting, by representatives to be appointed to attend the
same; where the state of all the several quarters and their members are to be
attended to, and such help afforded, and in such way and manner, as they in the
wisdom of truth may think proper, in subordination to our Christian discipline;
preserving records of their proceedings, and annually choosing or re-appointing
a clerk, which the quarterly and monthly select-meetings are all advised to do.

And it is agreed that the quarterly select-meeting be held the day before each
quarterly meeting, at the same place, at the eleventh hour; and that the yearly
select-meeting begin at Portsmouth the eleventh hour, on the day before the
yearly meeting.

This meeting desires that you, whom the Lord has gifted with a public
testimony for his name and truth, may be careful to attend to the motions of
truth, and in it be diligent to visit the heritage of God in their meetings,
and especially those least frequented. 1695.

We farther entreat you, that in all your religious meetings, appointed for the
worship of Almighty God, you wait in humble reverence for the influence of the
word of life; be cautious not to move, in acts of devotion, in your own will;
set not forward self to work, but patiently attend and wait for the gift and
enlivening power of the Divine Spirit, without which your performances will be
unacceptable, and like those of old, of which it was said, "Who has required
this at your hand?" Isaiah i. 12. 1742.

As we are fully persuaded, that the ministry of the gospel is not received of
man, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ, according to that apostolical
direction, As every man has received the gift, even so minister the same one
to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God; if any man speak,
let him speak as the oracles of God; if any man minister, let him do it as of
the ability which God gives, that God in all things may be glorified: And as
this ministry is divine, the motives and inducements thereunto are perfectly
disinterested, and no way mercenary and lucrative, but concurrent to the
precept Christ gave to his apostles, and immediate followers, "Freely ye have
received, freely give." 1771.

Friends, in their respective counties and meetings, are earnestly desired and
advised to use prudence and caution, so as not to be imposed upon by cheats, or
impostors, pretending to ministry or otherwise; and where there is a doubt or
question concerning the ministry of any persons, in that case let such be
called upon to show what certificate they have; and in general it is
recommended to the monthly and quarterly-meetings, to see that friends who
travel in the work of the ministry do go in the unity of the meetings to which
they belong, and with certificates therefrom; and further, that it may become
the tender care of the said meetings to watch over such as may be young in the
ministry, to see that they walk humbly and wisely: That as on the one hand,
nothing truly tending to the glory of God, and the edification of his church
and people, may be discouraged, so on the other, where any thing appears which
may make advice necessary, that the elders of the church, both ministers and
others, do, in the wisdom of God, give their advice thereupon, with due regard
to the state of weakness and childhood that such may be in. 1720.

And we do in much love caution those friends who are rightly concerned in the
work of the ministry, to watch over their own spirits, and not to be over hasty
or censorious in passing judgment respecting the state of those w^^ hear them;
but to manifest that, in the exercise of their ministry, they are led by the
love of God; and that their principal aim is, that they may be instrumental to
administer spiritual consolation and strength to the churches where they come.

Farther we earnestly exhort, that none would offer to impose themselves as
preachers, in any meeting of friends, who are not themselves faithful against
the payment of priests wages, and in observing the other branches of our
Christian testimony. 1745.

We tenderly and with earnestness advise all friends, who travel in the work of
the ministry, as well as others, that they not only shut their ears against all
private informations of persons and things, tending to the defamation of
particular persons or families, and to stir up disputes and contentions in
meetings for discipline; but also to rebuke and reprove the person or persons,
who shall attempt to prejudice their minds with any private informations of
that nature. 1752.

The spirit of God being be foundation of all true knowledge and experience,
both in ministers and hearers, we earnestly exhort that all would diligently
wait upon, and mind it: Ministers, in their public services especially, ought
always to attend closely to their several and peculiar gifts, and minister the
word faithfully as it is manifested and revealed to them; observing a decent
and modest behavior in the exercise of their ministry, and not entangling
themselves with the affairs of this life, that they may the better answer the
holy warfare in which they are engaged. And let the hearers be watchful over
their own spirits, and not forwardly judge or censure the testimonies which may
be delivered amongst them; for if they be not very careful and diligent in
attending upon the Lord in meetings, they are liable to mistake in the judgment
they may pass on the ministry.

Now this being a matter of great moment, for the preservation of love and
concord in the churches; and knowing the danger and ill consequences which
attend an hasty and censorious judging of the ministry, we think it necessary
to caution friends not to let their own spirits sway them, but let the Spirit
of God rule and reign in their hearts; for this will preserve all in sweetness
and tenderness one toward another: The due observance of which will be a great
help to ministers in the discharge of their duty, and the service to which they
are called.

And we earnestly request, that the elders in monthly and quarterly-meetings
would be ready to help and inform the weak, when suitable opportunities
present; and that both ministers and hearers, pursuing one and the same end,
namely, the glory of God, and the good and welfare one of another, the church
may be edified, increase and flourish, to the consolation of the faithful.

On the other hand, we advise ministers to have it very much at heart, to
maintain a perfect harmony and good understanding with the monthly-meetings to
which they belong; that as the said meetings may sometimes find themselves
concerned to advise them, respecting their conduct in meetings, or otherwise,
they show themselves ready to hear and receive advice, as well as to teach and
instruct.

We further advise all monthly-meetings, to take great care in giving
certificates to those who travel, to prevent the uneasiness which sometimes
falls on the church, from a weak and unskilful ministry; and let the elders,
when they see occasion, advise ministers to be very prudent in their conduct,
not as busy bodies, nor meddling with family or personal affairs, in which they
are not concerned, or required to be assisting; that they be very tender of one
another's reputation, and of that of friends among whom they travel; neither
giving ear to nor spreading reports, tending to raise in the minds of others a
lessening or disesteem of any of the brotherhood; and as soon as their service
in the ministry is over, that they return to their habitations, and there take
a reasonable and prudent care of their own business, household and family. 1731.

Our blessed Lord, just before his ascension, commanded his disciples to wait
at Jerusalem, till they were endued with power from on high; knowing their
inability, without the sensible feeling of that power, to speak in his name for
the conversion of the nations. It was this power that enabled them to speak
boldly in the name of Jesus: This alone that made them able ministers of
Christ; whose preaching was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in the
demonstration of the Spirit, and with power.

And seeing many of us have experienced much spiritual consolation, by waiting
in silence and humbly depending upon the Lord alone, we exhort friends, that
when met together for religious worship, they labor to feel their minds
abstracted from visible objects, into a true stillness and nothingness of self;
wherein the teachings of the Holy Spirit are witnessed by humble and contrite
souls.

In such a waiting state, you will have a true relish and savor of the
ministry of those who are rightly concerned by the same spirit, to labor in
word and doctrine among you. 1738.

We earnestly caution and entreat all such among you, as find themselves
concerned in Christian love to exhort and admonish others, that they be
especially careful of their own conduct; that by circumspect walking in all
holiness of life and conversation, they may become living examples of the
purity and excellence of the advices they recommend. 1748.

You that are elders and overseers in the church, and concerned in the
maintenance of good order and preservation of discipline, keep your own hands
clean, and garments unspotted, that you may rebuke with authority, and being
clothed with the meekness and gentleness of the Lamb, may steadfastly persevere
in the support of that testimony committed to you, that when the Great Shepherd
shall appear, you may come before him with reverent assurance, and receive the
reward of Well done, good and faithful servant, enter into the joy of thy Lord.
1753.

As to the elders among you, and such whom God, having endued with knowledge
and experience of the cleansing operations of his Spirit, has concerned to
minister to others, let them adorn the doctrine of the gospel, by showing, out
of a good conversation, their works with meekness of wisdom: Such as these,
being clothed with humility, and exemplary to the flock whom the feed; not by
constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; are
worthy of double honor, and to be highly esteemed in the church of Christ.
1751.

As the Lord is graciously pleased effectually to touch the hearts of many of
the youth, and prepare them for the reception of his heavenly gifts, whereby
many are called to the work of the ministry; and well knowing it is a due
attention to the gift, and waiting for the heavenly power and life to discharge
themselves therein, which has ever proved a blessing to the particular, and the
churches in general; we earnestly recommend, that the elders and sensible solid
friends do watch over such in an holy concern for their and the churches good;
that the weak and tender may be encouraged in a faithful discharge of their
duty, and where a forward spirit appears, that would lead into many words out
of the power and life, such may be properly admonished in the meekness of
wisdom, that each may speak the language of truth, by the ability which the
Lord only gives; and that the monthly-meetings do not indulge any to travel and
appoint meetings too soon, for many have been hurt thereby. 1753.

We recommend the apostolic advice, "Lay hands on no man suddenly," for we have
cause to believe that injudicious encouragement has tended to promote an
unsound ministry in some places. It is therefore recommended, that the approved
ministers and elders, in the several monthly-meetings, would tenderly advise
those who come forth in public testimony, to wait patiently under a deep
consideration of their state of infancy and childhood, without desiring to be
introduced into the meeting of ministers and elders, until their fruits afford
sufficient evidence of their qualifications for so important a service, and
they approved of by the monthly and quarterly-meetings to which they belong;
that such young ministers be reported to their monthly and quarterly-meetings;
which, upon solid and deliberate consideration, may, as in the wisdom of truth
shall seem meet, recommend them to the select-meeting of ministers and elders,
in order to their becoming regular members of those meetings. 1773.

Looking into the state of this part of the society, which stands in a more
conspicuous point of view than the more private members, the necessity of their
being ensamples to the flock appears exceeding great, particularly in a
diligent attendance of all our meetings for solemn worship and the discipline
of the church, and therein to be very deep and weighty in spirit, laboring
with an ardour of soul suited to the occasion, for the arising of the ancient
spring of life; which of a truth is the crown of our assemblies, and the ground
of our joy and rejoicing in him, and one in another: It being this alone which
preserves living, fresh and active members in the church of Christ, who are
enabled to communicate a degree of warmth to the rising youth, and those of
less experience in this most necessary exercise; not only in word and doctrine,
but also in silent, humble waiting on God, for the renewings of help day by day.

That where it shall appear, upon due inspection made, that any member shall or
do neglect or omit the due attendance of their meetings for worship and
discipline, through sloth, indolence, love of the world, lukewarmness in
religion or other insufficient cause, that each monthly meeting take care, that
all such be timely visited in love, and acquainted with the desire and mind of
friends in that case, and admonished to faithfulness therein. And if,
notwithstanding the due Christian labor and admonition, he, she or they, shall
continue in the said neglect or omission; if a minister, his or her public
testimony be denied; and if an elder, he or she be dismissed from that station.
1770.

Advised to have a godly care of judging or contradicting one another in public
meetings, or showing any marks or signs of division therein, among ministers or
others; it being of a very pernicious consequence to bring blame or contempt
upon the ministry, and a great hurt to our youth and others. 1716.

This meeting taking under their serious consideration the beauty and credit of
keeping decency and good order in our meetings for worship, advises friends
every where to avoid public opposition to a minister not disowned by the
monthly or quarterly meeting to which he or she shall belong, by keeping on
their hats in time of prayer, or any other tokens of disunion.

But if any person, pretending to be a minister, shall give cause of uneasiness
or dissatisfaction to friends, in doctrine, behavior or conversation, the
person so offending is to be dealt with privately in a gospel spirit and
manner: If this shall not take effect, then let complaint be made of such
person to the monthly meeting which he or she may belong to; that proceeding
thereon be had accordingly, and the affair settled with all possible
expedition. 1723.

Where friends in any monthly meeting are really dissatisfied, or burdened
with any that take upon them to preach among them, let them first be duly
admonished in their own monthly meeting, with the assistance of the faithful
approved ministers and elders of the same meeting, and adjacent meetings, if
need be; and if afterward they will persist to impose upon and burden
friends, then to be publicly testified against, where they so impose.

If any one who has been a public minister or elder shall be guilty of such
practices as may justly deserve public censure, and shall be disowned, and
afterward, upon tokens of repentance, be again admitted into membership; such
readmission is not to be interpreted so as to give him or her the liberty of
appearing as a public minister, or exercising the office of an elder, until the
monthly meeting he or she belongs to shall judge the scandal given by such
person is so far removed, as that such public appearance, or exercising the
office of an elder, may not administer occasion of reproach, either from
friends or others; and in case they should show themselves too forward in so
appearing, the meeting to which they belong are desired to give them such
advice as they shall see suitable to their circumstance. 1737.

A MEMORIAL of some necessary advices recommended to ministers, and, in the
love of the gospel, to be communicated to the several meetings of ministers and
elders in the yearly meeting, as caution and counsel.

1. Against undue and restless behavior, under the ministry of any friend,
whilst in the unity of the body.

2. That all be cautious of using unnecessary preambles, and laying too great
stress on their testimony, by too positively asserting a divine motion, and
frequently repeating the fame; seeing no such pretensions will obtain credit,
when it is not manifestly so; and where it is, the baptizing power of truth,
accompanying the words, is the best evidence.

3. Against misquoting and misapplying the Holy Scriptures; and it is desired
that all those concerned be frequent in reading them.

4. To be careful how they fall on disputed points in their testimony, and
making such objections as they do not clearly answer; and also against giving
repeated expectations of coming to a conclusion, recommending the people, etc.

5. Against hurting meetings, toward the conclusion, by unnecessary additions,
when the meeting was left well before.

6. Against unbecoming tones, sounds, gestures, and all affectation; which are
not agreeable to Christian gravity.

7. Against undertaking or running into employments they have no knowledge or
experience of, without the concurrence and advice of friends, as some have
done, to their own hurt, the injury of others, and the reproach of their
religious profession; but to employ themselves in business that they are
acquainted with, to avoid an idle life.

8. Not to speak against persons, or report things on hearsay; but to treat
with the parties concerned, and thereby prevent sowing discord.

9. That their apparel, and the furniture of their houses, their tables, and
way of living, may be with decency, moderation and temperance; that they be
good examples to others.

10. Against men and women traveling together, as companions in service, to
avoid all occasions of offense thereby.

11. To beware of too much familiarity, tending to draw out the affections one
of another, to their hurt.

12. That ministering friends be careful not to hurt one another's service in
public meetings, but every one have a tender regard for others; that nothing be
offered with a view to popularity, but in humility and the fear of the Lord.

13. Against running, in their own wills, to disturb or interrupt any people in
their worship; or presuming to prophecy, in their own spirits, against any
nation, city, town, people, or person.

14. That ministers, when they travel in the service of truth, be careful not
to make their visits burdensome, or the gospel chargeable.

15. That none show or expose manuscripts, so as to give expectations of their
being printed, before they are approved by the meeting for sufferings.

16. That ministers and elders be careful to keep their whole conversation
unspotted, being examples of meekness, temperance, patience and charity.

And lastly, as prayer and supplication to God is an especial part of his
worship, it must be performed in spirit and in truth, with a right
understanding seasoned with grace. Therefore let ministers be careful how and
what they offer in prayer, avoiding many words and repetitions, and not to run
from supplication into declaration, as though the Lord wanted information: And
let all be cautious of too often repeating the High and Holy Name, or his
attributes, by a long conclusion; neither let prayer be in a formal and
customary way, to conclude a meeting, without an awful sense of divine
assistance attending the mind. 1703, 1755.

Agreed that when public friends have a concern to travel on a religious visit,
and appoint meetings out of the quarterly meeting they belong to, or to attend
the sittings of neighboring yearly-meetings, or quarterly meeting belonging
thereunto, they seasonably communicate the same to the elders of their
respective meetings for their advice and concurrence, before they move it to
the monthly meeting, in order for a certificate.

And when their concern extends to visiting the churches, within any other of
the yearly-meetings on this continent, they proceed in like manner. And when
the monthly meeting have given their certificate, they acquaint the
quarterly meeting therewith for their concurrence, which is to be first had
before the friend proceed. And when the concern extends to Europe, or beyond
sea, as the most weighty, clear and deliberate evidence should be obtained in
so important a service, in which the reputation of society may be more
immediately concerned; it is therefore recommended, that unless such
considerations should prevent, which the quarterly and monthly meeting may
judge sufficient, the approbation of the yearly meeting of ministers and elders
should be likewise obtained.

QUERIES of the Yearly Meeting of Ministers and Elders.

1. Are ministers and elders careful duly to attend all their meetings for
worship and dicipline, bringing with them as many of their families as they
can? And are they good examples in humble waiting therein, not giving way to
drowsiness?

2. Are ministers sound in word and doctrine, careful to minister in the
ability God gives and thereby kept from burthening the living?

3. Are the lives and conversations of ministers and elders clean and blameless
amongst men? Are they in unity one with another, and with the meeting they
belong to, harmoniously laboring together for truth's honor, and careful to
give no just occasion of offense to any?

4. Do they rule their own houses well, bringing up their families in plainness
which truth requires, in dress, language and true moderation? And are they good
examples in those respects themselves?

5. Are they peacemakers in families and in the church, not concerned in
raising or spreading evil reports, nor busy bodies where they have no proper
business?

6. Are they careful to maintain the discipline in every part thereof, not even
to hide their own families from truth's judgment, if occasion be given, but
impartially to administer justice as faithful servants?

7. Do any travel abroad as ministers, without being first recommended to and
accepted by the quarterly meeting as such? And do any appoint meetings out of
the limits of the quarterly meeting they belong to, without a certificate from
the monthly meeting of business, or the concurrence thereof?

It is further earnestly and affectionately recommended that ministers and
elders watch over one another for good, to help those who are young in the
ministry in the right line, discouraging forward spirits that run into words
without life and power, advising against affectation of tones and gestures, and
every thing that would hurt their service; yet encouraging the humble, careful
traveller, speaking a word in season to them that are weary. And let all dwell
in that which gives ability to labor successfully in the church of Christ,
adorning the doctrine they deliver to others, being examples of the believers
in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, and in purity.

MONTHLY-MEETINGS.
IN the love of Christ we earnestly exhort you to watch diligently over the
flock of God, and deal in due time, and in a spirit of Christian love and
tenderness, with all such as walk disorderly amongst you, in order to reclaim
and restore them by brotherly counsel and admonition; and when, after patient
waiting, you find that your Christian labor of love has not its desired
effect, you neglect not to testify against and disown such persons, and thereby
prevent the reproach and dishonor which may be brought upon our holy
profession through their means, that the end and design of our wholesome
discipline may be answered.

We think it both unseasonable and dishonorable, when persons apply to
monthly-meetings on account of marriage, or for relief in case of necessity or
any similar occasion, then to object to them such offenses as the meeting,
through neglect of their own duty, have suffered long to pass by them
unreproved and unnoticed. 1743.

It is the ancient and constant sense of friends, that any person denied by a
monthly meeting, is adjudged as disowned by friends, and to stand and remain in
that state, till by his repentance, or by the reversal of such denial by a
superior meeting, he is reconciled to friends, or reinstated in membership
among them, with which this meeting has unity, and therefore confirms the
same. 1727.

When a person commits an offense, as soon as it comes to the knowledge of the
meeting wherein he resides, he not being a member thereof, that meeting shall
acquaint the meeting of which he is a member therewith.

The meeting of which he is a member shall then proceed to visit and deal with
him, unless by reason of distance it be not convenient; in which case they
shall apply to the monthly meeting in which the offender resides, to act for
them and visit him; and they shall report their proceedings to the meeting of
which he is a member, which meeting shall receive his acknowledgment, or disown
him, as in their judgment the case shall require.

If a testimony of denial be issued, a copy thereof shall be sent to the
meeting in the compass of which the offender resides, who shall acquaint him
therewith, and read it in a public meeting, if they see meet, and acknowledge
the receipt thereof to the meeting that sent it.

If the offender remove after dealing be commenced, the meeting that had him
under their care shall continue the same, if he be equally within their reach,
or otherwise write to the meeting into the compass of which he is removed,
which meeting shall proceed therein, and report to the meeting of which he is a
member, who shall receive his acknowledgment, or proceed to deny him as
aforesaid. But if the monthly meeting where the offense is committed judge the
case to be of such a nature as to require their more speedy dealing, and even
disowning the offender, for the clearing of truth according to our ancient care
and practice; they are at liberty so to do, giving the meeting the offender did
belong to as early notice thereof as they can. 1747, 1782.

In case offenders shall remove to places not within the acknowledged limits of
any monthly meeting, it is agreed that they shall be under the care of the
meeting to which they are the nearest situated.

If the offender cannot be found after reasonable enquiry, the meeting to which
he belongs, on notice thereof, shall issue a testimony against him, if the
nature of the case require it, and acquaint the other meeting or meetings
thereof.

When a person is disowned by a monthly meeting of which he was a proper
member, and afterward removes into, and resides within, the compass of another
meeting, he having come to repentance, and being desirous to be restored into
unity, the necessary acknowledgment should be made to the monthly meeting by
which he was disowned; which acknowledgment being received and accepted, he
shall be deemed a member of the said meeting 1763.

We recommend to friends in their several monthly-meetings, to take especial
care to appoint proper, prudent and judicious friends, to visit their brethren
in their families, to inform, advise or admonish, pursuant to former advices;
and that such friends labor faithfully in a spirit of love, and in the
meekness of wisdom, to convince the judgments of their respective members of
the necessity of their coming up with their brethren in practice, agreeable to
our Christian principle, that so the several branches of the testimony, which
truth has given our ancients and us to bear, may be maintained inviolate.
1733, 1751.

It is recommended, that the book of discipline be present in all our monthly,
quarterly and yearly-meetings, that the same may be consulted as occasion
requires; and as opportunity offers, such portions thereof be read in each
monthly meeting, the women being present, as the elders, overseers or other
concerned friends, may from time to time think proper, for the instruction,
help and furtherance of the young and rising generation, and such as may not
otherwise be conversant or acquainted therewith.

MOURNING HABITS.
ACCORDING to the primitive simplicity and innocence of friends, it is the
advice of this meeting, that no friends imitate the world in any distinction of
habit or otherwise, as marks or tokens of mourning for the dead. 1717.

Advised against imitating the vain custom of wearing or giving mourning, and
all extravagant expenses about the interment of the dead. 1724.

(...) NEGROES and SLAVES.
1. IT is the sense of this meeting, that the importation of Negroes from their
native country and relations This intended as slaves, or against their consent.
is not a commendable nor allowable practice, and that practice is censured by
this meeting. 1727.

2. We fervently warn all in profession with us, that they be careful to avoid
being any way concerned in reaping the unrighteous profits of that iniquitous
practice of dealing in Negroes, and other slaves; whereby, in the original
purchase, one man sells another as he does the beast that perishes, without
any better pretension to a property in him than that of superior force, in
direct violation of the gospel rule, which teaches every one to do as they
would be done by, and to do good unto all; being the reverse of that covetous
disposition, which furnishes encouragement to those poor ignorant people to
perpetuate their savage wars, in order to supply the demands of this most
unnatural traffic, whereby great numbers of mankind, free by nature, are
subjected to inextricable bondage; and which has often been observed to fill
their possessors with haughtiness and tyranny, luxury and barbarity; corrupting
the minds and debasing the morals of their children, to the unspeakable
prejudice of religion and virtue, and the exclusion of that holy spirit of
universal love, meekness and charity, which is the unchangeable nature and the
glory of true Christianity: We therefore can do no less than with the greatest
earnestness impress it upon friends every where, that they endeavor to keep
their hands clear of this unrighteous gain of oppression. 1760.

3. It is recommended to friends, who have slaves in possession, to treat them
with tend^rn^^ impress God's fear in their minds, promote their attending
places of religious worship, and give those that are young, at least, so much
learning that they may be capable of reading.

4. It is our sense and judgment, that truth not only requires that the young,
of capacity and ability, but likewise the aged and impotent, and also all in a
state of infancy and nonage among friends, be discharged and set free from a
state of slavery; that we do no more claim property in the human race, as we do
in the brutes that perish; and it is to be understood, that the aged and
impotent, and also infants and those in their nonage, be provided for, brought
up and instructed, as required by our tenth query. 1773.

Agreed that no friend import, or any ways purchase, dispose of or hold mankind
as slaves; but that all those who have been held in a state of slavery be
discharged therefrom; that all those be used well who are under friends care,
and are not in circumstances, through nonage or incapacity, to minister to
their own necessities; and that they give those that are young such an
education as become Christians, and encourage others in a religious and
virtuous life. 1773, 1780.

OATHS.
ADVISED that our Christian testimony be faithfully maintained against the
burden and imposition of oaths, according to the express prohibition of
Christ, and also of the apostle James, viz. Ye have heard that it has been
said by them of old time, Thou shall not forswear thyself, but shall perform
unto the Lord thine oaths: But I say unto you, Swear not at all: Neither by
heaven; for it is God's throne: Nor by the earth; for it is his footstool:
Neither by Jerusalem; for it is the city of the great King. Neither shall thou
swear by thy head, because thou can not make one hair white or black. But let
your communication be, Yea, yea; Nay, nay; for whatsoever is more than these
comes of evil, Mat. v. 33 -- 37.

But above all things, my brethren, swear not; neither by heaven, neither by
the earth, neither by any other oath: But let your yea, be yea; and your nay,
nay; lest ye fall into condemnation, James v. 12. 1693.

Agreed that oaths administered by judges, justices, select-men, town-councils
or other officers, who are under the care of friends, is a violation of our
ancient testimony; and that such persons ought to be dealt with as offenders.
Nor are such officers clear, who admit of clerks or others to administer oaths
before them, when sitting in their office, unless there be a number of others
present, not of our society, sufficient to authorize the same. 1733.

(...) ORPHANS, WILLS, EXECUTORS, etc.
KNOWING how quickly many are removed by death, it is weightily recommended
that care be taken, in each monthly meeting, that friends who have estates to
dispose of, by will or otherwise, be advised to make their wills in time of
health, and strength of judgment, and to dispose of their substance as in
justice and wisdom may be to their satisfaction; to prevent the inconveniences,
loss and trouble, that may fall upon their relations and friends, through their
dying intestate. Making such wills, in due time, can shorten no man's days; but
the omission or delay thereof has proved very injurious to many. 1691.

Advised that friends, in making their wills, have a strict regard to justice
and equity, and be not actuated by caprice and prejudice, to the injury of
those who may have a reasonable expectation from their kindred and near
connexions; nor carry any resentment, though occasion may have been given or
taken, to the grave, remembering we all stand in need of mercy and forgiveness.
Also that none postpone making their wills to a sick bed; an improper season to
settle our outward affairs, in the painful struggles of nature, even if we
should be favored with a clear understanding, which ought not to be diverted
from a solemn consideration of the approaching awful period of life.

Friends are earnestly recommended to employ persons capable, and of good
repute, to write their wills; as great inconvenience and loss, and sometimes
the ruin of families, has happened through the unskilfulness of some who have
taken upon them to write wills, being unqualified to act in an affair of such
importance. And all friends, who may become executors or administrators, are
advised to make a full, clear and proper inventory of the estate and effects of
the deceased, as soon as may be after the interment; as many difficulties and
disputes have arisen for want of it, where it has been deferred. 1782.

Recommended that friends, who have young children, do in their wills appoint
faithful friends to be guardians to them, till they arrive to lawful age: That
monthly-meetings take care that such guardians do discharge their trust with
justice and uprightness; and that orphans be admonished to be subject to the
wills of their deceased parents, as the said meetings shall see cause. 1706.

Executors and trustees, concerned in wills and settlements, are advised to
take especial care that they faithfully discharge their respective trusts,
according to the intent of the donors and testators; and that all charitable
gifts, legacies, bequests, and settlement of estates, by will or deed, intended
and given for the use of the poor, the aged, the impotent, or putting poor
friends children to education or apprenticeships, may not be appropriated or
converted to any other uses than such as the donors and testators have directed
and enjoined by legal settlement, will, or testament. 1715.

PARENTS and GUARDIANS.
WE do entreat and desire all parents and governors of families, that ye
diligently lay to heart your work and calling in your generation, for the Lord,
and the charge committed to you; not only in being good examples to the younger
sort, but also to use your power in your own families in educating your
children and servants in modesty, sobriety, and in the fear of God, curbing the
extravagant humor in the young ones, when it does appear; and not to indulge
or allow of it: For you are set in your families as judges for God, and (...)
you that must give an account of the power committed to you. And w^^^ you see a
libertine and wanton spirit appear in your children and servants, that lusts
after the vain customs and fashions of the world, either in habit, or outward
adorning, and craves your assistance and allowance, without which it cannot get
forward while they are under your government; Oh! then look to yourselves, and
discharge your trust for God, and for the good of their souls, exhorting in
meekness, and commanding in wisdom; that so you may minister and reach to the
witness, and help them over their temptations in the authority of God's power;
and when they feel themselves helped and delivered, their souls will bless God
for you, and you will reap the comfort of your labor. 1688.

We advise and exhort, that all masters of families, parents, guardians, and
tutors of children, would frequently put in practice the calling together of
their children and household, to wait upon the Lord in their families; that
receiving wisdom and counsel from him, they may be enabled seasonably to exhort
and encourage them to walk in the way of the Lord; to exercise themselves in
reading the Holy Scriptures, and in observing the duties and precepts of holy
living therein recommended; admonishing them to keep to that plainness and
simplicity in apparel, speech and behavior, which the spirit of truth led our
forefathers into, and which becomes the humble, self-denying followers of holy
Jesus. 1748.

It is our Christian and earnest advice and counsel to all friends concerned,
(so far as they are able, or may be capable) to provide schoolmasters and
mistresses, who are faithful friends, to teach and instruct their children; and
not to send them to such schools, where they are taught the corrupt ways,
manners, fashions and language of the world, and of the heathen in their
authors, and names of the heathenish gods and goddesses, tending greatly to
corrupt and alienate the minds of children into an averseness or opposition to
the truth, and the simplicity of it: But to take care that you train up your
children in the good nurture, admonition and fear of the Lord, in that
plainness and language which become truth. And parents and masters, etc. to be
good examples to them, in a sober and godly conversation, and plainness of
speech; and not to use the word you, or ye, to a child or servant, etc. nor
suffer your substance to be bestowed on your children, to furnish them with
such things as tend to pride, and to lift them up in vanity, or affect them
with the vain fashions of the world. 1690.

It being under consideration how friends children might be disposed of, that
are trained up in the way of truth, and fit to be put forth apprentices; it is
the advice and counsel of friends, that special care be taken to p^t them
apprentices to honest friends, that they may be preserved in the way of truth.
1697.

And that friends of all degrees take due care to bring up their children in
some useful and necessary employments, that they may not spend their precious
time in idleness, which is of evil example, and tends much to their hurt. 1703.

And it is agreed that none be placed out to any not of our society, unless
some special circumstance may induce the monthly meeting to think it best; and
when any parent or guardian thinks any such special circumstance do attend,
they may lay the same before the monthly meeting where they belong, who are to
appoint a committee to examine, consider and report the same, and the meeting
to advise accordingly as may appear best; and it is agreed that no friend's
child be placed out to any not of our society, without first having the
approbation or consent of the monthly meeting where they belong; and when any
parents or guardians do act contrary thereto, they be dealt with as those who
refuse the advice and disregard the unity of the body.

And it is recommended to all friends who take apprentices, to seek for and
give preference to our own members, and to be moderate in their terms, that the
children of the poorer sort in an especial manner may be brought up to such
trades and business as may, with the Lord's blessing on their prudence and
industry, procure for them such a living as will be to their comfort, and the
^eputation of society.

(...) PLAINNESS.
IT is also our concern to exhort all friends, both men and women, to watch
against the growing sin of pride, and beware of adorning themselves in a manner
disagreeable to the plainness and simplicity of the truth we make profession
of. Oh! that they would duly consider that severe reproof which the Lord, by
the mouth of his prophet, pronounced against the haughty daughters of Zion,
Isaiah iii. where it describes even the particularities of their dressings and
ornaments, so displeasing to the Lord, and drawing down his judgments upon
them. If those things in that time were so offensive in the eyes of the Lord,
how much more so are they now, in a people professing the plainness and
simplicity which the gospel of Christ recommends?

"I will," says the apostle Paul, that women adorn themselves in modest
apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety; not with broidered hair, or gold, or
pearls, or costly array; but, which becomes women professing godliness, with
good works, 1 Timothy ii. 9, 10; where he plainly shows that such adornings are
contrary to the profession of godliness. The apostle Peter also is very full in
his exhortations on this subject, "Whose adorning," says he, let it not be that
outward adorning of plaiting the hair, and of wearing of gold, and of putting
on of apparel; but let it be the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not
corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the
sig^^ of God of great price; for after this manner, in the old time, the holy
women also, who trusted in God, adorned themselves. 1 Pet. iii. 3, 4, 5;
plainly intimating, that those who of old were holy, and did trust in God,
placed not their delight in such ornaments. Oh, that ye would weigh and
consider these things! Let your moderation be known unto all men, and grieve
not the Holy Spirit of God; but be ye followers of him, as dear children,
walking circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time, because
the days are evil. 1739.

Let not any such as degenerate, in these respects, excuse their own weakness,
under a pretense of the misconduct of some, who have appeared outwardly plain;
an objection of very little weight: For did they rightly consider, they would
clearly see, that the very reason why deceivers sometimes put on plain apparel,
is, because true men have been accustomed to wear it.

We also tenderly advise, that friends take heed, especially those who should
be exemplary to others under their care, that they exercise plainness of
speech, without respect of persons, in all their converse among men; and not
baulk their testimony by a cowardly compliance, varying their language
according to their company: A practice of very ill example to our observing
youth, and rendering those who use it contemptible, and looked upon as a kind
of hypocrites, even by those with whom they so comply: Such a mean-spirited
practice seems to be cautioned against by the apostle, when he advises, 1 Timothy
"That the deacons be grave, not double-tongued;" a caution plainly importing,
that it is inconsistent with the gravity of the gospel. 1743.

Where any do not keep themselves, or their children, in moderation and
plainness, in gesture, speech, apparel, and furniture of their houses; or
accustom themselves, or suffer their children, to use the corrupt and
unscriptural language of (you) to a single person; or to call the days or
months by the names given them by the heathen, in honor to their idols,
contrary to the ancient advices of friends, to which we refer: It is desired
and advised, that friends from time to time, as such things appear, be stirred
up in the wisdom of truth, to take due and prudent care therein; and if any, by
continuing in such practices, reject the advice and labor of their friends,
then let such cases be brought forward to the monthly meeting, for further care
and dealing, as may appear necessary, for the support of our Christian
testimony.

POOR.
WITH respect to the poor amongst us, it ought to be considered, that the poor,
both parents and children, are of our family, and ought not to be turned off to
any others for their support or education; and although some may think the poor
a burden, yet be it remembered, when our poor are well provided for, and walk
orderly, they are an ornament to our society; and the rich should consider it
is more blessed to give than to receive, and that he who gives to the poor,
lends to the Lord, who will repay. 1718.

As mercy, compassion and charity, are eminently required in this new covenant
dispensation we are under; so, respecting the poor and indigent among us, and
to see there be no beggar in our Israel, it is the advice of this meeting that
all poor friends be taken due care of, and none of them sent to the town or
parish to be relieved; and that nothing be wanting for their necessary supply;
which has been according to our ancient practice and testimony. And it has long
been of good report, that we have not only maintained our own poor, but also
contributed our share to the poor of the respective towns and parishes wherein
we dwell. 1720.

Advised that where friends want ability in the world, their monthly and
quarterly-meetings assist them, that the children of the poor may have due help
of education, instruction, and necessary learning; and that the children both
of the rich and the poor may early be provided with useful employments, that
they may not grow up in idleness, looseness and vice; but that being seasoned
with the truth, taught our holy self-denying way, and sanctified of God, they
may become a reputation to our holy profession, the comfort of their honest
parents, instrumental to the glory of God, and the good of the succeeding
generations. 1709.

And as one of the first and great causes which engaged our ancient friends to
the orderly establishing our Christian discipline, was the care of the poor;
and as expenses must necessarily arise for their support and education, it is
recommended to each monthly meeting, of men and women friends, that they be
open-hearted and liberal in their subscriptions for the supply of the poor; and
that a treasurer be appointed to receive the same, and open to each meeting of
men and women; and two or more suitable friends, men and women, be annually
appointed as overseers of the poor, whose business and duty it should be to
visit, inspect and relieve them, as becomes the followers of Christ, and that
two or more friends be appointed as an audit to settle the treasurers and
overseers accounts.

QUARTERLY-MEETINGS.
WHEN a quarterly meeting has come to a judgment respecting any difference,
relative to any monthly meeting belonging to them, and notified the same in
writing to such monthly meeting, the said monthly meeting ought to submit to
the judgment of the quarterly meeting; but if such monthly meeting shall not be
satisfied therewith, then the monthly meeting may appeal to the yearly meeting,
against the judgment and determination of the quarterly meeting.

And if a monthly meeting shall refuse to take the advice and submit to the
judgment of the quarterly meeting, and notwithstanding will not appeal against
the determination of the said meeting to the yearly meeting; in such case, the
quarterly meeting shall be at liberty either to dissolve such monthly meeting,
or bring the affair before the next or succeeding yearly meeting.

And in case a quarterly meeting shall dissolve a monthly meeting, the
dissolved monthly meeting, or any part thereof, in the name of the said
meeting, shall be at liberty to appeal to the next or succeeding
yearly meeting, against such dissolution; but if the dissolved monthly meeting,
or a part thereof in its behalf, shall not appeal to the yearly meeting, the
quarterly meeting shall join the members of the said late monthly meeting, to
such other monthly-meetings as they may think most convenient; and until such
time, shall take care that no inconvenience does thereby ensue to the members
of such dissolved meeting, respecting any branch of our discipline.

And if any of the monthly-meetings, to which the quarterly meeting shall join
the whole or a part of the late monthly meeting, do think themselves aggrieved,
they shall be at liberty to appeal against the quarterly meeting to the
yearly meeting; and until such appeal is heard and determined, the friends
added by the quarterly meeting to them, shall be deemed their members. 1743.

All minutes and written epistles from the yearly meeting are to be entered by
the quarterly meeting in fair books, properly kept, that all friends of the
said quarter may have recourse to them, as occasion shall require. 1727.

It is recommended to the several quarterly-meetings, that there be held a
meeting for divine worship, on the first day of holding each quarterly meeting,
preceding their opening the business, according to the ancient and general
practice of friends; and that the several meetings be held as follow, viz.

Rhode Island quarter, on the fifth day before the second sixth day of the
following months, as usual: At Swanzey, in the first month; Greenwich, in the
fourth month; Smithfield, in the seventh month; Dartmouth, in the tenth month;
and contains the following monthly-meetings, viz. Rhode Island, Dartmouth,
Greenwich, Smithfield, Swanzey, Kingston, Acoaxet, Uxbridge and Providence.
Salem quarterly meeting to be held at Hampton, the seventh day before the first
first day in the third month; Salem, the first sixth day in the sixth month;
Falmouth, the seventh day before the fourth first day in the ninth month;
Dover, the seventh day before the first first day in the twelfth month;
consisting of the said four monthly-meetings of Salem, Hampton, Dover and
Falmouth. Sandwich quarterly meeting to be held at Falmouth, the second sixth
day in the twelfth month; Sandwich, the sixth day before the last first day in
the third month; Nantucket, the third day after the fourth sixth day in the
sixth month; Long-Plain, the seventh day before the second sixth day in the
tenth month; and is composed of three monthly-meetings, viz. Sandwich,
Nantucket and Pembroke.

QUERIES.
IT is the sense and judgment of this meeting, that it will tend to the benefit
of the society, that the following queries be sent to the several quarterly,
monthly and preparative-meetings, with the advice to be read preceding, as
follows:

It is recommended that all contention and personal reflections be kept out of
our meetings: That all friends be careful to keep out of heats and passions,
and doubtful disputations; and that we suffer no turbulent, contentious person
amongst us, in ordering and managing the affairs of truth; but that the same be
managed in the peaceable spirit and wisdom of Jesus, with decency, forbearance
and love, to each other.

1. Are all meetings for religious worship and discipline duly attended, the
hour observed; and are friends preserved from sleeping, or any other unbecoming
behavior therein?

2. Is love and unity maintained amongst you, as becomes the followers of
Christ? Are tale-bearing, backbiting, and evil reports, discouraged? And where
any differences arise, are endeavors used speedily to end them?

3. Are friends careful to bring up those under their direction in plainness of
speech, behavior and apparel? To restrain them from reading pernicious books,
and the corrupt conversation of the world? Are they good examples herein
themselves? And are the Holy Scriptures frequently read, (...) well publicly in
their families, when quietly convened, as on other occasions?

4. Are friends careful to avoid the use of spirituous liquors, except for
medicine, or upon extraordinary and necessary occasions? The unnecessary
frequenting of taverns, and places of public resort? And to keep in true
moderation and temperance, on the account of births, marriages, burials, and
other like occasions?

5. Are the circumstances of the poor, and such as appear likely to need
assistance, duly inspected; and their necessities relieved, or they assisted in
such business as they are capable of? Do their children freely partake of
learning, to fit them for business? And are they, and other friends children,
placed among friends?

6. Do parents and guardians discountenance those under their care accompanying
on account of marriage, without their consent? And do none unmarried make or
admit proposals, or accompany with each other on that account, without the
consent of their parents or guardians first obtained? Or with those not of our
society, on that account? And do all friends discountenance disorderly
marriages?

7. Do you maintain a faithful testimony against the payment of priests wages,
bearing of arms, training, or other military matters? Against being concerned
in property taken in war, buying or vending goods suspected to be run, and
against making of false entries, to evade the payment of duties?

8. Are friends careful frequently to inspect their affairs, settle their
accounts, and make their wills whilst in health; and take friends advice
therein, when necessary? And are public gifts and legacies applied to the use
intended by the donor?

9. Are friends careful to maintain our testimony faithfully against slavery?
And do they educate and encourage in virtue those under their care who have
been held therein?

10. Are there any friends deficient in performing their promises, or paying
their just debts, or that launch into business beyond their ability to manage
in the truth? And where any give reasonable grounds of fear, on either of these
accounts, is the necessary labor timely bestowed for the preservation of our
testimony?

11. Are friends careful to have all their marriages, births, deaths and
burials, duly recorded? And are there any friends, removed from or come amongst
us, without certificates?

12. Do you take due care regularly to deal with all offenders, in the spirit
of meekness and wisdom, without partiality or unnecessary delay? And is
judgment placed where it appears necessary, in the authority of truth,
according to our discipline?

And in order to render the said queries more effectual, it is directed that
the answers be full and explicit, comprizing the substance of every part of
each query, in order that this meeting being rightly informed of the state of
the church in general, the needful advice and assistance may be duly
administered. 1761.

That to this purpose they be first read in the preparative-meetings preceding
the quarterly meeting, and distinct answers given thereto in said meetings; and
those answers carried to their respective monthly-meetings, where the queries
are also to be read, and the answers aforesaid; and those answers digested in
each monthly meeting, and sent from thence to the quarterly meeting, where the
queries are to be again read, and the answers thereto, which came from the
monthly-meetings; and a summary account made in the quarterly meeting,
comprehending the state thereof, sounded on the answers to the queries, to be
entered on their records, and transmitted to the yearly meeting, and there
read; and a summary of the reports to be entered in the yearly meeting book.

And that the minutes and reports, which go from inferior to superior meetings,
be signed by their respective clerks.

(...) RECORDS.
IT is concluded that there be entered on our records, beside the usual minutes
of our proceedings, all the conclusions, advices and epistles, which go from
hence, both with the meetings we correspond with abroad, and the
quarterly-meetings; and a summary account of the answers to the queries from
the several quarters.

And that quarterly-meetings record all epistles, advices and conclusions,
received from this meeting; a summary account of the state of the
monthly-meetings, from the answers to the queries quarterly; and all their
proceedings, conclusions and advices, whether by epistle or otherwise.

And that monthly-meetings record, beside the usual minutes and conclusions,
all epistles of advice, and the conclusions of this and the quarterly meeting
they belong to; marriage certificates, with the witnesses at large; births,
deaths, burials; all papers of acknowledgment, and testimonies of denial; all
certificates of removal, from or to the meeting, and of friends that travel in
the ministry; letters of correspondence with other meetings, and an account of
all sufferings for our Christian, testimony; a copy of which account is to be
sent up to the meeting for sufferings, and after being examined and approved,
to be there also recorded; and that all our books of record have proper
alphabets at the end, that recourse may be had more readily to any particular,
when occasion requires.

That friends be careful to have all books of record well bound in leather or
parchment; and that they be kept in a secure place, so as not to be damaged by
wet or moisture.

(...) REMOVALS and SETTLEMENTS.
THAT no friends remove from one monthly meeting to another, without first
acquainting the monthly meeting to which they belong thereof, in order for
their brotherly advice and counsel in that respect.

And where any so remove, they are to apply for, and if no objection appears
against it, to have a certificate of their life, conversation and circumstance,
according to truth and justice, as they may deserve from the said meeting; to
be produced to such monthly meeting within whose limits they are going to
reside; and that such friend or friends shall from thenceforward be deemed
members of the meeting they so remove unto, except they were insolvent, or had
been relieved by the meeting recommending, or some other meeting on their
behalf, within the term of three years preceding the delivery of such
certificate; but if any friend or friends, who have delivered a certificate,
shall fall into necessitous circumstances, and shall ask and receive any relief
within the above limited time of three years, not having contributed to or been
employed in any service of the church, by the meeting they were recommended to,
such friend or friends shall then continue to belong to the meeting from whence
they were recommended; yet the meeting within the compass of which they reside
shall assist and relieve them, and give notice thereof to the meeting which
recommended them; and upon that meeting's receiving such notice, they shall
immediately take the necessary care of them, and repay the charges the meeting
to which they were recommended has been at on their account.

And that no friend gain a settlement by marriage-certificate, or other
recommendation, unless a removal be expressed therein.

Agreed, when any friend removes without applying for a certificate, the
monthly meeting from whence he removed should, as speedily as they can,
acquaint the monthly meeting within whose limits he or she resides, of the
circumstances in which they left them, in order for their knowledge and care in
dealing with them for such neglect; and if, after their discharging a Christian
duty toward them, they cannot be brought to a proper sense of their
irregularity, so as to comply with what is directed in such cases, that they,
upon information thereof being received by the meeting from whence they
removed, said meeting should have liberty to make a record on their minutes,
setting forth their disapprobation of such conduct; and that the said person
having disregarded the good order of our religious society, has thereby
rendered him or herself unworthy of membership among us; a copy of which minute
should be sent to the monthly meeting where they reside, to be delivered to
them, after which, if a husband or a father, a certificate should be sent for
the wife and children of such person, if any there be; or, if a mother, for the
children; nevertheless it is not hereby intended to lessen the authority given
to monthly-meetings, within whose limits any person may so remove and
afterward misbehave, from dealing with and testifying against them, if they
should see cause.

SALUTATIONS.
ADVICE given against a declension crept in among us by unbecoming gestures, in
cringing and bowing the body by way of salutation, which ^ught not to be taught
or countenanced. 1718. [See Plainness.]


(...) SCHOOLS.
ADVISED that schoolmasters and mistresses, who are faithful friends, and well
qualified, be encouraged in all places where there may be need; and that care
be taken, that poor friends children may freely partake of such education, as
may tend to their benefit and advantage, in order to apprenticeship. 1695.

Quarterly and monthly-meetings are desired to take care, that in all places
where schools are set up for teaching of friends children, the masters be
diligent to improve and forward their scholars in learning, and to keep them
out of every thing that would corrupt good manners. 1697.

It is the renewed concern of this meeting, to recommend a care for the
offspring of such parents, whose earnings or income are so small, as to render
them incapable of giving their children a suitable and guarded education, and
that especially from home, by which they may be prevented from mixing with
others not of our religious persuasion, which so often leads into hurtful
habits, from which they are not afterward easily reclaimed; and as some of our
members may incautiously permit their offspring to suffer this great loss,
rather than apply for assistance from their monthly-meetings, it is recommended
to friends in every monthly meeting to seek out such of their members as may be
thus straightened, and administer to their help; and it is desired that such
will receive the salutary aid with a willing mind, and thankfulness to the
great Author of all good. 1777.

It is advised that each monthly meeting appoint a solid, judicious committee,
whose care should be to meet as often as occasion requires, and consult
together, and assist friends in procuring friends to teach schools, and to
advise and assist them in the regulation thereof; and encourage friends to send
their children to the same.

And it is our advice, that no friend, after the present contracts, expire,
send their children to any other school but such as are kept by a member of our
society, and under the regulation of friends, without the particular
circumstances attending are such as the school-committee of the
monthly-meetings may think it best; and particularly the school-committee of
friends every where, throughout the yearly meeting, are desired to pay special
attention to give the poor of society such an education as may fit them for
business.

SCRIPTURES.
RECOMMENDED as an incumbent duty on friends, to cause their children to be
frequent in reading the Holy Scriptures, and in observing to them the examples
of such children, as in Scripture are recorded to have early learned the fear
of the Lord, and hearkened to his counsel: Instructing them in the fear and
dread of the Lord; planting upon their spirits impressions of reverence toward
God, from whom they have their daily support; showing them they ought not to
offend him; but love, serve, and honor him, in whose hand all blessings are.
1709.

It is also seriously advised, that no friends suffer romances, play-books, or
other vain and idle pamphlets, in their houses or families, which tend to
corrupt the minds of youth; but, instead thereof, that they excite them to the
reading the Holy Scriptures, and other religious books. Let the Holy Scriptures
be early taught our youth, diligently searched, and seriously read by friends,
with due regard to the Holy Spirit from whence they came, and by which they are
truly opened: For they contain excellent doctrine, rules and precepts, divine
and moral. 1720.

And, dear friends, inasmuch as the Holy Scriptures are the external means of
conveying and preserving to us an account of the things most surely to be
believed concerning the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ in the flesh, and the
fulfilling the prophesies relating thereto; we therefore recommend to all
friends, especially elders in the church, and masters of families (...) they
would, both by example and advice, impress on the minds of the younger ^
reverent esteem of those sacred writings, and advise them to a frequen^ (...)
and meditating therein; and that you would, at proper times and (...), when you
find your minds rightly disposed thereunto, give the youth to understand, that
the same good experience of the work of sanctification, through the operations
of the Spirit of God, which the Holy Scriptures plentifully bear testimony to,
is to be witnessed by believers in all generations, as well as by those in the
first ages of Christianity; in which case some account of our own experience
will be helpful to them; and this we recommend as the most effectual means of
begetting and establishing in their minds a firm belief of the Christian
doctrine in general, as well as the necessity of the aid and help of the
operations of the Holy Spirit of God in the hearts of men in particular,
contained in that most excellent book the Bible; and for the preserving them
from being defiled with the many pernicious notions and principles, contrary to
such sound doctrine, which are at this time industriously dispersed in this
country, to the reproach of the Christian profession in general. 1728.

And in order to render these advices more effectual, we further tenderly
recommend to all heads of families, that they do frequently call their children
and servants together; and, in a solemn way, audibly read, or cause to be read,
the Holy Scriptures; and in so doing that they humbly wait upon God with their
families, for instruction and counsel to them respecting Christian faith and
practice, according to the former advices of this meeting.

Sleeping in our religious Meetings.
FORASMUCH as our religious meetings are to be attended for the honor and
worship of our Almighty Creator, the promotion and enlargement of our own
peace, and good example to others; it is an incumbent duty of every member of
our society reverently to attend them; waiting for and obeying the measure of
grace and light received; such therefore who so far neglect their duty herein
as to sleep, or by nodding or bowing the head, or other apparent signs of
sleep, reproach themselves, bring a burden on the faithful, and dishonor the
truth, are to be treated tenderly with for their recovery; and if, after due
waiting and admonition in meekness and wisdom, any shall continue in so
disreputable and dishonorable a practice, they be not employed nor active in
any calling, business or appointment of society, until an overcoming be
witnessed, to the satisfaction of the brethren: And if he or she be such as
have usually sat facing the meeting, whether minister, elders or others, they
withdraw from such seats, that their ill example and reproach may be lessened,
and take their seats with the members at large, until they and friends are
sensible of an overcoming the sin that thus easily besets them. And, Brethren,
if a man be overtaken with a fault, ye which are spiritual restore such an one
in the spirit of meekness, considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted.
Gala. vi. 1.

(...) SPIRITUOUS LIQUORS.
THE excessive use of spirituous liquors, of all kinds, having for a long time
been seen by our society to be a practice tending to lead from calmness and
innocence, to the many evils which are the consequences of intemperance; and a
concern having arose for the spreading of this testimony, not only to the
disuse of distilled spirituous liquors among us, except as medicine, but that
others also may by our example be encouraged to restrain its use within the
limits of truth: We recommend to all friends every where, carefully to look at
the motives of being concerned therewith, not only of using but distilling,
importing, trading in or handing out to others, who from habit may have
acquired a thirst and inclination after it, tending to their hurt. We tenderly
advise all such as are concerned therein, to center down to the principle
leading to universal righteousness; and as we apprehend a continuance in such
practices will, in this day of light, weaken the hands not only of those
individuals concerned to further the reformation, but tend greatly to obstruct
society from holding up a standard to this important testimony, as becomes our
holy profession.

We entreat therefore those who have began well, and made advances in the way
toward their own peace, that as soon as may be they forbear the said
practices, that a line may in due time be drawn, and the standard raised and
spread to the nations. 1784.

(...) SPORTS and GAMING.
ADVISED that such be dealt with as run races, either on horseback or on foot;
or otherwise lay wagers, or use any kind of gaming, or needless and vain sports
or pastime: For our time swiftly passes away; and our pleasure and delight
ought to be in the law of the Lord. 1719.

And friends are advised against attending such places, on any account.

(...) STOCK.
AGREED that a collection be occasionally made for defraying the expenses of
society, and that it be lodged in the hands of a treasurer to be annually
appointed, and subject to be drawn out for the service of truth, by the meeting
for sufferings, who are to account for the same; the treasurer's accounts to be
audited annually by a committee, to be from time to time appointed for that
purpose.

The sums which may be thought necessary to be raised, is agreed to be
proportioned to each quarter by their representatives present, from time to
time; and each quarterly meeting is desired to be punctual in sending up the
same accordingly.

(...) SUFFERINGS.
UPON consideration of sufferings in general, it is advised that in cases of
difficulty, and where friends who are sufferers stand in need of advice in any
particular case, they send up their respective cases to the meeting for
sufferings. 1682.

That friends be careful of entangling themselves in law, because of some small
irregularity in the proceeding; but if the law be materially transgressed, and
the severity of it exceeded by the persecutor, that friends use their freedom,
upon serious and good advice among themselves, so as the testimony of truth may
be kept clear over all. 1676.

(...) TESTIMONIES and MEMORIALS.
IT is recommended to the quarterly and monthly-meetings, to appoint suitable
friends to collect memorials of the living services and dying sayings of
ministers, elders and other friends, whose lives are remarkable for true piety
and faithfulness; with the time of their birth and death as near as may be,
with a distinction between ministers, elders and others, and where they lived;
and that such collections be inspected by each quarterly and monthly meeting,
and from thence send them up to this meeting, to be again inspected by a
committee, and when approved by this meeting to be here recorded. 1760.

It is the judgment of this meeting, that it may be best to read all
testimonies of denial in a public meeting, except monthly-meetings consider the
person or persons disowned to have lived such lives that they have not been
deemed members among friends, by people not of our society; or unless it shall
appear, to the satisfaction of the monthly meeting, such publication may be
injurious to the cause of truth: That acknowledgments from persons restored be
published, so far as in best wisdom the monthly-meetings may judge proper.

(...) TRADE.
ADVISED that none launch into trading, and worldly business, beyond what they
can manage honorably and with reputation; so that they may keep their words
with all men, that their yea may prove yea indeed, and their nay, nay; for
whatsoever is otherwise comes of evil; and that they use few words in their
dealings, lest they bring dishonor to God through their forwardness; and such
as make themselves guilty, by thus dishonouring God, and the holy profession of
his name and truth, are for judgment, and the judgment of truth ought to be set
over them, that those who walk and abide in the truth may be clear of their
iniquities. 1675, 1688.

It is advised, and earnestly desired, that the payment of just debts be not
delayed by any professing truth, beyond the time promised and agreed upon; nor
occasion given of complaint to those they deal with, by their backwardness of
payment, where no time is limited; nor any to overcharge themselves with too
much trading, or with business beyond their capacities and abilities to manage
in the truth.

It is the advice of this meeting, to the several quarterly-meetings, that care
may be taken, that substantial friends be appointed to visit every family
amongst us, where they think there is occasion to suspect they are going
backwards in their worldly estate, in a manner that may be to the ill example
of others, or prejudice of creditors; and to enquire and see how things are
with them, advise them in tenderness according to our discipline; and if they
do not manifest a disposition to take such advice, and comply with it, then to
give them gospel order, and proceed therein against them.

And, dear friends, this meeting being under an holy care and deep concern, for
the glory of God, the honor of our holy profession, and safety and growth of
every member of the body; do advise and counsel all friends, for their own
good, that they keep to such lawful and honest employments as they well
understand, and are able to manage, for a necessary support of themselves and
families; and not to launch out beyond their abilities, especially upon such
credit as truth may have given them with their brethren or others, and more at
their hazard who trust them than their own, which is not only a dishonor to
truth, but dishonest as men, and such cannot be owned in such things to have
place in the body. 1710.

Advised that such be dealt with as trade by sea or land, or buy, bargain or
contract, beyond their abilities; and such as keep not their words, promises or
engagements, in their dealings; and do not pay or satisfy their just debts,
according to time agreed on. These being a reproach to truth, and a manifest
injury and injustice, advice to all such should be speedily given, and if they
do not reclaim, amend and duly answer, they are to be further proceeded
against. 1719.

It is earnestly desired, that all friends every where be very careful to avoid
all inordinate pursuits after the things of this world, by such ways and means
as depend too much upon the uncertain probabilities of hazardous enterprises;
but rather labor to content themselves with such a plain way and manner of
living, as is most agreeable to the self-denying principle of truth which we
profess, and which is most ^^^ducive to that tranquillity of mind that is
requisite to a religious conduct through this troublesome world. 1724.

Advised that a conscientious care dwell on all our minds, not only to be just
in our trade and dealing, neither deceiving the buyer in what we sell, or
falsifying the balances; but that we keep to our promises, and pay our debts in
due time; not exceeding our circumstances or reasonable expectations in our way
of living, nor engaging in hazardous things more out of vanity than necessity.
And it is our advice, when any professing truth finds himself not able to
comply with his contracts, that he call his creditors, and declare his
condition in time, and by showing the honesty of his intentions may clear the
society from any scandalous imputations; and where any so circumstanced refuses
to do so, let him be duly censured. And, on the other hand, we are to remind
you to take heed and beware of covetousness; this grand enemy of the love and
faith of Jesus being too apt to prevail in this time and place of outward
tranquillity, wherein we are a people signally blessed of God. 1737.

It is the sense and judgment of this meeting, that no persons who shall fail
of paying their just debts ought to be admitted to act in meetings for
business, or join with friends in collecting for the poor and the service of
the church, until they have made satisfaction to the monthly meeting they
belong to, and done what is in their power to take off the reproach they have,
by their imprudent conduct, brought on our Christian principle. 1737.

We are also engaged to caution every individual against imprudently entering
into joint securities with others; for, by these practices, many innocent wives
and children have been inevitably and unexpectedly involved in ruinous and
deplorable circumstances. We therefore earnestly desire friends to keep
strictly on their guard, that none, through any specious pretenses of rendering
acts of friendship to others with safety to themselves, may risque their own
peace and reputation, and the security of their families: In order hereunto, we
recommend this salutary advice of the wise man to their especial notice and
regard: Be not thou one of them that strike hands, or of them that are sureties
for debts. If thou have nothing to pay, why should he take away thy bed from
under thee? Prove. xxii. 26, 27. 1771.

It is earnestly recommended, that friends frequently inspect the state of
their affairs, and frequently settle their accounts; and when any find
themselves unable or have not more than sufficient to pay their just debts,
that they immediately disclose their circumstances to some judicious friends,
or principal creditors, and take their advice how to act, and be particularly
careful not to pay one creditor in preference to another. 1782.

(...) WAR.
WE have as a people looked upon ourselves, as well as the primitive
Christians, to be included in the notable prophecy, Isai. ii. 4, They shall
beat their swords into ploughshares, and their spears into pruning hooks, and
learn war no more; agreeable to the doctrine of our blessed Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ and his apostles (to which our ancient friends abundantly bore
testimony, both in doctrine and practice, and suffered deeply for, confirmed
and ratified by several of our yearly-meetings, particularly in the years 1693
and 1730, by their express declarations and testimonies against carrying guns,
for defending our ships, persons, and goods) and being under many strong
engagements to observe the same, from the particular care of Providence over
such as have been faithful to this our testimony, particularly those of our
friends in Pennsylvania; nevertheless some, professing to be of our society,
have slighted and neglected this our ancient and Christian testimony, to that
degree as to be concerned in privateering, or as owners of ships going as
letters of marque, which is a flagrant and lamentable departure from our
peaceable principle, which has always been to confide in the protection and
Providence of Almighty God, and not in weapons of war; which practice of theirs
may be attended with injustice, barbarity and bloodshed.

This meeting having taken this sorrowful and afflicting case, and breach of
our ancient testimony, into our serious consideration, have thought it our
incumbent duty to bear our testimony against such practices; and it is the
unanimous sense of this meeting, that all quarterly and monthly-meetings ought
speedily to deal with every person found in the practice of such things, in the
spirit of truth and love, in order to bring them to a sense of their error, and
to reclaim them from it; which if they cannot do, then to testify against them,
and let them know we have no unity or fellowship with them. 1744.

We are sorrowfully affected, by the answers to the Queries, that some friends
have failed in the maintenance of our Christian testimony against wars and
fighting, by joining with others to hire substitutes, and by the payment of
money to exempt themselves from personal service, in the militia; a practice
inconsistent with the testimony to the reign of the Prince of Peace our
ancients received, and were concerned to maintain through cruel sufferings, and
which the faithful in this day dare not shrink from: Which defection from our
Christian testimony and general practice having been matter of sorrow to this
meeting, we are concerned strongly to advise against, and that friends every
where stand faithful and single in their dependence on the Lord for
preservation, who alone is forever able to keep in perfect safety. And if
suffering be the lot which does result from such obedience to the divine
requiring, such will, as they abide in the simplicity and innocence of truth,
reap the fruits of peace in their own bosom. Let therefore the care of friends,
in their several monthly-meetings, be exerted to prevent any contributions for
hiring substitutes, or other methods of exempting themselves from the militia,
incon^istent with our well-known testimony. 1760.

It is our sense and judgment, that we cannot, consistent with our well-known
principles, actively pay any rate or assessment on any town or class of men
which may be imposed, for not raising the quotas or number assigned them to
raise for any military purpose; whether it be as a fine for neglect, or an
equivalent for such quotas or detachment; nor any rates or assessments made for
the advancing of the hire or inlisting-money of volunteers, or which may be
expressly therein ordered to be given or paid to military men. 1762.

We advise that all friends carefully avoid censuring or judging each other, in
respect to the payment or non-payment of such taxes, a part whereof goes to the
support of war, and a part for civil government.

And it is recommended to friends every where, to take into their serious
consideration the inconsistency of any under our profession suffering their
temporal interest to induce them in any manner to contribute to the purposes of
war.

It is the concern of this meeting to recommend to the several
monthly-meetings, that they, consistent with our ancient testimony, refuse the
payment of all taxes, expressly or specially for the support of war, whether
called for in money, provisions or otherwise; and that accounts of distraints
for such taxes be sent up; and that such friends as do actively pay such taxes
be dealt with as disorderly walkers. We also desire, that all friends carefully
avoid discouraging a tender scruple which may arise in the minds of our
brethren respecting the payment of such taxes, a part whereof is evidently for
the support of war; and that all be careful to manifest, by a steady consistent
conduct, that they singly aim to experience an advancement in the truth. 1781.

(...) WOMEN'S MEETINGS.
OUR women's meetings being set up and approved in the love of God, and by his
wisdom and power; and being of manifest service, and helpful in the church; it
is the earnest desire and advice of this meeting, that they may be upheld and
encouraged. 1707.

And in order that the service of women's meetings may be the more extensive, it
is recommended that each monthly meeting of women friends depute
representatives to attend the service of their quarterly-meetings; and each
quarterly meeting depute representatives to the yearly meeting.

That they proceed in answering the queries, appointing all the proper
officers, and conducting the business necessary to their meetings, as the men's
meetings are advised under queries, monthly-meetings, quarterly-meetings and
yearly-meetings.

In regard to the matter of men and women's meetings being united in disowning
and receiving members, it is agreed, when any person requests the care of
friends, and when any friend is taken under dealing in any monthly meeting,
such meeting, whether men's or women's, acquaint the other thereof, in order for
their uniting their sympathy, and help, if they think it best; and when the
meeting to whom application is made, or by whom the friend may be under
dealing, are about to receive, restore or disown the person under care, that
both meetings be acquainted therewith, and their concurrence or unity
manifested before the conclusion be entered; and when the approbation of both
men and women be obtained, the same be entered on the minutes of each meeting.

And it is advised, that men and women be attentive and ready in their monthly
and quarterly-meetings to unite their assistance to each other, when it appears
useful and best, whether expressly desired or not; and that testimonies of
denial be read, approved and minuted, in both meetings, and then be signed by
the clerk of the men's meeting, if respecting a man, and if a woman, by the
clerk of the women's meeting.

(...) YEARLY MEETING.
THE good and blessed intent and end of this and all our assemblies is, with
the Lord's assistance, for his honor, in the promoting and maintaining of our
Christian society and religion, in life and practice, in all the parts and
branches thereof. 1695.

It is the fervent desire of this meeting, that the business and concerns
thereof be solidly, in the fear of God, managed and carried on, without
contention or striving; and with as few words, and in as pertinent expressions
to the matter in hand, as may be, for expediting the affairs thereof without
loss of time, or any ways disordering the meeting; but one at a time speaking,
and standing up, that all things may be done decently, and in good order. 1710.

That the quarterly-meetings be careful annually to depute such friends to
attend the service of the yearly meeting, as are men fearing God, of good
conversation, weighty spirits, prudent and sincere, well acquainted with the
affairs of truth, and diligent attenders of meetings for discipline at home;
whose practice and conversation is answerable to the testimony they profess to
bear; men known to be faithful and conscientious. 1714, 1733.

Advised that no representatives withdraw from the meeting before it ends,
without leave first requested and granted, that the service of the meeting may
not be neglected. 1709.

It behooves us, in all such our assemblies, to have our minds seasoned with a
sense of the weight of the work we are engaged in, and to exert ourselves with
an holy zeal for the cause of God, and the promotion of his truth; carefully
watching against an exalted spirit, which would strive for mastery and
dominion, laboring in love and meekness of wisdom to be helpful one unto
another, that Nothing may be done through strife, or vainglory; but, in
lowliness of mind, let each esteem other better than themselves. Phil. ii. 3.
1747.

Agreed that at the close of the yearly meeting for worship all the
representatives retire, and agree upon a clerk for the present year; and when
the meeting of business is entered by the former clerk, or in his absence the
clerk of the meeting for sufferings, the clerk named by the representatives
being approved is to be entered, and then to take his seat at the table, and
proceed on the business before the meeting.

Agreed that all papers that come before this meeting, as well as quarterly and
monthly-meetings, except such as are from immediate correspondents, be first
examined by a committee, to be from time to time appointed, before they be read
up in our meetings.

YOUTH.
WE earnestly beseech our friends, and especially the youth among us, to avoid
all such couversation as may tend to draw out their minds into the foolish and
wicked pastimes with which this age abounds (particularly balls,
gaming-places, horse-races, and play houses) those nurseries of debauchery and
wickedness, the burden and grief of the sober part of other societies, as well
as of our own; practices wholly unbecoming a people under the Christian
profession, contrary to the tenor of the doctrine of the gospel, and the
examples of the best men in the earliest ages of the church. For as "Evil
communications corrupt good manners," so it is the duty of men professing
religion, who live in this world in order to obtain a better, not only to Shake
their hands from holding of bribes, and stop their ears from hearing of blood,
but also "to shut their eyes from seeing of evil." Isai. xxxiii. 15. 1739.

And dearly beloved youth, in an humble sense of the continued visitations of
the Father's love, and experience of their blessed effects, we entreat you, by
the mercies of God receive its holy impressions, submit to its discipline; this
will preserve you from the deplorable effect of Satan's transformations,
inspire you with holy resolutions, and enable you to maintain them in all godly
conversation, and purity of life and faith, adorning the doctrine of the gospel
by a blameless demeanor. True peace will then flow as a river in your own
minds; and the fruits of the tree of righteousness be brought forth to your
inexpressible consolation in Christ, the revival of Zion's beauty, the
rebuilding of her desolations; so that, by and through you, she may yet appear
beautiful to the sincere-hearted, but to her enemies terrible as an army with
banners. 1751.


