THE SIN AND DANGER OF SELF-LOVE DESCRIBED, IN A SERMON Preached at Plymouth,
in New England, 1621.

By Robert Cushman.

LONDON: PRINTED, PLYMOUTH, [MASSACHUSETTS] Reprinted BY NATHANIEL COVERLY, D,
DCCLXXXV.

To his loving Friends the Adventurers for NEW ENGLAND. TOGETHER, With all
Well-Willers, and Well-Wishers thereunto, Grace and Peace, etc.
NEW ENGLAND, so called, not only (to avoid novelties) because Captain Smith
has so entitled it in his Description, but because of the resemblance that is
in it, of England the native soil of Englishmen; It being much what the same
for heat and cold in Summer and Winter, it being Champion ground, but no high
mountains, some what like the soil in Kent and Essex; full of Dales, and meadow
Ground, full of Rivers and sweet Springs, as England is. But principally, so
far as we can yet find, it is an island, and near about the quantity of
England, being cut out from the main Land in America, as England is from the
main of Europe, by a great arm of the Sea, which enters in forty Degrees, and
runs up North West and by West, and goes out either into the South Sea, or
else into the Bay of Canada. The certainty whereof, and secrets of which, we
have not yet so found as that as eyewitnesses we can make narration thereof,
but if God give time and means, we shall, ere long, discover both the extent of
that River, together with the secrets thereof; and so try what Territories,
Habitation, or Commodities, may be found, either in it, or about it.

IT pertains not to my purpose to speak any thing either in praise, or
dispraise of the Country; so it is by God's Providence, that a few of us are
there planted to our content, and have with great Charge and Difficulty
attained quiet and competent Dwellings there. And thus much I will say for the
satisfaction of such as have any thought of going hither to inhabit? That for
men which have a large heart, and look after great riches, ease, pleasures,
dainties, and jollity in this World (except they will live by other men's sweat,
or have great riches) I would not advise them to come there, for as yet the
Country will afford no such matters: But if there be any who are content to lay
out their Estates, spend their, time, labors, and endeavors, for the benefit
of them that shall come after, and in desire to further the Gospel among those
poor Heathens, quietly contenting themselves with such hardship and
difficulties, as by God's Providence shall fall upon them, being yet young, and
in their strength, such men I would advise and encourage to go, for their ends
cannot fail them.

AND if it should please God to punish his people in the Christian Countries of
Europe, (for their coldness, carnality, wanton abuse of the Gospel, Contention,
etc.) either by Turkish slavery, or by popish tyranny which God forbid, yet if
the time be come, or shall come (as who knows) when Satan shall be let loose
to cast out his floods against them, ( Rev. 12.14, 15.) here is a way opened
for such as have wings to fly into this Wilderness; and as by the dispersion
of the Jewish Church through Persecution, the Lord brought in the fullness of
the Gentiles, ( Act. 11.20, 21.) so who knows, whether now by Tyranny and
Affliction, which he suffers to come upon them, he will not by little and
little chase them even amongst the Heathens, that so a light may rise up in the
dark, ( Luke 2.32.) and the Kingdom of Heaven be taken from them which now have
it, and given to a People that shall bring forth the fruit of it. ( Mat.
21.43.) This I leave to the judgment of the godly wise, being neither Prophet
nor son of a Prophet, ( Amos 7.14) but considering God's dealing of old, (2
Kin. 17, 23.) and seeing the name of Christian to be very great, but the true
nature thereof almost quite lost in all degrees and sects, I cannot think but
that there is some judgment not far off, and that God will shortly, even of
stones, raise up children unto Abraham. (Mat. 3, 5.)

AND who so rightly considers what manner of entrance, abiding, and
proceedings, we have had among these poor Heathens since we came hither, will
easily think, that God have some great work to do toward them.

THEY were wont to be the most cruel and treacherous People in all these parts,
even like Lions, but to us they have been like Lambs, so kind, so submissive,
and trusty, as a man may truly say, many Christians are not so kind, nor
sincere.

THEY were very much wasted of late, by reason of a great Mortality that fell
amongst them three years since, which together with their own Civil Dissentions
and Bloody Wars, has so wasted them, as I think the twentieth person is scarce
left alive, and those that are left, have their courage much abated, and their
countenance is dejected, and they seem as a People affrighted. And though when
we came first into the Country, we were few, and many of us were sick, and many
died by reason of the cold and wet, it being the depth of Winter, and we having
no houses, nor shelter, yet when there was not six able persons among us, and
that they came daily to us by hundreds, with their Sachems or Kings, and might
in one hour have made a dispatch of us, yet such a fear was upon them, as that
they never offered us the least injury in word or deed. And by reason of one
Tisquanto, that lives amongst us, that can speak English, we have daily
Commerce with their Kings, and can know what is done or intended toward us
among the Savages; Also we can acquaint them with our courses and purposes,
both human and religious. And the greatest Commander of the Country, called
Massasoit, comes often to visit us, though he lives 50 miles from us, often
sends us Presents, he having with many other of their Governors, promised,
yea, subscribed Obedience to our Sovereign Lord King JAMES, and for his cause
to spend both strength and life. And we for our parts, through Gods Grace, have
with that equity, justice, and compassion, carried ourselves toward them, as
that they have received much favor, help, and aid from us, but never the least
injury or wrong by us. They offer us to dwell where we will.
We found the place where we live empty, the people being all dead and gone
away, and none living near by 8 or 10 miles; and though in the time of some
hardship we found (traveling abroad) near 8 bushels of Corn hid up in a Cave,
and knew no owners of it, yet afterward hearing of the owners of it, we gave
them (in their estimation) double the value of it. Our care has been to
maintain peace amongst them, and have always set ourselves against such of them
as used any rebellion, or treachery against their Governors, and not only
threatened such, but in some sort paid them their due deserts; and when any of
them are in want, as often they are in the Winter, when their Corn is done, we
supply them to our power, and have them in our houses eating and drinking, and
warming themselves, which thing (though it be something a trouble to us) yet
because they should see and take knowledge of our labors, orders, and
diligence, both for this life and a better, we are content to bear it, and we
find in many of them, especially, of the younger sort, such a tractable
disposition, both to religion and humanity, as that if we had means to apparel
them, and wholly to retain them with us (as their desire is) they would
doubtless in time prove serviceable to God and man, and if ever God send us
means we will bring up hundreds of their children, both to labor and learning.

But leaving to speak of them till a further occasion be offered; If any shall
marvel at the publishing of this treatise in England, seeing there is no want
of good books, but rather want of men to use good books, let them know, that
the especial end is, that we may keep those motives in memory for ourselves,
and those that shall come after, to be a remedy against self love the bane of
all societies. And that we also might testify to our Christian Countrymen, who
judge diversely of us, that though we be in a Heathen Country, yet the Grace of
Christ is not quenched in us, but we still hold and teach the same points of
faith, mortification, and sanctification, which we have heard and learned, in a
most ample and large manner in our own country. If any shall think it too rude
and unlearned for this curious age, let them know, that to paint out the Gospel
in plain and flat English, amongst a company of plain Englishmen (as we are)
is the best and most profitablest teaching; and we will study plainness, not
curiosity, neither in things human, nor heavenly. If any error or unsoundness
be in it, (as who knows) impute it to that frail man which endited it, which
professes to know nothing as he ought to know it. I have not set down my name,
partly because I seek no name, and principally, because I would have nothing
esteemed by names, for I see a number of evils to arise through names, when the
persons are either famous, or infamous, and God and man is often injured if any
good or profit arise to thee in the receiving of it, give God the praise and
esteem me as a son of Adam, subject to all such frailties as other men are.

AND you my loving Friends the Adventurers to this Plantation; as your care has
been, first to settle Religion here, before either profit or popularity, so I
pray you, go on, to do it much more, and be careful to send godly men, though
they want some of that worldly policy which this world has in her own
generation, and so though you loose, the Lord shall gain. I rejoice greatly in
your free and ready minds to your powers, yea, and beyond your powers to
further this work, that you thus honor God with your riches, and I trust you
shall be repayed again double and treble in this world, yea, and the memory of
this action shall never die, but above all adding unto this (as I trust you do)
like freeness in all other Gods services both at home and abroad, you shall
find reward with GOD, ten thousand-fold surpassing all that you can do or
think; be not therefore discouraged, for no labor is lost, nor money spent
which is bestowed for God, your ends were good, your success is good, and your
profit is coming, even in this life, and in the life to come much more: And
what shall I say now, a word to men of understanding suffices, pardon I pray
you my boldness, read over the ensuing Treatise, and judge wisely of the poor
weakling, and the Lord, the God of Sea and Land, stretch out his arm of
protection over you and us, and over all our lawful and good enterprises,
either this, or any other way.

PLYMOUTH in NEW ENGLAND. December 12. 1621.
A SERMON Preached at PLYMOUTH, in New England, 1621.
1 CORINTHIANS 10.24. Let no man seek his own: But every man another wealth.


THE occasion of these words of the Apostle Paul, was because of the abuses
which were in the Church of Corinth. Which abuses arose chiefly through
swelling pride, self-love and conceitedness, for although this Church was
planted by Paul and watered by Apollo, and much increased by the Lord; yet the
sower of tares was not wanting to stir up evil workers and fleshly minded
hypocrites, under a show of godliness, and with Angel-like holiness in
appearance, to creep in amongst them to disturb their peace, try their
soundness, and prove their constancy. And this the Apostle complains of very
often: as first, in their carnal divisions, Chap. 1. then in their extolling
their eloquent teachers, and despising Paul, Chap. 4. Then in their offensive
going to Law, before the heathen Judges, Chap 6. Then in eating things offered
to Idols, to the destroying of the tender consciences of their Brethren, Chap.
8. Then in their insatiable love feasts, in the time and place of their Church
meetings, the rich which could together feed to fullness, despising and
contemning the poor, that had not to lay it on as they had, Chap. 11. Finally
in both the Epistles, he very often nippeth them for their pride, and
self-love, straitness and censoriousness, so that in the last Chapter he
wills them again and again to prove, try and examine themselves, to see
whether Christ were in them or not, for howsoever many of them seemed, as
thousands do at this day to soar aloft, and go with full sail to Heaven: yet as
men that row in Boats, set their Faces one way, when yet their whole body goes
apace another way: so there are many whicn set such a face upon Riligion, and
have their Mouth full of great swelling words: as if they would even blow open
the doors of heaven, despising all humble minded and brokenhearted people, as
weak, simple, sottish, etc. when yet notwithstanding, these Blusterers, which
seem to go so fast, and leave all others behind them, if like these glosing
Corinthians, they carry affectedly their own glory with them, and seem thus to
stand for the glory of God. What do they else but join flesh to spirit, serving
not God for naught, but for wages, and so serving their bellies, whose end will
be damnation, except a speedy and sound remedy be thought of, which Remedy is
even that which our Savor teaches the rich young gallant, and which Paul here
prescribes, in willing them not to seek their own, but every man another
wealth, which Physic is as terrible to carnal professors, as abstinence from
drink is to a man that has the dropsy; and it is a sure note, that a man is
sick of this disease of self-love, if this be grievous to him as appears in
the man whom Christ bid sell that he had, and he went away very sorrowful, yet
surely this vein must be pricked, and this humor let out, else it will spoil
all, it will infect both soul and body, yea, and the contagion of it is such
(as we shall see anon) as will even hazard the welfare of that society where
self seekers and self lovers are.

As God then did direct this Apostle to lay down this brief direction as a
remedy for that evil in Corinth, so you may think it is by God's special
providence, that I am now to speak unto you from this text: and say in your
hearts, surely something is amiss this way: let us know it and amend it.

The parts of this text are two. 1, A Dehortation. 2. An Exhortation. The
Dehortation, Let no man seek his own. The Exhortation, But every man another's
wealth.

In handling of which, I will first, open the words. Secondly, gather the
doctrine. Thirdly illustrate the doctrine by scriptures, experience and
reasons. Fourthly apply the same, to every one his portion.

The proper drift of the Apostle here is not no tax the Corinthians, for
seeking their own evil ends in evil actions, but for aiming at themselves, and
their own benefits in actions lawful, and that appears in the former verse,
where he says, All things are lawful, etc. viz all such things as now we speak
of, to eat any of Gods creatures, offered to Idols or not, to feast and be
merry together, to show love and kindness to this or that person, etc. but when
by such means we seek our selves, and have not a charitable loving and reverent
regard of others, then they are unexpedient, unprofitable, yea unlawful, and
must be forborne, and he that has not learned to deny himself even the very use
of lawful things, when it tends to the contempt, reproach, grief, offense and
shame of his other Brethren and Associates, has learned nothing aright, but
is, apparently a man that seeks himself, and against whom the Apostle here
deals most properly.

The manner of the speech, may seem as counsel left at liberty: as Mat. 27 49
And in our ordinary speech, we think they be but weak charges, which are thus
delivered, let a man do this, or let him do that. But we must learn the
Apostles modesty, and know that whatsoever the terms seem to imply, yet even
this and other the like in this Epistle, are most absolute charges: as, Let a
man esteem of us, as the Ministers of Christ, Chap. 4.1. That is, a man ought
so to esteem of us. Let a man examine himself, 1 Cor. 11.28. That is, as if he
said, a man must examine himself. Let your women keep silence in the Churches.
1 Cor. 14, 34. that is, they ought so to do.

The meaning then summarily is, as if he said, the bane of all these mischiefs
which arise among you is, that men are two cleaving to themselves and their own
matters, and disregard and Contemn all others: and therefore I charge you, let
this self-seeking be left off, and turn the stream another way, namely, seek
the good of your Brethren, Please them, Honor them, Reverence them, for other
wise it will never go well amongst you.

Obj. But does not the Apostle elsewhere say? That he, which cares not for his
own, is worse than an Infidel. 1 Timothy 5.8.

Ans. True, but by (own) there, he means properly, a man's kindred, and here
by (own) he means properly a man's self.

Secondly, He there especially taxes such as were negligent in their labors
and callings, and so made themselves unable to give relief and entertainment to
such poor Widows and Orphans as were of their own flesh and blood.

Thirdly, Be it so, that some man should even neglect his own self, his own
wife, children, friends, etc. And give that he had to strangers, that were but
some rare vice, in some one unnatural man, and if this vice slay a thousand,
self-love slays ten thousands.

And this the wisdom of God did well foresee, and has set no caveats in the
Scriptures either to tax men, or forewarn them from loving others, neither
says God any where, let no man seek out the good of another, but let no man
seek his own, and every where in the Scriptures he has set watch words against
self-good, self-profit, self-seeking, etc. And thus the sense being cleared, I
come to the doctrine.

Doct. 1 All men are too apt and ready to seek themselves too much, and to
prefer their own matters and causes beyond the due and lawful measure, even to
excess and offense against God, yea danger of their own souls.

And this is true not only in wicked men which are given over of God to vile
lusts, as Absalom in getting favor in his fathers Court: Jeroboam, in settling
his kingdom fast in Samaria, Ahab in vehement seeking Naboth's vineyard, but
men, otherwise godly, have through frailty been foiled herein, and many
thousands which have a show of godliness, are lovers of themselves: David was
about to seek himself when he was going to kill Naball; Asa in putting Hanani
in prison; Josiah when he would go war with Neho, against the counsel of God,
and reason; Peter when he dissembled about the Ceremonies of the Law, yea and
Paul complains of all his followers ( Timothy excepted) that they sought their
own too inordinately. And why else are these caveats in the scriptures, but to
warn the godly that they be not tainted herewith? as, Look not every man on his
own things, but on the things of another: Love seeks not her own things. Be
not desirous of vain glory, etc. Philip. 2.4. 1 Cor. 13.6. Gal. 5* ^6.

Yea and does not experience teach, that even amongst professors of Religion,
almost all the love and favor that is showed unto others is with a secret aim
at themselves, they will take pains to do a man good, provided that he will
take twice so much for them, they will give a penny so as it may advantage them
a pound, labor hard so as all the profit may come to themselves, else they are
heartless and feeble. The vain and corrupt heart of man cannot better be
resembled then by a belly-god, Host, or Inkeeper, which welcometh his guests
with smilings, and salutations, and a thousand welcomes, and rejoiceth greatly
to have their company to dice, cards, eat, drink, and be merry, but should not
the box be paid, the pot be filling, and the money telling, all this while, the
Epicures joy would soon be turned into sorrow, and his smiles turned into
frowns, and the door set open, and their absence craved: even so men blow the
bellows hard, when they have an Iron of their own a heating, work hard whilst
their own house is in building, dig hard whilst their own garden is in
planting, but is it so as the profit must go wholly or partly to others; their
hands wax feeble, their hearts wax faint, they grow churlish, and give cross
answers, like Naball, they are sour, discontent, and nothing will please them.
And where is that man to be found, that will disperse abroad, and cast his
bread upon the waters, that will lend, looking for nothing again, that will do
all duties to others freely and cheerfully in conscience to God, and love unto
men, without his close and secret ends or aiming at himself; such a man, out of
doubt, is a black Swan, a white Crow almost, and yet such shall stand before
God with boldness at the last day, when others which have sought themselves,
though for love of themselves they have sought heaven, yea and through
self-love persuaded themselves they should find it, yet wanting love unto
others, they will be found as sounding brass, and as a tinkling Cimbal, and
whilst they have neglected others, and not cared how others live, so as
themselves may fare well, they will be found amongst them, that the Lord will
say unto, I know you not depart ye cursed into everlasting fire, Mat. 25.41.42.

But that I may not walk in generalities, the particular ways by which men seek
their own are these, First, such as are covetous, seek their own by seeking
riches, wealth, money, as Felix pretending love unto Paul, sent for him often,
but it was in hope of money. Many there are who say, who will show us any good,
Psalm. 4.7. And pretend Religion, as some of the Jews did the keeping of the
Sabbath, which yet cried out, when will the Sabbath be done, that we may sell
corn, and gain; if a man can tell how to get gold out of a flint, and silver
out of the Adamant, no pains shall be spared, no time shall be neglected, for
gold is their hope, and the wedge of gold is their confidence, their hearts are
set upon the pelf of this world, and for love of it, all things are let slip,
even all duties to God or men, they care not how basely they serve, how
wretchedly they neglect all others, so as they may get wealth: pinch who will,
and wring who will; all times are alike with them, and they run for the bribe
and Gehazie; and this is the first way that men seek their own.

Now the contrary is seen in Nehemiah, who when the people were hard put to it,
and the land raw, he took not the duties which were due to him being a
magistrate, he bought no land, nor grew rich, for it was no time: but he
maintained at his table many of his brethren the Jews, and so spent even his
own proper goods. And Paul sought no man's gold nor silver, but though he had
authority, yet he took not bread of the Churches, but labored with his hands:
And why? It was no time to take, some Churches were poor and stood in want, as
Thessalonica, others were in danger to be preyed upon by covetous belly-gods,
as Corinth: and therefore he saw it no fit time now to take any thing of them.

And indeed here is the difference between a covetous worldling, and an honest
thrifty Christian, it is lawful sometimes for men to gather wealth, and grow
rich, even as there was a time for Joseph to store up corn, but a godly and
sincere Christan will see when this time is, and will not hoard up when he
sees others of his brethren and associates to want, but then is a time, if he
have any thing to fetch it out and disperse it, but the covetous gather goods,
he like Achan covets all that he sees; and neglects no time, but gathers still
and holds all fast, and if it were to save the life of his brother, his bags
must not be diminished, nor his chests lighted, nor his Field set to sale,
gather as much as he can, but its death to diminish the least part of it.

2. The second way by which men seek their own, is when they seek ease, or
pleasure, as the Scribes and Pharisees, who would not touch the burden with one
of their fingers; for there is a generation, which think to have more in this
world then Adams felicity in innocence, being born (as they think) to take
their pleasures, and their ease, let the roof of the house drop through, they
stir not; let the field be overgrown with weeds, they care not, they must not
foul their hand, nor wet their foot, it is enough for them to say, Go you, not
let us go, though never so much need; such idle Droanes are intolerable in a
settled Commonwealth, much more in a Commonwealth which is but as it were in
the bud; of what earth I pray thee art thou made, of any better than the other
of the sons of Adam? And can thou see other of thy brethren toil their hearts
out, and thou sit idle at home, or take thy pleasure abroad? Remember the
example of Uriah, who would not take his ease nor his pleasure, though the King
required him, and why? Because his brethren, his associates, better men than
himself (as he esteemed them) where under hard labors and conditions, lay in
the field in tents, caves, etc.

3. The third way is when men seek their own bellies, as some did in the
Apostles times, which went about with new doctrines and devices, knowing that
the people had itching ears, and would easily entertain and willingly feed such
novelists, which brought in dissensions, schisms, and contentions, and such
were rocks, or pillars in their love feasts, as Jude speaks, ver. 12. They
were shadows in God's service, but when feasting came, then they were
substances, then they were in their element. And certainly there are some men
which shape even their Religion, humane state, and all, even as the belly cheer
is best, and that they must have, else all heart and life is gone, let all
conscience, care of others go, let Lazarus starve at the gate, let Ioseph's
affliction be increased, they must have their dishes, their dainties, or no
content. The contrary was seen in Nehemiah, who would not take his large
portion allotted to the governor, because he knew it went short with others of
his brethren; and Uriah would not receive the King's present, and go banquet
with his wife, because he knew the whole Host his brethren were fain to snap
short in the fields.

And the difference between a temperate good man, and a belly-god is this: A
good man will not eat his morsels alone, especially, if he have better then
others, but if by Gods providence, he have gotten some meat which is better
than ordinary, and better than his other brethren, he can have no rest in
himself, except he make others partake with him. But a belly-god will slop all
in his own throat, yea, though his neighbor come in and behold him eat, yet
his griple-gut shameth not to swallow all. And this may be done sometimes, as
well in mean fare as in greater dainties, for all countries afford not alike.

4 The fourth way by which men seek their own, is by seeking outward honor,
fame and respect with men; as King Saul when he had lost all respect and favor
with God, then thought to give content to his heart by being honored before
the Elders of the people; and it is wonderful to see how some men are desirous
of vain glory, Gal 5.26. And how earnestly they seek praise, favor, and
respect with men, and can have no quiet longer then their worldly favor
lasts, and that they will have what dishonor soever come to God, or disgrace
unto men, yea, they will disgrace, reproach, and disdain others, to gain honor
and advancement to themselves, yea, they will make bold with the Scriptures and
Word of God, to wrest and wring, and slight it over for their credits sake. And
let a man mark some men's talk, stories, discourses, etc. and he shall see their
whole drift is to extol and set out themselves, and get praise and commendation
of men.

Now the contrary was seen in Paul, he says, He needed no letters of
commendations, 2 Cor. 3.2. And again, He is not affected with men's praise, 2
Cor. 10.12. And here is indeed the difference between an humble-minded
Christian, and a proud self-lover; an humble man often has praise, as David,
Hezekiah, and Josiah, but he seeks it not, he desires it not, he is content to
go without it, he loves not the praise of men, for he knows it but froth and
vanity: But a proud self-lover, he seeks it still, get it or not get it, and if
he get it he is fully satisfied, if he get it not he hangs his head like a
Bull-rush, and has no comfort..

5. The fifth way by which men seek their own, is by seeking to have their
wills; as the wrong doers in Corinth, who thought it not enough to do wrong and
harm to their brethren, but to have their wills enough of them, drew them
before the Heathen Magistrates.

And truly, some men are so Prince-like, or rather Papal, that their very will
and word is become a law, and if they have said it, it must be so, else there
is no rest or quietness to be had, let never so many reasons be brought to the
contrary, its but fighting with the wind. They are like the obstinate Jews,
who, when against God's law, and reason, they asked a King* though Samuel
showed them that it would turn in the end to their own smart, yet still held
the conclusion, and said, nay, But we will have a King, 1 Samuel 8.19. Thus men
are caught by their own words, and ensnared by the straitness of their own
hearts, and it is death to them not to have their wills, and howsoever
sometimes (like Iezebell) they are cut short of their purposes, yet self-willed
men will strout and swell like Absalom, saying neither good nor bad, 2 Samuel
13.22. but hope for the day, and threaten like profane Esau, Genesis 27.41. Now
the contrary is seen in David, though a Prince, a Captain, a Warrior, who
having said, yea sworn, that he would kill Nabal, and all his family that day,
yet upon reasonable counsel given, and that by a weak woman, he changed his
mind, altered his purpose, and returned, without striking one stroke, an
example rare, and worthy imitation; and when men are sick of will, let them
think of David, it was his grace and honor to go back from his word and
practice, when reason came. So was it Herod's disgrace and shame to hold his
word and will against reason and conscience, Math. 14.8, 9.

Quest. But some men happily will say unto me, It is true, that men seek their
own by all these ways, But what should be the reason and cause of this? that
men seek so earnestly themselves, in seeking riches, honor, ease, belly-chear,
will, etc. something there is that carries them.

Ans. True, and the reasons and causes are specially these three,

First, Pride and high conceitedness, when men overvalue themselves: And this
made Absalom to seek his Fathers kingdom, because he thought himself worthy of
it. 2 Samuel 15.4. This made Haman so sore vexed, because Mordicai bowed not to
him, because he highly valued himself, Esth. 3.5.

And surely that which a man valueth much, he gives much respect to, and so it
is a sure sign that a man loves himself most when he gives most to himself;
and some intolerable proud persons even think all the world is for them, and
all their purposes and endeavors show what a large conceit they have of
themselves.

Secondly, Want of due consideration and valuation of other men's endowments,
abilities and deserts; when men pass those things by, though they have both
seen, heard, and felt them; as Pharaoh's Butler forgot Ioseph's eminency when
he was restored to his place, Genesis 40.23. So men use to write their own good
actions in Brass, but other men's in Ashes, never remembering nor considering the
pains, labor, good properties, etc. which others have, and so they have no
love to them, but only to themselves; as if God had made all other men
unreasonable beasts, and them only reasonable men.

Thirdly, Want of Heavenly Conversation, and spiritual Eye to behold the glory,
greatness, and majesty, and goodness of God; as the Queen of Sheba thought
highly of her own glory, wisdom and happiness, till she saw Solomon's wisdom
and glory, and then she cried out, not of the happiness of her own servants,
but of his servants that stood before him, ^ Kin. 10.7, 8. And verily, if men
were conversant Courtiers in Heaven, they would cry out with Paul* Romans 11.33.
Oh the deph of the riches, wisdom, and knowledge of God, etc. and would be
ashamed of their own sinfulness, nakedness and misery; for, as Countrymen
which never saw the state of cities, nor the glory of Courts, admire even their
own Country Orders: And as the Savages here which are clad in Skins, and creep
in woods and holes, think their own brutish and inhumane life the best, which
if they saw and did rightly apprehend the benefit of comely humanity, the
sweetness of Religion, and the service of God, they would even shamefully hide
themselves from the eye of all noble Christians. Even so, if men in serious
contemplation, by the eye of faith, would behold the glory of God, and what
great riches, beauty, fullness, perfection, power, dignity, and greatness is in
God, they would leave admiring of themselves, and seeking of themselves, and
would say with David, What am I? And what is my Fathers house? that thou
should thus bless me? 2 Samuel 7.18. Yea What is man? or the son of man that
thou so negardest him? Psalm. 8.3. ^^

But it is time to come to apply these things more particularly to ourselves,
and see what Use is to be made of them.

Use 1. Is it so, that God sees a proneness in all the sons of Adam, to seek
themselves too much, and has given them warnings and watch-words thereof, as
we have heard, and does experience confirm it? Then hence are reproved a number
of men, who think they can never show love enough to themselves, nor seek their
own enough, but think all cost, charges, cherishing, praise, honor, etc. too
little for them, and no man, needs to say to them, as Peter did to Christ,
favor thy self; but if they do a little for another man, they account it a
great matter, though it be but a morsel of bread, or a single penny; but no
varieties of dainties is too good for them, no silk, purple, cloth, or stuff is
too good to cloth them, the poor man's idleness and ill husbandry is often
thrown in his dish, but their own carnal delights and fleshly wontonness is
never thought upon: and why? Because they think even God and man owes all to
them, but they owe nothing to none. Why, thou foolish and besotted man, has
not the Holy Ghost read it in the very face of every son of Adam, that he is
too apt to seek his own, and art thou wiser than God, to think thou never
seek thine own enough? or dreamest thou that thou art made of other, and
better mettle then other men are? Surely, I know no way to escape, having of
corruption to thy Father, and the worm to thy Sister and Brother. And if God
had any were in all the Scriptures said, love thyself, make much of thyself,
provide for one, etc. there were some reason for thee to take up the Nigards
Proverbs, Every man for himself, and God for us all; Charity begins at home,
etc. But God never taught thee these things; No, they are Satan's positions.
Does God ever commend a man for carnal love of himself? Nay he brands it, and
disgraceth it, as self love, taking thought for the flesh; loving of pleasure,
etc. Romans 13.14. 2 Timothy 34.

Obj. It is a point of good natural policy, for a man to care and provide for
himself.

Ans. Then the most fools have most natural policy, for you see not the
greatest drons and novices, either in church, or Commonwealth, to be the
greatest scratchers and scrapers, and gatherers of riches? Are they not also
for the most part, best fed and clad? And live they not most easily? What shall
I say? Even hogs, dogs, and brute beasts know their own ease, and can seek that
which is good for themselves; And what does this shifting, progging, and fat
feeding which some use, more resemble any thing then the fashion of hogs? And
so let it be what natural policy it will.

Use 2. If God see this disease of self-love so dangerous in us, then it
stands us all in hand to suspect ourselves, and so to seek out the root of
this disease, that it may be cured. If a learned Physician, shall see by our
countenance and eye, that we have some dangerous disease growing on us, our
hearts will smite us, and we will bethink ourselves where the most grief lies,
and how it should come, whether with cold, heat, surfeit, overflowing of
blood, or through grief, melancholy, or any such way, and every man will bestir
himself to get rid of it, and will prevent always that which feed the disease,
and cherish all courses that would destroy it.

Now, how much more ought we to bestir ourselves, for this matter of self-love,
since God himself has cast all our waters, and felt all our pulses, and
pronounces us all dangerously sick of this disease? Believe it, God cannot
lie, nor be deceived; He that made the Heart, does not he know it? Let every
man's heart smite him, and let him fall to the examination of himself and see
first, whether he love not riches and worldly wealth too much, whether his
heart be not too jocand at the coming of it in, and too heavy at the going of
it out, for if you find it so there is great danger, if thou can not buy as
if thou possessed not, and use this world as though thou used it not, (1 Cor.
7.30, 31.) thou art sick, and had need to look to it. So, if thou love thine
ease and pleasure, see whether thou can be content to receive at Gods hands
evil as well as good, ( Job 2.10.) whether thou have learned as well to abound
as to want, ( Phil. 4.10.) as well to endure hard labor, as to live at ease;
and art as willing to go to the house of mourning as to the house of mirth, (
Eccl. 7.6.) for, else, out of doubt, thou love thy carnal pleasure and ease
too much.

Again, see whether thine heart cannot be as merry, and thy mind as joyful, and
thy countenance as cheerful, with course fare, with poulse, with bread and
water (if God offer thee no better, nor the times afford other) as if thou had
the greatest dainties. ( Dan. 1.15.) So also whether thou can be content as
well with scorns of men, when thou have done well* as with their praises, so if
thou can with comfort and good conscience say, I pass little for man's judgment;
whether thou can do thy duty that God requires* and despise the shame,
referring thyself unto God, for if thou be disheartened, discouraged, and
weakened in any duty because of men's dispraises, its a sign thou love
thyself too much.

So for the will, if thou can be content to give way even from that which thou
have said shall be, yea, ^owed shall be, when better reason comes, and have
that reverence of other men, as that when it stands but upon a matter of
will, thou art as willing their wills shall stand as thine, and art not sad,
churlish, or discontent, (1 Kings 21.4.) but cheerful in thine heart, though
thy will be crossed, it is a good sign, but if not, thou art sick of a
self-will, and must purge it out. I the rather press these things, because I
see many men both wise and religious, which yet are so tainted with this
pestilent self-love, as that it is in them even as a dead fly to the
Apothecaries ointment, spoiling the efficacy of all their graces, making their
lives uncomfortable to themselves, and unprofitable to others, being neither
fit for Church nor Commonwealth, but have even their very souls in hazard
thereby, and therefore who can say too much against it.

It is reported, that there are many men gone to that other Plantation in
Virginia, which, whilst they lived in England, seemed very religious, zealous,
and conscionable; and have now lost even the sap of grace, and edge to all
goodness; and are become mere worldlings. This testimoney I believe to be
partly true, and amongst many causes of it, this self-love is not the least. It
is indeed a matter of some commendations for a man to remove himself out of a
thronged place into a wide wilderness; to take in hand so long and dangerous a
journey, to be an instrument to carry the Gospel and humanity among the brutish
heathen; but there may be many goodly shows and glosses and yet a pad in the
straw, men may make a great appearance of respect unto God, and yet but
dissemble with him, having their own lusts carrying them: and, out of doubt,
men that have taken in hand hitherto come, out of coffeehouse, in regard of
their estates in England; and aiming at great matters here, affecting it to be
Gentlemen, Landed men, or hoping for Office, Place, Dignity, or fleshly
Liberty; let the show be what it will, the substance is naught, and that bird
of self-love which was hatched at home, if it be not looked to, will eat out
the life of all grace and goodness: and though men have escaped the danger of
the Sea, and that cruel mortality, which swept away so many of our loving
friends and brethren; yet except they purge out this self-love, a worse
mischief is prepared for them: And who knows whether God in mercy have
delivered those just men which here depared, from the evils to come; and from
unreasonable men, in whom there neither was, nor is, any comfort, but grief,
sorrow, affliction, and misery, till they cast out this spawn of self-love.

But I have dwelt too long upon this first part; I come now to the second,
which concerns an Exhortation, as I showed you, in the Division.

But every man another wealth.

In direct opposition, he should say, Let every man seek another, but the
first part being compared with the latter, and (seek) being taken out of the
former and put to the latter, and ( wealth) taken out or rather implied, in the
former, the whole sentence is thus resolved, Let no man seek his own wealth,
but let every man seek another wealth.

And the word here translated wealth, is the same with that in Romans 13.4. and
may not be taken only for riches, as Englishmen commonly understand it, but
for all kinds of benefits favors, comforts either for soul or body; and so
here again, as before you must understand an Affirmative Commandment, as the
Negative was before: and least any should say, If I may not seek my own good, I
may do nothing; Yes says Paul, I Will tell thee, thou shall seek the good of
another, whereas now all thy seeking helps but one, by this means thou shall
help many: and this is further enforced by these two circumstances; (no man)
may seek his own, be he rich, learned, wise, etc. But every man must seek the
good of another.

The point of instruction is taken from the very letter and phrase, viz.

Doct. 2. A man must seek the good, the wealth, the profit of others.

I say he must seek it, he must seek the comfort, profit and benefit of his
neighbor, brother, associate, etc. His own good he need not seek, it will
offer itself to him every hour; but the good of others must be sought, a man
must not stay from doing good to others till he is sought unto, pulled and
haled, (as it were) like the unjust Judge, for every benefit that is first
craved, comes too late. And thus the ancient Patriarchs did practice, when the
traveller and way-fareing men came by, they did not tarry till they came and
asked relief and refreshment, but sat at the gates to watch for such, ( Judge.
19.20, 21) and looked in the streets to find them, yea, set open their doors
that they might freely and boldly enter in. And howsoever, some may think this
too large a practice, since now the world is so full of people, yet I see not
but the more people there is, the larger Charity ought to be.

But be it so, as a man may neglect, in some sort the general world, yet those
to whom he is bound, either in natural, civil, or religious bands* them he must
seek how to do them good. A notable example you have in David, who, because
there was twixt him and Jonathan a band and covenant, therefore he enquired,
Whether there was any left of the house of Saul, to whom he might show mercy
for Ionathan's sake, 2 Samuel 9.1. So this people of Corinth, to whom Paul
writes, they were in a spiritual league and covenant in the Gospel, and so
were a body. Now for one member in the body to seek himself, and neglect all
others were, as if a man should cloth one arm or one leg of his body with gold
and purple, and let all the rest of the members go naked. 1 Cor. 12.27.

Now brethren, I pray you, remember yourselves, and know, that you are not in a
retired Monastical course, but have given your names and promises one to
another and covenanted here to cleave together in the service of God, and the
King; What then must you do? May you live as retired Hermites? and look after
no body? Nay, you must seek still the wealth of one another; And enquire as
David, how lives such a man? How is he clad? How is he fed? He is my brother,
my associate; we ventured our lives together here, and had a hard brunt of it
and we are in league together. Is his labor harder than mine? surely I will
ease him; has he no bed to lie on? why, I have two, I Will lend him one; has he
no apparel? why, I have two suits, I Will give him one of them; eats he course
fare, bread and water, and I have better, why, surely we will part stakes. He
is as good a man as I, and we are bound each to other, so that his wants must
be my wants, his sorrows my sorrows, his sickness my sickness, and his welfare
my welfare, for I am as he is. And such a sweet sympathy were excellent,
comfortable, yea, heavenly, and is the only maker and conserver of Churches and
commonwealths, and where this is wanting, ruin comes on quickly, as it did here
in Corinth.

But besides these motives, there are other reasons to provoke us not only to
do good one to another; but even to seek and search how to do it.

1. As first, To maintain modesty in all our associates, that of hungry
wanters, they become not bold beggars and impudent cravers; for as one says of
women, that, when they have lost their shamefacedness, they have lost half
their honesty, so may it be truly said of a man that when he has lost his
modesty, and puts on a begging face, he has lost his majesty, and the image of
that noble creature; and man should not beg and crave of man, but only of God.
True it is, that as Christ was fain to crave water of the Samaritan woman, (
Ioh. 4.5.) so men are forced to ask sometimes rather than starve, but indeed in
all societies it should be offered them. Men often complain of men's boldness in
asking, but how comes this to pass, but because the world have been so full of
self-lovers, as no man would offer their money, meat, garments, though they saw
men hungry, harbourless, poor, and naked in the streets; and what is it that
makes men brazen-faced, bold, brutish, tumultuous, but because they are
pinched with want, and see others of their Companions (which it may be have
less deserved) to live in prosperity and pleasure?

2 It wonderfully encourages men in their duties, when they see the burden
equally borne; but when some withdraw themselves and retire to their own
particular ease, pleasure, or profit; what heart can men have to go on in their
business? when men are come together to lift some weighty piece of timber or
vessel; if one stand still and do not lift, shall not the rest be weakened and
disheartened? Will not a few idle drones spoil the whole stock of laborious
Bees: so one idle-belly, one murmurer, one complainer, one self-lover will
weaken and dishearten a whole Colony. Great matters have been brought to pass
where men have cheerfully as with one heart, hand, and shoulder, gone about it,
both in wars, buildings, and plantations, but where every man seeks himself,
all comes to nothing.

3 The present necessity requires it, as it did in the days of the Jews,
returning from captivity, and as it was here in Corinth. The country is yet
raw, the Land untilled, the Cities not builded, the Cattle not settled, we are
compassed about with a helpless and idle people, the natives of the Country,
which cannot in any comely or comfortable manner help themselves, much less us.
We also have been very chargeable to many of our loving friends, which helped
us hither, and now again supplied us, so that before we think of gathering
riches, we must even in Conscience think of requiting their charge, love and
labor, and cursed be that profit and gain which aims not at this. Besides,
how many of our dear friends did here die at our first entrance, many of them
no doubt for want of good lodging, shelter, and comfortable things, and many
more may go after them quickly, if care be not taken. Is this then a time for
men to begin to seek themselves? Paul says, that men in the last days shall be
lovers of themselves, (2 Timothy 3.2.) but it is here yet but the first days, and
(as it were) the dawning of this new world, it is now therefore no time for men
to look to get riches, brave clothes, dainty fare, but to look to present
necessities; it is now no time to pamper the flesh, live at ease, snatch,
catch, scrape, and pill, and hoard up, but rather to open the doors, the
chests, and vessels, and say, brother, neighbor, friend, what want ye, any
thing that I have? make bold with it, it is yours to command, to do you good,
to comfort and cherish you, and glad I am that I have it for you.

4. And even the example of God himself, whom we should follow in all things
within our power and capacity, may teach us this lesson, for (with reverence to
his Majesty be it spoken) he might have kept all grace, goodness, and glory to
himself, but he has communicaeth it to us, even as far as we are capable of it
in this life, and will communicate his glory in all fullness with his Elect in
that life to come; even so his son Jesus Christ left his glory eclipsed for a
time, and abased himself to a poor and distressed life in this world, that he
might, by it, bring us to happiness in the world to come. If God then have
delighted in thus doing good and relieving frail and miserable man, so far
inferior to himself, what delight ought man to have to relief and comfort man,
which is equal to himself?

5. Even as we deal with others* ourselves and others shall be dealt withal.
Carest thou not how others fare, how they toil, are grieved, sick, pinched,
cold, harbourless, so as thou be in health, live at ease, warm in thy nest,
farest well? The days will come when thou shall labor and none shall pity
thee, be poor and none relieve thee, be sick, and lie and die and none visit
thee, yea, and thy children shall lie and starve in the streets, and none shall
relieve them, for it is the merciful that shall obtain mercy; Mat. 5.7. and the
memory of the just shall be blessed even in his seed; Prove. 10. and a merciful
and loving man when he dies, though he leave his children small and desolate,
yet every one is mercifully stirred up for the Fathers sake to show compassion,
but the unkindness, currishness, and self-love of a Father, is through God's
just judgment recompensed upon the children with neglect and cruelty.

6. Lastly, That we may draw to an end; A merciless man, and a man without
natural affection or love, is reckoned among such as are given over of God to a
reprobate mind, ( Romans 1.30.) and (as it were) transformed into a beast-like
humor; for, what is man if he be not sociable kind, affable, free-hearted,
liberal; he is a beast in the shape of a man; or rather an infernal Spirit,
walking amongst men, which makes the world a hell what in him lies; for, it is
even a hell to live where there are such men: such the Scriptures calls
Nabals, which signifies fools, (Psalm. 14.1.) and decayed men, which have lost
both the sap of grace and nature; and such merciless men are called Goats, and
shall be set at Christ's left hand at the last day, ( Math. 25.33.) Oh
therefore seek the wealth one of another.

Obj. But some will say, It is true, and it were well if men would so do, but
we see every man is so for himself, as that if I should not do so, I should do
full ill, for if I have it not of my own, I may snap short sometimes, for I see
no body shows me any kindness, nor gives me any thing; If I have Gold or
silver, that goes for payment, and if I want it I may lie in the street,
therefore I had best keep that I have, and not be so liberal as you would have
me, except I saw others would be so toward me.

Ans. This Objection seems but equal and reasonable, as did the Answer of
Nabal to David's men, but it is most foolish and carnal, as his also was; for,
if we should measure our courses by most men's practices, a man should never do
any godly duty; for, do not the most, yea, almost all, go the broad way that
leads to death and damnation, ( Luke. 13.23, 24.) Who then will follow a
multitude? It is the word of God, and the examples of the best men that we must
follow. And what if others will do nothing for thee, but are unkind and
unmerciful to thee? Know thou not that they which will be the children of
God must be kind to the unkind, loving to their enemies, and bless those that
curse them? ( Mat. 5.44, 47.) If all men were kind to thee, it were but
Publicans righteousness to be kind to them? If all men be evil, will thou be so
too? When David cried out, Help Lord, for not a godly man is left, Psalm. 12.1.
Did he himself turn ungodly also? Nay, he was rather the more strict. So, if
love and charity be departed out of this world, be thou one of them that shall
first bring it in again.

And let this be the first rule, which I will with two others conclude for this
time.

1. Never measure thy course by the most, but by the best, yea, and principally
by God's word: Look not what others do to thee, but consider what thou art to
do to them: seek to please God, not thy self. Did they in Mat. 25.44. plead,
that others did nothing for them? No such matter, no such plea will stand
before God, his word is plain to the contrary, therefore, though all the world
should neglect thee, disregard thee, and contemn thee, yet remember thou have
not to do with men, but with the highest God, and so thou must do thy duty to
them notwithstanding.

2. And let there be no Prodigal Parson to come forth and say, Give me the
portion of lands and goods that appertains to me, and let me shift for
myself; Luke 15.12. It is yet too soon to put men to their shifts; Israel was
seven years in Canaan, before the land was divided unto Tribes, much longer
before it was divided unto Families: And why would thou have thy particular
portion, but because thou think to live better then thy neighbor, and
scornest to live so meanly as he? but who, I pray thee, brought this
particularizing first into the world? Did not Satan, who was not content to
keep that equal state with his fellows, but would set his throne above the
Stars? Did not he also entice man to despise his general felicity and
happiness, and go try particular knowledge of good and evil; And nothing in
this world does more resemble heavenly happiness, then for men to live as one,
being of one heart, and one soul; neither any thing more resembles hellish
horror, then for every man to shift for himself; for if it be a good mind and
practice, thus to affect particulars, mine and thine, then it should be best
also for God to provide one heaven for thee, and another for thy neigbour.

Object. But some will say, If all men will do their endeavors as I do. I
could be content with this generality, but many are idle and slothful, and eat
up others labors, and therefore it is best to part, and then every man may do
his pleasure.

First, this, indeed, is the commmon plea of such as will endure no
inconveniences, and so for the hardnese of men's hearts, God and man does often
give way to that which is not best, nor perpetual, but indeed if we take this
course to change ordinances and practices because of inconveniences we shall
have, every day new laws.

Secondly, If others be idle and thou diligent, thy fellowship, provocation,
and example, may well help to cure that malady in them, being together, but
being asunder, shall they not be more idle, and shall not gentry and beggary be
quickly the glorious ensigns of your commonwealth.

Thirdly, Construe things in the best part, be not too hasty to say, men are
idle and slothful, all men have not strength, skill, faculty, spirit, and
courage to work alike; it is thy glory and credit, that can do so well, and
his shame and reproach, that can do no better; and are not these sufficient
rewards to you both.

Fourthly, If any be idle apparently, you have a law and governors to execute
the same, and to follow that rule of the Apostle, to keep back their bread, and
let them not eat, go not therefore whispering, to charge men with idleness; but
go to the governor and prove them idle; and thou shall see them have their
deserts. Acts 19.38. 2 These. 3.10. Deuteronomy. 19.15.

And as you are a body together, so hang not together by skins and gymocks, but
labor to be jointed together and knit by flesh and sinews; away with envy at
the good of others, and rejoice in his good, and sorrow for his evil. Let this
day be thy Joy, and his sorrow thy sorrow: Let his sickness be thy sickness:
his hunger thy hunger: his poverty thy poverty: and if you profess friendship,
be friends in adversity: for then a friend is known and tried, and not before.

3. Lay away all thought of former things and forget them, and think upon the
things that are, look not gapingly one upon other, pleading your goodness, your
birth, your life you lived, your means you had and might have had, here you are
by God's providence under difficulties, be thankful to God, it is no worse, and
take it in good part that which is, and lift not up yourselve because of former
privileges, when Job was brought to the dunghill, he sat down upon it. Job
2.8. and when the Almighty had been bitter to Naomi, she would be called Marah,
consider therefore what you are now, and whose you are, say not I could have
lived thus, and thus; but say thus and thus I must live: for God and natural
necessity requires, if your difficulties be great, you had need to cleave the
faster together, and comfort and cheer up one another, laboring to make each
others burden lighter, there is no grief so tedious as a churlish companion and
nothing makes sorrows easy more than cheerful associates: bear ye therefore one
another's burden, and be not a burden one to another, avoid all factions,
frowardness, singularity and withdrawings, and cleave fast to the Lord, and one
to another continually; so shall you be a notable president to these poor
heathens, whose eyes are upon you, and who very brutishly and cruelly do daily
eat and consume one another, through their emulations, ways and contentions; be
you therefore ashamed of it, and win them to peace both with yourselves, and
one another, by your peaceable examples, which will preach louder to them, then
if you could cry in their barbarous language, so also shall you be an
encouragment to many of your christian friends in your native country, to come
to you, when they hear of your peace, love and kindness that is amongst you:
but above all, it shall go well with your souls, when that God of peace and
unity shall come to visit you with death as he has done many of your
associates, you being found of him, not in murmurings, discontent and jars, but
in brotherly love, and peace, may be translated from this wandering wilderness
unto that joyful and heavenly Canaan.

AMEN.
APPENDIX. Containing some account of the Life and Character of Mr. Robert
Cushman, from the time of his being settled with the Rev. John Robinson, in the
city of Leyden, in Holland, in the year 1609, to the time of his arrival in
America.
ROBERT CUSHMAN, the author of the preceding discourse, was one of the most
distinguished characters among that collection of worthies, who quitted England
on account of their religious difficulties, and settled with Mr. John Robinson,
their pastor in the City of Leyden, in Holland, in the year 1609. Proposing
afterward a removal to America in the year 1617. Mr. Cushman and Mr. John
Carver, (afterward the first Governor of New-Plymouth) were sent over to
England, as their agents, to agree with the Virginia Company for a settlement,
and to obtain, if possible, a grant of liberty of conscience in their intended
plantation, from King James.

From this negotiation, though conducted on their part with great discretion
and ability, they returned unsuccessful to Leyden, in May 1618. They met with
no difficulty indeed with the Virginia Company, who were willing to grant them
sufficient territory, with as ample privileges as they could bestow: But the
pragmatical James, the pretended vice gerent of the Deity, refused to grant
them that liberty in religious matters, which was their principal object --
when this persevering people finally determined to transport themselves to this
country, relying upon James's promise that he would connive at, though not
expressly tolerate them; Mr. Cushman was again dispatched to England in
February 1619, with Mr. William Bradford, another of the company, to agree with
the Virginia Company on the terms of their removal and settlement.

After much difficulty and delay, they obtained a patent in the September
following, upon which part of the Church at Leyden, with their Elder Mr.
Brewster determined to transport themselves as soon as possible. Mr. Cushman
was one of the Agents in England to procure money, shipping* and other
necessaries for the voyage, and finally embarked with them at South-Hampton,
August 5th. 1620. But the Ship, in which he sailed, proving leaky, and after
twice putting into port to repair, being finally condemned as unfit to perform
the voyage. Mr. Cushman with his family, and a number of others were obliged,
though reluctantly, to relinquish the voyage for that time and returned to
London -- Those in the other Ship proceeded and made their final settlement at
Plymouth in December 1620. where Mr. Cushman also arrived in the Ship Fortune
from London, on the 10th of November 1621, but took passage in the same Ship
back again, pursuant to the directions of the merchant adventurers in London,
(who fitted out the Ship and by whose assistance the first settlers were
transported) to give them an account of the plantation -- He sailed from
Plymouth December 13th. 1621. and arriving on the coast of England, the Ship,
with a cargo, valued at 500l. sterling, was taken by the French. Mr. Cushman,
with the crew, was carried into France; but arrived in London in the February
following. During his short residence at Plymouth, though a mere lay Character,
he delivered the preceding discourse, which was printed in London in 1622, and
afterward reprinted in Boston in 1724. And though his Name is not prefixed to
either Edition, yet unquestionable tradition renders it certain that he was the
Author, and even transmits to us a knowledge of the spot where it was
delivered. Mr. Cushman, though he constantly corresponded with his friends
here, and was very serviceable to their interest in London -- never returned to
the country again, but while preparing for it was removed to a better, in the
year 1626 The news of his death and Mr. Robbinson's arrived at the same time at
Plymouth, by Captain Standish, and seem to have been equally lamented by their
bereaved and suffering friends there -- He was zealously engaged in the
prosperity of the plantation, a man of activity and enterprise, well versed in
business, respectable in point of intellectual abilites, well accomplished in
scriptural knowledge, and unaffected professor, and a steady sincere practiser
of religion. The design of the preceding discourse was to keep up that noble
flow of public spirit, which perhaps begun then to (...) which was necessary
for their preservation and security. The policy of that entire commu^^^^ of
interests which our fathers established, and which this (...) was designed to
preserve, is nevertheless justly questionable. The love of separate property,
for good and wise purposes, is strongly implanted in the heart of Man -- So far
from being unfavourable to a reasonable generosity and public spirit, it better
enables us to display them, and is not less consistent with the precepts of
scripture, rightly understood, than with the dictates of reason. This is
evidenced by the subsequent conduct of this very people. In the year 1623,
departing a little from their first system, they agreed that every family
should plant for themselves, bringing in a complete portion at harvest for the
maintenance of public officers, fishermen etc. and in all other things to go on
in the general way (as they term it) as before, for this purpose they assigned
to every family a parcel of land, for a year only, in proportion to their
number -- even this temporary division, as Governor Bradford in his Manuscript
History observes, has a very good effect -- makes all industrious -- gives
content -- even the women and children now go into the field to work, and much
more Corn is planted than ever. In the spring of the year 1624. the people
being still uneasy, we find one acre of land was giving to each in fee-simple:
no more to be giving, it was then said, till the expiration of seven years --
yet in the year 1627. when they purchased the Interest of the adventures in
England in the plantation, we find there was a division and allotment of almost
all their property, real and personal -- twenty acres of tillage land to each,
besides what they held before -- the meadows and the trade only remaining in
common.

Thus it is observeable, how Men in spite of their principles, are naturally
led into that mode of conduct, which truth and utility, ever coincident point
out. Our fathers deserve the highest commendation for prosecuting, at the
hazard of life and fortune, that reformation in religion, which the Church of
England left imperfect.

Taking for this purpose, the sacred scriptures, as their only guide, they
undoubtedly traveled in the path of truth, and appealed to a most noble and
unerring standard, which though established by the Deity himself, has been long
disregarded: but when from their reverence to this divine authority, in matters
of religion, they were inclined to esteem it the only guide in all the affairs
of life, and attempted to regulate their civil polity upon church ideas, they
as undoubtedly erred and involved themselves thereby in innumerable
difficulties.

The end of civil society is the security of the temporal liberty and
prosperity of man -- not all the happiness and perfection, which he is capable
of attaining, for which other means are appointed. Had not our fathers placed
themselves upon such a footing, with respect to property, as was repugnant to
the nature of man, and not warranted by the true end of civil society, there
would probably have been no just ground of complaint of a want of a real and
reasonable public spirit; and the necessity of the doctrine and reproof,
contained in Mr. Cushman's discourse, would have been entirely superseded --
their zeal -- their enterprise -- their uncommon sufferings and numerous works
of supererogation in the prosecution of their arduous undertaking, renders it
morally certain, that they would have ever cheerfully performed, and even
exceeded their real duty in this respect -- their co-temporaries might censure
them for what they did not, but their posterity must ever admire and revere
them for what they did exhibit.

By hardship sinew'd, and by danger fired;
For every virtue every worth renowned;
Sincere, plain-hearted, hospitable, kind;
-- and the sure resource
Of those that under grim oppression groan --
THOMSON. THE END.

