BOSTON ORATIONS.

ORATIONS DELIVERED AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF THE TOWN OF BOSTON, TO
COMMEMORATE THE EVENING OF THE FIFTH OF MARCH, 1770; WHEN A NUMBER OF CITIZENS
WERE KILLED BY A PARTY OF BRITISH TROOPS, QUARTERED AMONG THEM, IN A TIME OF
PEACE.

BOSTON, PRINTED BY PETER EDES, IN STATE-STREET.

TO THE INHABITANTS OF THE TOWN OF BOSTON.
I Hope my collecting in one volume, the following Orations, which were first
severally printed at your request, but many of which have been long since not
to be purchased, will be considered in the mild light of an attempt to please
the Public.

Americans have been reprehended for not preserving, with sufficient care, the
various pamphlets and political tracts which this country has afforded during
the late war.

Many of those productions which appear trite to us who live on the spet where
they grew, may, however, be considered as sources of curiosity to strangers.
Many of these Orations have been considered as the sentiments of this
metropolis, from time to time, touching the revolution, and as our earliest
public invectives against oppression.

As the institution of an Oration upon the Eifth of March is now superseded by
the celebration of the anniversary of Independence upon the Fourth of July, I
have given to this volume a general title, which will apply to both
institutions: so that if hereafter there shall be a like volume, containing the
Orations of that anniversary, this may be considered the first and that the
second volume of Boston Orations.

I am, with the greatest respect, your obedient humble servant, PETER EDES.
Boston, January, 1785.
ORATION, DELIVERED AT BOSTON, APRIL 2, 1771.
By JAMES LOVELL, A. M.
Omnes homines natura Libertati student, et CONDITIONEM Ser vitutis oderunt.

CAES. -- Nunc ea petit, quae dare nullo modo possumus, nisi prius volumus nos
bello victos confiteri.

CIC.
YOUR design in the appointment of this ceremony, my Friends and
Fellow-Townsmen, cannot fail to be examined in quite different lights at this
season of political dissension. From the principles I profess, and in the
exercise of my common right to judge with others, I conclude it was decent,
wise, and honorable.

THE certainty of being favored with your kindest partiality and candor, in a
poor attempt to execute the part to which you have invited me, has overcome the
objection of my inability to perform it in a proper manner; and I now beg the
favor of your animating countenance.

THE horrid bloody scene we here commemorate, whatever were the causes which
concurred to bring it on that dreadful night, must lead the pious and humane,
of every order, to some suitable reflections. The pious will adore the conduct
of that BEING who is unsearchable in all his ways, and without whose knowledge
not a single sparrow falls, in permitting an immortal soul to be ^rried by the
flying ball, the messenger of death, in the twinkling of an eye, to meet the
awful Judge of all its secret actions. The humane, from having often thought,
with pleasing rapture, on the endearing scenes of social life, in all its
amiable relations, will lament, with heartfelt pangs, their sudden
dissolution, by indiscretion, rage and vengeance.

BUT let us leave that shocking close of one continued course of rancor and
dispute, from the first moment that the troops arrived in town: that course
will now be represented by your own reflections to much more solid, useful
purpose, than by any artful language. I hope, however, that heaven has yet in
store such happiness for this afflicted town and province, as will in time wear
out the memory of all your former troubles.

I sincerely rejoice with you in the happy event of your steady and united
effort to prevent a second tragedy.

OUR fathers left their native land, risqued all the dangers of the sea, and
came to this then-savage desert, with that true undaunted courage which is
excited by a confidence in GOD. They came that they might here enjoy
themselves, and leave to their posterity the best of earthly portions, full
English Liberty. You showed upon the alarming cause for trial, that their brave
spirit still exists in vigor, though their legacy of right is much impaired.
The sympathy and active friendship of some neighboring towns, upon that sad
occasion, commands the highest gratitude of this.

WE have seen and felt the ill effects of placing standing forces in the midst
of populous communities; but those are only what individuals suffer. Your vote
directs me to point out the fatal tendency of placing such an order in free
cities -- fatal indeed! Athens once was free; a citizen, a favorite of the
people, by an artful story, gained a trifling guard of fifty men; ambition
taught him ways to enlarge that number; he destroyed the commonwealth and made
himself the tyrant of the Athenians. Caesar, by the length of his command in
Gaul, got the affections of his army, marched to Rome, overthrew the state, and
made himself perpetual dictator. By the same instruments, many less republics
have been made to fall a prey to the devouring jaws of tyrants. -- But this is
a subject which should never be disguised with figures; it chooses the plain
style of dissertation.

THE true strength and safety of every commonwealth or limited monarchy, is the
bravery of its freeholders, its militia. By brave militias they rise to
grandeur, and they come to ruin by a mercenary army. This is founded on
historical facts, and the same causes will, in similar circumstances, forever
produce the same effects. Justice Blackstone, in his inimitably clear
commentaries, tells us, that "it is extremely dangerous in a land of liberty,
to make a distinct order of the profession of arms; that such an order is an
object of jealousy; and that the lows and constitution of England are strangers
to it." One article of the Bill of Rights is, that the raising or keeping a
standing army within the kingdom in a time of peace, unless it be with consent
of parliament, is against law. The present army, therefore, though called the
peace establishment, is kept up by one act, and governed by another; both of
which expire annually. This circumstance is valued as a sufficient check upon
the army. A less body of troops than is now maintained has, on a time,
destroyed a King, and fought under a parliament with great success and glory;
but, upon a motion to disband them, they turned their masters out of doors, and
fixed others in their stead. Such wild things are not again to happen, because
the parliament have power to stop payment once a year: but arma tenenti quis
neget? which may be easily interpreted, "who will bind Sampson with his locks
on Trenchard.
?"

THE bill which regulates the army, the same fine author I have mentioned,
says, "is, in many respects, hastily penned, and reduces the soldier to a state
of slavery in the midst of a free nation. This is impolitic: for slaves envy
the freedom of others, and take a malicious pleasure in contributing to destroy
it."

BY this scandalous bill a justice of peace is empowered to grant, without a
previous oath from the military officer, a warrant to break open any
(freeman's) house, upon pretense of searching for deserters.

I MUST not omit to mention one more bad tendency: it is this, -- a standing
force leads to a total neglect of militias, or tends greatly to discourage them.

YOU see the danger of a standing army to the cause of freedom. If the Br^tish
parliament consents from year to year to be exposed, it doubtless has good
reasons. But when did our assembly pass an act to hazard all the property, the
liberty and lives of their constituents? what check have we upon a British
army? can we disband it? can we stop its pay?

OUR own assemblies in America can raise an army; and our Monarch, George the
3d, by our constitution, taken immediate command. This army can consent to
leav^ their native provinces. Will the royal chief commande^ send them to find
barracks at Brunswick or Lunenburg, at Hanover, or the commodious hall of
Westminster? suppose the last -- suppose this army was informed^ nay thought
the parliament in actual rebellion, or only on the eve of one, against their
King, or against those who paid and clothed them -- for there it pinches. --
we are rebels against parliament; -- we adore the King.

WHERE, in the case I have stated, would be the value of the boasted English
constitution?

WHO are a free people? not those who do not suffer actual oppression; but
those who have a constitutional check upon the power to oppress.

WE are slaves or freemen: if, as we are called, the last, where is our check
upon the following powers, France, Spain, the States of Holland, or the British
Parliaments? now if any one of these (and it is quite immaterial which) has
right to make the two acts in question operate within this province, they have
right to give us up to an unlimited army, under the sole direction of one
Saracen commander.

THUS I have led your thoughts to that upon which I formed my conclusion, that
the design of this ceremony was decent, wise and honorable. Make the bloody 5th
of March the Era of the resurrection of your birthrights, which have been
murdered by the very strength that nursed them in their infancy. I had an eye
solely to parliamentary supremacy; and I hope you will think every other view
beneath your notice, in our present most alarming situation.

Chatham, Camden, and others, Gods among men, and the Farmer, whom you have
addres^ed as the friend of mankind; all these have owned that England has right
to exercise every power over us, but that of taking money out of our pockets,
without our consent Taxation and representation are inseparable.

Chath. Cambd. From what in our constitution is representation not inseparable^
-- multa a CRASSO divin^us dicta esserebantur, cum sibi illum consu^^m esse
negaret cui senator ipse non esset.

CIC.
. Though it seems almost too bold therefore in us to say "we doubt in every
single instance her legal right over this province I confine mys^lf to this
province, partly from ignorance of other charters; but more from a desire even
to ve^ some abler pen to purs^e the idea of CHLCK; which an unchartered FREEMAN
may do, as well as any other in America.
", yet we must assert it. Those I have named are mighty characters, but they
wanted one advantage Providence has given us. The beam is carried off from our
eyes, by the flowing blood of our fellow-citizens, and now we may be allowed to
attempt to remove the mote from the eyes of our exalted patrons. That mote, we
think, is nothing but our obligation to England first, and afterward
Great Britain, for constant kind protection of our lives and birthrights
against foreign danger. We all acknowledge that protection.

LET us once more look into the early history of this province. We find that
our English ancestors, disg^sted in their native country at a Legislation,
which they saw was sacrificing all their rights, left its Jurisdiction ^^ec
sunt enim sundamenta firmissima no^ libertatis, sui quemque juris et retinendi
et dimittendi esse dominum.

CIC.
, and sought, like wandering birds of passage, some happier climate. Here at
length they settled down. The King of England was said to be the royal I choose
to bury a fruitful subject for any satirical genius of the family of PENN.
landford of this territory; with HIM they entered into mutual, sacred compect,
by which the price of tenure, and the rules of management, were fairly stated.
It is in this compact that we find OUR ONLY TRUE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY.

I MIGHT here enlarge upon the character of those first settlers, men of whom
the world was little worthy; who, for a long course of years, assisted by no
earthly power, defended their liberty, their religion, and their lives, against
the greatest inland danger of the savage natives: but this falls not within my
present purpose. They were secure by sea.

IN our infancy, when not an over-tempting jewel for the Bourbon Crown, the
very name of England saved us; afterward her fleets and armies. We wish not to
depreciate the worth of that protection. Of our gold, yea of our most fine
gold, we will freely give a part. Our fathers would have done the same. But
must we fall down and cry "let not a stranger rob and kill me, O my father! let
me rather die by the hand of my brother, and let him ravish all my portion --
^a vitam corpusque servato, ita fortunas, ita rem famil arem, ut haec
posteriora ^ertati ducas, -- nec pro his libertatem, sed pr^ libertati haec
projicias, tanquam pignora injuriae.
!"

IT is said that disunited from Britain "we should bleed at every vein." I
cannot see the consequence. The States of Holland do not suffer thus. But grant
it true, SENECA, would prefer the LAUNCETS of France, Spain, or any other
power, to the Bow-STRING, though applied by the fair hand of Britannia.

THE declarative vote of the British Parliament is the death-warrant of our
birthrights, and wants only a Czarish King to put it into execution. Here then
a door of salvation is open. Great Britain may raise her fleets and armies, but
it is only our own King that can direct their fire down upon our heads. He is
gracious, but not omniscient. He is ready to hear our APPEALS in their proper
course; and knowing himself, though the most powerful prince on earth, yet, a
subject under a divine constitution of LAW; that law he will ask and receive
from the twelve Judges of England. These will prove that the claim of the
British Parliament over us is not only ILLEGAL IN ITSELF, but A DOWNRIGHT
USURPATION OF HIS PREROGATIVE as King of America.

A BRAVE nation is always generous. Let us appeal, therefore, at the same time,
to the generosity of the PEOPLE of Great Britain, before the tribunal I do not
think the QUO WARRANTO against our first charter, was tried in a proper court.
of Europe, not to envy us the full enjoyment of the RIGHTS OF BRETHREN.

AND now, my Friends and Fellow-Townsmen, having declared myself an American
Son of Liberty of true charter principles: having shown the critical and
dangerous situation of our birthrights, and the true course for speedy redress;
I shall take the freedom to recommend, with boldness, one previous step. -- Let
us show we understand the true value of what we are claiming.

THE patriotic Farmer tells us, "the cause of Liberty is a cause of too much
dignity to be sullied by turbulence and tumult. -- Anger produces anger; and
differences, that might be accommodated by kind and respectful behavior, may,
by imprudence, be enlarged to an incurable rage. In quarrels -- risen to a
certain height, the first cause of dissension is no longer remembered, the
minds of the parties being wholly engaged in recollecting and resenting the
mutual expressions of their dislike. When feuds have reached that fatal point,
considerations of reason and equity vanish; and a blind fury governs, or rather
confounds all things. A people no longer regard their interest, but a
gratification of their wrath."

WE know ourselves subjects of common LAW: to that and the worthy executors of
it, let us pay a steady and conscientious regard. Past errors in this point
have been written with gall, by the pen of MALICE. May our future conduct be
such as to make even that vile IMP lay her pe^ aside.

THE Right which imposes duties upon us, is in dispute: but whether they are
managed by a Surveyor-General, a Board of Commissioners, Turkish Janissaries, or
Russian Cossacks, let them enjoy, during our time of fair trial, the common
personal protection of the laws of our constitution. Let us shut our eyes, for
the present, to their being executors of claims subversive of our rights.

WATCHFUL, hawk-eyed JEALOUSY, ever guards the portal of the temple of the
GODDESS LIBERTY. This is known to those who frequent her altars. Our whole
conduct therefore, I am sure, will meet with the utmost candor of her VOTARIES:
but I am wishing we may be able to convert even her basest APOSTATES.

WE are SLAVES until we obtain such redress, through the justice of our King,
as our happy constitution leads us to expect. In that condition, let us behave
with the propriety and dignity of FREEMEN; and thus exhibit to the world, a new
character of a people, which no history describes.

MAY the allwise and beneficient RULER OF THE UNIVERSE preserve our lives and
health, and prosper all our lawful endeavors in the glorious cause of FREEDOM.

ORATION, DELIVERED AT BOSTON, MARCH 5, 1772.
By DR. JOSEPH WARREN.
Quis talia fando,
Myrmidonum, Dolopumve, aut duri miles Ulyssei,
Temperet a lacrymis.
VIRGIL.
WHEN we turn over the historic page, and trace the rise and fall of states and
empires; the mighty revolutions which have so often varied the face of the
world strike our minds with solemn surprise, and we are naturally led to
endeavor to search out the causes of such astonishing changes.

THAT man is formed for social life, is an observation which, upon our first
enquiry, presents itself immediately to our view, and our reason approves that
wise and generous principle which actuated the first founders of civil
government; an institution which has its origin in the weakness of
individuals, and has for its end, the strength and security of all: and so
long as the means of effecting this important end are thoroughly known, and
religiously attended to, government is one of the richest blessings to mankind,
and ought to be held in the highest veneration.

IN young and new-formed communities, the grand design of this institution, is
most generally understood, and most strictly regarded; the motives which urged
to the social compact, cannot be at once forgotten, and that equality which is
remembered to have subsisted so lately among them, prevents those who are
clothed with authority from attempting to invade the freedom of their
brethren; or if such an attempt is made, it prevents the community from
suffering the offender to go unpunished: every member feels it to be his
interest, and knows it to be his duty, to preserve inviolate the constitution
on which the public safety depends Omnes ordines ad conservamdam rempublicam,
mente, voluntate, studio, virtute, voce, consentiunt.
, and is equally ready to assist the Magistrate in the execution of the laws,
and the subject in defense of his right; and so long as this noble attachment
to a constitution, founded on free and benevolent principles, exists in full
vigor, in any state, that state must be flourishing and happy.

IT was this noble attachment to a free constitution, which raised ancient Rome
from the smallest beginnings, to that bright summit of happiness and glory to
which she arrived; and it was the loss of this which plunged her from that
summit, into the black gulf of infamy and slavery. It was this attachment
which inspired her senators with wisdom; it was this which glowed in the
breasts of her heroes; it was this which guarded her liberties, and extended
her dominions, gave peace at home, and commanded respect abroad: and when this
decayed, her magistrates lost their reverence for justice and the laws, and
degenerated into tyrants and oppressors -- her senators, forgetful of their
dignity, and seduced by base corruption, betrayed their country -- her
soldiers, regardless of their relation to the community, and urged only by the
hopes of plunder and rapine, unfeelingly committed the most flagrant
enormities; and hired to the trade of death, with relentless fury they
perpetrated the most cruel murders, whereby the streets of imperial Rome were
drenched with her noblest blood. Thus this empress of the world lost her
dominions abroad, and her inhabitants, dissolute in their manners, at length
became contented slaves; and she stands to this day, the scorn and derision of
nations, and a monument of this eternal truth, that PUBLIC HAPPINESS DEPENDS ON
A VIRTUOUS AND UNSHAKEN ATTACHMENT TO A FREE CONSTITUTION.

IT was this attachment to a constitution, founded on free and benevolent
principles, which inspired the first settlers of this country: -- they saw with
grief the daring outrages committed on the free constitution of their native
land -- they knew that nothing but a civil war could at that time restore its
pristine purity. So hard was it to resolve to embrue their hands in the blood
of their brethren, that they chose rather to quit their fair possessions, and
seek another habitation in a distant clime. When they came to this new world,
which they fairly purchased of the Indian natives, the only rightful
proprietors, they cultivated the then barren soil, by their incessant labor,
and defended their dear-bought possessions with the fortitude of the christian,
and the bravery of the hero.

AFTER various struggles, which, during the tyrannic reigns of the house of
STUART, were constantly kept up between right and wrong, between liberty and
slavery, the connection between Great Britain and this Colony, was settled in
the reign of King William and Queen Mary, by a compact, the conditions of which
were expressed in a Charter; by which all the liberties and immunities of
British Subjects, were confined to this province, as fully and as absolutely as
they possibly could be by any human instrument which can be devised. And it is
undeniably true, that the greatest and most important right of a British
subject is, that he shall be governed by no laws but those to which he either
in person or by his representative has given his consent: and this I will
venture to assert, is the grand basis of British freedom; it is interwoven with
the constitution; and whenever this is lost, the constitution must be destroyed.

THE British constitution (of which ours is a copy) is a happy compound of the
three forms (under some of which all governments may be ranged) viz. monarchy,
aristocracy, and democracy: of these three the British Legislature is composed,
and without the consent of each branch, nothing can carry with it the force of
a law; but when a law is to be passed for rasing a tax, that law can originate
only in the democratic branch, which is the House of Commons in Britain, and
the House of Representatives here -- The reason is obvious: they and their
constituants are to pay much the largest part of it; but as the aristrocratic
branch, which in Britain, is the house of lords, and in this province, the
council, are also to pay some part, THEIR consent is necessary; and as the
monarchic branch, which in Britain is the King, and with us, either the King in
person, or the Governor whom he shall be pleased to appoint to act in his
stead, is supposed to have a just sense of his own interest, which is that of
all the subjects in general, HIS consent is also necessary, and when the
consent of these three branches is obtained, the taxation is most certainly
legal.

LET us now allow ourselves a few moments to examine the late acts of the
British parliament for taxing America -- Let us with candor judge whether they
are constitutionally binding upon us: -- if they are, IN THE NAME OF JUSTICE
let us submit to them, without one murmuring word.

FIRST, I would ask whether the members of the British House of Commons are the
democracy of this province? if they are, they are either the people of this
province, or are elected by the people of this province, to represent them, and
have therefore a constitutional right to originate a bill for taxing them: it
is most certain they are neither; and therefore nothing done by them can be
said to be done by the democratic branch of our constitution. I would next ask,
whether the Lords, who compose the aristocratic branch of the legislature, are
Peers of America? I never heard it was (even in these extraordinary times) so
much as pretended, and if they are not, certainly no act of theirs can be said
to be the act of the aristocratic branch of our constitution. The power of the
monarchic branch we with pleasure acknowledge, resides in the King, who may act
either in person or by his representative; and I freely confess that I can see
no reason why a PROCLAMATION for raising money in America, issued by the King's
sole authority, would not be equally consistent with our own constitution, and
therefore equally binding upon us with the late acts of the British parliament
for taxing us; for it is plain, that if there is any validity in those acts, it
must arise altogether from the monarchical branch of the legislature: and I
further think that it would be at least as equitable; for I do not conceive it
to be of the least importance to us by whom our property is taken away, so long
as it is taken without our consent; and I am very much at a loss to know by
what figure of rhetoric, the inhabitants of this province can be called FREE
SUBJECTS, when they are obliged to obey implicitly, such laws as are made for
them by men three thousand miles off, whom they know not, and whom they never
have empowered to act for them; or how they can be said to have PROPERTY, when
a body of men, over whom they have not the least control, and who are not in
any way accountable to them, shall oblige them to deliver up any part, or the
whole of their substance, without even asking their consent: and yet, whoever
pretends that the late acts of the British parliament for taxing America ought
to be deemed binding upon us, must admit at once that we are absolute SLAVES,
and have no property of our own; or else that we may be FREEMEN, and at the
same time under a necessity of obeying the arbitrary commands of those over
whom we have no control or influence; and that we may HAVE PROPERTY OF OUR
OWN, which is entirely at the disposal of another. Such gross absurdities, I
believe will not be relished in this enlightened age: and it can be no matter
of wonder that the people quickly perceived, and seriously complained of the
inroads which these acts must unavoidably make upon their liberty, and of the
hazard to which their whole property is by them exposed; for, if they may be
taxed without their consent, even in the smallest trifle, they may also,
without their consent, be deprived of every thing they possess, although never
so valuable, never so dear. Certainly it never entered the hearts of our
ancestors, that after so many dangers in this then desolate wilderness, their
hard-earned property should be at the disposal of the British parliament; and
as it was soon foun^ ^at this taxation could not be supported by reason and
argument, it seemed necessary that one act of oppression should be enforced by
another, and therefore, contrary to our just rights as possessing, or at least
having a just title to possess, all the liberties and IMMUNITIES of British
subjects, a standing army was established among us in a time of peace; and
evidently for the purpose of effecting that, which it was one principal design
of the founders of the constitution to prevent (when they declared a standing
army in a time of peace to be AGAINST LAW) namely, for the enforcement of
obedience to acts which, upon fair examination, appeared to be unjust and
unconstitutional.

THE ruinous consequences of standing armies to free communities, may be seen
in the histories of SYRACUSE, ROME, and many other once flourishing STATES;
some of which have now scarce a name! their baneful influence is most suddenly
felt, when they are placed in populous for, by a corruption of morals, the
public happiness is immediately affected? and that this is one of the effects
of quartering troops in a populous city, is a truth, to which many a mourning
parent, many a lost, despairing child in this metropolis, must bear a very
melancholy testimony. -- Soldiers are also taught to consider arms as the only
arbiters by which every dispute is to be decided between contending states; --
they are instructed implicitly to obey their commanders, without enquiring into
the justice of the cause they are engaged to support: hence it is, that they
are ever to be dreaded as the ready engines of tyranny and oppression. -- And
it is too observable that they are prone to introduce the same mode of decision
in the disputes of individuals, and from thence have often arisen great
animosities between them and the inhabitants, who, whilst in a naked
defenseless state, are frequently insulted and abused by an armed soldiery. And
this will be more especially the cas^^ when the troops are informed that the
intention of the ^ing stationed in any city, is to OVERAWE THE INHABITANTS.
That this was the avowed design of stationing an armed force in this town, is
sufficiently known; and we, my fellow-citizens, have seen, WE have felt the
tragical effects! -- THE FATAL FIFTH OF MARCH, 1770, CAN NEVER BE FORGOTTEN --
The horrors of THAT DREADFUL NIGHT are but too deeply impressed on our hearts
-- Language is too feeble to paint the emotions of our souls, when our streets
were stained with the BLOOD OF OUR BRETHREN, -- when our ears were wounded by
the groans of the dying, and our eyes were tormented with the sight of the
mangled bodies of the dead. -- When our alarmed imagination presented to our
view our houses wrapped in flames, -- our children subjected to the barbarous
caprice of the raging soldiery, -- our beauteous virgins exposed to all the
insolence of unbridled passion, -- our virtuous wives, endeared to us by every
tender tie, falling a sacrifice to worse than brutal violence, and perhaps,
like the famed LUCRETIA, distracted with anguish and despait, ending their
wretched lives by their own fair hands. -- When we beheld the authors of our
distress parading in our streets, or drawn up in a regular battalia, as though
in a hostile city, our hearts beat to arms; we snatched our weapons, almost
resolved, by one decisive stroke, to avenge the death of our SLAUGHTERED
BRETHREN, and to secure from future danger, all that we held most dear: but
propitious heaven forbad the bloody carnage, and saved the threatened victims of
our too keen resentment, not by their discipline, not by their regular array,
-- no, it was royal GEORGE's livery that proved their shield -- it was that
which turned the pointed engines of destruction from, their breasts I have the
strongest reason to believe that I have mentioned the only circumstance which
saved the troops from destruction. It was then, and now is, the opinion of
those who were best acquainted with the state of affairs at that time, that had
thrice that number of troops, belonging to any power at open war with us, been
in this town, in the same exposed condition, scarce a man would have lived to
have seen the morning light.
. The thoughts of vengeance were soon buried in our inbred affection to
Great Britain, and calm reason dictated a method of removing the troops more
mild than an immediate recourse to the sword. With united efforts you urged the
immediate departure of the troops from the town -- you urged (...) with a
resolution which ensured success -- you obtained your wishes, and the removal
of the troops was effected, without one drop of their blood being shed by the
inhabitants.

THE immediate actors in the tragedy of THAT NIGHT were surrendered to justice.
-- It is not mine to say how far they were guilty! they have been tried by the
country and ACQUITTED of murder! and they are not to be again arraigned at an
earthly bar: but, surely the men who have promiscuously scattered death amidst
the innocent inhabitants of a populous city, ought to see well to it, that they
be prepared to stand at the bar of an omniscient Judge! and all who contrived
or encouraged the stationing troops in this place, have reasons of eternal
importance, to reflect with deep contrition, on their base designs, and humbly
to repent of their impious machinations.

THE infatuation which has seemed, for a number of years, to prevail in the
British councils, with regard to us, is truly astonishing! what can be proposed
by the repeated attacks made upon our freedom, I really cannot surmise; even
leaving justice and humanity out of the question, I do not know one single
advantage which can arise to the British nation, from our being enslaved: -- I
know not of any gains, which can be wrung from us by oppression, which they may
not obtain from us by our own consent, in the smooth channel of ^merce: we wish
the wealth and prosperity of Britain; we contribute largely to both. Does what
we contribute lose all its value, because it is done voluntarily? the amazing
increase of riches to Britain, the great rise of the value of her lands the
flourishing state of her navy are striking proofs of the advantages derived to
her from her commerce with the colonies; and it is our earnest desire that she
may still continue to enjoy the same emoluments, until her streets are paved
with AMERICAN GOLD; only, let us have the pleasure of calling it our own,
whilst it is in our hands; but this it seems is too great a favor -- we are to
governed by the absolute commands of others; our property is to be taken away
without our consent -- if we complain, our complaints are treated with
contempt; if we assert our rights, that assertion is deemed insolence; if we
humbly offer to submit the matter to the impartial decision of reason, the
SWORD is judged the most proper argument to silence our murmurs! but this
cannot long be the case -- surely the British nation will not suffer the
reputation of their justice and their honor, to be thus sported away by a
capricious ministry; no, they will in a short time open their eyes to their
true interest: they nourish in their own breasts, a noble love of liberty; they
hold her dear, and they know that all who have once possessed her charms, had
rather die than suffer her to be torn from their embraces -- they are also
sensible that Britain is so deeply interested in the prosperity of the
colonies, that she must eventually feel every wound given to their freedom;
they cannot be ignorant that more dependence may be placed on the affections of
a brother, than on the forced service of a slave; they must approve your
efforts for the preservation of your rights; from a sympathy of soul they must
pray for your success: and I doubt not but they will, ever long, exert
themselves effectually, to redress your grievances. Even in the dissolute reign
of King CHARLES II. when the House of Commons impeached the earl of Clarendon
of high treason, the first article on which they founded their accusation was,
tha^ (...) he had designed a standing army to be raised, and to g^ the kingdom
thereby." And the eighth article was, that "he had introduced an arbitrary
government into his majesty's plantation." A terrifying example to those who
are now forging chains for this COUNTRY.

YOU have, my friends and countrymen, frustrated the designs of your enemies,
by your unanimity and fortitude: it was your union and determined spirit which
expelled those troops, who polluted your streets with INNOCENT BLOOD. You have
appointed this anniversay as a standing memorial of the BLOODY CONSEQUENCES OF
PLACING AN ARMED FORCE IN A POPULOUS CITY, and of your deliverance from the
dangers which then seemed to hang over your heads; and I am confident that you
never will betray the least want of spirit when called upon to guard your
freedom. -- None but they who set a just value upon the blessings of Liberty
are worthy to enjoy her -- your illustrious fathers were her zealous votaries
-- when the blasting frowns of tyranny drove her from public view, they clasped
her in their arms, they cherished her in their generous bosoms, they brought
her safe over the rough ocean, and fixed her seat in this then dreary
wilderness; they nursed her infant age with the most tender care; for her sake,
they patiently bore the severest hardships; for her support, they underwent the
most rugged toils: in her defense, they boldly encountered the most alarming
dangers; neither the ravenous beasts that ranged the woods for prey, nor the
more furious savages of the wilderness, could damp their ardor! -- Whilst with
one hand they broke the stubborn glebe, with the other they grasped their
weapons, ever ready to protect her from danger. -- No sacrifice, not even their
own blood, was esteemed too rich a libation for her altar! GOD prospered their
valor; they preserved her brilliancy unsullied; they enjoyed her whilst they
lived, and dying, bequeathed the dear inheritance to your care. And as they
left you this glorious legacy, they have undoubtedly transmitted to you some
portion of their noble spirit, to inspire you with virtue to merit her, and
courage to preserve her: you surely cannot, with such examples before your
eyes, as every page of the history of this country affords At simul heroum
lauds, et facta parentis
Jam legere, et quae sit poteris cognoscere virtus.
VIRG.
, suffer your liberties to be ravished from you by lawless force, or cajoled
away by flattery and fraud.

THE voice of your fathers blood cries to you from the ground; MY SONS SCORN TO
BE SLAVES! in vain we met the frowns of tyrants -- in vain, we crossed the
boisterous ocean, found a new world, and prepared it for the happy residence of
LIBERTY -- in vain, we toiled -- in vain, we fought -- we bled in vain, if you,
our offspring want valor to repel the assaults of her invaders! -- Stain not
the glory of your worthy ancestors, but like them resolve, never to part with
your birthright; be wise in your deliberations, and determined in your
exertions for the preservation of your liberties. -- Follow not the dictates of
passion, but enlist yourselves under the sacred banner of reason; use every
method in your power to secure your rights; at least prevent the curses of
posterity from being heaped upon your memories.

IF you, with united zeal and fortitude, oppose the torrent of oppression; if
you feel the true fire of patriotism burning in your breasts; if you, from your
souls, despise the most gaudy dress that slavery can wear; if you really prefer
the lonely cottage (whilst blessed with liberty) to gilded palaces, surrounded
with the ensigns of slavery, you may have the fullest assurance that tyranny,
with her whole accursed train, will hide their hideous heads in confusion,
shame and despair -- if you perform your part, you must have the strongest
confidence, that THE SAME ALMIGHTY BEING who protected your pious and venerable
forefathers -- who enabled them to turn a barren wilderness into a fruitful
field, who so often made bare his arm for their salvation, will still be
mindful of you their offspring.

MAY THIS ALMIGHTY BEING graciously preside in all our councils. -- May he
direct us to such measures as he himself shall approve, and be pleased to
bless. -- May we ever be a people favored of GOD. -- May our land be a land of
Liberty, the seat of virtue, the asylum of the oppressed, a name and a praise
in the whole ^^^th, until the last shock of time shall bury the empires of the
world in one common undistinguished ruin!

ORATION, DELIVERED AT BOSTON, MARCH 5, 1773.
By DR. BENJAMIN CHURCH.
Impius hac culta novalia miles habebit?
Barbarus has segetes? en quo discordia cives
perduxit miseros? en queis consevimus agros?
VIRGIL, Ecl. 1. O SOCII
O passi gr^iora, dabit Deus his quoque finem:
-- r^ocate animos, maestumque timorem
mi^ti^e, forsan et haec clim meminisse juvabit.
VIRGIL, Aene. 1.
FROM a consciousness of inability, MY FRIENDS AND FELLOW COUNTRYMEN, I have
repeatedly declined the duties of this anniversary. Nothing but a firm
attachment to the tottering liberties of America Periculosae plenum opus al^^
Tractas, incedis per ignes
Supposites cineri doloso.
MORACE.
, added to the irresistible importunity of some valued friends, could have
induced me (especially with a very short notice) so far to mistake my
abilities, as to render the utmost extent of your candor truly indispensable.

WHEN man was unconnected by social obligations; abhorrent to every idea of
dependence; actuated by a savage ferocity of mind, displayed in the brutality
of his manners, the necessary exigences of each individual, naturally impelled
him to acts of treachery, violence and murder.

THE miseries of mankind thus proclaiming eternal war with their species, led
them, probably, to consult certain measures to arrest the current of such
outrageous enormities.

A SENSE of their wants and weakness, in a state of nature, doubtless inclined
them to such reciprocal aids and support, as eventually established society.

MEN then began to incorporate; subordination succeeded to independence; order
to anarchy; and passions were disarmed by civilization: society lent its aid to
secure the weak from oppression, who wisely took shelter within the sanctuary
of law.

INCREASING society afterward exacted, that the tacit contract made with her
by each individual, at the time of his being incorporated, should receive a
more solemn form to become authentic and irrefragable; the main object being to
add force to the laws, proportionate to the power and extent of the body
corporate, whose energy they were to direct.

THEN society availed herself of the sacrifice of that liberty and that natural
equality of which we are all conscious: superiors and magistrates were
appointed, and mankind submitted to a civil and political subordination. This
is truly a glorious inspiration of reason, by whose influence, notwithstanding
the inclination we have for independence, we accept control, for the
establishment of order.

ALTHOUGH unrestrained power in one person, may have been the first and most
natural recourse of mankind, from rapine and disorder; yet all restrictions of
power, made by laws, or participation of sovereignty, are apparent improvements
upon what began in unlimited power.

IT would shock humanity, should I attempt to describe those barbarous and
tragic scenes, which crimson the historic page of this wretched and detestable
constitution, where absolute dominion is lodged in one person: where one makes
the whole, and the whole is nothing. What motives, what events, could have been
able to subdue men, endowed with reason, to render themselves the mute
instruments, and passive objects of the caprice of an individual.

MANKIND apprized of their privileges, in being rational and free, in
prescribing civil laws to themselves, had surely no intention of being
enchained by any of their equals; and although they submitted voluntary
adherents to certain laws, for the sake of mutual security and happiness, they,
no doubt, intended by the original compact, a permanent exemption of the
subject body from any claims, which were not expressly surrendered, for the
parpose of obtaining the security and defense of the whole. Can it possibly be
conceived, that they would voluntarily be enslaved by a power of their own
creation?

THE constitution of a magistrate, does not therefore take away that lawful
defense against force and injury, allowed by the law of nature; we are not to
obey a prince, ruling above the limits of the power entrusted to him; for the
commonwealth, by constituting a head, does not deprive itself of the power of
its own preservation The celebrated Mrs. Macaulay.
. Government and magistracy, whether supreme or subordinate, is a mere human
ordinance, and the laws of every nation are the measure of magistratical power:
and kings, the servants of the state, when they degenerate into tyrants,
forfeit their right to government.

BREACH of trust in a governor Mrs. Macaulay.
, or attempting to enlarge a limited power, effectually absolves subjects from
every bond of covenant and peace; the crimes acted by a king against the
people, are the highest treason against the highest law among men Salus populi
suprema lex este.
.

"IF the king (says Grotius) has one part of the supreme power, and the other
part is in the senate or people, when such a king shall invade that part which
does not belong to him, it shall be lawful to oppose a just force to him,
because his power does not extend so far."

THE question in short turns upon this single point, respecting the power of
the civil magistrate: is it the end of that office that one particular person
may do what he will without restraint? or rather that society should be made
happy and secure? the answer is very obvious -- And it is my firm opinion that
the equal justice of GOD, and the natural freedom of mankind, must stand or
fall together.

WHEN rulers become tyrants, they cease to be kings: they can no longer be
respected as GOD's vicegerents, who violate the laws they were sworn to
protect. The preacher may tell us of passive obedience, that tyrants are
scourges in the hands of a righteous GOD to chastise a sinful nation, and are
to be submitted to like plagues, famine and such like judgments: such doctrine
may serve to mislead ill-judging princes into a false security; but men are not
be harrangued out of their senses; human nature and self-preservation will
eternally arm the brave and vigilant, against slavery and oppression.

As a despotic government The ingratitude and corruption of Rome, is perhaps,
in no instance, more strongly marked than in her treatment of her colonies; by
their labors, toils, and arms, she had reached to that summit of glorious
exaltation, as to be like Britain, the wonder and dread of the world; but by
fatal experience, those runied colonies incalcate this serious lesson, the
ambition of a DESPOT is boundless; his rapine is insatiable; the accomplishment
of his conquests over his enemies, is but the introduction of slavery, with her
concomitant plagues, to his friends.
is evidently productive of the most shocking calamities, whatever tends to
restrain such inordinate power, though in itself a severe evil, is extremely
beneficial to society; for where a degrading servitude is the detestable
alternative, who can shudder at the reluctant poniard of a Brutus, the
crimsoned axe of a Cromwell, or the reeking dagger of a Ravilla^?

To enjoy life as becomes rational creatures, to possess our souls with
pleasure and satisfaction, we must be careful to maintain that inestimable
blessing, liberty. By liberty I would be understood, the happiness of living
under laws of our own making, by our personal consent, or that of our
representatives The very idea of representative, deputy or trustee, includes
that of a constituent, whose interest they are ordained and appointed to
promote and secure; my unappointed, self-constituted agent in the British
parliament, has fraudently and arbitrarily surrendered my best interest,
without my privity or consent; I do therefore hereby protest against all such
powers as he shall claim in my behalf, and most solemnly discard him my service
forever. See Lock civil government.

Risum teneatis amici (...)
.

WITHOUT this, the distinctions among mankind are but different degrees of
misery; for as the true estimate of a man's life consists in conducting it
according to his own just sentiment and innocent inclinations, his being is
degraded below that of a free agent, which heaven has made him, when his
affections and passions are no longer governed by the dictates of his own mind,
and the interests of human society, but by the arbitrary, unrestrained will of
another.

I THANK GOD we live in an age of rational inquisition, when the unfettered
mind dares to expatiate freely on every object worthy its attention, when the
privileges of mankind are thoroughly comprehended, and the rights of distinct
societies are objects of liberal enquiry. The rod of the tyrant no longer
excites our apprehensions, and to the frown of the DESPOT, which made the
darker ages tremble Caelum non animum mutant, qui trans mare currunt. The
citizens of Rome, Sparta, or Lacedemon, at those blessed periods when they were
most eminent for their attachment to liberty and virtue, could never exhibit
brighter examples of patriotic zeal, than are to be found at this day in
America; I will not presume to say that the original British spirit has
improved by tranplanting; but this I (...) affirm, that should Britons stoop to
oppression, the struggles of their American brethren, will be their eternal
reproach.
, we dare oppose demands of right, and appeal to that constitution, which holds
even kings in fetters.

IT is easy to project the subversion of a people, when men behold them, the
ignorant or indolent victims of power; but it is difficult to effect their
ruin, when they are apprized of their just claims, and are sensibly and
seasonably affected with thoughts for their preservation. GOD be thanked, the
alarm is gone forth The instituting a committee of grievances and
correspondence, by the town of Boston, has served this valuable purpose: The
general infraction of the rights of all the colonies, must finally reduce the
discordant provinces, to a necessary combination for their mutual interest and
defense: Some future Congress will be the glorious source of the salvation of
America: The Amphictiones of Greece, who formed the diet or great council of
the states, exhibit an excellent model for the rising Americans.
, the people are universally informed of their CHARTER RIGHTS; they esteem them
to be the ark of GOD to NEW ENGLAND, and like that of old, may it deal
destruction to the profane hand that shall dare to touch it.

IN every state or society of men, personal liberty and security must depend
upon the collective power of the whole, acting for the general interest Lord
chief justice Coke observes "when any new device is moved in the king's behalf,
for aid or the like, the commons may answer, they dare not agree without
conference with their counties." The novel device of fleecing the colonies, was
introduced in a way the constitution knows not of, and crammed down their
throats, by measures equally iniquitous.

I will not alarm the sticklers for the present measures, by confronting them
with more stole authorities, if they will permit me the following* short but
express declaration of Sidney, which they may (...) at le^sure. NO MAN CAN GIVE
THAT WHICH IS WOTHER'S.


. If this collective power is not of the whole, the freedom and interest of the
whole is not secured: If this confluent power acts by a partial delegation, or
for a partial intered, its operation is surely determinable, where its
delegation ends.

THE constitution of England, I revere to a degree of idolatry; but my
attachment is to the commonweal: The magistrate will ever command my respect,
by the integrity and wisdom of his administrations.

JUNIUS well observes; when the constitution is openly invaded, when the first
original right of the people, from which all laws derive their authority, is
directly attacked, inferior grievances naturally lose their force, and are
suffered to pass by without punishment or observation.

NUMBERLESS have been the attacks made upon our free constitution; numberless
the grievances we now resent: but the Hydra mischief, is the violation of my
right, as a BRITISH AMERICAN freeholder, in not being consulted in framing
those statutes I am required to obey.

THE authority of the BRITISH monarch over this colony was established, and his
power derived from the province CHARTER; by that we are entitled to a distinct
legislation. As in every government there must exist a power superior to the
laws, viz. the power that makes those laws, and from which they derive their
authority Nothing, continued the corporal, can be so sweet,
An please your honor, as liberty;
Nothing Trim, said my uncle Toby, musing --
Whilst a man is free -- cried the corporal, giving a flourish with b^ stick
thus:
TRISTRAM SHANDY.
: therefore the liberty of the people is exactly proportioned to the share the
body of the people have in the legislature; and the check placed in the
constitution, on the executive power. That state only is free, where the people
are governed by laws which they have a share in making; and that country is
totally enslaved, where one single law can be made or repealed, without the
interposition or consent of the people.

THAT the members of the British parliament are the representatives of the
whole British empire, expressly militates with their avowed principles: property
and residence within the island, alone constituting the right of election; and
surely he is not my delegate in whose nomination or appointment I have no
choice: but however the futile and absurd claim of a virtual representation,
may comport with the idea of a political visionary; he must (if possible)
heighten the indignation, or excite the ridicule of a freeborn American, who by
such a fallacious pretext would despoil him of his property.

AN American freeholder, according to the just and judicious conduct of the
present ministry, has no possible right to be consulted, in the disposal of his
property: when a lordly, though unlettered British elector, possessed of a
turnip garden, with great propriety may appoint a legislature, to assess the
ample domains of the most sensible, opulent American planter.

BUT remember, my brethren, when a people have once sold their liberties, it is
no act of extraordinary generosity, to throw their lives and properties into
the bargain, for they are poor indeed when enjoyed at the mercy of a master.

THE late conduct of Great Britain, so inconsistent with the practice of former
times, so subversive of the first principles of government, is sufficient to
excite the discontent of the subject: the Americans justly and decently urged
an exclusive right of taxing themselves; was it indulgent, conciliating, or
parental conduct in that state, to exaggerate such a claim, as a concerted plan
of rebellion in the wanton Americans? and by a rigorous and cruel exercise of
power to enforce submission, excite such animosities, as at some future period,
may produce a bitter repentance?

CAN such be called a legal tax or free gift? it is rather levying
contributions on grudging enslaved Americans, by virtue of an act framed and
enforced, not only without, but against their consent; thereby rendering the
provincial assemblies a useless part of the constitution.

WHERE laws are framed and assessments laid without a legal representation, and
obedience to such acts urged by force, the despairing people robbed of every
constitutional means of redress, and that people, brave and virtuous, must
become the admiration of ages, should they not appeal to those powers, which
the immutable laws of nature have lent to all mankind. Fear is a slender tie of
subjection; we detest those whom we fear, and wish destruction to those we
detest; but humanity, uprightness, and good faith, with an apparent
watchfulness for the welfare of the people, constitute the permanency, and are
the firmest support of the sovereign's authority; for when violence is opposed
to reason and justice, courage never wants an arm for its defense.

WHAT dignity, what respect, what authority, can Britain derive from her
obstinate adherence to error? she stands convicted of violating her own
principles, but persoeveres with unrelenting severity; we implore for rights as
a grace, she aggravates our distress, by lopping away another and another
darling privilege; we ask for freedom and she sends the sword!

To the wisdom, to the justice, to the piety of his most sacred Majesty, I
unite in my appeal with this unbounded Empire; GOD grant he may attend to the
reiterated prayer, instea^ of the marmur of discontent, and the frown of
louring disaffection; we would universally hail him with those effasions of
germine joy, and duteous veneration, which the proudest DESPOT will vainly look
for, from forced respect or ceremon^ (...).

PARTIES and factions, since the days of the detested Andross, have been
strangers to this land; no distinctions of heartfelt animosity, disturbed the
peace and order of society till the malignant folly of a The Nettleham Baronet.
late rancorous commander in chief conjured them from the dead: when shall this
unhappy clime be purged of its numerous plagues? when will our troubles, our
feuds, our struggles cease? when will the locusts leave the land? then, and not
till then, peace and plenty shall smile around us; the husbandman will labor
with pleasure; and honest industry reap the reward of its toil.

BUT let us not forget the distressing occasion of this anniversary: the sullen
ghosts of murdered fellow-citizens, haunt my imagination "and harrow up my
soul;" methinks the tainted air is hung with the dews of death, while Ate hot
from hell, cries havoc, and lets slip the dogs of war. Hark! the van tenants
of the grave still shriek for vengeance on their remorseless butchers: forgive
us heaven! should we mingle involuntary execrations, while hovering in idea
over the guiltless dead. Where is the amiable, the graceful Maverick? the
opening blossom is now withered in his cheek, the sprightly fire that once
lightened in his eye is quenched in death -- Hic ubi barbarus hostis,
Ut sera plus valiant legibus arma sacit.
OVID de Ponto.
; the savage hands of brutal ruffians, have crushed the unsuspecting victim^
and in an evil hour snatched away his gentle soul.

WHERE is the friendly, the industrious Caldwell? he paced innoxious through
the theater of death, inconscious of design or danger; when the winged fate
gored his bosom, and stripped his startled soul for the world of spirits. Where
are the residue of active citizens that were wont to tread these sacred floors?
fallen by the hands of the vindictive assassins, they swell the horrors of the
sanguinary scene. Loyalty stands on tiptoe at the shocking recollection, while
justice, virtue, honor, patriotism become suppliants for immoderate vengeance:
the whole soul clamours for arms, and is on fire to attack the brutal banditti;
we fly agonizing to the horrid aceldama; we gaze on the mangled corses of our
brethren, and grinning furies glotting over their carnage; the hostile attitude
of the miscreant murderers, redoubles our resentment, and makes revenge a
virtue.

BY heaven they die! thus nature spoke, and the swollen heart leaped to execute
the dreadful purpose; dire was the interval of rage, fierce was the conflict of
the soul. In that important hour, did not the stalking ghosts of our stern
forefathers, point us to bloody deeds of vengeance! did not the consideration
of our expiring LIBERTIES, impel us to remorseless havoc? but hark! the
guardian GOD of New England issues his awful mandate, "PEACE, BE STILL;"
hursh'd was the bursting war, the louring tempest frowned its rage away.
Confidence in that GOD, beneath whose wing we shelter all our cares, that
blessed confidence released the dastard, the cowering prey: with haughty ^rn we
refused to become their executioners, and nobly gave them to the wrath of
heaven: but words can poorly paint the horrid scene -- Multaque rubentia coede
Lubrica saxa madent, nulli sua prosuit aetas.
LUCAN, Lib. 24
-- Defenseless, prostrate, bleeding countrymen -- the piercing, agonizing
groans -- the mingled moan of weeping relatives and friends: -- These best can
speak; to rouse the lukewarm into noble zeal; to fire the zealous into manly
rage, against the soul oppression, of quartering troops, in populous cities, in
times of peace.

THOU who yon bloody walk shall traverse, there
Where troops of Britain's king, on Britain's sons,
Discharged the leaden vengeance; pass not on
Ever thou have blessed their memory, and paid
Those hallowed tears, which sooth the virtuous dead:
O s^ranger! stay thee, and the scene around
Contemplate well; and if perchance thy home
Salute thee with a father's honored name,
Go call thy sons -- instruct them what a debt
They owe their ancestors, and make them swear
To pay it, by transmitting down entire
Those sacred rights, to which themselves were born.
ORATION, DELIVERED AT BOSTON, MARCH 5, 1774.
BY THE HON. JOHN HANCOCK, ESQUIRE.
Vendidit hic auro patriam, dominumque potentem
Imposuit: fixit leges pretio atque refixit.
Non, mihi si linguae centum sint, oraque centum,
Ferrea vox, omnes scelerum comprendere formas,
-- possim.
VIRG.
MEN, BRETHREN, FATHERS AND FELLOW-COUNTRYMEN!
THE attentive gravity; the venerable appearance of this crowded audience; the
dignity which I behold in the countenances of so many in this great assembly;
the solemnity of the occasion upon which we have met together, joined to a
consideration of the part I am to take in the important business of this day,
fill me with an awe hitherto unknown; and heighten the sense which I have ever
had, of my unworthiness to fill this sacred desk; but, allured by the call of
some of my respected fellow-citizens, with whose request it is always my
greatest pleasure to comply, I almost forgot my want of ability to perform what
they required. In this situation I find my only support, in assuring myself
that a generous people will not severely censure what they know was well
intended, though its want of merit, should prevent their being able to applaud
it. And I pray, that my sincere attachment to the interest of my country, and
hearty detestation of every design formed against her liberties, may be
admitted as some apology for my appearance in this place.

I HAVE always, from my earliest youth, rejoiced in the felicity of my
fellow-men; and have ever considered it as the indispensable duty of every
member of society to promote, as far as in him lies, the prosperity of every
individual, but more especially of the community to which he belongs; and also,
as a faithful subject of the state, to use his utmost endeavors to detect, and
having detected, strenuously to oppose every traitorous plot which its enemies
may devise for its destruction. Security to the persons and properties of the
governed, is so obviously the design and end of civil government, that to
attempt a logical proof of it, would be like burning tapers at noonday, to
assist the sun in enlightening the world; and it cannot be either virtuous or
honorable, to attempt to support a government, of which this is not the great
and principal basis; and it is to the last degree vicious and infamous to
attempt to support a government, which manifestly tends to render the persons
and properties of the governed insecure. Some boast of being friends to
government; I am a friend to righteous government, to a government founded upon
the principles of reason and justice; but I glory in publicly avowing my
eternal enmity to tyranny. Is the present system which the British
administration have adopted for the government of the colonies, a righteous
government? or is it tyranny? -- Here suffer me to ask (and would to heaven
there could be an answer) what tenderness, what regard, respect or
consideration has Great Britain shown, in their late transactions, for the
security of the persons or properties of the inhabitants of the colonies? or
rather, what have they omitted doing to destroy that security? they have
dec^ared that they have, ever had, and of right ought ever to have, full power
to make laws of sufficient validity to bind the colonies in all cases whatever:
they have exercised this pretended right by imposing a tax upon us without our
consent; and lest we should show some reluctance at parting with our property,
her fleets and armies are sent to enforce their mad pretensions. The town of
Boston, ever faithful to the British crown, has been invested by a British
fleet: the troops of George the III. have crossed the wide atlantic, not to
engage an enemy, but to assist a band of TRAITORS in trampling on the rights
and liberties of his most loyal subjects in America, -- those rights and
liberties which, as a father, he ought ever to regard, and as a king, he is
bound, in honor, to defend from violations, even at the risque of his own life.

LET not the history of the illustrious house of Brunswick inform posterity,
that a king, descended from that glorious monarch George the II. once sent his
British subjects to conquer and enslave his subjects in America; but be
perpetual infamy entailed upon that villain who dared to advise his master to
such execrable measures; for it was easy to foresee the consequences which so
naturally followed upon sending troops into America, to enforce obedience to
acts of the British parliament, which neither GOD nor man ever empowered them
to make. It was reasonable to expect that troops, who knew the errand they were
sent upon, would treat the people whom they were to subjugate, with a cruelty
and haughtiness, which too often buries the honorable character of a soldier,
in the disgraceful name of an unfeeling ruffian. The troops, upon their first
arrival, took possession of our senate house, and pointed their cannon against
the judgment-hall, and even continued them there whilst the supreme court of
judicature for this province was actually sitting to decide upon the lives and
fortunes of the king's subjects. Our streets nightly refounded with the noise
of riot and debauchery; our peaceful citizens were hourly exposed to shameful
insults, and often felt the effects of their violence and outrage. -- But this
was not all: as though they thought it not enough to violate our civil rights,
they endeavored to deprive us of the enjoyment of our religious privileges; to
viciate our morals, and thereby render us deserving of destruction. Hence the
rude din of arms which broke in upon your solemn devotions in your temples, on
that day hallowed by heaven, and set apart by GOD himself for his peculiar
worship. Hence, impious oaths and blasphemies so often tortured your
unaccustomed ear. Hence, all the arts which idleness and luxury could invent,
were used, to betray our youth of one sex into extravagance and effeminacy, and
of the other to infamy and ruin; and did they not succeed but too well? did not
a reverence for religion sensibly decay? did not our infants almost learn to
lisp out curses before they knew their horrid import? did not our youth forget
they were Americans, and regardless of the admonitions of the wise and aged,
servilely copy from their tyrants those vices which finally must overthrow the
empire of Great Britain? and must I be compelled to acknowledge, that even the
noblest, fairest part of all the lower creation did not entirely escape the
cursed snare? when virtue has once erected her throne within the female breast,
it is upon so solid a basis that nothing is able to expel the heavenly
inhabitant. But have there not been some, ^w indeed, I hope, whose youth and
inexperience have ^^nder'd them a prey to wretches, whom, upon the least
reflection, they would have despised and hated as foes to GOD and their
country? I fear there have been some such unhappy instances; or why have I seen
an honest father clothed with shame; or why a virtuous mother drowned in tears?

BUT I forbear, and come reluctantly to the transactions of that dismal night,
when in such quick succession we felt the extremes of grief, astonishment and
rage; when heaven in anger, for a dreadful moment, suffered hell to take the
reins; when satan with his chosen band opened the sluices of New-England's
blood, and sacrilegiously polluted our land with the dead bodies of her
guiltless sons. Let this sad tale of death never be told without a tear: let
not the heaving bosom cease to burn with a manly indignation at the barbarous
story, through the long tracts of future time: let every parent tell the
shameful story to his listening children 'til tears of pity glisten in their
eyes, and boiling passion shakes their tender frames; and whilst the
anniversary of that ill-fated night is kept a jubilee in the grim court of
pandaemonium, let all America join in one common prayer to heaven, that the
inhuman, unprovoked murders of the fifth of March, 1770, planned by
Hillsborough, and a knot of treacherous knaves in Boston, and executed by the
cruel hand of Preston and his sanguinary coadjutors, may ever stand on history
without a parallel. But what, my countrymen, witheld the ready arm of vengeance
from executing instant justice on the vile assassins? perhaps you feared
promiscuous carnage might ensue, and that the innocent might share the fate of
those who had performed the infernal deed. But were not all guilty? were you
not too tender of the lives of those who came to fix a yoke on your necks? but
I must not too severely blame a fault, which great souls only can commit. May
that magnificence of spirit which scorns the low pursuits of malice; may that
generous compassion which often preserves from ruin, even a guilty villian,
forever actuate the noble bosoms of Americans! -- But let not the miscreant
host vainly imagine that we feared their arms. No; them we despised; we dread
nothing but slavery. Death is the creature of a poltroon's brains; it is
immortality to sacrifice ourselves for the salvation of our country. We fear
not death. That gloomy night, the pale-faced moon, and the affrighted stars
that hurried through the sky, can witness that we fear not death. Our hearts,
which at the recollection, glow with a rage that four revolving years have
scarcely taught us to restrain, can witness that we fear not death; and happy
it is for those who dared to insult us, that their naked bones are not now piled
up an everlasting monument of Massachuset^s' bravery. But they retired, they
fled, and in that flight they found their only safety. We then expected that
the hand of public justice would soon inflict that punishment upon the
murderers, which, by the laws of GOD and man, they had incurred. But let the
unbiased pen of a Robertson, or perhaps of some equally famed American,
conduct this trial before the great tribunal of succeeding generations. And
though the murderers may escape the just resentment of an enraged people;
though drowsy justice, intoxicated by the poisonous draught prepared for her
cup, still nods upon her rotten seat, yet be assured, such complicated crimes
will meet their due reward. Tell me, ye bloody butchers! ye villains high and
low! ye wretches who contrived, as well as you who executed the inhuman deed!
do you not feel the goads and stings of conscious guilt pierce through your
savage bosoms? though some of you may think yourselves exalted to a height that
bids defiance to the arms of human justice, and others shroud yourselves
beneath the mask of hypocracy, and build your hopes of safety on the low arts
of cunning, chicanery and falsehood; yet, do you not sometimes feel the knawings
of that worm which never dies? do not the injured shades of Maverick, Gray,
Caldwell, Attucks and Carr, attend you in your solitary walks, arrest you even
in the midst of your debaucheries, and fill even your dreams with terror? but
if the unappeased manes of the dead should not disturb their murderers, yet
surely even your obdurate hearts must shrink, and your guilty blood must chill
within your rigid veins, when you behold the miserable Monk, the wretched
victim of your savage cruelty. Observe his tottering knees which scarce sustain
his wasted body; look on his hagga^d eyes; mark well the death-like paleness on
his fallen cheek, and tell me, does not the sight plant daggers in your souls?
unhappy Monk! cut off in the gay morn of manhood, from all the joys which
sweeten life, doomed to drag on a pitiful existence, without even a hope to
taste the pleasures of returning health! yet Monk, thou live not in vain;
thou live a warning to thy country, which sympathizes with thee in thy
sufferings; thou live an affecting, an alarming instance of the unbounded
violence which lust of power, assisted by a standing army, can lead a traitor
to commit.

FOR us he bled, and now languishes. The wounds by which he is tortured to a
lingering death, were aimed at our country! surely the meek-eyed charity can
never behold such sufferings with indifference. Nor can her lenient hand
forbear to pour oil and wine into these wounds; and to assuage at least, what
it cannot heal.

PATRIOTISM is ever united with humanity and compassion. This noble affection
which impels us to sacrifice every thing dear, even life itself, to our
country, involves in it a common sympathy and tenderness for every citizen, and
must ever have a particular feeling for one who suffers in a public cause.
Thoroughly persuaded of this, I need not add a word to engage your compassion
and bounty toward a fellow-citizen, who, with long protracted anguish, falls a
victim to the relentless rage of our common enemies.

YE dark designing knaves, ye murderers, par^icides! how dare you tread upon
the earth, which has drank in the blood of slaughtered innocents shed by your
wicked hands? how dare you breathe that air which wafted to the ear of heaven,
the groa^s of those who fell (...) sacrifice to your accur^ed ambition? but if
the laboring earth does not expand her jaws; if the air you breathe is not
commissioned to be the minister of death; yet, hear it, and tremble! the eye of
heaven penetrates the darkest chambers of the soul, traces the leading clue
through all the labyrinths which your industrious felly has devised; and you,
however you may have screen^d yourselves from human eyes, must be arraigned,
must lift your hands, red with the blood of those whose death you have
procured, at the tremendous bar of GOD.

BUT I gladly quit the gloomy theme of death, and leave you to improve the
thought of that important day, when our naked souls must stand before that
Being, from whom nothing can be hid. I would not dwell too long upon the horrid
effects which have already followed from quartering reg^ar troops in this town:
let our misfortunes teach posterity to guard against such evils for the future.
Standing armies are sometimes (I would by no means say generally, much less
universally) composed of persons who have rendered themselves unfit to live in
civil society; who have no other motives of conduct than those which a desire
of the present gratification of their passions suggests; who have no property
in any country; men who have lost or given up their own liberties, and envy
those who enjoy liberty; who are equally indifferent to the glory of a George
or a Lewis; who for the addition of one penny a day to their wages, would
desert from the christian cross, and fight under the crescent of the Turkish
Sultan; from such men as these, what has not a state to fear? with such as
these, usurping Caesar passed the Rubicon; with such as these he humbled mighty
Rome, and forced the mistress of the world to own a master in a traitor. These
are the men whom sceptered robbers now employ to frustrate the designs of GOD,
and render vain the bounties which his gracious hand pours indiscriminately
upon his creatures. By these the miserable slaves in Turkey, Persia, and many
other extensive countries, are rendered truly wretched, though their air is
salubrious, and their soil l^^riously fertile. By these France and Spain,
though blessed by nature with all that administers to the convenience of life,
have been reduced to that contemptible state in which they now appear; and by
these Britain -- but if I was possessed of the gift of prophecy, I dare not,
except by divine command, unfold the leaves on which the destiny of that once
powerful kingdom is inscribed.

BUT since standing armies are so hurtful to a state, perhaps, my countrymen
may demand some substitute, some other means of rendering us secure against the
incursions of a foreign enemy. But can you be one moment at a loss? will not a
well disciplined militia afford you ample security against foreign soes? we
want not courage; it is discipline alone in which we are exceeded by the most
formidable troops that ever trod the earth. Surely our hearts flutter no more
at the sound of war, than did those of the immortal band of Persia, the
Macedonian phalanx, the invincible Roman legions, the Turkish Jamssaries, the
Gens des Arms of France, or the well known Gre^adiers of Britain. A well
disciplined mil^tia is a safe, an honorable guard to a community like this,
whose inhabitants are by nature brave, and are laudably tenacious of that
freedom in which they were born. From a well regulated militia we have nothing
to fear; their interest is the same with that of the state. When a country is
invaded, the militia are ready to appear in its defense; they march into the
field with that sortitude which a consciousness of the justice of their cause
inspires; they do not jeopard their lives for a master who considers them only
as the instruments of his ambition, and whom they regard (...) as the daily
dispenser of the scanty pittance of (...) water. No, they fight for their
houses, their (...) their wives, the^^ ^ldren, for all who (...) est names, and
a^ (...) dearest in their heart, they ^^ght proaris and focis, for their
liberty, and for themselves, (...) for their GOD. And let it not off^nd, if I
say, that (...) litia ever appeared in more flourishing condition, (...) that
of this province now does; and pardon me if I say, -- of this town in
particular. -- I mean not to boast; I would not excite envy, but manly
emulation. We have all one common cause; let it therefore be our only contest,
who shall most contribute to the security of the liberties of America. And may
the same kind providence which has watched over this country from her infant
state, still enable us to defeat our enemies. I cannot here forbear noticing
the signal manner in which the designs of those who wish not well to us have
been discovered. The dark deeds of a treacherous cabal, have been brought to
public view. You now know the serpents who, whilst cherished in your bosoms,
were darting their envenomed stings into the vitals of the constitution. But
the representatives of the people have fixed a mark on those ungrateful
monsters, which, though it may not make them so secure as Cain of old, yet
renders them at least as infamous. Indeed it would be affrontive to the tutelar
deity of this country even to despair of saving it from all the snares which
human policy can lay.

TRUE it is, that the British ministry have annexed a salary to the office of
the governor of this province, to be paid out of a revenue, raised in America,
without our consent. They have attempted to render our courts of justice the
instruments of extending the authority of acts of the British parliament over
this colony, by making the judges dependent on the British administration, for
their support. But this people will never be enslaved with their eyes open. The
moment they knew that the governor was not such a governor as the charter of
the province points out, he lost his power of hurting them. They were al^rmed;
they suspected him, have guarded against him, and he has found that a wife and
a brave people, when they know their danger, are fruitful in expedients to
escape it.

THE courts of judicature also so far lost their dignity, by being supposed to
be under an undue influence, that our representatives thought it absolutely
necessary to resolve that they were bound to declare that they would not
receive any other salary besides that which the general court should grant
them; and if they did not make this declaration, that it would be the duty of
the house to impeach them.

GREAT expectations were also formed from the artful scheme of allowing the
East India company to export tea to America, upon their own account. This
certainly, had it succeeded, would have effected the purpose of the contrivers,
and gratified the most sanguine wishes of our adversaries. We soon should have
found our trade in the hands of foreigners, and taxes imposed on every thing
which we consumed; nor would it have been strange, if, in a few years, a
company in London should have purchased an exclusive right of trading to
America. -- But their plot was soon discovered. The people soon were aware of
the poison which with so much craft and subtility had been concealed: loss and
disgrace ensued: and, perhaps, this long-concerted masterpiece of policy, may
issue in the toral disuse of tea, in this country, which will eventually be the
saving of the lives and the estates of thousands -- yet while we rejoice that
the adversary has not hitherto prevailed against us, let us by no means put off
the harness. Restless malice, and disappointed ambition, will still suggest new
measures to our inveterate enemies. Therefore let us also be ready to take the
field whenever danger calls; let us be united and strengthen the hands of each
other, by promoting a general union among us. Much has been done by the
committees of correspondence for this and the other towns of this province,
toward uniting the inhabitants; let them still go on and prosper. Much has
been done by the committees of correspondence, for the houses of assembly: in
this and our sister colonies, for uniting the inhabitants of the whole
continent, for the security of their common interest. May success ever attend
their generous endeavors. But permit me here to suggest a general congress of
deputies, from the several houses of assembly, on the continent, as the most
effectual prethod of establishing such an union, as the present posture of our
affairs requires. At such a congress, a firm foundation may be laid for the
security of our rights and liberties; a system may be formed for our common
safety, by a strict adherence to which, we shall be able to frustrate any
attempts to overthrow our constitution; restore peace and harmony to America,
and secure honor and wealth to Great Britain, even against the inclinations of
her ministers, whose duty it is to study her welfare; and we shall also free
ourselves from those unmannerly pillagers who impudently tell us, that they are
licenced by an act of the British parliament, to thrust their dirty hands into
the pockets of every American. But, I trust, the happy time will come, when,
with the besom of destruction, those noxious vermin will be swept forever from
the streets of Boston.

SURELY you never will tamely suffer this country to be a den of thieves.
Remember, my friends, from whom you sprang -- Let not a meanness of spirit,
unknown to those whom you boast of as your fathers, excite a thought to the
dishonor of your mothers. I conjure you by all that is dear, by all that is
honorable, by all that is sacred, not only that ye pray, but that you act;
that, if necessary, ye fight, and even die, for the prosperity of our
Jerusalem. Break in sunder, with noble disdain, the bonds with which the
Philistines have bound you. Suffer not yourselves to be betrayed by the soft
arts of luxury and offeminacy, into the pit dug for your destruction.
Despise the glare of wealth. That people who pay greater respect to a wealthy
villain, than to an honest upright man in poverty, almost deserve to be
enslaved; they plainly show that wealth, however it may be acquired, is, in
their esteem, to be preferred to virtue.

BUT I thank GOD, that America abounds in men who are superior to all
temptation, whom nothing can divert from a steady pursuit of the interest of
their country; who are at once its ornament and safeguard. And sure I am, I
should not incur your displeasure, if I paid a respect so justly due to their
much-honoured characters, in this place; but when I name an ADAMS, such a
numerous host of fellow-patriots rush upon my mind, that I fear it would take
up too much of your time, should I attempt to call over the illustrious roll:
but your grateful hearts will point you to the men; and their revered names, in
all succeeding times, shall grace the annals of America. -- From them, let us,
my friends, take example; from them let us catch the divine enthusiasm; and
feel, each for himself, the GOD-like pleasure of diffusing happiness on all
around us; of delivering the oppressed from the iron grasp of tyranny; of
changing the hoarse complaints and bitter moans of wretched slaves, into those
cheerful songs, which freedom and contentment must inspire. There is a
heartfelt satisfaction in reflecting on our exertions for the public weal,
which all the sufferings an enraged tyrant can inflict, will never take away;
which the ingratitude and reproaches of those whom we have saved from ruin,
cannot rob us of. The virtuous assertor of the rights of mankind, merits a
reward, which even a want of success in his endeavors to save his country, the
heaviest misfortune which can befall a genuine patriot, cannot entirely prevent
him from receiving.

I HAVE the most animating confidence that the present noble struggle for
liberty, will terminate gloriously for America. And let us play the man for our
GOD, and for the cities of our GOD; while we are using the means in our power,
let us humbly commit our righteous cause to the great LORD of the universe, who
loves righteousness and hates iniquity. -- And having secured the approbation
of our hearts, by a faithful and unwearied discharge of our duty to our
country, let us joyfully leave her important concerns in the hands of HIM who
raises up and puts down the empires and kingdoms of the world as HE
pleases; and with cheerful submission to HIS sovereign will, devoutly say,

"Although the fig tree shall not blessom, neither shall fruit be in the vines;
the labor of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat; the
flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls:
yet we will rejoice in the LORD, we will joy in the GOD of our salvation."

ORATION, DELIVERED AT BOSTON, MARCH 6, 1775.
By DR. JOSEPH WARREN.
Tantae molis erat, Romanam condere gentem.
VIRGIL's AEN. Qbi, metuens, vivit, liber mihi non crit unquam.
HOR. EPIS.
MY EVER-HONORED FELLOW-CITIZENS,
IT is not without the most humiliating conviction of my want of ability that I
now appear before you: but the sense I have of the obligation I am under to
obey the calls of my country at all times, together with an animating
recollection of your indulgence, exhibited upon so many occasions, has induced
me, once more, undeserving as I am, to throw myself upon that candor which
looks with kindness on the feeblest efforts of an honest mind.

YOU will not now expect the elegance, the learning, the fire, the enrapturing
strains of eloquence which charmed you when a LOVELL, a CHURCH, or a HANCOCK
spoke; but you will permit me to say that with a sincerity, equal to theirs, I
mourn over my bleeding country: With them I weep at her distress, and with them
deeply resent the many injuries she has received from the hands of cruel and
unreasonable men.

THAT personal freedom is the natural right of every man; and that property, or
an exclusive right to dispose of what he has honestly acquired by his own
labor, necessarily arises therefrom, are truths which common sense has placed
beyond the reach of contradiction. And no man, or body of men, can, without
being guilty of flagrant injustice, claim a right to dispose of the persons of
acquisitions of any other man or body of men, unless it can be proved that such
a right has arisen from some compact between the parties in which it has been
explicitly and freely granted.

IF I may be indulged in taking a retrospective view of the first settlement of
our country, it will be easy to determine with what degree of justice the late
parliament of Great Britain have assumed the power of giving away that property
which the Americans have earned by their labor.

OUR fathers having nobly resolved never to wear the yoke of despotism, and
seeing the European world, at that time, through indolence and cowardice,
falling a prey to tyranny, bravely threw themselves upon the bosom of the
ocean; determined to find a place in which they might enjoy their freedom, or
perish in the glorious attempt. Approving heaven beheld the favorite ark
dancing upon the waves, and graciously preserved it until the chosen families
were brought in safety to these western regions. They found the land swarming
with savages, who threatened death with every kind of torture. But savages, and
death with torture, were far less terrible than slavery: nothing was so much
the object of their abhorrence as a tyrant's power: they knew that it was more
safe to dwell with man in his most unpolished state, than in a country where
arbitrary power prevails. Even anarchy itself, that bugbear held up by the
tools of power (though truly to be deprecated) is infinitely less dangerous to
mankind than arbitrary government. Anarchy can be but of short duration; for
when men are at liberty to pursue that course which is most conducive to their
own happiness, they will soon come into i^, and from the rudest state of
nature, order and good government must soon arise. But tyranny, when once
established, entails its curses on a nation to the latest period of time;
unless some daring genius, inspired by heaven, shall, unappalled by danger,
bravely form and execute the arduous design of restoring liberty and life to
his enslaved, murdered country.

THE tools of power, in every age, have racked their inventions to justify the
few in sporting with the happiness of the many; and, having found their
sophistry too weak to hold mankind in bondage, have impiously dared to force
religion, the daughter of the king of heaven, to become a prostitute in the
service of hell. They taught that princes, honored with the name of christian,
might bid defiance to the founder of their faith, might pillage Pagan countries
and deluge them with blood, only because they boasted themselves to be the
disciples of that teacher who strictly charged his followers to do to others as
they would that others should do unto them.

THIS country, having been discovered by an English subject, in the year 1630,
was (according to the system which the blind superstition of those time
supported) deemed the property of the crown of England. Our ancestors, when
they resolved to quit their native soil, obtained from King James, a grant of
certain lands in North America. This they probably did to silence the cavils of
their enemies, for it cannot be doubted, but they despised the pretended right
which he claimed thereto. Certain it is, that he might, with equal propriety
and justice, have made them a grant of the pran^t Jupiter. And their subsequent
conduct plainly show that they were two well acquainted with humanity, and the
principles of natural equity, to suppose that the grant gave them any right to
take p^esession; they therefore entered into a treaty with the natives, and
bought from them the lands: nor have I ever yet obtained any information that
our ancestors ever pleaded, or that the natives ever regarded the grant from
the English crown: the business was transacted by the ^ties in the same
independent manner that it would have been, had neither of them ever known or
heard of the island of Great Britain.

HAVING become the honest proprietors of the soil, they immediately applied
themselves to the cultivation of it; and they soon beheld the virgin earth
teeming with richest fruits, a grateful recompense for their unwearied toil.
The fields began to wave with repining harvests, and the late barren wilderness
was seen to blossom like the rose. The savage natives saw with wonder the
delightful change, and quickly formed a scheme to obtain that by fraud or
force, which nature meant as the reward of industry alone. But the illustrious
emigrants soon convinced the rude invaders, that they were not less ready to
take the field for battle than for labor; and the insidious foe was driven from
their borders as often as he ventured to disturb them. The crown of England
looked with indifference on the contest; our ancestors were left alone to
combat with the natives. Nor is there any reason to believe, that it ever was
intended by the one party, or expected by the other, that the grantor should
defend and maintain the grantees in the peaceable possession of the lands named
in the patents. And it appears plainly, from the history of those times, that
neither the prince, nor the people of England, thought themselves much
interested in the matter. They had not then any idea of a thousandth part of
those advantages which they since have, and we are most heartily willing they
should still continue to reap from us.

BUT when, at an infinite expense of toil and blood, this widely extended
continent had been cultivated and defended: when the hardy adventurers justly
expected that they and their descendants should peaceably have enjoyed the
harvest of those fields which they had sown, and the fruit of those vineyards
which they had planted; this country was then thought worthy the attention of
the British ministry; and the only justifiable and only successful means of
rendering the colonies serviceable to Britain were adopted. By an intercourse
of friendly offices, the two countries became so united in affection, that they
thought not of any distinct or separate interests, they found both countries
flourishing and happy. Britain saw her commerce extended, and her wealth
increased; her lands raised to an immense value; her fleets riding triumphant
on the ocean; the terror of her arms spreading to every quarter of the globe.
The colonist found himself free, and thought himself secure: he dwelt under his
own vine, and under his own figtree, and had none to make him afraid: he knew
indeed that by purchasing the manufactures of Great Britain, he contributed to
its greatness: he knew that all the wealth that his labor produced centered in
Great Britain: But that, far from exciting his envy, filled him with the
highest pleasure; that thought supported him in all his toils. -- When the
business of the day was past, he solaced himself with the contemplation, or
perhaps entertained his listening family with the recital of some great, some
glorious transaction which shines conspicuous in the history of Britain: or,
perhaps, his elevated fancy led him to foretell, with a kind of enthusiastic
confidence, the glory, power, and duration of an empire which should extend
from one end of the earth to the other: he saw, or thought he saw, the British
nation risen to a pitch of grandeur which cast a veil over the Roman glory,
and, ravished with the praeview, boasted a race of British kings, whose names
should echo through those realms where Cyras, Alexander, and the Caesar's were
unknown; princes for whom millions of grateful subjects redeemed from slavery
and Pagan ignorance, should, with thankful tongues, offer up their prayers and
praises to that transcendently great and beneficent being, by whom Kings reign
and Princes decree justice.

THESE pleasing connections might have continued; these delightsome prospects
might have been every day extended; and even the reveries of the most warm
imagination might have been realized; but unhappily for us, unhappily for
Britain, the madness of an avaricious minister of state, has drawn a sable
curtain over the charming scene, and in its stead has brought upon the stage,
discord, envy, hatred, and revenge, with civil war close in their rear.

SOME demon, in an evil hour, suggested to a short-sighted financier, the
hateful project of transfering the whole property of the King's subjects in
America, to his subjects in Britain. The claim of the British parliament to tax
the colonies, can never be supported but by such a TRANSFER; for the right of
the house of commons of Great Britain, to originate any tax, or grant money, is
altogether derived from their being elected by the people of Great Britain to
act for them; and the people of Great Britain cannot confer on their
representatives a right to give or grant any thing which they themselves have
not a right to give or grant personally. Therefore it follows, that if the
members chosen by the people of Great Britain, to represent them in parliament,
have, by virtue of their being so chosen, any right to give or grant American
property, or to lay any tax upon the lands or persons of the colonists, it is
because the lands and people in the colonies are bona fide, owned by, and
justly belonging to the people of Great Britain. But (as has been before
observed) every man has a right to personal freedom, consequently a right to
enjoy what is acquired by his own labor. And as it is evident that the property
in this country has been acquired by our own labor; it is the duty of the
people of Great Britain, to produce some compact in which we have explicitly
given up to them a right to dispose of our persons or property. -- Until this
is done, every attempt of theirs, or of those whom they have deputed to act for
them, to give or grant any part of our property, is directly repugnant to every
principle of reason and natural justice. But I may boldly say, that such a
compact never existed, no, not even in imagination. Nevertheless, the
representatives of a nation, long famed for justice and the exercise of every
noble virtue, have been prevailed on to adopt the fatal scheme; and although
the dreadful consequences of this wicked policy have already shaken the empire
to its center; yet still it is persisted in. Regardless of the voice of reason
-- deaf to the prayers and supplications -- and unaffected with the flowing
tears of suffering millions, the British ministry still hug the darling idol;
and every rolling year affords fresh instances of the absurd devotion with
which they worship it. Alas! how has the folly, the distraction of the British
councils, blasted our swelling hopes, and spread a gloom over this western
hemisphere.

THE hearts of Britons and Americans, which lately felt the generous glow of
mutual confidence and love, now burn with jealously and rage. Though, but of
yesterday, I recollect (deeply affected at the ill-boding change) the happy
hours that past whilst Britain and America rejoiced in the prosperity and
greatness of each other (heaven grant those halcyon days may soon return.) But
now the Briton too often looks on the American with an envious eye, taught to
consider his just plea for the enjoyment of his earnings, as the effect of
pride and stubborn opposition to the parent country. Whilst the American
beholds the Briton as the ruffian, ready first to take away his property, and
next, what is still dearer to every virtuous man, the liberty of his country.

WHEN the measures of administration had disgusted the colonies to the highest
degree, and the people of Great Britain had, by artifice and falsehood, been
irritated against America, an army was sent over to enforce submission to
certain acts of the British parliament, which reason scorned to countenance,
and which placemen and pensioners were found unable to support.

MARTIAL law and the government of a well regulated city, are so entirely
different, that it has always been considered as improper to quarter troops in
populous cities; frequent disputes must necessarily arise between the citizen
and the soldier, even if no previous animosities subsist. And it is further
certain, from a consideration of the nature of mankind, as well as from
constant experience, that standing armies always endanger the liberty of the
subject. But when the people on the one part, considered the army as sent to
enslave them, and the army on the other, were taught to look on the people as
in a state of rebellion, it was but just to fear the most disagreeable
consequences. Our fears, we have seen, were but too well grounded.

THE many injuries offered to the town I pass over in silence. I cannot now
mark out the path which led to that unequalled scene of horror, the sad
rememberance of which, takes the full possession of my soul. The sanguinary
theater again opens itself to view. The baleful images of terror crowd around
me -- and discontented ghosts, with hollow groans, appear to solemnize the
anniversary of the FIFTH of MARCH.

APPROACH we then the melancholy walk of death. Hither let me call the gay
companion; here let him drop a farewell tear upon that body which so late he saw
vigorous and warm with social mirth -- hither let me lead the tender mother to
weep over her beloved son -- come widowed mourner, here satiate thy grief;
behold thy murdered husband gasping on the ground, and to complete the pompous
show of wretchedness, bring in each hand thy infant children to bewail their
father's fate -- take heed, ye orphan babes, lest, whilst your streaming eyes
are fixed upon the ghastly corpse, your feet slide on the stones bespattered
with your father's brains After Mr. Gray had been shot through the body, and
had fallen dead on the ground, a bayonet was pushed through his skull; part of
the bone being broken, his brains fell out upon the pavement.
. Enough! this tragedy need not be heightened by an infant weltering in the
blood of him that gave it birth. Nature, reluctant, shrinks already from the
view, and the chilled blood rolls slowly backward to its fountain. We wildly
stare about, and with amazement, ask, who spread this ruin round us? what
wretch has dared deface the image of his GOD? has haughty France, or cruel
Spain, sent forth her myrmidons? has the grim savage rushed again from the far
distant wilderness? or does some fiend, fierce from the depth of hell, with all
the rancorous malice, which the apostate damned can feel, twang her destructive
bow, and hurl her deadly arrows at our breast? no; none of these -- but, how
astonishing! it is the hand of Britain that inflicts the wound. The arms of
George, our rightful king, have been employed to shed that blood, when justice,
or the honor of his crown, had called his subjects to the field.

BUT pity, grief, astonishment, with all the softer movements of the soul, must
now give way to stronger passions. Say, fellow-citizens, what dreadful thought
now swells your heaving bosoms -- you fly to arms -- sharp indignation flashes
from each eye -- revenge gnashes her iron teeth -- death grins an hideous
smile, secure to drench his greedy jaws in human gore -- whilst hovering furies
darken all the air.

BUT stop, my bold adventurous countrymen, stain not your weapons with the
blood of Britons. Attend to reason's voice -- humanity puts in her claim -- and
sues to be again admitted to her wonted seat, the bosom of the brave. Revenge
is far beneath the noble mind. Many perhaps, compelled to rank among the vile
assassins, do, from their in most souls, detest the barbarous action. The
winged death, shot from your arms, may chance to pierce some breast that bleeds
already for your injured country.

THE storm subsides -- a solemn pause ensues -- you spare, upon condition they
depart. They go -- they quit your city -- they no more shall give offense. --
Thus closes the important drama.

And could it have been conceived that we again should have seen a British army
in our land, sent to enforce obedience to acts of parliament destructive of our
liberty. But the royal ear, far distant from this western world, has been
assaulted by the tongue of slander; and villains, traitorous alike to king and
country, have prevailed upon a gracious prince to cloth his countenance with
wrath, and to erect the hostile banner against a people ever affectionate and
loyal to him and his illustrious predecessors of the house of Hanover. Our
streets are again filled with armed men: our harbor is crowded with ships of
war; but these cannot intimidate us; our liberty must be preserved; it is far
dearer than life, we hold it even dear as our allegiance; we must defend it
against the attacks of friends as well as enemies; we cannot suffer even
BRITONS to ravish it from us.

No longer could we reflect, with generous pride, on the heroic actions of our
American fore fathers, -- no longer boast our origin from that far-famed
island, whose warlike sons have so often drawn their well-tried swords to save
her from the ravages of tyranny; could we, but for a moment, entertain the
thought of giving up our liberty. The man who meanly will submit to wear a
shackle, contemns the noblest gift of heaven, and impiously affronts the GOD
that made him free.

IT was a maxim of the Roman people, which eminently conduced to the greatness
of that state, never to despair of the commonwealth. The maxim may prove as
salutary to us now, as it did to them. Short-sighted mortals see not the
numerous links of small and great events, which form the chain on which the
fate of kings and nations is suspended. Ease and prosperity (though pleasing for
a day) have often sunk a people into effeminacy and sloth. Hardships and
dangers (though we forever strive to shun them) have frequently called forth such
virtues, as have commanded the applause and reverence of an admiring world. Our
country loudly calls you to be circumspect, vigilant, active and brave. Perhaps
(all gracious Heaven avert it) perhaps, the power of Britain, a nation great in
war, by some malignant influence, may be employed to enslave you: but let not
even this discourage you. Her arms, it is true, have filled the world with
terror: her troops have reaped the laurels of the field: her fleets have rode
triumphant on the sea, -- and when, or where, did you, my countrymen, depart
inglorious from the field of fight The patience with which this people have
borne the repeated injuries which have been heaped upon them, and their
unwillingness to take any sanguinary measures, has, very injudiciously, been
ascribed to cowardice, by persons both here and in Great Britain. I most
heartily wish, that an opinion, so erroneous in itself, and so fatal in its
consequences, might be utterly removed before it be too late: and I think
nothing further necessary to convince every intelligent man, that the conduct
of this people is owing to the tender regard which they have for their
fellow-men, and an utter abhorrence to the shedding of human blood, than a
little attention to their general temper and disposition, discovered when they
cannot be supposed to be under any apprehension of danger to themselves. -- I
will only mention the universal detestation which they show to every act of
cruelty, by whom and upon whomsoever committed; the mild spirit of their laws;
the very sew crimes to which capital penalties are annexed; and the very great
backwardness which both courts and juries discover, in condemning persons
charged with capital crimes. -- But if any should think this observation not to
the purpose, I readily appeal to those gentlemen of the army who have been in
the camp, or in the field, with the Americans.
? you too can show the trophies of your forefather's victories and your own;
can name the fortresses and battles you have won; and many of you count the
honorable scars of wounds received, whilst fighting for your king and country.

WHERE justice is the standard, heaven is the warrior's shield: but conscious
guilt unnerves the arm that lifts the sword against the innocent. Britain,
united with these colonies, by commerce and affection, by interest and blood,
may mock the threats of France and Spain: may be the seat of universal empire.
But should America, either by force, or those more dangerous engines, luxury
and corruption, ever be brought into a state of vassalage, Britain must lose
her freedom also. No longer shall she sit the empress of the sea: her ships no
more shall waft her thunders over the wide ocean: the wreath shall wither on
her temples: her weakened arm shall be unable to defend her coasts: and she, at
last, must bow her venerable head to some proud foreigner's despotic rule.

BUT if, from past events, we may venture to form a judgment of the future, we
justly may expect that the devices of our enemies will but increase the
triumphs of our country. I must indulge a hope that Britain's liberty, as well
as ours, will eventually be preserved by the virtue of America.

THE attempt of the British parliament to raise a revenue from America, and our
denial of their right to do it, have excited an almost universal inquiry into
the rights of mankind in general, and of British subjects in particular; the
necessary result of which must be such a liberality of sentiment, and such a
jealousy of those in power, as will, better than an adamantine wall, secure us
against the future approaches of despotism.

THE malice of the Boston port-bill has been defeated in a very considerable
degree, by giving you an opportunity of deserving, and our brethren in this and
our sister-colonies an opportunity of bestowing, those benefactions which have
delighted your friends and astonished your enemies, not only in America, but in
Europe also. And what is more valuable still, the sympathetic feelings for a
brother in distress, and the grateful emotions excited in the breast of him who
finds relief, must forever endear each to the other, and form those
indissoluble bonds of friendship and affection, on which the preservation of
our rights so evidently depend.

THE mutilation of our charter, has made every other colony jealous for its
own; for this, if once submitted to by us, would set on float the property and
government of every British settlement upon the continent. If charters are not
deemed sacred, how miserably precarious is every thing founded upon them.

EVEN the sending troops to put these acts in execution, is not without
advantages to us. The exactness and beauty of their discipline inspire our
youth with ardor in the pursuit of military knowledge. Charles the invincible,
taught Peter the great, the art of war. The battle of Pultowa convinced Charles
of the proficiency Peter had made.

OUR country is in danger, but not to be despaired of. Our enemies are numerous
and powerful -- but we have many friends, determining to BE FREE, and heaven
and earth will aid the RESOLUTION. On you depend the fortunes of America. You
are to decide the important question, on which rest the happiness and liberty
of millions yet unborn. Act worthy of yourselves. The faltering tongue of hoary
age calls on you to support your country. The lisping infant raises its
suppliant hands, imploring defense against the monster slavery. Your fathers
look from their celestial seats with smiling approbation on their sons, who
boldly stand forth in the cause of virtue; but sternly frown upon the inhuman
miscreant, who, to secure the loaves and fishes to himself, would breed a
serpent to destroy his children.

BUT, pardon me, my fellow-citizens, I know you want not zeal or fortitude. You
will maintain your rights or perish in the generous struggle. However difficult
the combat, you never will decline it when freedom is the prize. An
independence on Great Britain is not our aim. No, our wish is, that Britain and
the colonies may, like the oak and ivy, grow and increase in strength together.
But whilst the infatuated plan of making one part of the empire slaves to the
other, is persisted in; the interest and safety of Britain, as well as the
colonies, require that the wise measures, recommended by the honorable the
continental congress, be steadily pursued; whereby the unnatural contest
between a parent honored, and a child beloved, may probably be brought to such
an issue, as that the peace and happiness of both may be established upon a
lasting basis. But if these pacific measures are ineffectual, and it appears
that the only way to safety, is through fields of blood, I know you will not
turn your faces from your foes, but will, undauntedly, press forward, until
tyranny is trodden under foot, and you have fixed your adored goddess LIBERTY,
fast by a BRUNSWICK's side, on the Amerirican throne.

YOU then, who nobly have espoused your country's cause, who generously have
sacrificed wealth and ease -- who have despised the pomp and show of tinseled
greatness -- refused the summons to the festive board -- been deaf to the
alluring calls of luxury and mirth -- who have forsaken the downy pillow, to
keep your vigils by the midnight lamp, for the salvation of your invaded
country, that you might break the fowler's snare, and disappoint the vulture of
his prey; you then will reap that harvest of renown which you so justly have
deserved. Your country shall pay her grateful tribute of applause. Even the
children of your most inveterate enemies, ashamed to tell from whom they
sprang, while they, in secret, curse their stupid, cruel parents, shall join
the general voice of gratitude to those who broke the fetters which their
father's forged.

HAVING redeemed your country, and secured the blessing to future generations,
who, fired by your example, shall emulate your virtues, and learn from you the
heavenly art of making millions happy; with heartfelt joy -- with transports
all your own, YOU CRY, the GLORIOUS WORK IS DONE. Then drop the mantle to some
young ELISHA, and take your seats with kindred spirits in your native skies.

ORATION, DELIVERED AT WATERTOWN Boston was at this time garrisoned by the
British troops, and the inhabitants were in the country; which occasioned this
oration to be delivered at Watertown.
, MARCH 5, 1776.
BY PETER THACHER, M. A.
Asellum in prato timidus pascebat senex
Is, hostium clamore subito territus,
Suadebat afino fugere, ne possent capi.
At ille lentus: quaeso, number binas mihi,
Clitellas impositurum victorem putas?
Senex negavit. Ergo quid refert mea,
Cui serviam? Clitellas dum portem meas.
PHAEDRUS.
MY FRIENDS,
WHEN the ambition of princes induces them to break over the sacred barriers of
social compact, and to violate those rights, which it is their duty to defend,
they will leave no methods unessayed to bring the people to acquiesce in their
unjustifiable encroachments.

IN this cause, the pens of venal authors have, in every age, been drawn: with
Machiavelian subtilty, they have labored to persuade mankind, that their
public happiness consisted in being subject to uncontrouled power; that they
were incapable of judging concerning the mysteries of government; and that it
was their interest to deliver their estates, their liberties, and their lives,
into the hands of an absolute monarch.

MITRED hypocrites, and cringing, base-fouled priests, have impiously dared to
enlist the oracles of GOD into the service of despotism; to assert that, by the
command of the supreme lawgiver, we are bound to surrender our rights into the
hands of the first bold tyrant who dares to seize them; and that when they are
so seized, it is rebellion against GOD, and treason against the prince, for us
to attempt to resume them.

DEPRAVED as is the human understanding, it has yet strength enough to discern
the ridiculous fallacy of these assertions: the votaries of ignorance and
superstition may, indeed, be imposed upon by them. When we place unlimited
confidence in our civil or spiritual fathers, we can swallow, with ease, the
most improbable dogmas: but there are feelings in the human heart, which compel
men to recognize their own rights -- to venerate the majesty of the people --
and to despise the insult which is offered to their understandings, by these
doting absurdities. Had princes no other methods to accomplish their purposes,
could they not establish their usurpation, without convincing men's judgments of
their utility? they would be more harmless to mankind than they have ever yet
been. They might be surrounded with the fascinating gewgaws of regal pomp; a
few parasites might bow the knee before these idols of their own creating; the
weak and the wicked might obey their mandates; but the baneful influence which
they now have upon the interests of individuals, and of society, would come to
a period: they would not revel in the spoils of nations, nor trample upon the
ruins of public liberty.

CONSCIOUS of this, they have used arguments, and pursued methods, entirely
different from these, to effect their designs; instead of convincing the
understandings, they have addressed themselves to the passions of men: the arts
of bribery and corruption have been tried with a fatal success: men, we know,
have sold their children, their country, and their GOD, for a small quantity of
painted dirt, which will perish with the using.

EXTENSIVE as are the revenues of princes, they are still inadequate to the
purpose of bribing large communities to submit to their pleasure; corrupting
therefore a few, they have overawed the rest; from small beginnings, and under
specious pretenses, they will raise a standing military force, the most
successful engine ever yet weilded by the hand of lawless domination.

WITH such a force, it is easy for an ambitious prince, possessed by nature of
very slender abilities, to subvert every principle of liberty in the
constitution of his government, and to render his people the most abject of
slaves: if any individual feels the injury done to his country, and wishes to
restore it to a state of happiness, with a bayonet at his breast, a dragoon
will compel him to silence: if the people, awakened to see their interest and
their duty, assemble for the same purpose, a military force is at hand to
subdue them, and by leaden arguments, to convince them of their error.

AN easy task would it be to enlarge upon the fatal consequences of keeping up
such a standing army in time of peace, and of quartering a lawless body of men,
who despise the just restraints of civil authority, in free and populous
cities: that no vestige of freedom can remain in a state where such a force
existed: that the morals of the people will be gradually corrupted: that they
will contract such an habit of tame submission, as to become an easy prey to
the brutal tyrant who rules them, has been heretofore largely and plainly
demonstrated, by persons so much more capable of doing it, than he who is
speaking, that it would be presumption in him to attempt it now.

THERE is no need of recurring to the ancient histories of Greece and Rome, for
instances of these truths. The British nation, once famous for its attachment
to freedom, and enthusiastically jealous of its rights, is now become a great
tame beast, which fetches and carries for any minister who pleases to employ it.

ENGLISHMEN have been wont to boast of the excellence of their constitution; to
boast that it contained whatever was excellent in every form of government
hitherto, by the wit of man, devised: in their king, whose power was limited,
they have asserted that they enjoyed the advantages of monarchy, without fear
of its evils: while their house of commons, chosen by the suffrages of the
people, and dependant upon them, represented a republic, their house of peers,
forming a balance of power between the king and the people, gave them the
benefit of an aristocracy. In theory, the British constitution is, on many
accounts, excellent; but when we observe it reduced to practice, when we
observe the British government, as it has been, for a long course of years,
administered, we must be convinced that its boasted advantages are not real:
the management of the public revenue, the appointment of civil and military
officers, are vested in the king: improving these advantages which these powers
give him, he has found means to corrupt the other branches of the legislature;
Britons please themselves with the thought of being free; their tyrant suffers
them to enjoy the shadow, whilst he himself grasps the substance of power.
Impossible would it have been for the kings of England to have acquired such an
exorbitant power, had they not had a standing army under their command: with
the officers of this army, they have bribed men to sacrifice the rights of
their country: having artfully got their arms out of the hands of the people,
with their mercenary forces they have awed them into submission. When they have
appeared, at any time, disposed to assert their freedom, these troops have been
ready to obey the mandates of their sovereign, to imbrue their hands in the
blood of their brethren.

HAVING found the efficacy of this method to quell a spirit of liberty in the
people of Great Britain, the righteous administration of the righteous king
George the third, determined to try the experiment upon the people of America.
To fright us into submission to their unjustifiable claims, they sent a
military force to the town of Boston. This day leads us to reflect upon the
fatal effects of the measure! by their intercourse with troops, made up in
general of the most abandoned of men, the morals of our youth were corrupted:
the temples and the day of our GOD were scandalously profaned: we experienced
the most provoking insults; and at length saw the streets of Boston strewed
with the corpses of five of its inhabitants, murdered in cool blood, by the
British mercenaries.

THE indignant rage which swelled your bosoms upon this occasion -- the
fortitude and humanity which you discovered -- the anguish of the friends and
relatives of the dead and wounded, with all the horrors of that memorable
night, have been painted in vivid colors by an HANCOCK and a WARREN: they have
shown the necessity of those exertions made by the town, which defeated, at
that time, the designs of the enemies to American liberty, and preserved us,
for the present, from the calamities of war.

BUT the past year has presented us with a tragedy more striking, because more
extensive, than this: a tragedy, which more plainly proves the fatal effects of
keeping up standing armies in time of peace, than any arguments whatsoever: we
have seen the ground crimsoned with the gore of hundreds of our
fellow-citizens; -- we have seen the first city in America, for wealth and
extent, depopulated -- -- we have seen others destroyed, and heard our savage
enemies breathing out thirstings for our blood.

FINDING their arts insufficient to flatter, or their treasures to bribe, the
people of America out of their freedom, the British government determined, by
force, to subjugate them to their arbitrary will; in consequence of this
determination, a large party of their troops marched from Boston, on the
morning of the ever-memorable nineteenth of April last: flushed with the hopes
of certain victory, and defying the armies of the living GOD, they broke
through every divine and political obligation; they wantoned in cruelty; they
shed again American blood.

AROUSED by the unprovoked injury, like a lion awaking from his slumber, we
sprang to arms! we felt ourselves inspired with the spirit of our ancestors; we
heard our brethren's blood crying to us for vengeance; we rushed into the midst
of battle: we compelled our enemies to betake themselves to disgraceful flight;
we pursued them with avidity, and desisted not till they took refuge in that
city, of which, by fraud and treachery, they had possessed themselves.

TRUSTING to the divine protection, from that hour we determined never to
sheathe the sword, till we had reparation for our injuries; till we had secured
our own freedom and the freedom of our posterity: from that hour the den of
enemies has been surrounded by an American army, brave and determined:
although they had before boasted of their superiority to all the troops in the
world, they have scarcely dared to set their feet out of their strong holds
since that time; and instead of ravaging the American continent in a single
compaign, with a single regiment, they have proceeded -- one mile and an half
in the conquest of it.

THE heights of Charlestown witnessed to the world, that Americans, fighting in
the cause of freedom, were a formidable foe: although they were surrounded by
troops hitherto deemed invincible; although they saw the habitations of their
countrymen inveloped with flames; although cannon roared on every quarter, and
they beheld scenes of desolation and bloodshed, to which they were entirely
unused, yet they retired not till they had compelled their enemy twice to
retreat, and had expended the whole of their ammunition: the British forces
gained the ground, but they lost the flower of their army.

FROM one end of the continent to the other, a series of successes has
attended the American arms; instead of having troops of savages poured down to
our frontiers (which the murderous policy of the tyrant of Britain induced him
to attempt) we have, through the favor of heaven, carried our victorious arms
into the very bowels of Canada; instead of having our stores and provisions cut
off by the enemy, we have made important captures from them: success has
crowned our enterprises, while disappointment has followed those who oppose us.

THAT elation of spirit, which is excited by our victories, is damped by our
feeling the calamities of war. To hear the expiring groans of our beloved
countrymen; to behold the flames of our habitations, once the abodes of peace
and plenty, ascending to heaven; to see ruin and desolation spread over our
fruitful villages, must occasion sensations in the high^ ^egree painful.

THIS ^ay, upon which the gloomy scene was first opened, calls upon us to mourn
for the heroes who have already died in the bed of honor, fighting for GOD and
their country. Especially, does it lead us to recollect the name and the
virtues of General WARREN! the kind, the humane, the benevolent friend, in the
private walks of life; the inflexible patriot, the undaunted commander in his
public sphere, deserves to be recollected with gratitude and esteem! this
audience, acquainted, in the most intimate manner, with his numberless virtues,
must feel his loss, and bemoan their beloved, their entrusted fellowcitizen!
ah! my countrymen, what tender, what excrutiating sensations rush at once upon
our burdened minds, when we recall his loved idea! when we reflect upon the
manner of his death; when we fancy that we see his favage enemies exulting over
his corpse, beautiful even in death; when we remember that, destitute of the
rites of sepulture, he was cast into the ground, without the distinction due to
his rank and merit; we cannot restrain the starting tear, we cannot repress the
bursting sigh! we mourn thine exit, illustrious shade, with undissembled grief;
we venerate thine exalted character; we will erect a monument to thy memory in
each of our grateful breasts, and to the latest ages, will teach our tender
infants to lisp the name of WARREN, with veneration and applause!

WHEN we traverse the Canadian wilds, and come to the plains of Abraham, where
WOLF once fell, we are there again compelled to pay a tribute to exalted
merit, and to lament the fall of the great MONTGOMERY! warmed with a spirit of
patriotism, too little felt by his venal countrymen, he espoused the cause of
American freedom: he left domestic ease and affluence: he girded on the sword
which he had long laid aside, and jeoparded his life in the high places of the
field: victory followed his standard; she hovered over his head, and crowned it
with the laurel wreath: she was just ready to hail him the conqueror of Canada,
when the fatal sisters snapped, in a moment, the thread of life, and seized,
from his eager grasp, the untasted conquest! Americans, bear witness to his
humanity and his valor, for he died fighting in your cause, and the cause of
mankind! let his memory live in your breasts; let it be handed down to your
posterity, that millions yet unborn may rise up and call him blessed!

THE tender feelings of the human heart are deeply affected with the fate of
these and the other heroes who have bled and died, that their country may be
free: but at the same time, sensations of indignant wrath, are excited in the
breast of every friend to freedom: he will listen to the voice of their blood,
which cries aloud to heaven, and to him for vengeance! he will feel himself
animated with new vigor in the glorious cause: nothing daunted by their
untimely fate, he will rush into the midst of danger, that he may share their
glory, and avenge their death! every idea which can warm and animate him to
glorious deeds, will rush at once upon his mind; and, when engaged in the
warmest battle, he will hear them, from their heaven, urging him to action; he
will feel their spirits transfused into his breast; he will sacrifice whole
hecatombs of their murderers to their illustrious manes!

INDEED, my countrymen, the people of America have every thing to animate and
encourage them in the present contest. Formidable as was once the power of the
British lion, he has now lost his teeth; universal dissipation has taken
place of that simplicity of manners, and hardiness of integrity, for which the
nation was once remarkable: the officers of the British army, instead of
inuring themselves to discipline, and ^eking for glory in the bloodstained
field, wish alone to captivate the softer sex, and triumph over their virtue.
The legislature of Great Britain is totally corrupt; her administration is
arbitrary and tyrannical; the people have lost their spirit of resentment; and,
like the most contemptible of animals, how the shoulder to bear and become
servants unto tribute. The national resources are cut off; she is loaded with
an intolerable public dept; she is become the scorn of those foreigners, to
whom she was once terrible; and it is easy to see that her glory is in the wane.

How different from this is the present state of our country; descended from a
race of hardy ancestors, who loved their freedom better than they loved their
lives; the Americans are jealous of the least infringement of their rights;
strangers to that luxury, which effeminates the mind and body, they are capable
of enduring incredible hardships; with eagerness they rush into the field of
battle, and brave, with coolness, every danger: they possess a rich and a
fruitful country, sufficient to supply them with every necessary and
convenience of life; they have inexhaustible resources for carrying on war, and
bid fair soon to be courted for their alliance, by the proudest monarchs of the
earth. Their statesmen are equal to the task of forming and defending a free
and extensive empire: their generals are brave and humane, intrepid and
prudent. When I name a WASHINGTON, my audience will feel the justice of the
remark, and acquit me of the charge of flattery.

POSSESSED of these advantages, we should be inexcusable to GOD, to our
posterity, to the whole world, if we hefitated, a single moment, in asserting
our rights and repelling the attacks of lawless power. Freedom is offered to
us; she invites us to accept her blessings; driven from the other regions of
the globe, she wishes to find an asylum in the wilds of America; with open arms
let us receive the persecuted fair; let us imitate the example of our venerable
ancestors, who loved and courted her into these desert climes. With determined
bravery, let us resist the attacks of her impudent ravishers; by resolution and
firmness we may defend her from their power, and transmit her blessings to
millions upon millions of our posterity. Let us then arouse to arms; for, upon
our exertions, under GOD, depends their freedom; upon our exertions depends the
important question, whether the rising empire of America, shall be an empire of
slaves or of freemen.

ANIMATED by these considerations, my friends and fellow-citizens, let us
strain every nerve in the service of our country! what are our lives, when
viewed in competition with the happiness of such an empire! what is our private
interest when opposed to that of three millions of men! let our bosoms glow
with the warmth of patriotism; let us sacrifice our ease, our fortunes, and our
lives, that we may save our country.

THAT a spirit of public virtue may transcend every private consideration, you,
the respected inhabitants of the town of Boston, have plainly manifested: with
pleasure you have sacrificed what selfish men hold most dear, to save this
oppressed land! with firmness you have resisted every attack of arbitrary
power! like the sturdy oak, you have stood unmoved, and to you, under GOD, will
be owing the salvation of this extensive continent.

WE feel, my beloved friends, our obligations to you! our hearts confess them;
we cordially wish it were in our power to reward you for your patriotism; to
restore you to that ease and affluence, of which, for our sakes, you have
deprived yourselves; it is not. But our morning and evening petitions to the
guardian GOD of America shall be, that he will bless and reward you.

WITH transport, my countrymen, let us look forward to the bright day, which
shall hail us a free and independent state. With earnestness let us implore the
forgiveness and the patronage of the Being of all beings, who holds the fate of
empires in his hands! with zeal let us exert ourselves in the service of our
country, in life: and when the earthly scene shall be closing with us, let us
expire with this prayer upon our quivering lips, O GOD LET AMERICA BE FREE!

ORATION, DELIVERED AT BOSTON, MARCH 5, 1777,
BY BENJAMIN HICHBORN, ESQUIRE.
-- Tum vos, O Tyrii, stirpem et genus omne futurum
Exercete odiis; cinerique haec mittite nostro
Mumera: nullus amor populis, nec faedera sunto.
VIRGIL.
FRIENDS AND COUNTRYMEN!
LEAVING apologies for my inability to act the part I am to take, in this day's
solemnity, to those who might have remedied the evil, by a more suitable
appointment, I shall offer my sentiments upon the subject with the same freedom
that I conceived them.

THE advantages of social life, are the result of such evident necessity, so
extensively diffusive and universally felt, that all mankind will readily
acknowledge their existence without the aid of metaphysics or history.

THE right that every individual has to reason freely upon the nature of that
government he is called to submit to, having nature for its source, is no less
obvious and perceptable -- and hence, as a necessary foundation for the
exercise of this right, I define civil liberty to be, not "a government by
laws," made agreeable to charters, bills of rights or compacts, but a power
existing in the people at large, at any time, for any cause, or for no cause,
but their own sovereign pleasure, to alter or annihilate both the mode and
essence of any sormer government, and adopt a new one in its stead.

PLACING ourselves then upon this broad basis of civil liberty, founded on
natural right, we will, unawed by the standing armies of any tyrant's tools The
petty states and princes who have raised their armies as a peasant would his
game cocks, and sent them to market for a price, are in the most infamous sense
of the word, tools.
, or monarchs, deliberate freely upon the nature of their institutions, and
their dangerous tendency to the rights of man.

EVERY military force must necessarily imply a right of exercising an arbitrary
power, so far as respects the objects against which it is to be directed; and
what will be the objects, against which it will be in constant exercise, in
proportion to its extent, we may collect from the experience of ages, and the
well-known ^arce of human actions.

THE page of history seldom groans with the calamities of mankind; but we may
trace the source of their unhappiness to this engine of oppression.

PROJECTED in the blackest principles of the human mind, and supported by
ambition and a lust of unbounded sway, this armed monster has spread havoc and
misery throughout the world. We find the bloody traces of its footsteps through
all the ruins of greatness and freedom, either in ancient or modern times: the
most free and op^lent cities of the world, by conniving at its birth, have, at
last, fallen a prey to its relentless f^ry Pisistratus of Athens, Dyonisius of
Syracuse, and Caesar of Rome, furnish a few among numberless examples, that
history affords.
.

WHILE we are ravished with the politeness, wisdom, and greatness of the
Grecian states, we can scarce believe that the productions of such art,
refinement, and learning, should ever be subdued by a power that never could
have crept into life, but through the channel of their indulgence.

BUT alas! their fate remains a standing MONUMENT of this truth, that freedom,
at fufference, is a sol^cism in politi^s.

To avoid the pain that humanity must suffer, upon finding so few instances of
virtue that have been proof against the temptations to prostitute a delegated
power, I am ininclined to think, that the great FOUNDER of societies has caused
the CURSE of infatuating ambition, and relentless cruelty to be entailed on
those whose vanity may lead them to assume his prerogative among any of his
people as they are cantoned about in the world, and to prevent mankind from
paying that adoration and respect to the most dignified mortal, which is due
only to infinite wisdom and goodness in the direction of almighty power, and
therefore that he alone is fit to be a MONARCH.

WERE we to traverse the whole field of human transactions, and expect any
where to find an exemption from this general charge, we should most naturally
fix our eyes upon the Romans -- but how mortified do we find ourselves by the
survey?

AT the very time this people were most famed for their virtue and greatness,
-- while they were regaling themselves with luxurious case in the lap of
freedom -- the provinces they obtained by fraud and violence, were suffering
under every species of the vilest survitude, and made ^o contribute to that
very (...) and lunury at the discretion of the most merciless unfeeling
taskmasters.

BUT they themselves, by the same tools they had armed to execute their bloody
purposes, in their turn, because the subjects of the same kind of oppression
they so liberally dealt out to others, and stand recorded in history equal
monuments of the greatness and depravity of human nature.

TAUGHT by the experience of former ages, that a general, at the head of an
armed force, would ever make himself superior to the laws. E^^^pe, for several
centuries, raised effectual barriers against the danger (and, I may say, the
possibility) of their usurpations; for the tenure The feudal tenure.
of their lands, though they acknowledge a superior lord, was upon conditions
so abhorrent to the idea of standing armies, that it offered at once, both a
promise and a pledge against them.

BUT to convince us that no human institutions can insure permanent felicity to
mankind, -- security, the offspring of ease and freedom, opened the door for
one enterprising usurper after another Charles VII. Lewis XI. of France, having
set the example, all the ^r^wned heads in Eu^ope soon followed it.
, till the inhabitants of the whole eastern world had but little left of the
property of their species but what they possessed in their shape.

STRANGE metamorphosis! but is it not much stranger still, to see these
pitiable wretches stripped of every enjoyment that can render life a blessing,
meanly courting favor and protection from the tyrants who enslaved them, and
easily mistaking the chains of servitude for the garb of nature?

THE formalities of a free, and the ends of a despotic state (says a modern
writer) have often subsisted together. Britain furnishes a most unhappy example
of this shocking truth: as if the relish of liberty was pampered to make
slavery itself more intolerably loathsome, they feel all the mortifying
consequences of the basest servitude, and are left to console themselves with
this consideration, that the weight of their grievances can never be increased,
while they are complimented, or rather tantalized with the name of freemen.
These are some of the glorious effects of standing armies among foreign
nations. Let us now consider their consequences in that part of the world, in
whose affairs we take a more interesting part.

IT is easy to conceive that those men who would not scruple to make use of
every artifice and violence to reduce the very people to whose generosity they
were indebted for their splendour, wealth, and greatness, to a state of
vassalage, would never hesitate to make their conquests as extensive as their
power; -- they can feel the influence of no law but that of the sword, and
therefore (whatever may be their pretensions) you will, in every case, find
them ultimately make an appeal to its decisions.

IF such are the governors, what must the people be? having been robbed of
liberty themselves, without the faintest struggle in its defense The murder of
two or three people in St. George's fields, seems to be all the ceremony
attending the death and burial of British li^erty.
, they are just fit to be made the instruments of wresting it from others.

How can we expect that they who know nothing of the happiness of freedom
themselves, should feel any reluctance at reducing all mankind to their own
disgraceful situation? indeed the reverse is true, for we generally find them
taking an unnatural pleasure, in stripping others of the noblest ornaments and
gifts of nature, to countenance their own deformity and wretchedness.

A TRIFLING farce, therefore, upon the question of right in parliament, was all
the previous parade that was thought necessary to the introduction of a
standing army, with all the ensigns of war, into the bowels of our country.

IT is needless to recount the various preludes to hostilities, the fatal day
we now commemorate, opened a scene that filled every honest mind with
indignation, and every tender heart with distress -- Quis talia fando,
Myrmidonum, dol^pumve, aut duri miles ulyssei,
Temperet a lackrymis.
VIRGIL.
. -- It is impossible for any who were not witnesses of that shocking event, to
conceive the terrors of that dreadful night, and they who were must have images
of horror upon the mind they never can communicate.

THE variety of contending passions that once fall upon and distract the mind,
upon the arrival of such an important crisis, can never be realized but once.

To see the peaceful inhabitants of a city, deliberately murdered by the very
men, who, in pretense, were supported for their protection -- to hear the
piercing groans -- to see the mangled bodies and ghastly visages of the dying
and the dead -- to hear the shrieks and cries of the timid, with the
promiscuous, mingling horrid sound of arms, execrations, and vengeance,
produced a scence of confusion and wretchedness, so complicated and complete,
that the power of the richest language must ever fail in describing it Non mihi
si lingu^e centum sint, oraque centu^,
Eerrea vox, omnes scelerum comprende^e formas
-- poss^m.
VIRGIL.
.

THE eye of pity is yet called to drop a tear at the sufferings, and patriotism
to pour the balm of charity over the wounds of half-murdered citizens, draging
out a miserable life, and fresh bleeding with the blows aimed at our country.

WE could dwell, with a melancholy pleasure, on this sad catastrophe, did not a
more ample field of violence, bloodshed, and cruelty, demand our attention.

THE palpable absurdity of making use of the name of a king, to give a sanction
to those very operations which were carrying on against him, has been so
sensibly felt, through all ranks of men, that we have not yet altogether got
rid of its disagreeable effects.

AND I must confess I should blush at the ludicrous figure in which this part
of our history must exhibit to view, in future time, were we not countenanced
by the same, or more striking inconsistencies which are to be found attendant
(and perhaps necessarily so) upon all important revolutions.

WE can easily conceive a mixture of prejudice and fear, that will excite such
awful ideas of the person, to whom we have been taught from our cradles, to
annex the properties of a most gracious sovereign, most sacred majesty, and a
train of such GOD-like attributes, as would make us feel conscious of a degree
of impiety, in calling a villain by his proper name, while shrouded under this
garb of sanctity.

BUT it is exeedingly diverting to view the influence of this chimerical
divinity in those who are made the immediate tools of supporting it -- they
will tell you it is a task most ungrateful to men of their sensibility and
refinement, to be made the instruments of sending fire and death
indiscriminately among the innocent, the helpless, and the fair -- but they
have sworn to be faithful to their sovereign, and were they ordered to scale
the walls of the new Jerusa^em, they should not dare to decline the impious
attempt.

WERE it not for this ridiculous faith in the omnipotence of the tyrant whom
they serve, we must suppose them fools or madmen: -- Indeed that very faith
would justify the charge of extreme madness and folly against all mankind, who
had not been nurtured in this cradle of infatuation.

WERE it not for the indulgence that a generous mind will always show to the
weakness and prejudices of the worst of men, many whom the chance of war has
thrown into our hands, must have felt the severity and contempt of a justly
enraged people, while they, with all their vanity and ostentation, remain the
unhurt objects of our pity.

IT is surely rather a subject of merry ridicule, than deserving of serious
resentment, to see many of this kind of gentry affecting to deny the character
of prisoners, and attributing that indulgence which is the effect of
unparalleled generosity, to the mean motive of fear; but we will let them know,
that they cannot provoke us even to justice in the line of punishment, and we
leav^ them to their own consciences and the impartial censures of surrounding
nations, to make some returns for the unexampled cruelties that many of our
friends have suffered from their barbarous hands Capt. Johnson and his crew,
the prisoners in general at New York and Halifax, Mr. Lovell and many others in
Boston, are instances sufficient to destroy the little credit they ever had for
humanity; and the sufferings of some to which I have myself been a witness,
exposed to all the inconveniences and hazards of a languishing disease in
confinement on shipboard, in view of the persons and habitations of their
nearest friends, and a sympathizing parent turned over the side, with
reproaches for attempting to speak to his sick, suffering, dying child, must
give the characters of the polite, sensible, humane Admiral Graves, and his
nephew Sam, a stamp of infamy, which the power of time can never wi^e away.
; in lieu of that severity, which, however just, humanity shudders to inflict.
But we cannot think it strange to find people in the subordinate departments of
life, influenced by such ridiculous notions, while their haughty masters seem
to labor under the misfortune of the same infatuation.

SLAVES always rate the consequence of those they serve, by the treatment they
receive from them, and wonder that others do not feel the weight of the same
importance.

To call men of distinguished rank, in any government, knaves, fools, and
scoundrels, however they may deserve it, is esteemed neither polite or decent:
I am therefore, at a loss for names while I am describing the oppressors of my
country. Who, without deserving these reproachful appellations, could have
conceived the horrid wish of decking his crown, with the idle plume of foreign
empire, at the expense of the peace, wealth, and very being of a nation? and
who but a pompous blockhead, in the execution of this impious design, could
expect to conquer a hardy, virtuous set of men, by ineffectual threats and
empty promises, contained in a set of proclamations, he wanted either courage
or power to disperse among the people they were designed to subdue The Generals
Gage and How, have been playing this warlike game ever since they have been in
the country.
?

POSSIBLY they may conceive the length of their master's purse, at the rate of
thirty crowns a man, to be equal to all the armed force of Europe, and
therefore they should be able ultimately to effect that by the point of the
bayonet, which they rather wished, than expected, to obtain on any other terms.

HERE let us pause, and for the honor of our species, give a moment to
reflection upon this shocking idea! is it possible that any of the race of man,
should be so lost to a sense of the rights of nature, and the dignity of their
rank in the chain of beings, as to suffer themselves (like the horses which
they ride) to be tutored to the field of war, to have a price set upon their
lives, which their masters will receive, and then be sold into the service of
lust, ambition and avarice, and become the tools of eternal war against the
lives, the properties, and freedom of the rest of mankind.

BUT thanks to heaven! this black combination of passions, supported by the
unmasked tyrant of Britain, with all the mercenary forces of his powerful and
extensive allies, have hitherto proved unsuccessful (and I trust in GOD they
ever will) in every effort to contaminate the only column of free air in both
hemispheres; however, one advantage we derive from their open attempts, which
is to expect no security for ourselves, but in their ruin; deliberate murders,
indiscriminate plunder, and the most barbarous violence upon the delicacy and
virtue of the fair, have marked the few paces of imaginary conquest they have
trod See accounts of their proceedings in the Jersies, and general order^ in
the orderly book taken at Trenton.
.

METHINKS I see the tender parent, frantic with rage, defying hosts of ruffians
armed, and courting death in every dismal form, rather than live the witness of
his daughter's shame; -- ah! hear the shrieks of virgin innocence calling in
vain for succor from that arm which often defended her! but see the helpless
victim of their brutish lust, in wild despair, wringing her guiltless hands,
with looks to heaven, as if, without a crime, she had lost her only title to
those pure abodes! where is the coward heart that does not beat to arms, and
glow with unusual ardour for revenge?

WHERE are friends to reconciliation, with these so^s to virtue? they will tell
us their power is formidable, and it is wise to accommodate ourselves to the
requisitions of superior force -- as soon I Would tamper with the power of hell I
for -- "'It Is the worst of slavery
"Tamely to bend our necks beneath the yoke
"And suffer fraud to talk us out of freedom."


THEY wish to sooth but to destroy us; and if this stale artifice of tyrants
should succeed, we well deserve the ruin it ensures: -- they never ask for what
they can demand, and impotence alone prevents a general carnage.

DOES courage want a stimulus in the defense of virtue? let us cast our eyes on
the example of our illustrious general; equally beyond the reach of calumny and
encomium, the tongue of slander has never dared to attack him, while the ablest
panegyrist must blush when he is attempting to give him half the eulogiums
which are his due.

THE generous sacrifice he has made of private interest, domestic felicity, and
all the consequent refined enjoyments of social life, to the exigencies of his
country in the field of war: -- the cheerfulness with which he has sustained
all the hardships, anxieties, and disappointments of two important campaigns,
against a formidable body of well-disciplined veterans, with an army composed
of men different in their manners, and unused to the discipline of a camp,
without exciting the smallest jealousies in the CIVIL POWER on the one hand, or
giving occasion for the faintest murmurs among his soldiers, on the other. --
And finally, when his enemies were at the zenith of their glory, and in
imagination, already in possession of a conquered world; -- with the remnant of
his expiring army, to resume the field, and with this handful of his chosen
followers, disperse, destory, or captivate whole hosts of foes, must excite
sentiments of affection, gratitude, and esteem, that border upon adoration.

DID not a life of the most disinterested patriotism and unremitted ardour in
the cause of virtue and of mankind, point him out as an exception to the charge
we have so fully supported against all who lived before him? I should dread
more from the virtues of this great man, than from all the standing armies in
the world.

BUT so full a confidence do I possess in his inviolable attachment to the
rights of humanity and the cause of freedom, that in some future emergencies of
the state (preduced perhaps by the shifting fortune of war) to his instinctive
goodness and excentric operations, I would most cheerfully commit supreme
command.

I WILL explain my sentiments upon this subject, by those of a friend, in his
own words.

"'It Is best that reason govern man,
It Is calm, deliberate, wise,
Yet passions were not given in vain,
Here then the difference lies.
Reason, though sure, too slow is found
In great emergencies,
While passion instant feels the wound,
As quick the cure applies.
Yet that must not due bounds transgress,
But move at reason's nod,
Submit at last to her decrees
And own her for the GOD.
'Twas thus the synod of our land,
The reasoning power of state,
Gave WASHINGTON supreme command
And made his orders fate.
Yet as necessity impelled
The step -- when that is past
The senate shall resume the field
And reign supreme at last."
IN support of such a cause, directed by such a leader, who would think his
life too dear a sacrifice? -- let the mean, base, grovling soul, that wishes
for security on any terms, through fear sorget he is a man, cringe to the
creature he despises, smile on the man he hates, alternately shake hands with
vice and virtue, and court protection from the power he wishes to destroy! --
let us, my friends, determined to maintain our sacred rights, or perish in the
attempt Justum et tenacem, propositi virum,
Non civium ardor, prava jubentium
Non vulius instantis tyranni
Mente quatit solida: --

, with vigor urge the war, frown on our soes wherever we meet them, despise
their mercy when we feel their power, and from this moment hold ourselves
beyond the reach of pardon.

ORATION, DELIVERED AT BOSTON, MARCH 5, 1778.
By JONATHAN W. AUSTIN, Esquire.
-- Multaque rubentia Caede
Lubrica Saxa madent, nulli sua profuit Aetas.
LUCAN, Lib. 2. -- Hic ubi barbarus hostis,
Ut fera plus valiant legibus arma facit.
OVID DE PONTO. Quis claden, ^llius noctis, quis funera fando
Explicet? aut possit Lacrymis aequare labores?
Plurima perque vias sternuntur inertia passim
Corpora.
VIRGIL 2d AENEID.
MY FRIENDS AND FELLOW-CITIZENS,
TO weep over the tomb of the patriot -- to drop a tear to the memory of those
unfortunate citizens, who fell the first sacrifices to tyranny and usurpation,
is noble, generous, and humane. Such are the sentiments that influence you, my
countrymen, or why, through successive periods, with heartfelt sensations,
have you attended this solemn anniversary, and paid this sad tribute to the
memory of your slaughtered brethren. Nor is the circle contracted -- the most
amiable part of the creation share the grief, and, soft pity beaming in their
countenances, like the daughters of Israel, annually lament the fate of others,
and weep over the miseries of their country Judges xi. 39, 40.
. Come then, my friends, let us enter the solitary courts of death, and,
perhaps, an hour spent in such reflection, may afford as solid improvement as
nature in her gayest scenes.

To commemorate the deaths of those men who fell unhappy victims to brutal
violence -- to show the dangerous tendency of standing armies in populous
cities in time of peace, the origin of this fatal catastrophe -- to trace its
connection and effects, as they have been, and are now displayed, in different
parts of America, I take to be the design of this day's solemnity.

IT appears to me needless to enter into the nature and ends of civil
government, and to evince that standing armies are a solecism in such a
constitution. Such sentiments are founded in nature, and have, for ages, under
different forms, and different meridians, been sully displayed by men who knew
the rights of nature and mankind. The names of LO^K, SYDN^Y, and HAM^DEN, have
l^ng been illustrious, and my country men are too well acquainted with their
writings, not to venerate their memories. Nor can I forget the same sentiments
which have charmed you from the lips of men, who have spoke before me, on the
same occasion, whose charact ^rs will be ever dear, and the exertions of whose
patriotism and virtue, exhibited, in the most critical situations, posterity
will ever wonder at and revere.

IN short, to confirm this point by logical conclusions, must be an useless
mispense of time. Even a crown lawyer, whose sentiments are not always friendly
to the rights of mankind, will tell us, "in a land of liberty, it is extremely
dangerous to make a distinct order of the profession of arms. In absolute
mon^^chies this is indeed necessary for the safety of the prince, and arises
from the main principle of their constitution, which is governing by fear: but
in free states, the profession of a soldier, taken singly and merely as a
profession, is justly an object of jealousy. The laws, therefore, and
constitution of these kingdoms, know no such thing as a perpetual, standing
soldier Blackstone's Commentaries, vol. 1. page 407.
."

ARGUMENTS existing in theory, however the mind may be captivated, do not
always convince; and consequences, traced from the same source, are seldom
interesting. But when we find the apprehensions of the greatest and best of
mankind, who actuated by a principle of benevolence, felt for the common
interests, fully displayed in awful and tremendous effects, we then start from
our lethargy, and like the sensitive plant, shrink from approaching danger!
such is the case with respect to the subject before us. Philosophers and
statesmen have shown how dangerous standing armies must be in a free state, and
every page in the volume of mankind consirms the melancholy account.

SPECULATIVE writers may indeed tell us, that the seeds of dissolution evist in
every body politic -- that like the body natural, it must decay and di^ -- and
that the same causes which brought the empires of R^us and Cyrus to
destruction, will sap every other government on earth See Bellizarus by M.
Marmontell.
. For my own part, I am no fatalist, and nil desp^randum (...) republica, is to
me a much pr^able, and m^re generous motto. And instead of enumerating their
many vices and corruptions, as the original cause, I think a little
acquaintance with history will insorm us, that they are not merely the original
cause, but (...) resulting from the satal measure we are considering. In
absolure monarchies, where the military is the principal engine of government,
we are not to look for a confirmation of this argument. But in republics; 'till
the introduction of a soldiery, distinct from the citizens, we find them as
remote from corruption, luxury, and the other black catalogue of vices as any
human system can attain to: but when standing troops were introduced, they
immediately followed. Depravity of manners -- a dislike to virtue and manly
sentiment -- effeminacy, and those grosser vices, too indelicate to be
mentioned in this place, stalked like demons through their cities. Witness, ye
republics, that were once great and illustrious, but are now no more! witness,
O Boston! for ye were too well acquainted with the melancholy truth!

WE will now confirm the sentiment by a brief inspection into some parts of
history.

THE Gree^, were a republic, that, in a short flight of years, exhibited the
most glorious spectacle that ever appeared to mankind; and, as one observes,
the age they lived in, seemed to be the golden period of human nature Harris
Hermes.
. In every branch of war or peace, in every species of science they excelled,
and were at once feared, admired, and venerated by the other nations of the
world: yet this heroic confederacy was originally reduced from this glorious
superiority, by the arts of one man Pisistratus.
under the idea of a guard, from an inconsiderable number of attendants, he
increased to that stretch of power as proved the fatal stab to the vitals of
his country. The bank thus broken down, the tide swelled too rapid to be
stemmed, and virtue, freedom and the laws, all fell a sacrifice.

SIMILAR was the situation of the Romans. Although not so universally
distinguished as the Gree^s, yet from the expulsion of their kings, to the time
of Marius, they evinced to what a prodigious greatness mankind may arrive when
actuated by the principles of liberty, virtue and honor. Influenced by such
motives, no wonder their actions were conformable; and while the most rigid
inflexibility presided at home, the Roman eagle flew to the remotest corner of
the globe.

CAN we then suppose, when we view the characters which appeared on the stage
at this period -- when we consider how remote they were from those vices which
have been prevalent in powerful monarchies, and how carefully they watched the
sacred alter of freedom, that they themselves must remain a standing monument
of the consequences of this fatal measure. Such is the case. Marius, in new
modelling the legions, and replacing the citizens who served in them with
foreign mercenaries, laid the horrid foundation. -- The door was now open for
one too powerful citizen after another, until Caesar, losing every check, and
laughing at the impotent anathemas of the senate, with the distant legious
marched to Rome, and formed a new era in their history. From this period we
are charmed no more with illustrious actions, and the last remains of dignity,
sunk in the Roman world. So true is it, that when a people lose their liberty,
they at once become fit subjects of every thing base and infamous.

WE have thus far produced instances of the fatal effects of armies thus kept
up, which have ended in the utter subversion of the laws and government of two
of the most memorable republics in ancient story. We will now shift the scene,
and while we show their dangerous tendency in states of a more modern date, we
will exhibit an illustrious example through what scenes of danger, hardships
and blood, the determined spirit of honor, and attachment to freedom, will
carry a people.

PREVIOUS to mentioning the situation of the United Provintes, I must remark
how very similar their circumstances were to our's. We shall ever find it an
unalterable maxim of princes, who in time of peace kept up a standing force,
however they may call them the protectors of law, the end is to subvert those
laws and render the constitution useless. Such was the mode of conduct of
Philip the second, of Spain, to the low countries, and such the procedure of a
similar character, George the third, of Britain, influenced by as despicable a
ministry. The former, as sir William Temple observes, "thinking it not agreeing
with his greatness," (an army being now in the bowels of their country) "to
consider their discontents, or be limited by their ancient forms of
government," proceeds to despise the one and overturn the other. New courts
judicatory were appointed, new offices established, depending absolutely on the
king. Sir William Temple's observations on the United Provinces, Page 21, 23.


WHAT was the consequence? -- could it be supposed a generous people would sit
down tamely, and kiss the rod that lashed them? a different mode of conduct
ensued. -- The duke of Alva was sent with a powerful army, the very forcible
plea of tyrants, and the most shocking cruelties were committed. Here let
humanity spread her veil, nor let the tender breast heave with anguish at such
scenes. But shocking as they are, they flow as naturally from this cursed
engine of oppression, as beams of light from the sun. For as the same sensible
writer observes, "So great antipathy ever appears between citizens and
soldiers; while one pretends to be safe under law, which the other pretends
shall be subject to his sword and his will."

But terrible as the many executions of their most illustrious patriots
appeared to them, while the land was dreached in its richest blood -- however
affecting the sight of confiscations, imprisonments, and the numberless
cruelties that attended them, they were not daunted. That GOD who hates
oppression, and delights in the happiness of his creation, inspired them with
sentiments, that carried them through innumerable hardships, 'till after having
expended immense treasures and blood for better than threescore years, they
laid the foundation of a rich, free, and flourishing people: Providence hereby
giving an instructive lesson to posterity in every age, who are contending for
all that is dear and sacred, to pursue the glorious object undaunted; knowing
that, as liberty is a plant transplanted from the gardens of heavens, its
divine parent will still cherish it, and, in spite of opposition, it will
flourish, it will live forever.

SUCH, my friends, have been the methods used by enterprising men, in former
ages, to carry into effect their ambitious designs, and found their greatness
on the ruins of their country. But in our day, these measures have become
systematical. They are in fact part of the constitution. To take a view of the
different powers in Europe, and compare them with the state of ancient
republics, under great and wise legislators, who seemed to be raised up for the
benefit of the age they lived in, and the admiration of posterity, we must drop
the tear of sensibility at the contrast. Where is the kingdom that does not
groan under the calamities of military tyranny? let us pause a while on the
most eminent of them.

IN the large empire of Russia, the effects are glaring. Even the shadow of
liberty has vanished. Of so great imp^rtance is the military, that a recruiting
officer can go through their villages, and pitch upon the ablest of the
inhabitants, as he would choose his cattle. And eve^ a father has been
imprisoned in his own house, for the escape of a child, while by order of the
officer, his own sons have been his goalers Vid Guth^ie's Grammar.
.

PERHAPS there is no nation in any part of the world, more happy than France,
in every luxury of life. But amid this profusion of plenty, the farmer exhibits
the most wretched spectacle in nature. Supported by the gleanings of the field,
the fruits of his labor go to the subsistence of the soldiery. Thus dispirited
and depressed, he contents himself with the refuge of his ground, while, after
his greatest exertions, another will reap the fruits of his honest industry.
The most obdurate breast must melt at such scenes, and execrate the effects of
standing armies.

LOOK into the fituation of Poland. Under the direction of that great man John
Subjeski^
, famous for his victories against the Turks; they were brave and virtuous, and
proved the bulwark of Christendom. But under the Saxon line, this spirit not
suiting their plan of government, was awed by Electoral troops, and totally
decayed. The consequences are now severely experienced by them; and while in
this depressed state they are an object of desire to Turks and Russians, their
country is a scene of bloodshed and misery.

IT is needless to mention England, or the idle farce of an annual act of
parliament, for the support of standing troops, which is nothing but an insult
on the sense of that nation. The more virtuous among them, if the flame of
liberty has not entirely expired, easily see through the guise, and in the
death of Allen and others, wantonly butchered by a mercenary soldiery, can too
clearly read the fate of themselves and posterity.

THE melancholy part of this subject must give pain to every ^^mane breast.
This is natural. But these scenes more directly affect other nations; and
however we may pity the unhappy sufferer, there is a kind of pleasure we feel
that we ourselves are not immediately interested. And would to GOD, it had ever
remained so. O my country! with what heartfelt satisfaction, should I rejoice,
if oppression had never stretched her baleful wings to this once happy clime!
that that liberty which an illustrious set of men, of whom the world was not
worthy, purchased at so dear a rate, might have descended unimpaired to latest
posterity. But is this the case? has this scourge of mankind, standing armies,
never interrupted our prosperity? if so, why is this desk hung with the sable
covering of death! why am I surrounded by so many of my fellow-citizens, who
listen to the tale of woe! yes, my countrymen, we ourselves are deeply
interested; and this same engine of oppression, which has thrown mighty
republics from their foundations, has attempted and still continues to spread
the same horrid consequences in America: and in its usual mode of conduct, has
been attended with every species of cruelty, some of them unheard of before;
but which your firmness, under GOD, has hitherto, and I pray ever may, surmount.

THE shocking scene of that dreadful night, the fatal effects of which we are
now still weeping over, is beyond description. No one, perhaps, if it is taken
in every view, that was not a spectator, can conceive it. When I consider the
many insults, abuses and violences, this unhappy town was exposed to for months
previous to this melancholy tragedy, and when the tumult of contrary passions
was thus naturally excited, to see a brutal soldiery, scattering promiscuous
death through a defenseless, unarmed multitude, till yonder street was
crimsoned with the blood of its citizens, while a tender mother, frantic with
grief, pours forth the anguish of her heart over a beloved son, now incapable
of any returns of gratitude; all this exhibits a scene which the distressed
heart may painfully feel, but which the tongue cannot express. Let the breast,
then, still continue to beat. These, my friends, are virtuous, generous
feelings, and do honor to humanity. May we ever retain them. May this
institution, sacred to the memory of our murdered brethren, be ever carefully
preserved. Yes, ye injured shades! we will still weep over you, and if any
thing can be more soothing, WE WILL REVENGE YOU.

THIS glaring specimen of cruelty roused the citizens, and in convincing colors
displayed the effects of standing armies in time of peace. But however our
exertions were then successful, however the storm subsided, it was but
temporary. While the scales of justice were held in palsied hands, and the most
shocking barbarities were the highest merit, an additional force only was
necessary. That arriving, the mask was thrown off, and a still greater scene of
carnage and destruction, opened in our adjacent villages.

BUT such proceedings, however alarming at that period, were soon lost in more
dreadful and distressing operations. The heights of Charlestown too awfully
convinced us of the melancholy truth, and posterity, while with tears of
compassion, they ponder the transactions of that day, must execrate the causes
which produced them. In any situation, the relics of slaughtered citizens are
objects of pity, and the sympathizing spectator will ever drop a tear over
them. But there may be instances, when the lesser streams of affection are
abforbed in a still greater sea of woe. Such are the sentiments that must
strike every breast, when we reflect, illustrious WARREN! on thy death -- a
death, which whole hecatombs of slaughtered enemies, strowed around thy corpse,
can never repay. Here, ye minions of power! ye who are dead to the calls of
honor and public virtue, are willing to wade to station, through the blood of
your brethren, here behold a spectacle that must harrow your inmost soul. You,
my countrymen, with the most pleasing sensations, have attentively listened,
while, like us, he was weeping over the unhappy fate of others. You have
kindled into rage, while he has set before you the dangerous nature and
consequences of standing armies, and prophetically pointed out to you still
greater events. How affecting! that he who could lament the fate of others,
must be himself deplored; and that he who could so feelingly paint the effects
of this horrid measure, must himself fall one of the first sacrifices to it.

BUT it is not sufficient to drop a transient tear to the memory of departed
heroes, or to pay an eulogy to their characters. The happiness of such men,
who, after having expired in the arms of liberty and virtue, are now sharing
the highest degree of felicity, cannot be increased by our praises: no, my
friends, the best way to express our affection for such great and good men, is
to rouse and revenge them. To hurl still fiercer bolts of vengeance on an
inhuman soldiery, who, instead of affording the last honors, sacred to the
dead, and which a generous enemy will ever regard. -- after grinning with
heilish pleasure on the mangled corpse, which alive could strike terror into
their bo^dest heart, lodged it in a promiscuous grave; that since they could
not prevent his name and reputation being immortal, his remains might be hid
forever. -- O Britain! thou have, and shall still weep tears of blood for this!

ARE not such instances, my countrymen, very convincing proofs of the fatal
effects of standing armies, in time of peace. In such a period they originated,
and from the fifth of March 1770, through every degree of violence and
barbarity, to the present day, it is but one connected scene.

AFTER such exhibitions of cruelty and carnage, what can we suppose too brutal,
too infamous for such an army? can we wonder to see our houses in flames? our
altars rased to the ground, or converted to a much more horrid use, than the
Jewish temple? if possible they have even exceeded; and the armies of Britain
seem to be held up as a standing evidence, how far the spirit of tyranny and
oppression can operate.

WE shudder when the faithful page of history opens to our view the conduct of
armies, flushed with victory, sacking towns, burning villages, and perpetrating
murders, with all the other dreadful concomitants. But if we look into the
conduct of the British army in the Jersies, and some part of the state of
New York, we shall find instances of all these crimes, and, perhaps, in some
places, instances beyond them. To see the third city in a neighboring state,
wantonly consumed by an enemy, who not having spirit or ability, to meet us in
the field, descend to these little mean methods of exciting terror -- to see
the ravages in the Jersies, and the garden of America thus wantonly defaced --
does not the blood beat high! -- do we not press forward to exterminate such
barbarians from the face of the earth! but to mention still greater scenes of
cruelty -- does not the ear tingle when it hears the shrieks of helpless
virgins, dreadful victims to lust and barbarity; while the gray hairs and
expressive groans of an aged parent, witness to his daughter's shame, plead in
vain. Can any thing swell this complicated scene of woe? it can receive
addition. These monsters exceed even the most barbarous nations. With them the
ashes of the dead have ever been sacred. But under the patronage of a British
tyrant and his general, snussing the tainted gale, they have ransacked the
silent repositories, and the remains of one that was once amiable and
captivating, flung about as food for the birds of the air Delauncy's farm.
. O GOD, where is thy vengeance! O virtue, honor, religion, humanity, where,
where are ye fled!

THESE, my countrymen, are not the flights of fancy, not the dictates of
imagination: they are solid, though very affecting realities. Can we then wish
a reunion with such a people? can we ever familiarly shake hands with a
nation, who, leaping every barrier, are thus wantonly sporting with our
distresses, and bathing themselves in the blood of our countrymen? may America
never retain such mean, dastardly sentiments! for my own part, if I may be
indulged, I would entreat, I would conjure every one, who as a parent feels for
the welfare of his posterity, to imitate the example of the renowned
Carthagenian As Hannibal, then about nine years old, was soothing with childish
caresses his father Hamilear, to take him along with him to Spain, whither,
after finishing the war in Africa, he was now about to transport his troops,
and was sacrificing for success in that expedition, he was led by his father to
the altar, and with his hand on the victim, was bound by this solemn oath,
"that as soon as he should have it in his power he would declare himself an
enemy to the Roman people."

Livey, b. 21, chapter 1.
. Lead your sons, ye fathers, not to the altar of Paganism, and under the
tutelage of some unknown deity, but to the sacred altar of freedom; and while
the guardian GOD of America is witness to the solemn obligation, MAKE THEM
SWEAR that they never will be friends to a power, who are thus sacrificing
their dearest privileges. Ring in their young ears the dreadful tale of
murders, rapes, and massacres. Paint to them the conduct of Britain, as
displayed in her arms in different parts of America, till their young breasts
glow with ardor, and thus early catching the flame of patriotism, they may,
through life, pursue undaunted so glorious an object. Pleased with such an
invocation, the shades of our fathers will rejoice over their posterity, and
the angels of love and purity will look down delighted.

No one, I think, can suppose these thoughts proceed from rage or passion. They
are the cool dictates of my heart. I love my country; her distresses affect me;
nor, from this moment, do I ever wish a reconciliation with a power, whose
prosperity must be founded on my utter destruction.

I HAVE now, my countrymen, endeavored to exhibit the fatal effects of standing
armies in time of peace; not from abstract reasoning, but as they exist in
fact, and now prevail in our distressed land. Here I would remark, that it is
standing armies in time of peace, and the consequences thence resulting, that
we are now deprecating. Armies, in defense of our country, unjustly invaded,
are necessary, and in the highest sense justifiable. We, my friends, attacked
by an arbitrary tyrant, under the sanction of a force, the effects of which, we
have attempted to illustrate, have been obliged to make the last solemn appeal.
And I cannot but feel a pleasing kind of transport, when I see America,
undaunted by the many trying scenes that have attended her, still baffling the
efforts of the most formidable power in Europe, and exhibiting an instance,
unknown in history. To see an army of veterans, who had fought and conquered in
different quarters of the globe -- headed by a general tutored in the field of
war, illustrious by former victories, and flushed with repeated successes,
threatening, with all the pomp of expression, to spread havoc, desolation, and
ruin around him; to see such a soldiery and such a general, yielding to an
hardy race of men, new to the field of war; while on the one hand it exalts the
character of the latter, convincingly proves the folly of those, who, under
pretense of having a body of troops, bred to war, and ever ready for action,
adopt this dangerous system, in subversion of every principle of lawful
government. Here, if after having depictured scenes of so distressing a nature,
it may not appear too descending, I could not forbear smiling at the British
general and his troops, who not willing to reflect on their present humiliating
condition, affect the air of arrogant superiority. But Americans have learnt
them, that men, fighting on the principles of freedom and honor, despise the
examples that have been set them by an enemy; and though, in the field, they
can brave every danger in defense of those principles, to a vanquished enemy
they know how to be generous; but that this is a generosity not weak and
unmeaning, but founded on just sentiments, and if wantonly presumed upon, will
never interfere with that national justice, which ever ought, and lately has
been properly exerted.

BUT while, with the warmest gratitude to heaven, we view our late successes,
and are at a loss to express our acknowledgment to the illustrious hero, who
was the instument, and whose name, to remotest ages, will be ever dear to these
New England states, let us not forget our situation. There is an army, and a
very powerful one, still existing in the heart of America. Methinks the
reputation of past successes should animate every inhabitant of America to fly
to arms; and by one general exertion utterly expel this last, this only
remaining power of Great Britain on the continent. Ye, to whom the sacred, the
important system of government is committed -- ye men of sense and virtue -- ye
patriots, who feel an affection for your country and posterity, let me conjure
you to seize the present opportunity, happier than we could ever have expected,
and which once omitted may never be again in our power.

I WOULD not pretend to insinuate, that this is the only point which ought to
be under immediate consideration, by a wise people or their delegates. But this
I will venture to affirm, that unless this is the governing sentiment, in every
deliberation, every other thing is superfluous. Let us then rise superior to
every private local attachment. As we are embarked on one broad bottom of
universal freedom, let us attend to this most pressing occasion; an occasion
providentially offered for future security and happiness. If a royal army, though
weak in its number, can thus insult us unpunished, the most slender imagination
can easily foresee what must be the effects of a still greater force. I wish
that the present generation, I wish that posterity may not feelingly reproach
our inactivity.

SHALL the frequent calls of our EXALTED GENERAL, who seems to have been raised
up by heaven, to show to what an height humanity may soar; who generously
sacrificing affluence and domestic ease, wishes to share with you in every
danger and distress, shall his frequent calls be in vain? remember, my
countrymen, the eyes of the good and great, in every clime, are upon the
present contest. Liberty, disgusted at scenes of cruelty and oppression, has
left her ancient altars, and is now hovering to fix her last residence in
America. Our exertions have hitherto been great and successful. Let not the
ashes of WARREN, MONTGOMERY, and the illustrious roll of heroes, who died for
freedom, reproach our inactivity and want of spirit, in not completing this
grand superstructure; the pillars of which have been cemented with the richest
blood of America. May that same ardor, which has rendered America famous, still
continue, and looking forward to those happy days of liberty and peace, which
our posterity shall enjoy, let us exalt at the thought, that future
generations, while they reap the glorious fruits of our struggles, will rise up
and call us blessed.

ORATION, DELIVERED AT BOSTON, MARCH 5, 1779.
BY WILLIAM TUDOR, ESQUIRE.
-- Sed et illa propago
Contemptrix superum saevaeque avidissima caedis
Et violenta fuit.
OV. M. L. I. F. 5. Whatever secondary props may rise
From politics, to build the public peace,
The bafis is, the manners of the land.
YOUNG.
FATHERS, COUNTRYMEN, FRIENDS,
"THAT man was born to delude and be deluded; to believe whatever is taught,
and bear whatsoever is imposed;" are political dogmas which have long afforded
matter for exultation and security to dignified villains, from the sceptered
tyrant, to the meanest minion of power. But however confirmed they may have
been, by the passive conduct of the greatest part of mankind, you, my
fellow-citizens, thank GOD, you are an exception to their truth. The numerous,
the respectable assembly which now crowd this hallowed temple, are an exalted
exception to maxims as disgraceful as they are general. Ever vigilantly
attentive to the sacred, unalienable rights of man; equally studious in the
glorious principles of liberty as intrepidly determined to preserve inviolate
the inestimable previleges she bestows; you are now convened, not merely to
commemorate this anniverversary, but solemnly to renew the resolves, which
freedom, wisdom, virtue, honor inspire: and not barely to resolve, but I trust,
steadily to pursue the execution of resolutions which have resulted from
deliberate investigation and full conviction.

To so intelligent, so well informed an auditory, it must be unnecessary to
deduce the origin of civil society, which founded in reciprocal advantage, and
springing from social virtue, on the combined necessities and assistance of
individuals built the general happiness -- a happiness thus instituted, nothing
but public spirit, and a union of force and of council can preserve: I must
therefore request your indulgence whilst I rather point out those evils which
the concurrent experience of ages and nations prove to be subversive of every
good proposed from civil compact. Little solicitous of rhetorical applause, I
shall offer you my sentiments as they arise warm from a heart devoted to the
interests of this my parent country, in language that becomes a freeman to use
when addressing a free assembly.

SIMILAR causes will forever operate like effects in the political, moral, and
physical world: those vices which ruined the illustrious republics of Greece,
and the mighty commonwealth of Rome, and which are now ruining Great Britain,
so late the first kingdom of Europe, must eventually overturn every State,
where their deleterious influence is suffered to prevail. Need I add that
luxury, corruption, and standing armies are those destructive efficients?

LUXURY, no sooner finds admittance into a state than she becomes the parent of
innumerable evils, public and domestic; her contagious influence is soon felt
in society, and her baneful effects discovered by a general dissipation of
manners and a declension of private virtue, which begets effeminate habits, and
by a natural gradation a base pliability of spirit.

LUXURY is ever the foe of independence, for at the same time that it creates
artificial wants it precludes the means of satisfying them. It first makes men
necessitous, and then dependant. It first unfits men for patriotic energies,
and soon teaches them to consider public virtue as a public jest.

AT such a period, corruption finds an easy access to mens' hearts. To the
promotion of interested pursuits, and the gratification of voluptuous wishes, a
ready sacrifice is made of the general good at the shrine of power. Then
slumbers that virtuous jealousy of public men and public measures, which was
wont to scrutinize not only actions but motives: then nods that active zeal,
which, with eagle eye watched, and with nervous arm defended the constitution.
Every day new inroads are made upon public liberty, while encroachments, like
temptations, grow more frequent and more dangerous in proportion as the power
of resistance decreases. Thus before a nation is completely deprived of
freedom, she must be fitted for slavery by her vices.

GENERALLY, but not always, for we have known a people ruled by a despot, who,
from a private station, rose to uncontroled dominion, at a time when they were
sternly virtuous. And this mode of introducing bondage is ever to be
apprehended at the close of a successful struggle for liberty, when a
triumphant army, elated with victories, and headed by a popular General, may
become more formidable than the tyrant that has been expelled. Witness the last
century in the English history! witness the aspiring CROMWELL!

THIS audacious citizen, entrusted by his country with the command of her
armies, to chastize the man whom previous folly If a man in private life, finds
his oldest son an idiot or a rascal, he may dispose of his estate among his
other children: but if the heir apparent (in hereditary monarchies) to a crown,
an inheritance in which millions are interested, turns out to be a blockhead or
a villain, still ^e must be the king, because such is the line of succession
established by law. -- Hence the few prince; who have not been either the
scourge or disgrace of the kingdoms they have ruled.
had enthroned, and who soon presumed to treat his subject, as all kings are
wont to do, with contempt and injury, had no sooner dispatched the foolish,
imperious monarch, than he attempted to succeed him: with a little management,
he soon found his army as disposed to regisy him, as they had been to depose
Charles. With these mercenary associates at his heels, he appeared in the synod
of the State, and dared with force displace the most glorious band of patriots
that ever led a tyrant from his throne to a scaffold. Not content with this
enormous outrage upon the constitution, this annihilating stroke upon the
tottering liberties of his country, for a time, to keep up the form of a
popular government and to bring parliament into contempt, he convened an house
of commons, constituted entirely of his own creatures. They met, and in a few
months discovered that they were utterly unequal to the posts they were raised
to, they therefore petitioned their master to dissolve them. Cromwell granted
their request, and became sole tyrant of three kingdoms. Tyrant -- for of what
consequence is it by what style or under what modification despotism operates
to the public wrong -- dictator, king, protector, it is not the appellation we
reprobate, though even that we should guard against, but the thing. Who but
must own that Cromwell, under the name of protector, was as absolute a despot
as he could have been with any other title?

THE first Caesar affords us another instance among the thousands which history
holds up to our view, to teach us what bold and unprincipled spirits have
effected by the aid of armies. This ambitious subject having been for several
years engaged in the humane, the soldierly employment of slaughtering his
fellow men, and in extending his conquests over countries which he had not even
a pretense to invade; this Caesar, who boasted that he had slain a million of
men Plutarch says that Casur could boast, that he had slain a million of men,
gave a million their liberty, and made a million prisoners.

Vid. Plut. in vit. Caes.
, was at length ordered home by the senate to answer to some charges against
his conduct. He knew that at such an interview his sword would be his ablest
advocate. He therefore led his veteran legions, "nothing loath," against his
country; passed the rubicon; fought his way to Rome; plunged a dagger in her
vitals; impiously trampled on her dearest rights; and seized on empire
crimsoned, execrable paricide! crimsoned with the richest blood of Rome's best
citizens!

Too late the patriot poniard reached the ^itor's heart: Caesar fell -- alas!
the republic had fallen before. Rome changed her governors, but the tyranny
remained. The same army that had enabled Julius to triumph over the liberties
of his country, led the cars of OCTAVIUS, ANTHONY and LEPIDUS, through se^ of
Roman blood, and bad the cursed triumvirate divide an enslaved world!

IF Rome could have been saved, BRUTUS and his virtuous associates would have
saved her; but a standing army, and a perpetual dictator, were, and ever will,
prove too hard for the patriotic few. Learn hence, my countrymen, that a state
may sink so low in slavery that even virtue itself cannot retrieve her. From
these examples, prudence dictates -- resist ^eginnings. A free and wise people
will never suffer any citizen to become too popular -- much less too powerful.
A man may be formidable to the constitution even by his virtues.

BUT why do I keep your attention fixed on remote transactions? our own times
furnish additional and convincing proofs of the destructive consequences of
political corruption and mercenary armies.

SWEDEN, the bravest, hardiest, freest nation of the north -- Sweden, in one
hour, was plunged from the distinguished heights of liberty into abject
vassalage. What ties can bind a king? scarce had GUSTAVUS the third ascended
the throne of limited monarchy; scarce had the roofs of the senate house ceased
to reverberate the insidious accents of his inauguration speech This speech is
inserted at large, not only because it is fraught with excellent advice, but
also to show how little reliance ought to be placed on coronation speeches.

The king of Sweden's speech to the States on the 1st of June, 1772.

You are this day assembled, in order to confirm in the manner of your
ancestors, the band of union which ties you to me, and me to you, and both to
the whole commonwealth; we must therefore remember, with the most sensible
gratitude, the benevolence of the Almighty, who has ordered things so, that
this very ancient kingdom of the Swedes and Goths is still existing, after so
many foreign, as well as national shocks, and that I, in the throne of my
ancestors, can yet address free and independent States.

Assured of your hearts, most sincerely proposing to merit them, and to six my
throne upon your love and felicity, the public engagement which you are going
to enter into, would, in my opinion, be needless, if ancient custom and the law
of Sweden did not require it of you. Unhappy the king who wants the tie of
oaths to secure himself on the throne, and who, not assured of the hearts of
his subjects, is constrained to reign only by the force of laws, when he cannot
by the love of his subjects!

I need not put you in mind of the weightiness of the engagement you are going
to take; the States of Sweden know best the extent of their duty to themselves
and the commonwealth; may concord and harmony ever unite your hearts; may
foreign views and private gain ever be sacrificed to public interest; may this
alone be a perpetual bond of union amongst you; and may the ambition of any
part of you, never raise any such disturbances as may endanger the freedom and
independency of the whole commonwealth!

Gentlemen of the house of nobles,

Preserve always the honor and intrepidity of your ancestors; be an example to
your fellow-citizens; and, as you are the first order of the kingdom, be also
the first in virtue and love of your country.

Good men of the reverend order of clergy,

May mutual friendship and peace, obedience to the laws, reverence to God and
the king, bear witness to me and the country, of your zeal in the execution of
the sacred office with which you are entrusted!

Good men of the respectable order of burghers,

Strive always with your fellow subjects who shall contribute the most to the
public good; may the fruits of the extensive share which belongs to you, be
general credit and confidence, useful institutions, frugal living, and moderate
gain, which lead to sure and certain wealth.

Good men of the worthy order of peasants,

May piety, diligence, temperance, and old Swedish faith and modesty, be the
strongest confirmation of the honor always ^ue to that order which gives
subsistence to all the others; an honor which the Swedish peasants have at all
times attained.

This is all I ask of you, when you observe this, you perform in the best
manner, that duty to me, and your country, which, according to the Swedish
laws, I now call upon you to confirm by oath.

For an historical account of this revolution, vid. gentleman's magazine for
1772, page 397, etc. For the Swedish constitution, vid. the abbot Vertot.


, whilst yet venerable representatives of their country were fondly
anticipating the blessings that would arise from the reign of so wise, so
gracious a king -- The unblushing parricide surrounded, with an armed host, the
temple in which the senate was assembled, planted his cannon against the gates,
and with the swords of his guards at the throats of the senators, demanded
immediate absolution from his coronation oath, by which he had most sacredly
bound himself to preserve inviolate the laws and liberties of the Swedes!
astonishing that a strippling, whose language breathed the glowing sentiments
of enthusiastic generosity, so natural to youth, could, with such facility, set
at defiance all that is held sacred, honorable, and obligatory among men! but
the lust of domination, so natural to human nature, will ever prove too hard
for the checks of conscience and the dictates of right, when a favorable
opportunity presents to gratify it. Gustavus, knowing that the army were ready
to assist his iniquitous designs (as all standing armies are to promote
despotism, because under such a system of rule, soldiers must be necessary and
consequently favored) the barriers raised by justice and his plighted faith to
Sweden, became slight indeed. Force backed inclination, and Gustavus changed
circumscribed authority, for unconfined sovereignty For a complete system of
despotism, see the lex regia of Denmark, constituted by Frederick 3d, in 1665,
and published by Christian 5th, in 1683.
.

LET us now turn our eyes to that nation whom we once did love, and with whom
we had yet been friends had not an unparalleled series of folly and cruelty
compelled us to renounce the pleasing relationship. A short retrospect of whose
public conduct, subsequent to the last war, will afford many and important
instructions.

IN 1763 peace was restored after a war of seven years, successfully waged in
every quarter of the globe. At that period what an unrivalled figure did
Great Britain stand amongst the nations! great beyond all former example, in
arms, in commerce and in wealth. Not a corner of the earth but had witnessed
her achievements. Wheresoever she directed her armies, victory and conquest
attended; whilst her irresistible navy, thundering over every ocean, not only
subdued, but annihilated the fleets of her enemies.

TRIUMPHANT in war, nor less distinguished in peace. In many of the polite, in
most of the useful arts and sciences, superior to her neighbors. In commerce
unequalled; no^ a sea but bore, not a wind but wasted her countless ships,
laden with the riches of the earth, and made her crowded ports the marts of the
world. Late glorious nation, how are thou fallen, how lost! from so envied, so
stupendous an height, by the perverted will of thy infatuated monarch, and the
pernicious counsels of his nefarious ministers. Driven to the fearful edge of
ruin, we now behold thee tottering over the gulf of annihilation, whilst
France and her allies urge thee over the irremeable steep!

WHEN we consider the capital desects in the English constitution -- the
character of her present weak and ambitious monarch -- the luxury, dissipation
and venality of her influential men, we shall cease to wonder at her declension
and present circumstances.

IN a limited monarchy, where the prince as supreme executive magistrate, and
first branch of the legislature, is invested with the important prerogative of
making peace and war; is constituted the sole fountain of honor, and becomes
the exclusive disposer of every lucrative and honorable appointment, civil,
ecclesiastic, and military; his influence becomes too enormous to be compatible
with the public liberty: but if to such extravagant powers (by a fatal error in
the constitution, placed in the hands of the prince) he should superadd a
detestable system of corruption to bribe the representatives of the people (a
system which, during the reign of his present Britannic majesty, has been
urged to its utmost possible extent) the worst species of vassalage must ensue.
That equipoise between the respective branches of the legislature (in which the
seeming, the theoretic excellence of the English constitution consists) will be
totally destroyed; the executive will involve the powers of the legislative,
and whilst the letter and formalities of the constitution are retained, its
spirit and intendment will be totally lost. An absolutely arbitrary, with the
forms of a free government (that worst and surest of all tyrannies) will
gradually succeed and be finally established, unless a total revolution is
happily effected by the timely exertions of the people, before the despot has
strengthened himself with a mercenary army, and forever closed their chains.

BUT this tyranny is already established in Great Britain, for what hopes can
Britons entertain of effecting a revolution, whilst the crown, by the
multiplicity of gifts in its power, can maintain an infamous majority in each
house of parliament, to legalize, and a standing army to enforce its projects,
however imperious, inhuman or unjust. In vain, a few wise and virtuous men see
and lament their dishonorable situation -- an army of forty thousand soldiers,
in time of peace, and a still more numerous band of placemen and pensioners,
properly disposed throughout the kingdom, effectually stifle in their birth
every effort of patriotism to restore the constitution to its primaeval
principles.

SUCH is the boasted constitution, such the prince, and such the present
condition of the people of Britain. Unhappy nation, thus constitutionally
enslaved -- thus legally und^e! unworthy descendants of illustrious ancestors
-- thus to suffer your most essential rights to be bartered away, your
government not only corrupted, but perverted to purposes diametrically opposite
to its original intention. An house of commons at first constituted to watch
over and preserve your rights and immunities from the enchroaching steps of
ambitious princes, you have permitted to become an engine in the hands of
royalty, the more effectually to abridge or nullify those rights. A parliament
constituted the stewards of your property, who, instead of guarding it from the
insatiable grasp of royal avidity, you patiently see lavishingly indulging the
utmost extravagance of regal profusion; granting enormous sums for effecting
the most pernicious purposes; traitorously leaguing with the servants of the
crown in loading you with intolerable taxes, and, sharers in the spoil,
prodigally complying with the most unbounded demands of ministerial rapacity,
while they, at the same time, treacherously unite to screen the most infamous
defaulters of the public money. Instead of bravely drawing your swords in
defense of your freedom and national honor, you first tamely acquiesced in an
insidious and ignominious Vid. Statutes at large -- Particularly 2 Geo. 3d. chapter
29, and 10th Geo. 3d. chapter 19. and Black. Com. B. 2. chapter 27. -- For the game and
forest laws.
law, by which you were basely disarmed like slaves, and then, from necessity,
submitted to keeping on foot, in time of peace, a standing army, that, in time
of war, had been raised professedly for the defense of the national territories
from foreign attacks -- an army which you now behold, without shame and without
regret, spreading devastation and horror over a late peaceful and happy
country; and having at length dismembered the empire, are now attempting to
reduce us to the most infamous and most miserable of all conditions, that of
being the conquered vassals of your weak, vindictive, despotic monarch.

DEGENERATE sons of mighty fathers! how poor is the consolation for the loss of
essential rights, that you still retain the empty privilege of pasquinading
your king and his ministers, whilst you are destitute of that public spirit and
solid virtue which should purge your corrupted government and reform your
wretched constitution!

FROM subjection to a government, thus defective and corrupt, and thus vilely
administered, what freeman would not struggle for an emancipation? but if there
is an American present who can yet secretly wish for a reunion with this
nation, and a share in her ideal privileges, let him for a moment consider the
innumerable indignities, which, for fifteen years back, have been offered us by
this haughty power, added to the savage barbarities which they have exercised
in every part of America where their army have made any progress, and he must
blush at the spiritless, the ignoble sentiment.

IN 1764 the plan for raising a revenue from this country was resolved on by
the British ministry, and THEIR obsequious parliament were instructed to pass
an act for that purpose. Not content with having for a century directed the
entire commerce of America, and centered its profits in their own island;
thereby deriving from the colonies every substantial advantage which the
situation and transmarine distance of the country could afford them: not
content with appointing the principal officers in the different governments,
while the king had a negative upon every law that was enacted: not content with
our supporting the whole charge of our municipal establishments, although their
own creatures held the chief posts therein: not content with laying external
duties upon our mutilated and shackled commerce, they, by this statute,
attempted to rob us of even the curtailed property, the hard-earned peculium
which still remained to us -- to create a revenue for the support of a fleet
and army, in reality to overawe and secure our subjection, not (as they
insidiously pretended) to protect our trade, or defend our frontiers; the first
of which they annoyed, and the latter deserted.

AFTER repealing this imperious edict, not because it was unjust in principle,
but inexpedient in exercise, they proceeded to declare, by a public act of the
whole legislature, that we had no property but what was at their disposal, and
that Americans, in future, were to hold their privileges and lives solely on
the tenure of the good will and pleasure of a British parliament. Acts soon
followed correspondent to this righteous determination, which, not quadrating
with American ideas of right, justice and reason, a fleet and army were sent to
give them that force, which laws receive when promulgated from the mouths of
cannon, or at the points of bayonets.

WE then first saw our harbor crowded with hostile ships, our streets with
soldiers -- soldiers accustomed to consider military prowess as the standard of
excellence, and vain of the splended pomp attendant on regular armies, they
contemptuously looked down on our peaceful orders of citizens. Conceiving
themselves more powerful, they assumed a superiority which they did not feel;
and whom they could not but envy, they effected to despise. Perhaps, knowing
they were sent, and believing they were able to subdue us, they thought it was
not longer necessary to observe any measures with ^aves -- hence^ that
arrogance in the carriage of the officers -- hence that licentiousness and
brutality in the common soldiers, which at length broke out with insufferable
violence, and proceeding to personal insults and outrageous assa^^ts on the
inhabitants, soon roused them to resentment, and produced the catastrophe which
we now commemorate. The immediate horrors of that distressful night -- Hecaten
vocat alte^a, saevam
Altera Tisiphonen serpents, atque videres
Infernas errare Canes; Lunamque rubentem,
Ne foret his Testis post magna latere sepulchra.
Hor. L. 1. S. ^.
have been so often and so strikingly painted, that I shall not again wring
your feeling bosoms with the affecting recital: to the faithful pen of history
I leave them to be represented as the horrid prelude to those more extensive
tragedies, which, under the direction of a most obdurate and sanguinary prince,
have since been acted in every corner of America where his armies have been
able to penetrate.

OUR citizens who fell on that memorable night, falling bequeathed us this
salutary lesson, written indeliably with their blood. Confusion, murders, and
misery must ever be the consequence of mercenary standing armies cantoned in
free cities. -- Et altis Urbibus ultim^
Stetere Causae cur perirent
Funditus imprimeretque Muris
Hostile Aratrum Exercitus insolens.
Hor. Lib. 1. Car. 16.
.

MY contrymen, suffer not the slaughtered brethren we now lament to have bled
in vain; let us forever retain the important lesson, and they will not have
ineffectually fallen. Security shall spring from their tombs, and their deaths
preserve the lives of citizens yet unborn. Succeeding generations shall
celebrate the era of this anniversary as the epoch of American triumph, not as
a day of sadness; and future patriots nobly envy the death of those, who dying
taught their countrymen experimental wisdom.

ORATION, DELIVERED AT BOSTON, MARCH 6, 1780.
BY MR. JONATHAN MASON, JUN.
"Devotion to the public. Glorious flame!
"Celestial ardor! in what unknown worlds,
"Have thou been blessing myriads, since in Rome,
"Old virtuous Rome, so many deathless names
"From thee their luster drew? since taught by thee
"Their poverty put splendour to the blush,
"Pain grew luxu^, and even death delight.
THOMSON, vol. 1. p. 336. "Unblesi by VI^UE, government, and league
"Becomes a ci^ing junto of the great
"To rob by law. --
"What are without IT senates, save a face
"Of consultation deep and reason free,
"While the determined voice and heart are sold?
"What boasted freedom save a sounding name?
"And what election, but a market vile
"Of slaves self-barter'd?
ID. p. 3.
MY FRIENDS AND FELLOW-CITIZENS,
THAT the greatness and prosperity of a people depend upon the proportion of
public spirit and the love of virtue, which is found to exist among them, seems
to be a maxim established (...) the universal consent, and I may say,
experience of all ages.

MAN is formed with a constitution wonderfully adapted for social converse and
connection. Scarcely ushered into the world, but his wants teach him his
inability, of himself, to provide for them. Wrapped in astonishment, with an
anxiety inexpressible, the solitary existant looks around for the aid of some
friendly neighbor, and should he perchance meet the desired object; should he
find one, endowed with intellectual faculties, beset with the same wants and
weaknesses, and in all respects the very image of himself; should he find him
with a heart open to mutual kind offices, and a hand stretched out to bestow a
proportion of his labor, with a bosom glowing with gratitude, his soul is on
the wing to express the sense he entertains of the generous obligation.

A CONFIDENCE is established between him and his benefactor, they fwear
perpetual friendship, and a compact for mutual protection and assistance
becomes imperceptably consented to. Thus doubly armed, together they pursue
their morning route to satisfy those demands only which nature reminds them of,
and while the ingenuity of the one is exercised to ensnare, the strength of the
other is, perhaps, employed to subdue their vigorous opponent.

THEIR little family soon increases, and as their social ring becomes gradually
enlarged, their obligations to each other are equally circular. Honest industry
early teaches them that a part only is sufficient to provide for the whole, and
that a portion of their time may be spared to cull the conveniences as well as
appease the wants of nature. Property and personal security appear to be among
the first objects of their attention, and acknowledged merit receives the
unanimous suffrage to preside guardian over the rights and privileges of their
infant society. The advantages derived are in a moment experienced. Their
little policy, erected upon the broad basis of equality, they know of no
superiority but that which virtue and the love of the whole demands; and while,
with cheerfulness, they entrust to his care a certain part of their natural
rights, to secure the remainder, the agreement is mutual, and the obligation
upon his part equally solemn and binding to resign them back, either at the
instance and request of their sovereign pleasure, or whenever the end should
be perverted for which he received them.

INTEGRITY of heart, benevolence of disposition, the love of freedom and public
spirit, are conspicuous excellencies in this select neighborhood. Lawless
ambition is without a friend, and the insinuating professional pleas of
tyrants, ever accompanied by the magnificence and splendour of luxury A mode of
living above a man's annual income, weakens the state, by reducing to poverty
not only the squanderers themselves, but many innocent and industrious persons
connected with them. Luxury is above all pernicious in a commercial state.
Shall profits satisfy the frugal and industrious, but the luxurious despise
almost every branch of trade but what returns great profits.

Home's hist, of man, p. 113. vol. 2. In the savage state man is almost all
body with a very small proportion of mind. In the maturity of civil society, he
is complete both in mind and body. In a state of degeneracy by luxury and
voluptuousness, he has neither mind nor body.

Id. 114.
, are unheard of among them; but simple in their manners, and honest in their
intentions, their regulations are but few and those expressive, and without the
aid of extreme refinement There are very few laws which are not good while the
state retains its principles.

Montesq. 6.8.6.12.
, by a universal adherance to the spirit of their constitution, and to those
glorious principles from which that spirit originated, we find them attaining
real glory -- we find them crowned with every blessing that human nature has
ever known of -- we find them in the possession of that summit of solid
happiness that universal depravity will admit of.

PATRIOTISM is essential to the preservation and well-being of every free
government. To love one's country The amor patriae or patriotism stands at the
head of social affections, and so high in our esteem, that no actions but what
proceed from it, are termined grand or heroic. It triumphs over every selfish
motive, is a firm support to every virtue, and wherever it prevails the morals
of the people are found to be pure and correct.

Elements of Criticism.
has ever been esteemed honorable; and under the influence of this noble
passion, every social virtue is cultivated, freedom prevails through the whole,
and the public good is the object of every one's concern. A constitution built
upon such principles, and put in execution by men possessed with the love of
virtue and their fellow-men, must always ensure happiness to its members. The
industry of the citizen will receive encouragement and magnanimity; heroism and
benevolence will be esteemed the admired qualifications of the age. Every the
least invasion on the public liberty, is considered as an infringement on that
of the subject; and feeling himself roused at the appearance of oppression,
with a divine enthusiasm he flies to obey the summons of his country, and does
she but request, with zeal he resigns the life of the individual for the
perservation of the whole.

WITHOUT some portion of this generous principle, anarchy and confusion would
immediately ensue, the jarring interests of individuals, regarding themselves
only, and indifferent to the welfare of others, would still further heighten
the distressing scene, and with the assistance of the selfish passions, it
would end in the ruin and subversion of the state. But where patriotism is the
leading principle, unanimity is conspicuous in public and private councils. The
constitution receives for its stability the united efforts of every individual,
and revered for its justice, admired for its principle, and formidable for its
strength, its fame reaches to the skies.

SHOULD we look into the history of the ancient republics, we shall find them a
striking example of what I have asserted, and in no part of their progress to
greatness, producing so many illustrious actions, and advancing so rap^dly in
the road to glory, as when actuated by public spirit and the love of their
country. The Greeks in particular ever held such sentiments as these in the
highest veneration, and with such sentiments as these alone they established
their freedom, and finally conquered the innumerable armies of the east.

WHEN Xerxes Herod. C. J. C. 56, 99. and Rollin An. His.
, the ambitious prince of Persia, vainly thinking that nature and the very
elements were subject to his control, inflamed with the thoughts of conquest,
threatening the seas, should they resist, with his displeasure, and the
mountains, should they oppose his progress: when, after having collected the
armies of the then known world under his banners, he entered the bowels of
Greece, leading forth his millions, resolutely bent upon the destruction and
extirpation of this small hut free people; what do we perceive to be their
conduct upon so alarming an occasion? do they tamely submit without a struggle?
do they abandon their property, their liberties, and their country, to the sury
of these merciless invaders? do they meanly supplicate the favor, or entreat
the humanity of this haughty prince? no! sensible of the justice of their
cause, and that valor is oftentimes superior to numbers; undaunted by the
appearance of this innumerable host, and fired with the glorious zeal, they,
with one voice, resolve to establish their liberties, or perish in the attempt.

VIEW them at the moment when the armies of their enemies, like an inundation,
overspread their whole Greecian territory; when oppression seemed as though
collecting its mighty force, and liberty lay fettered at the shrine of
ambition; then shone forth the heavenly principle, then slamed the spirit of
the patriot, and laying aside all sentiments of jealously, as though favored
with the prophetic wisdom of heaven, with brav^ry unexampled, they charge their
foe, and fighting in defense of their country, success crowns the virtuous
attempt. With three hundred Lacedimonians These brave Lacedimonians thought it
become them who were the choicest soldiers of the chief people of Greece, to
devote themselves to certain death, in order to make the Persians sensible how
difficul^ it is to reduce freemen to slavery, and to teach the rest of Greece,
by their example, either to vanquish or to perish. A monument was afterward
erected to the memory of Leonidas and those who fell with him at Thermopylae;
upon which was this inscription: Dic. hospes, Spartae nes te hic vidisse
jacentes
Duen, sanctis patriae legibus obsequimur.
ROLLIN.
, one only of whom was left to tell the fate of these intrepid men to their
weeping country, they conquered the combined force of the whole eastern world.

THE privileges and immunities of the States of Holland Temple's observation.
, after a contest of forty year^, in which they withstood the exertions of
their powerful neighbors, being established by the force of this single
principle, which appears to prevail both in the senate and the field, might
also be adduced in support of what I have advanced, but, my fellow-countrymen,
we cannot want additional proofs; the living history of our own times, will
carry conviction to the latest posterity, that no state, that no community, I
may say that no family, nay even that no individual can possibly flourish and
be happy, without some portion of this sacred fire. It was this that raised
America from being the haunt of the savage, and the dewlling place of the
beast, to her present state of civilization and opulence: it was this that has
supported her under the severest trials: it was this that taught her sons to
fight, to conquer and to die in support of freedom and its blessings; and what
is it, but this ardent love of liberty, that has induced you, my
fellowcitizens, to attend on this solemn occasion, again to encourage the
streams of sensibility, and to listen with so much attention and candor to one
of the youngest of your fellow-citizens, whose youth and inability plead
powerfully against him, while the annual tribute is paid to the memory of those
departed citizens, who fell the first sacrifices to arbitrary power. Check not
such generous feelings. They are the fruits of virtue and humanity, and while
the obligations you remain under to those unhappy men, lead you to shed the
sympathetic tear, to dwell with pleasure upon their memories, and execrate the
causes of their death, remember that you can never repay them. Ever bear it in
your minds, that so implicit was the confidence you willingly placed in that
country, that owed to you her affection, that notwithstanding the introduction
of that inhuman weapon of tyrants into the very heart of your peaceful
villages, you still would fain rely on their deceitful assertions, and paint
the deformed monster to your imaginations as the minister of peace and
protection. Men born in the bosom of liberty, living in the exercise of the
social affections in their full vigor, having once fixed them upon particular
objects, they are not hastily eradicated. Unaccustomed to sport with, and
wantonly sacrifice these sensible overflowings of the heart, to run the career
of passion and blinded lust, to be familiar with vice, and sneer at virtue; to
surprise innocence by deceitful cunning, and assume the shade of friendship to
conceal the greater enmity, you could not at once realize the fixed, the
deliberate intention of those from whom you expected freedom, to load you with
slavery and chains, and not till insult repeated upon insult: not till
oppression stalked at noonday through every avenue in your cities: nay, not
till the blood of your peaceful brethren flowed through your streets, was the
invenvomed serpent to be discovered in the bushes: not till a general trespass
had been made upon the keenest feelings of human nature, and the widowed mother
was summoned to entomb the cold remains of her affectionate son; the virtuous
bosom to resign its tender partner, and social circles their nearest friends;
could you possibly convince yourselves that you and Britain were to be friends
no more. Thrice happy day! the consequences of which have taught the sons of
America that a proper exercise of public spirit and the love of virtue has
been able to surprise and baffle the most formidable and most powerful tyranny
on earth.

PATRIOTISM is a virtue which will ever be universally admired, even by those
incapable of possessing it. Its happy effects are equally visible in
individuals as in states, and if we bestow a moment's reflection upon the
heroes of antiquity, who have been deservedly celebrated by succeeding
generations, both for their abilities and conduct, we shall find that the true
source of their greatness was this spirit of freedom, and their inviolable
attachment to the interest of their country.

WITH an attentive silence we listen to the historian while he relates to us
the integrity of conduct, the invincible courage, the earnest glow of soul, and
the ardent love of liberty which was exhibited in the lives of those
illustrious men, and so great were their virtues that we are scarce able to
credit them, but as the dreams of fancy, or the fictions of the ingenious.

IT is recorded of the celebrated Timoleon Rollin.
, general of Corinth, that notwithstanding he was blessed with a temper
singularly humane, and with feelings that were ever roused at the miseries of
his fellow-men, he loved his country so passionately, that after making use of
every argument in his power to convince an elder brother of his error, for
attempting to become the tyrant of it, he devoted him to death; a brother on
whom he had previously placed his affection, and whose life being exposed to
the fire of an enemy in a severe battle, he had before saved at the great
risque of his own. Even in old age, after a period of rigid retirement for
twenty years, we are attracted by the disinterested conduct of this exalted
patriot.

WHEN the Syracusians, groaning under every species of cruelty, which lust,
avarice and ambition could inflict, supplicated their generous neighbors for
assistance, to alleviate those miseries they themselves had been exposed to.
Timoleon, urged to accept the command of the Corinthian auxiliaries, at first
hesitated, his age, his manners, his private happiness and the endearments of
his family forbid it; but sensible that he was but a member of the community,
and stung by the cries of innocence, his inclinations were but of trivial
moment in competition with his duty.

VIEW him at the head of his chosen army, assembled to plead the cause of
suffering virtue. In possession of arms and of power, if inclined to pervert
them, are his principles changed with his station? are his thoughts bept on
conquest or on death? or does he entertain a secret wish to seize the moment of
confidence, and build his greatness upon the ruin of the distressed, to remove
one tyrant to reinstate another? no, but fired with a generous glow of foul,
fired with the manly sentiments of freedom, with an implacable hatred to
oppression of all kinds, he marches his troops to the deliverance of his
afflicted people, and with a firmness becoming soldiers, fighting under the
standard of liberty, after a series of fatigue and toil, harrassing marches and
fierce conflicts, he dethrones the tyrant, and is proclaimed the deliverer of
Syracuse. -- Having restored tranquillity to this unhappy country, repeopled
their cities, revived their laws, and dispensed justice to all ranks and
classes, he resigned his command, and retreated once again to the private walks
of life, accompanied with the grateful acknowledgments of millions as the
patron of their liberty and the savior of their country. -- Happy man! endowed
with such a noble soul, prone to feel for the misfortunes, and rejoice in the
happiness of his fellow creatures.

BUT why need we resort to distant ages to furnish us with istances of the
effects of patriotism upon individuals? will not the present day afford at
least one illustrious example to our purpose? yes, my fellow-countrymen,
AMERICA, young AMERICA too, can boast her patriots and heroes, men who have
saved their country by their virtues, whose characters posterity will admire,
and with a pleased attention, listen on tiptoe to the story of their glorious
exertions. Let us pause a moment only upon the select catalogue, and take the
first upon the list. --

VIEW him in his private station, and here, as though Providence, for his
excellencies, had selected him for her own; from the extensive circle of
humanity, we perceive him enjoying her richest dispensations. By an affluent
fortune, placed beyond the reach of poverty or dependence, blessed with the
social circle of friends, and happily connected by yet more endearing ties;
peaceful reflections are his companions through the day, and the soothing
slumbers of innocence hover over his couch: charity presides steward of his
household, and the distressed are ever sure to receive from his bosom that sigh
which never fails to console, and from his cheek the alleviating tear of
sympathy. Having reached the summit of human felicity, beyond even the picture
of his most sanguine expectations, it is indifferent to him, as an individual,
whether prince or people rule the state, but nurtured in the bosom of freedom,
endowed with a greatness of soul, swallowed up with public spirit and the love
of mankind, does oppression scatter her baleful prejudices, does ambition rear
its guilty crest, friends Carinfunt parents, cari liberi, propinqui,
familiares, sed omnes omnium caritates patriae uxa complexa est, pro qua quis
bonus dubitet murtem oppetere?

C^es.
, relations and fortune are like the dust of the balance. The pleas of nature
give way to those of his country, and urged on by heavenly motives, he flies
instantly to her relief. See him while grief distracts his bosom, at the
effusion of human blood, gras^ the sword of justice and buckle on the harness
of the warrior. ^^e him, with fortitude unparalleled, with perseverance
indefatigable, deaf to pleasure and despising corruption, cheerfully
encountering the severest tasks of duty, and the hardiest toils of a military
life. Modest in prosperity, and shining like a meteor in adversity, we behold
this patriotic hero, with a small army of determined freemen, attacking,
fighting and conquering an army composed of the bravest veteran troops of
Britain.

AND shall we, my countrymen, stop the current of gratitude? and can we forbear
testifying our joy upon the success of such singular exertions? shall we seal
his death before we thank him for his services? by no means. -- Our
acknowledgement will irresistably flow from us to this deserved object of
admiration, and his very actions will sting the soul of the ungrateful wretch,
until he is forced to admire their luster, and confess his inability to equal
them.

SOME there are, who, Roman-like, would banish him for his good conduct; but
while we copy the spirit of this great people, let us not be as diligent to
catch their vices. Such conduct is inconsistent with the sentiments of freemen,
and surely we cannot forget that he has saved our country.

REWARDS One method of preventing crimes is to reward virtue. If the rewards
for the discovering of useful truths have increased our knowledge, and
multiplied good books, is it not probable that (...) wards, distributed by the
beneficent hand of a sovereign, would also (...) virtuous actions. The coin of
honor is inexhausible, and i^ ^^^ndantly fruitful in the hands of a prince who
disiributes i^ wisely.

MARQ. of BECOA.
and punishments are in the hands of the public, and it is equally consistent
with generosity and humanity, to bestow the one, as inflict the other. We
cannot be too cautious in the objects of our gratitude; let merit, conspicious
merit, be the standard to which our praises shall resort, and it will excite a
noble emulation in others, and let us rather forbear that respect, which is too
often found attendant upon the rich, though their wealth has been amassed with
the ruin of their country.

BUT the praises of us are not the patriot's only reward; with an approving
conscience, sweetning the declivity of life, his invitation is to the skies,
there to receive a far more precious reward, for the establishment of that
principle to which, since the orign of mankind, heaven has paid an immediate
attention.

"WHERE the brave youth with love of glory fired,
"Who greatly in his country's cause expired,
"Shall know he conquered. The firm patriot there,
"Who made the welfare of mankind his care,
"Though still by faction, vice, and fortune crossed
"Shall find his generous labor was not lost Cato
."
SUCH is the progress of public spirit and the love of virtue, and it is the
only pillar, upon which can safely be erected the happiness of mankind. Without
some play of the locial affections in every society, without some barrier to
oppose the stormy passions of individuals, without some general attachment to
the public welfare, a door is open to ambition and political corruption, The
Assyrian, the Persian and Craesian, the three first universal monarchies,
finally sunk under luxury and corruption; and it is well known that the Romans
did not preserve their liberties for half a century after being debauched by
the luxury of Asia, but fell a prey to its vices, and was at length divided by
the Goths and Vandals.
luxury and selfishness become fashionable vices, and the spirit of the
government is perverted; the public good is neglected, the riches of the state
insecure, the liberty of the subject slighted, and the attempts of the tyrant
made successful by the follies of the people.

WHAT but the want of patriotism that has buried in ruins the mighty empires
of Greece and Rome; that standing armies, the scourge of the innocent, prevail
throughout all Europe; that the pages of history present to our view so
melancholy a picture of the human species, and that America and Britain are
not at this day, running the road to greatness and glory in concert; and what
is it but the want of patriotism that could induce this haughty nation,
divested of every public virtue, of every bosom feeling, of every pretension to
humanity, without apology or pretext to usher a standing army, composed of
vagrants, criminals, and mercenaries, into our peaceful country.

O MY countrymen, it is the want of patriotism, that we are at this time called
to weep over the wanton massacre of innocent men; that this is not the only
house of mourning; that the fields of America have become devoted to war, and
scenes of slaughter familiar to her sons; that our oppressors yet persist in
their destructive system of tyranny, and if their power was equal to their
thirst of blood, with the spirit of ambition, by which they are now directed,
would lead them to destroy and extirpate the wh^ human race. But thanks be to
heaven, that by the fo^e of those virtues which they have discarded, we have
nobly resisted the attempts of these cruel men, and the miseries they have so
profusely dealt out to us, are returning, with additional vengeance, upon their
own heads. The danger of the issue is now past, and if we but retain the same
patriotic ardor, with which we first defended our rights from the grasp of our
enemies, they are every day in our power. We have every thing to hope; they on
the other hand have every thing to fear. Youth, vigor, and the invincible arm
of justice, are on our side: -- The genius of liberty also is our advocate,
who, though persecuted, has never been conquered.

IN our day we are called to see a happy country laid waste at the shrine of
ambition; to experience those seenes of distress which history is filled with,
but experience rivets its lessons upon the mind, and if we resolve with
deliberation, and execute with vigor, we may yet be a free and flourishing
people. Repine not too much at the ravages of war, nor murmur at the
dispensations of Providence. We oftentimes rate our blessings in proportion to
the difficulty of attaining them, and if, without a struggle, we had secured
our liberties, perhaps we should have been less sensible of their value.
Chastisements in youth are not without their advantages; blessings most
commonly spring from them in old age. They lead us to reflect seriously in the
hour of retirement, and to cherish those qualifications, which are frequently
lost in ^he glare of prosperity.

THE important prophecy is nearly accomplished. The rising glory of this
western hemisphere is already announced, and she is summoned to her seat among
the nations. We have publicly declared ourselves convinced of the destructive
tendency of standing armies: we have acknowledged the necessity of public
spirit and the love of virtue, to the happiness of any people, and we profess
to be semible of the great blessings that slow from them. Let us not then act
unworthy of the reputable character we now sustain: like the nation we have
abandoned, be content with freedom in form and tyranny in substance, profess
virtue and practice vice, and convince an attentive world that in this glorious
struggle for our lives and properties, the only men capable of prizing such
exalted privileges, were an illustrious set of heroes, who have sealed their
principles with their blood. Dwell, my fellow-citizens, upon the present
situation of your country. Remember that though our enemies have dispensed with
the hopes of conquering, our land is not entirely freed of them, and should our
resistance prove unsuccessful by our own inattention and inactivity, death will
be far preferable to the voke of bondage.

LET us therefore be still vigilant ^ver our enemies. -- instill into our armies
the righteous cause they protect and support, and let not the soldier and
citizen be distinct characters among us. By our conduct let us convince them It
has ever been thought inconsistent with good policy and even common sense to
commit the defense of a country to men who have no interest in its preservation.

Diod. Lib. 1. p. 67.
, that it is for the preservation of themselves and their country, they are now
sighting; that they, equally with us, are interested in the event, and abandon
them not to the insatiable rapacity of the greedy extortioner.

As a reward for our exertions in the great cause of freedom, we are now in the
possession of those rights and privileges attendant upon the original state of
nature, with the opportunity of establishing a government The true definition
of a free state is where the legislative adberes strictly to the laws of
nature, and calculates every one of its regulations for improving society and
for promoting industry and ^onesty among the people.
for ourselves, independent upon any nation or people upon earth. We have the
experience of ages to copy from, advantages that have been denied to any who
have gone before us. Let us then, my fellow-citizens, learn to value the
blessing. Let integrity of heart, the spirit of freedom and rigid virtue be
seen to actuate every member of the commonwealth. Let not party rage, private
animosities, or self interested motives, succeed that religious attachment to
the public weal which has brought us successfully thus far; for vain are all
the boasted charms of liberty if her greatest votaries are guided by such base
passions. The trial of our patriotism is yet before us, and we have reason to
thank heaven, that its principles are so well known and diffused. Exercise
toward each other the benevolent feelings of friendship, and let that unity of
sentiment, which has shone in the field, be equally animating in our councils.

REMEMBER that prosperity is dangerous; that though successful, we are not
infallible, ^^at like the rest of mankind we are capable of erring. The line of
our happiness may be traced with exactness, and still there may be a difficulty
in persuing it. Let us not forget that our enemies have other arts in store for
our destruction; that they are tempting us into those snares, which, after
successful struggles, proved the ruin of the empires of the East, and let this
sacred maxim receive the deepest impression upon our minds, that if avarice, if
extortion, if luxury and political corruption, are suffered to become popular
among us, civil discord and the ruin of our country will be the speedy
consequence of such fatal vices; but while patriotism is the leading principle,
and our laws are contrived with wisdom, and executed with vigor, while
industry, frugality and temperance, are held in estimation, and we depend upon
public spirit and the love of virtue for our social happiness, peace and
affluence will throw their smiles upon the brow of the individual, our
commonwealth will flourish, our land become the land of liberty, and AMERICA an
asylum for the oppressed.

ORATION, DELIVERED AT BOSTON, MARCH 5, 1781.
BY THOMAS DAWES, JUN.
"Patria cara -- carior Libertas!"
FATHERS, FRIENDS, AND CITIZENS,
AVOIDING apology, even at a time when uncommon propriety might justify it; and
trusting rather to a continuance of the same liberality which has ever noted my
countrymen, I attempt the duties of this solemn anniversary.

AND it is conceived that we shall, in some measure, perform those duties, if
we sketch out some general traits of liberty, and mark the lines of her
progress in particular nations; if we paint the wounds she has suffered from
corruption and despotic force, and from the whole educe such sentiments as
become a brave and free, though injured people.

NUMEROUS as the descriptions are of primeval man, the reflective eye is not
yet weary. We still feel an interest in that archadian state which so well
imitated the world we are looking for. And we shall continue to feel it so long
as nature is pleasing and the heart retains a feature of innocence. Like the
gods It was represented of Marcus Aurelius, that in imitating the gods his
study was to have as few wants as possible.

VID SPECTATOR No. 634.
, our first fathers had but few desires, and those to be satisfied by the works
of virtue. Their passions were as the gales of their own Eden -- enough to give
a spring to good actions -- to keep the waters of life in motion without
inducing storm and whirlwind The passions of every kind, under proper
restraints, are the gentle breezes which keep life from stagnation; but, let
loose, they are the storms and whirbwinds which tear up all before them.

Mrs. BROOK.
. Conversing with divinities, Liberty, sent from above, was their peculiar
inmate: that Liberty, whose spirit, mingling with the nature of man at his
formation, taught him, unlike the other animals, to look upward and hope for a
throne above the stars Rronaque cum spectent animalia caetera terram, Os homini
sublime dedit, caelumque tueri Jussit.

OVID. MET.
: that Liberty who taught him to pluck, with confidence, the fruits of nature;
to pursue the direction of reason upon his heart, and, under tha^ direction, to
acquire, secure, and enjoy all possible happiness, not impeding, but assisting
others in the same privilege No man's social liberty is lessened by another's
enjoying the same.

BOLLAN
. When families, and consequently human wants were afterward multiplied, it was
this same Liberty who, joined with Justice, led the patriarchs to some aged
oak. There, in the copious shade, misunderstandings were explained, and charity
and peace embraced each other. -- Such was the morning of man!

BUT misunderstandings are quarrels in embrio. Satisfaction of one want
originated another. Depravity grew enraptured with strife. The wind was up.
Passion rage^ Brother's blood then smoaked from the ground and cried for
vengeance. Nimrod commenced his prelude to tyranny, and Fame was clamorous with
the deeds of death. -- Liberty heared and trembled -- considered herself an
outcast, and has, on many times since, traveled up and down the world,
forlorn, forsaken, majesty in rags. Nor will she, perhaps, until the millenium
comes, if America does not now retain her, ever command that complete and
permanent homage which is suitable to her nature. The old republics may have
been the most perfect seats of her residence while they lasted, and are often
mustered up from the tomb of empire to witness the adoration which they paid
her. But even there she received so frequent violence that the continuance of
her reign was for the most part precarious; and when even at the summit of her
glory, she was only elevated that her fall might be more astonishing. Having
passed all the degrees of fortune, thank GOD she has found her way to these
remote shores: and, if from effects we may judge, she is well pleased with her
new abode. O cherish the divine inhabitant! O let her not return to the courts
above with a story that shall fire the heavens against us -- that she had
blessings for us, but that we were not prepared to receive them -- that she
could find among us no lasting habitation; but that, like the dove after the
deluge, she was scarce favored with the top of some friendly mountain for a
melancholy moment.

LIBERTY, my friends, is a palladium to the place of her dwelling, a rock and a
sure defense. Wherever she is, every man has something to protect. He knows
what are his riches, and that while he lives himself shall gather them. He
views, with conscious joy, his circumstances. His social affections shoot out
and flourish. Even his prejudices are a source of satisfaction, and among them
local attachment, a fault which leads to the side of patriotism.

SUPPORTED by and tenacious of these fruits of liberty, some little free
states, which the geographer in his map had otherways never noticed, have long
stood uninjured by change, and some of them inaccessible by the greatest
efforts of power. There is now, in a distant quarter of the globe, a living
illustration of this remark. Situate upon a venerable pile of rocks, in Italy,
stands the commonwealth of St. Marino. It was founded by a holy man whose name
it bears, and who fled to this romantic fairyland to enjoy religion and free
air, unpursued by power and the restless spirit of the world. His example was
followed by the pious, the humane, and the lovers of freedom. And these, a
favorite few, who were before scattered up and down through other parts of
Italy; who had lived all their days under arbitrary rule, and whom nature had
secretly taught that there was somewhere a happier institution for man -- these
hurried away to the snowy top of St. Marino: and having there first tasted
those rights which come down from GOD, made it their life's labor to support
and hand them down in purity. There every man finds his prosperity in
submitting to those laws which diffuse equality. There every man fee^s himself
happily liable to be called to the senate or the field: every man divides his
day between alternate labor and the use of arms -- on tip-toe, ready to start
for the prize, the mark of universal emulation -- the commonweal; officious to
promote that interest which is at once the public's and his own. So stands a
constitution informed with the very essence of liberty. It has so stood, while
other neighboring states have been blackened and defaced with frequent
revolution. And we prophesy that 'till the approach of some unforeseen vice --
till some degeneracy unknown to the fires creep upon the sons, St. Marino must
stand admired: as, (...) present circumstance, no prince or potentate, after
^ing down and counting the cost, will ever attempt the impenetrable union of
much so prudence and virtue Many of the facts here mentioned of St. Marino may
be seen in Addison's more complete account of that republic.
.

THE name of Venice now occurs to memory as another modern example of genuine
greatness. The ascendency gained by that single city over the whole Ottoman
power -- the universal panic that struck and pervaded all orders of the Turks
when routed at Dardanelles, and the reasonable fear of approaching dissolution
that reached even to the throne and blasted the ^eart and withered the nerves
of a despot^ these, amazing ^t first, nevertheless appear, when their springs
are laid open, the natural issues of a contest between free agents and slaves
This alludes only to a particular era in the Venetian history.
.

A MORE ancient and perhaps still more brilliant proof of the proportionate
powers of different degrees of liberty, may be gathered from the annals of the
city of Tire. The Lybian madman And the born'd head belied the Lybian god.

POPE.
who thought he had conquered all and wept that he had no more to conquer
Alexander after all his conquests, complained that he had no more worlds to
subdue.

SENECA of a happy life.
-- the invincible son of Jove, before whom principalities and powers had bowed
down their heads as a bulrush -- behold him, with his phalanx, puzzled and
confounded at the walls of Tire. To overrun Asia cost him less labor,
enterprise and valor, than the reduction of this one favorite haunt of liberty
For an illustration of this see Ancient Universal History, vol. ii. page 75 and
on; also -- that part of Newton on the prophesies which relates to Tire, vol. i.
. And perhaps he had never reduced her but for her own falling off from her
pristine wisdom. Her liberty was not in first full vigor, but had received a
shock from corruption introduced with riches. Bribery, pride, and oppression
followed close behind. She was then cast out as profane from the mountain of
GOD Ezekiel xxxiii. 16.
. Tire is beome like the top of a rock -- a place to spread nets upon.

LET us consider the story of Tire as a monument which upon one side shows the
force of excellence, and upon the other the baneful influence of vice; (...)
memento that every state below the sun has, like Achilles of old, some
vulnerable part. A^ not a nation is exempted; and left, in a fond prejudice, we
might exclude our own America, and so induce a fatal security, even America has
received a caveat from heaven, and in her youthful purity has been tempted by
her enemies. With what sort of success tempted we need but remember the
machinations and slight of the most infamous Arnold, and the affecting, though
just separation of the unfortunate Andre.

HAPPY the nation that, apprized of the whole truth, impartially weighs it is
own alloy, and bars, with tenfold adamant, it is gate of danger. But to return,

I HAD cherished some aversion to names grown trite by repetition, and had, on
that account, evaded the ancient republics. But I find the observation just,
that "half our learning is their epitaph." I conceive that the "mossgrown"
columns and broken arches of those once-renowned empires are full with
instruction as were the groves of Lyceum or the school of Plato. Let Greece
then be the subject of a moment's reflection. When liberty fled from the gloom
of Egypt, she sought out and settled at infant Greece -- there disseminated the
seeds of greatness -- there laid the groundwork of republican glory.
Simplicity of manners, piety to the gods, generosity and courage were her
earliest character. "Human nature shot wild and free From Dr. Blair's
differtation upon the works of Ossian.
." Penetrated with a spirit of industry, her sons scarcely knew of relaxation:
even their sports were heroic. Hence that elevated, independent soul, that
contempt of danger, that laudable by^s^ to their country and its manners. Upon
the ba^ks of Eurota flourished her principal state. Frugality of living and an
avarice of time were of the riches of Lacedaemon. Her maxims were drawn from
nature, and one was "that nothing which bore the name of Greek was born for
slavery." From this idea flowed an assistance to her sister states. From a like
idea in her sister states that friendship was returned in grateful measure.
This, had it continued, would have formed the link of empire, the charm that
would have united and made Greece invulnerable. While it lasted, the joint
efforts of her states rendered her a name and a praise through the whole earth.
And here, was it not for the sake of a lesson to my country, I would not only
drop my elogium of Greece, but draw an impervious veil over her remaining
history. Her tenfold luster might at this day have blazed to heaven, had the
union Accuracy has been offended that this example is employed for the American
States -- which resemble each other in constitution and are united in their
last resort; whereas the Greecian were unlike among themselves and professedly
separate. But attention to the history of Greece will discover in the causes of
her fall a lesson sufficiently apposite to our purpose. The anonimous
translator of Tourreil writes as follows: "when Persia, so often vanquished by
the Greecians, despaired of subduing them, her last shift was to divide them;
to which their prosperity opened her a means. Spirits naturally quick and too
licentious, blown up with their frequent victories, could not contain
themselves or govern their good fortune; they abandoned themselves to
jealousies and ambition. -- These divisions ended, at last, in a general
slavery." -- Thomson most beautifully speaks the truth upon the same occasion,
When Greece with Greece
Embroiled with foul contention, fought no more
For common glory and for common weal:
But, false to freedom, sought to quell the free;
Broke the firm hand of (...), and sacred love,
That lent the whole irrefragable force;
And, as around the partial trophy blushed,
Prepared the way for total overthrow.

of her states been held more sacred. But that union of her states, that cement
of her existence once impared -- hear the consequence! the fury of civil-war
blows her accursed clarion. The banners late of conquering freedom now adorn
the triumphs of oppression. Those states which lately stood in mighty concert,
invincible, now breathe mutual jealousy and fall piecemeal a prey to the
common enemy. Attic wisdom, Theban hardihood, Spartan valor, would not combine
to save her. That very army, which Greece had bred and nourished to reduce the
oriental pride, is turned vulture upon her own vitals -- a damnable parricide,
the faction of a tyrant. Behold the great and GOD-like Greece, with all her
battlements and towers about her, borne headlong from her giddy height -- the
shame, the pity of the world.

HAVING attempted some general sketches of liberty, from the dawn of social
life to the fall of national glory, I would be somewhat more particular upon
those qualities to which her triumphs are chiefly indebted.

IN the vile economy of depraved man, there appears an inclination to bestow
upon one part power and affluence, and to impose upon the other debility and
woe. When that inclination is gratified, the majority being slaves, the remains
of freedom are shared among the great; like the triumphal bridge at the
Archipelago, so strangely dignified, that, by a decree of senate, none of the
vulgar were suffered to enjoy it. When that inclination is counterbalanced by
the laws; when the true interests of both those parts are reconciled; when
society is considered as "a public combination for private protection Earlo
Abingdon.
," -- and the governed find their happiness in their submission -- there is the
essence of all-powerful liberty. Not to wire-draw a sentiment already graven
upon the hearts of this audience, it is such a liberty, as that every man who
has once tasted it, becomes a temporary soldier, as soon as it is invaded and
resents any violence offered it, as an attack upon his life -- hence it is
that, in free states, as such, there is no such thing as a perpetual standing
army. For the whole body of the people, ever ready, flock to the general
standard upon emergency, and so preclude the use of that infernal engine. I say
infernal engine, for the tongue " labors, and is at a loss to express," the
hideous and frightful consequences that flow wherever the powers of hell have
procured its introduction. Turkey and Algiers are the delight of its vengeance.
Denmark, once over-swarmed with the brave inhabitants of the north, has
suffered depopulation, poverty, and the heaviest bondage, from the quartering
troops amongst their peasants in time of peace: if it can be called peace, when
robbery, conflagration, and murder are let loose upon the sons of men. Indeed,
it is said that no nation ever kept up an army in time of peace that did not
lose its liberties. I believe it. Athens, Corinth, Syracuse, and Greece in
general were all overturned by that tremendous power: and the same power has
been long operating with other causes to humble the crest of Britain. Let us
hear a passage from Davenant! "If (says he, speaking of standing armies) if
they who believed this eagle in the air frighted all motions toward liberty;
if they who heretofore thought armies in time of peace, and our freedom
inconsistent; if the same men should throw off a whig principle so fundamental,
and thus come to clothe themselves with the detested garments of the tories,
and if all that has been here discoursed on should happen, then will the
constitution of this country be utterly subverted For the whole passage, which
was too lengthy for our purposes vid. the works of Dr. Davenant, corrected by
Whitworth, vol. ii. p. 333. Edition 1771.
." It would exceed the limits of the present occasion to expatiate upon all the
instances wherein the liberties of Britain have in fact suffered according to
the views of Davenant. Suffice it to say that a standing army has been, long
since, virtually engrafted a limb upon her constitution, has frequently
overawed her parliaments, sometimes her elections The election of the Scotch
Peers in the year 1735, and the misconduct of Blackerby and others at the
election of the Westminster members in the year 1741, are instances well known.
Vid. Burgh's politic disq. 2d vol. p. 444 and 473.
, and has carried distraction and massacre The affair of Capt. Porteus at
Edinburgh (vid. London Magazine for 1737, in a variety of pages) and of Capt.
Preston, at Boston, are of themselves sufficient examples.
into different parts of her empire.

THAT standing mercenary troops must sooner or later entail servitude and
misery upon their employers, is an eternal truth that appears from the nature
of things. On the one hand behold an inspired yeomanry, all sinew and soul,
having stepped out and defended their ancient altars, their wives and children,
returning in peace to till those fields which their own arms have rescued. Such
are the troops of every free people "That the yeomanry are the bulwark of a
free people" -- was, if memory serves, in a celebrated extempore speech of the
honorable Samuel Adams, made in the year 1773. The steadiness of that great
Republican to his political creed, evinces that sentiments grounded upon just
data will not easily bend to a partial interest, or accommodate to the changes
of popular opinion.
. Such were the troops who, led on by the patriot Warren, gave the first
home-blow to our oppressors. Such were the troops who, fired by Gates in the
northern woods, almost decided the fate of nations. Such were the troops who,
under the great and amiable Lincoln, sustained a siege in circumstances that
rank him and them with the captains and soldiers of antiquity. Such, we trust,
are the troops, who, inferior number, though headed indeed by the gallant and
judicious Morgan, lately vanquished a chosen veteran band long dedicated to
Mars and disciplined in blood. And such, we doubt not, are the troops who beat
the British legions from the Jersies, and have ever since preserved their
country, under the conduct of that superior man who combines in quality the
unshaken constancy of Cato, the triumphant delay of Fabius, and, upon proper
occasions, the enterprising spirit of Hannibal.

MAY the name of WASHINGTON continue steeled, as it ever has been, to the dark
slandrous arrow that flies in secret. As it ever has been! for who have offered
to eclipse his glory, but have afterward sunk away diminished, and "shorn of
their own beams."

JUSTICE to other characters forbids our stopping to gaze at this constellation
of heroes, and would fain draw forth an eulogium upon all who have gathered
true laurels from the fields of America.

"Thousands, -- the tribute of our praise
"Demand; but who can count the stars of heaven?
"Who speak their influence on this lower world Thomson.
."
WHITHER has our gratitude borne us? let us behold a contrast -- the army of an
absolute prince -- a profession distinct from the citizen and in a different
interest -- a haughty phalanx, whose object of warfare is pay, and who, the
battle over, and if perchance they conquer, return to slaughter the sons of
peace. This is a hard saying. But does not all history press forward to assert
its justice? do not the praetorian bands of tottering Rome now crowd upon the
affrighted memory? do not the embodied guards from Petersburgh and
Constantinople stalk horrid the tools of revolution and murder? to come nearer
home for an example, do we not see the darkened spring of 1770, like the moon
in a thick atmosphere, rising in blood and ushered in by the figure of Britain
plunging her poniard in the young bosom of America? Oh, our bleeding country!
was it for this our hoary fires sought thee through all the elements --
elementa per omina quaerunt
JUY.
, and having found thee sheltering away from the western wave, disconsolate,
cheered thy sad face, and decked thee out like the garden of GOD? time was when
we could all affirm to this gloomy question -- when we were ready to cry out
that our fathers had done a vain thing. -- I mean upon that unnatural right
which we now commemorate; when the fire of Brutus was on many a heart -- when
the strain of Gracchus was on many a tongue. "Wretch that I am, whither shall I
retreat? whither shall I turn me? to the capitol? the capitol swims in my
brother's blood. To my family? there must I see a wretched, a mournful and
afflicted mother Guthrie's Cicero de Oratore.
?" -- Misery loves to brood over its own woes: and so peculiar were the woes of
that night, so expressive the pictures of despair, so various the face of death
"Plurima Mortis Imago."
, that not all the grand tragedies which have been since acted, can crowd from
our minds that era of the human passions, that preface to the general conflict
that now rages. May we never forget to offer a sacrifice to the manes of our
brethren who bled so early at the foot of liberty. Hitherto we have nobly
avenged their fall: but as ages cannot expunge the debt, their melancholy
ghosts still rise at a stated season, and will forever wander in the night of
this noted anniversary. Let us then be frequent pilgrims at their tombs --
there let us profit of all our feelings; and, while the senses are "struck deep
with woe," give wing to the imagination. Hark! even now in the hollow wind I
hear the voice of the departed. O ye, who listen to wisdom and aspire to
immortality, as ye have avenged our blood, thrice blessed! as ye still war
against the mighty hunters of the earth, your names are recorded in heaven!

SUCH are the suggestions of fancy: and having given them their due scope;
having described the memorable Fifth of March as a season of disaster, it would
be an impiety not to consider it in its other relation. For the rising honors
of these states are distant issues, as it were, from the intricate "The ways of
heaven are dark and intricate."

ADDISON'S CATO.
though all-wise Divinity which presided upon that night. Strike that night out
of time, and we quench the first ardor of a resentment which has been ever
since increasing, and now accelerates the fall of tyranny. The provocations of
that night must be numbered among the master-springs which gave the first
motion to a vast machinery, a noble and comprehensive system of national
independence. "The independence of America," says the writer under the
signature of common sense, "should have been considered as dating its era from
the first musket that was fired against her." Be it so! but Massachusetts may
certainly date many of its blessings from the Boston massacre -- a dark hour in
itself, but from which a mavelous light has arisen. From that night
revolution became inevitable, and the occasion commenced of the present most
beautiful form of government. We often read of the original contract, and of
mankind, in the early ages, passing from a state of nature to immediate
civilization. But what eye could penetrate through gothic night and barbarous
fable to that remote period. Such an eye, perhaps, was present, when the Deity
conceived the universe and fixed his compass upon the great deep Not that we
can believe, with some theoretical writers, that individuals met together in a
large plain, entered into an original contract, etc.

But though Society had not its formal beginning from any convention of
individuals, etc. --

And this is what we mean by the original contract of society; which, though
perhaps, in no instance it has been formally expressed, at the first
institution of a state, yet, etc. --

1st Blackstone's Com. p. 47. vid. the whole passage.
.

AND yet the people of Massachusetts have reduced to practice the wonderful
theory. A numerous people have convened in a state of nature, and, like our
ideas of the patriarchs, have deputed a few fathers of the land to draw up for
them a glorious covenant. It has been drawn. The people have signed it with
rapture, and have, thereby, battered, among themselves, an easy degree of
obedience for the highest possible civil happiness. To render that covenant
eternal, patriotism and political virtue must forever blaze -- must blaze at
the present day with superlative luster; being watched, from different motives,
by the eyes of all mankind. Nor must that patriotism be contracted to a single
commonwealth. A combination of the states is requisite to support them
individually. "Unite or die" is our indispensable motto. Every step from it is
a step nearer to the region of death. This idea was never more occasional than
at the present crisis -- a crisis pregnant with fate and ready to burst with
calamity. I allude to that languor which, like a low hung cloud, overshadows a
great part of the thirteen states. That the young, enterprising America, who
stepped out in the cause of humankind, and, no other arm daring, lopped the
branches of wide despotic empire -- that the same America should now suffer a
few insolent bands to ravage her borders with impunity -- that her now tardy
hand should suspend the finishing stroke of resentment, and leave to her
generous allies a labor which her own vigor ought to effect; this must disturb
those, illestrious, who sell in her infant exertions; this must stab the peace
of the dead, however it may affect the hearts of the living. Oh could I bear a
part among the means of awakening virtue -- oh could I call strength to these
feeble lungs and borrow that note which shook the throne of Julius! vain wish!
if the silent suggestions of truth -- if the secret whispers of reason are not
sufficient -- the efforts of human eloquence might be futile, her loudest bolt
might roll unhee led!

THIS is not intended to inspire gloom; but only to persuade to those exertions
which are necessary to life and independence. Let justice then be done to our
country -- let justice be done to our great Leader; and, the only means under
heaven of our salvation, let his army be replenished. That grand duty over, we
will once more adopt an enthusiasm sublime in itself, but still more so as
coming from the lips of a first patriot -- the chief magistrate of this
commonwealth. "I have, said he, a most animating confidence that the present
noble struggle for liberty will terminate gloriously for America." Aspiring to
such a confidence, I see the expressive leaves of fate thrown wide;
Of future times I see the mighty tide,
And, borne triumphant on its buoyant wave,
A god-like number of the great and brave.
The bright, wide ranks of martyrs -- here they rise --
Heroes and patriots move before my eyes:
These crowned with olive, those with laurel come,
Like the first fathers of immortal Rome.
Fly time! oh lash thy fiery steeds away --
Roll rapid wheels and bring the smiling day Sun gallop down the western skies,
Gang soon to bed and quickly rise;
O lash your steeds, post time away,
And haste about the bleezing day.
ALLAN RAMSAY.
,
When these blessed states, another promised land,
Chosen out and fostered by the Almighty hand,
Supreme shall rise -- their crowded shores shall be
The fixed abodes of empire and of liberty.


ORATION, DELIVERED AT BOSTON, MARCH 5, 1782.
BY GEORGE RICHARDS MINOT.
Quid tantum insano juvat indulgere dolori?
-- non haec sine numine divum
VIRG. AEN. 2d. 776. Eveniunt. --
Inde genus durum sumus, experiensque latorum;
E^ documenta damus, qua ^mus origin nati.
OVID METAM. lib. 1. 414.
FATHERS, FRIENDS, AND FELLOW-CITIZENS,
WHEN I consider the important occasion from which this anniversary derives its
origin, and the respectable characters that have exerted themselves to
perpetuate its history, I confess there is an unusual security in my feelings;
since no mistaken effort of mine can injure an institution, founded on so
memorable an event, and supported by names so justly claiming the applause of
posterity.

WHILE I rely, then, upon that honesty of intention, which is itself the best
apology for its errors, permit me to employ the present hour, which your united
voices have annually made sacred to the commemoration of our country's wrong,
in recapitulating the most injurious of her sufferings, among which that on the
tragical fifth of March is by no means the least, and in recounting the
blessings which have followed from measures as really disgraceful to those who
adopted them, as they were intentionally destructive to those against whom they
were levelled.

A NATION falling from those great principles of justice and virtue which had
made her respectable; subverting the boasted improvements of her arts to the
savage purposes of revenge; with venality and corruption entrenched on her
cabinet, affords a spectacle too serious for the amusement of the beholder. He
turns for relief to the annals of those people whose masculine virtues have
obstinately, will he not say wifely, resisted the refinement of a civilized
world. But from the misfortunes of such a nation, much is to be learned. As she
is hurried onwards by the vortex of that immeasurable gulf, in which empires
sink to rise no more, let her serve us as a signal to avoid the first impulse
of its resistless tide.

TO trace Great Britain through the whole progress of her ambition in this
country, would be to step back to a very early period: for, long before she
avowed her system of colonial slavery in the stamp act, the liberties of our
ancestors had endured the most alarming innovations from her throne. Without
cause, and without notice, she had invalidated their charters; laid impositions
upon their trade; attempted a most dangerous influence over their internal
government, by endeavoring to make it independent of the people; -- and all
this with the same confidence, as though her policy and foresight, and not her
persecutions, had settled them on this side the atlantic.

BUT the full display of her despotic policy was reserved to add accumulated
disgrace to the inglorious reign of the third George. Then, intoxicated with
America, she slumbered upon the tottering pillars of her own constitution; the
hand of slavery rocked her as she lay on the giddy height; falsehood gilded her
visions and bound her senses with the enchantment of success; while her blind
ambition alone remained awake, to misdirect the ordinary assistance of fortune,
and to make her fall equally certain and complete.

THE genius of Britain once interred, the first spectre which shot from its
tomb was the stamp act. This promulgation of a scheme so repugnant to the
fundamental principles of the late English constitution, announced the fall,
but did not obliterate the memory of that much respected system, in this
country. America saw that the act bore not a single feature of its reputed
parent, and having detected its illegitimacy, effectually resisted its
operation. But, as though conviction must ever be productive of obstinacy,
Britain desisted not to rend in pieces the charters of her colonies, which
served to remind her of the violence she committed on her own. Her
administration affecting to realize the fables For some of these fanciful
misrepresentations see a vindication of the town of Boston, from many false and
malicious aspersions contained in certain letters written by governor Bernard
and others, published by order of the town, 1769.
of its minions, whose very fears were as subservient to its purposes, as their
hopes were dependant on its venality, and making pretense of trespasses, which,
if real, the laws were open to punish, unmasked its true designs, by quartering
an armed force in this metropolis in a time of peace.

WHERE was the citizen whose indignation did not flash at this undisguised
attack on his liberties? the soldiers pride too grew sanguinary at the idea of
contempt from the people he himself had been taught to despise; and, as though
heaven designed to effect its greatest purposes by the sacrifice of what men
conceive to be the dearest objects of its guardianship, the lives and rights of
citizens were delivered over to the scourge of military rancour.

See Abbe Raynal's list. American revolution p. 65.
VENERABLE patrons of freedom, wherever your country may lie! boast not that
the reason and speculative truths of this our common cause, armed an extensive
world in support of its justice. Turn to the tragedy we commemorate as
imprinted by the bloody hand of the tyrant, and view the highest outrage his
power could commit, or the forbearance of humanity sustain. There hecatombs of
slaughtered citizens were offered at the shrine of cursed ambition. -- What can
we add to their memories through whose wounds their country bled; whose names
are handed round the globe with the great occasion on which they fell; and
whose tomb shall ever stand a basis to the stateliest pillar in the temple of
freedom? heaven has avenged their fall by realizing the prophecy of the
indignant American, as he vented his anguish over their rankling blood. "These
are indeed my country's wounds, Anorimous.
but oh! said he, the deep and tremendous restitutions are at hand; I see them
with a prophetic eye this moment before me. Horrors shall be repaid with
accumulation of horror. The wounds in America shall be succeeded by
deep-mouthed gashes in the heart of Britain! the chain of solemn consequences
is now advancing. Yet, yet my friends, a little while, and the poor, forlorn
one, who has fought and fallen at the gate of her proper habitation, for
freedom, for the common privileges of life, for all the sweet and binding
principles in humanity, for father, son, and brother, for the cradled infant,
the wailing widow, and the weeping maid; yet, yet a little while and she shall
find an avenger. Indignant nations shall arm in her defense. Thrones and
principalities shall make her cause their own, and the fountains of blood that
have run from her exhausted veins shall be answered by a yet fuller measure of
the horrible effusion -- blood for blood; and desolation for desolation; O my
injured country! my massacred America!"

MELANCHOLY scene! the fatal, but we trust the last effect in our country of a
standing army quartered in populous cities in a time of peace.

BRITAIN having thus violated the greatest law nations or individuals can be
held by, to use the language of the ancients, threw a veil over the alters of
her gods whom she was too haughty to appease. Would to heaven, for her sake, we
too had a veil to hide from the eye of justice, the ashes of our desolated
towns, and the tracts which her ravages have imprinted through every quarter of
our once peaceful land.

IF Becaetia on crimes and punishments, p. 10.
"every act of authority of one person over another, for which there is not an
absolute necessity, is tyrannical," and if tyranny justifies resistance, to
have remained inactive, under these injures, had been a kind of political
stoicism, equally inconsistent with the laws of nature and of society. On such
principles arose the memorable declaration of July 1776. -- A declaration which
at once gave life and freedom to a nation; dissolved a monopoly unnatural as
unjust; and extended the embraces of our country to the universe. -- A
declaration which heaven has since ratified by the successful event of her
arms. For, when we consider the number of her victories; the disadvantages
under which they were obtained; with the chain of important consequences which
depended upon the very moment of their decision, who but must acknowledge,
after allowing to our military actors every thing heroism can claim, that there
appeared peculiar marks of more than human assistance? the surrender of entire
armies to a power which they affected to look upon on rather as an object of
their chains than of their swords, was a degree of glory which no enemy that
ever passed the Roman yoke afforded to that republic. Hapless Britain! for even
those whom you injure must pity you, how has fortune added acrimony to her
sickleness, in choosing for a scene of your disgrace that climate where, in a
late war, she so loudly vaunted the invincibility of your arms!

AMERICA once unfettered, nobly relied upon the uprightness of her cause and
the bravery of her sons. But, as though the virtues of one crown were to
apologize for the merciless cruelty of another, a monarch, equally wise in
council as brilliant and powerful in arms, met her in an alliance which must
ever enliven her gratitude; exalt the honor of France; and, we trust too,
promote the interest of both.

AMONG the advantages which have arisen from these great events to the people
of Massachusetts, that of securing their lives, their liberties, and property,
the great object of all civil government, by a constitution of their own
framing, is not to be accounted the least. Dismembered from a government, which
had long stood by the exactest balance of its powers, even against the
corruption of its ministers, they found themselves accustomed to principles,
which age had stamped with authority, and patriots sealed with their blood. The
cause of their separation had taught them the avenues through which despotism
insinuates itself into the community, and pointed out the means of excluding
it. Under these circumstances they produced a system which, we trust,
experience will evince to be an improvement Is it not so in the equality of
representation and mode of election?
upon the best mankind have hitherto admired. The quick return of all delegated
power to the people from whom it is made to spring, and the check which each
part of the government has upon the excesses of the other, seem to warrant us
in placing on it all the confidence human laws can deserve. But,

LET us not trust to laws: an uncorrupted people can exist without them; a
corrupted people cannot long exist with them, or any other human assistance.
They are remedies which at best always disclose and confess our evils. The body
politic, once distempered, they may indeed be used as a crutch to support it
awhile, but they can never heal it. Rome, when her bravery conquered the
neighboring nations, and united them to her own empire, was free from all
danger within, because her armies, being urged on by a love for their country,
would as readily suppress an internal as an external enemy. In those times she
made no scruple to throw out her kings who had abused their power. But when her
subjects fought not for the advantage of the commonwealth; when they thronged
to the Asiatic wars for the spoils they produced, and preferred prostituting
the rights of citizenship upon any barbarian that demanded them, to meeting him
in the field for their support; then Rome grew too modest to accept from the
hands of a dictator those rights, which she ought to have impaled him for
daring to invade. No alteration in her laws merely, could have effected this.
Had she remained virtuous, she might as well have expelled her dictators as her
kings. But what laws can save a people who, for the very purpose of enslaving
themselves, choose to consider them rather as councils which they may accept or
refuse, than as precepts which they are bound to obey? A conscience more
scrupulous than it is probable Sylla ever had would be apt to imagine this
general disposition of the people wiped away the guilt of enslaving them from
any hand that effected it. If in any case, it is in this that we may apply the
maxim volen^ mon fit injuria.
with such a people they must ever want a sanction and be contemned. -- Virtue,
in a republic, is a most simple thing; it is a ^^ve for the republic; it is a
sensation, and not a consequence of acquired knowledge: a sens^tion that may be
felt by the meanest as well as by the highest person in the state.

Spirit of laws, book 5th. chap. 2d.
Virtue and long life seem to be as intimately allied in the political as in
the moral world: she is the guard which providence has set at the gate of
freedom.

TRUE it is, when the nature and principles of a government are pure, we have a
right to suppose it at the farthest possible distance from falling. But when we
confider that those countries The politic Greeks who lived under a popular
government, who knew no other support but virtue. The modern inhabitants of
that country are entirely taken up with manufactures, commerce, finances,
riches, and luxury.

Spirit of laws, book 3d. chap. 3d.
in which the wisest institutions of republican governments have been
established, now exhibit the strongest instances of apostasy, we cannot but see
the necessity of vigilance. Commerce, which makes perhaps, the greatest
distinction between the old world and the modern, having raised new objects for
our curiosity, habitual indulgence has at length made them necessary to our
infirmities. Thus effeminated, can we hope to exceed the rigor of their
principles, who even forbad the mentioning of a foreign custom, and whose
sumptuary laws are held up in our age as objects of astonishment? Such nations
have mouldered away, an uncontrovertable proof, that the best constructed human
governments, like the human body, tend to corruption; but as with that too,
there are not wanting remedies to procrastinate their final decay.

AMONG the causes of their fall there are none more common or less natural than
that of their own strength. Continual wars making a military force necessary,
the habit of conquest once acquired and other objects being wanting, history is
not without For a complete collection of these, I beg leave to refer to the 3d
book of the political disquisitions.
instances of its turning itself inwards, and knowing as it were, upon its own
bowels. Happy are we in the frequent change of our soldiery The design of
society being to protect the weak against the more powerful, whatever tends to
taking away the distinction between them, and to putting all its members upon
the same level, must be consonant to its first principles. This was an object
with the old republics; Rome obliged her citizens to serve in the field ten
years, between the age of sixteen years and forty-seven.

Vid. Reflections on the rise and fall of (...) Romans Emp. c. 10 last note.
(...).
. This seems to be the best antidote against such an evil. I^ prevents that
lethargy which would be a symptom of dea^ in the citizen at home; and checks
that immoderation in the soldier which is apt to mislead his virtues in the
field. By this exchange of their qualities they mutually warrant happiness to
each other, and freedom to their country.

AMERICA once guarded against herself, what has she to fear? her natural
situation may well inspire her with confidence. Her rocks and her mountains are
the chosen temples of liberty. The extent of her climate, and the variety of
its produce, throw the means of her greatness into her own hands, and insure
her the traffic of the world. Navies shall launch from her forests, and her
bosom be found stored with the most precious treasures of nature. May the
industry of her people be a still surer pledge of her wealth. -- The union of
her states too is founded upon the most durable principles: the similarity of
the manners, religion, and laws of their inhabitants, must ever support the
measure which their common injuries originated. Her government, while it is
restrained from violating the rights of the subject, is not disarmed against
the public foe.

COULD Junius Brutus, and his colleagues, have beheld her republic erecting
itself on the disjointed neck of tyranny, how would they have wreathed a laurel
for her temples as eternal as their own memories! America! fairest copy of such
great originals! be virtuous, and thy reign shall be as happy as durable, and
as durable as the pillars of the world you have enfranchised.

ORATION, DELIVERED AT BOSTON, MARCH 5, 1783.
BY DR. THOMAS WELSH.
Non tali auxilio, nec defensoribus istis
Tempus eget:
VIRG. Aeneid, Lib. 2. Lin. 521.
FRIENDS AND FELLOW-CITIZENS,
INVITED to this place by your choice, and recollecting your well-known
^ndulgence, I feel myself already possessed of your candor, while I "impress
upon your minds, the ruinous tendency of standing armies being placed in free
and populous cities in a time of peace."

A FIELD here presents annually traversed by those, who, by their sagacity,
have discovered, and by their voices declared, in strains of manly eloquence,
the source from whence those fatal streams originate, which, like the
destroying pestilence, have depopulated kingdoms and laid waste the fairest
empires.

IN prosecution of the subject, I presume I shall not offend a respectable part
of my audience, I mean the gentlemen of the American patriot army I should not
have neglected so favorable an opening to have shown my poor ^pects to the
character of the Commander in Chief of the American army, but from a
conciousness of inability to add to a name, more durable than marble, which
will outlive the assaults of envy and the ravages of time.
, -- An army whose glory and virtues have been long since recorded in the
temple of fame -- her trumpet has sounded their praises to distant nations --
her wing shall bear them to latest ages.

WHEN the daring spirit of ambition, or the boundless lust of domination, has
prompted men to invade the The natural state of nations with respect to each
other, is certainly that of society and peace. Such is the natural and
primitive state of one man with respect to another; and whatever alteration
mankind may have made in regard to their original state, they cannot, without
violating their duty, break in upon that state of peace and society, in which
nature has placed them, and which, by her laws, she has strongly recommended to
their observance.

PURLAMAQUI, Part 4. Chap. 1. Sect. 4.
natural peaceful state of society, it is among the first emotions of the
heart, to repel the bold invader. Men, assembled from such motives, having
expelled the enemy from their borders, re-assuming the pruning-hook and the
spade, for the sword and the spear, have, in all ages, been called the saviors
of their country.

A MILITIA is the most natural defense of a free state, from invasion and
tyranny: they who compose the militia, are the proprietors of the soil; and who
are so likely to defend it, as they who have received it from their ancestors
-- acquired it by their labor -- or obtained it by their valor? every free man
has within his breast the great essentials of a soldier, and having made the
use of arms familiar, is ever ready for the field. And where is the tyrant who
has not reason to dread an army of freemen?

IN the battle of Naseby Vict. Political Disquisitions.
, in the days of Cromwell, the number of forces was equal on both sides; and
all circumstances equal. In the parliament's army only nine officers had ever
seen actual service, and most of the soldiers were London apprentices, drawn
out of the city two months before. In the king's army there were about a
thousand officers who had served abroad, yet the veterans were routed by the
apprentices.

ROME advanced on the zenith of glory and greatness, and conquered all nations
in the times of the republic, while her army was an unpaid militia.

THE Greecians carried on their wars against Persia by means of their militia;
and at last beat the numerous mercenary armies, and subdued the vast empire of
Persia.

THE deeds of valor performed by my own countrymen, and in our day, are
numerous and recent, and point out, as with a sunbeam, that the militia is to
a free country a lasting security.

YOU will now permit me to consider the condition and consequences of a
standing army.

MEN who inlist themselves for life soon lose the feelings of citizens. To
command and be commanded, excites an idea of servitude and dependence, which
degrades the mind, and in a social view destroys the character of a free agent
Moore in his view of society and manners in Europe, observes -- "As to the
common soldiers, the leading idea of the discipline is, to reduce them, in many
respects, to the nature of machines; that they may have no volition of their
own, but be actuated solely by that of their officers; that they may have such
a superlative dread of their officers, as annihilates all fear of the enemy;
that they may move forward when ordered, without deeper reasoning or more
concern than the firelocks they carry along with them."
.

THEY who follow the profession of arms conceive themselves exempted from the
useful occupations of life, and thence contract a habit of dissipation;
soldiers inured to exercise and labor in their duty, at leisure to roam, will
not be wholly inactive in a city, where the means of gratification abound;
pursuing the objects of pleasure, with the same zeal with which they engaged in
the toils and enterprises of the field, whole armies have, too late, found
themselves destroyed by the dissolving power of luxury.

WE have a remarkable instance of this, my fellow-citizens, in the army of
Hanibal, which, having withstood the greatest hardships, and which the most
dreadful dangers had never been able to discourage, in winter quarters, at
Capua, was entirely conquered by plenty and pleasures Vid. Livy's Roman history
for an account of the battles, susserings, and almost incredible march and
destruction of the renowned Carthaginian general and his army.
.

THE effects of luxury, though productive of the greatest misfortunes to an
army stationed in a city, are by no means confined to that class of men. The
great body of the people, smote by the charms and blandishments of a life of
ease and pleasure, fall easy victims to its fascinations. The city, reared by
the forming hand of industry, soon feels the symptons of dissolutions -- the
busy merchant now no more extends his commerce! the mechanic throws aside his
chissel; the voice of riot succeeds to the sound of the hammer, and the
midnight revel to the vigils of labor.

WHEN a large respectable standing army has been stationed in a city, commanded
by officers of known patriotism, who have taught those under their orders, to
interchange the kind and friendly offices of life; citizens, conceiving
themselves secured from domestic broils and the danger of invasion from abroad,
imperceptibly relax in their attention to mi^itary exercises, and may thus be
exposed as a tempting bait to an aspiring despot; besides, a people who have
made themselves respectable by their personal attention to their own defense,
neglecting their militia, may be insulted by those neighbors who had formerly
been accustomed to revere their power.

WHEN communities have so far mistaken their interest as to commit the defense
of every thing valuable in life to a standing army, the love of ease will
scarcely permit them to reassume the unpleasing task of defending themselves.

AT the conclusion of a long and bloody war, the liberberties of a people are
in real danger from the admission of troops into a free city. When an army has
suffered every hardship to which the life of a soldier is peculiarly incident,
and has returned crowned with the well-carned laurels of the field, they justly
expect to be received into the open arms, and with the applauses of those for
whom they have fought, and in whose cause they have bled; in a situation like
this, whole communities, in transport of gratitude, have weakly sacrificed at
the shrine of a deliverer, every thing for which their armies have fought, or
their heroes of bled.

NATIONS the most renowned among the ancients for their wisdom and their
policy, have viewed the army with an eye of attentive jealousy; the Romans
characterized for personal bravery In the battles fought in our age, every
single soldier has very little security and confidence except in the multitude;
but among the Romans, every individual, more robust and of greater experience
in war, as well as more inured to the fatigues of it, than the enemy, relied
upon himself only. He was naturally endued with courage, or in other words,
with that virtue which a sensibility of our own strength inspires.

MONTESQUIZU.
, trembled for their country, at the sight of one hundred and fifty lictors or
peace-officers, ^s a guard of the decemviri -- Such an army was dangerous, they
said, to liberty. These politic people knew the prevailing propeusity in all
mankind to power. The history of later times has abundantly justified the
wisdom of their jealousies. All parts of Europe which have been enslaved, have
been enslaved by armies. No nation can be said to enjoy internal liberty which
admits them in a time of peace. When a government has a body of standing troops
at command, it is easy to form pretensions for the distribution of them, so as
to effect their own purposes; when a favorite point is to be carried, a
thousand soldiers may convey irresistible argument, and compel men to act
against their feelings, interest, and country.

SUCH were the arguments employed by Philip the second, of Spain, to persuade
the inhabitants of the Netherlands to relinquish their liberties, their
property, and their religion; the progress of these dreadful measures produced
scenes of massacre and devastation, the recital of which must excite exquisite
horror in the most savage breast.

ONE of the commanders of the army under the duke of Alva, demanding a pass a
pass through the city of Rotterdam The whole affair is related at length (...)
Watson's hist, of the Low Countries, to which the reader is referred.
, was at first refused, but assuring the magistrates that he meant only to lead
his troops through the town, and not to lodge them in it, they consented to
suffer the companies to pass through one by one: no sooner had the first
company entered the city, than the officer, without regard to his engagements,
ordered them to keep the gates open until the other companies should arrive:
one of the citizens, endeavoring to shut the gate, was killed by his own hand;
his troops, eager to follow his example, drew their swords, and, giving a loose
to their fury, spread themselves over the town, and butchered more than three
hundred of the inhabitants.

THIS was among the first events of that war which rendered the Netherlands a
scene of horror and devastation for more than thirty years; but which, whilst
it proved the source, on many occasions, of extreme distress to the people,
called forth an exertion of virtue, spirit, and intrepidity, which seldom
occurs in the annals of history. Never was there a more unequal contest than
between the inhabitants of the Low Countries and the Spanish m^narch; and never
was the issue of any dispute more contrary to what the parties had reason to
expect.

UNDER similar circumstances, my fellow-citizens, a standing army was
introduced and stationed in this city; which produced the scene we now
commemorate; and which I know you cannot all remember; but let the stranger
hear and let the listening youth be told, -- that on the evening of the fifth
of March, seventeen hundred and seventy, under the orders of a mercenary
officer, murder, with her polluted weapons, stood trampling in the blood of our
slaughtered countrymen; imagination cannot well conceive what mingling passions
then convulsed the soul and agonized the heart! -- those pangs were sharp
indeed which ushered into life, a naetion! -- like Hercules Hercules is
represented when very young, engaged in the most courageous and ^angerous
enterprises -- such as encountering lions, squeezing them to death against his
own breast, or tearing their jaws asunder; sometimes when an infant, grasping
serpents with a little smile upon his cheek, as if he was pleased with their
fine colors and their motions, and killing them by his strong gripe with so
much case that he scarce deigns to look upon them.
she rose brawny from the cradle, the snakes of Britain yet hung hissing round
her horrible, and fell! -- at her infant voice they hasted -- at the dread of
her rising arm they fled away.

AMERICA separated from the nations of Europe by the mighty ocean, and from
Britain by the mightier hand of heaven, is acknowledged an independent nation;
she has now to maintain her dignity and importance among the kingdoms of the
earth. May she never be seduced from her true interest, by sub^le intrigue,
mistaken policy, or misguided ambition! but, considering her own condition, may
she follow the maxims of wisdom, which are better than the weapons of war!

IT has become fashionable in Europe, to keep a large standing army in times of
peace. The people of Great Britain have professed their aversion to the
establishment, yet have suffered it to gain ground upon the idea of preserving
the balance of power. This custom is so deeply rooted and so firmly
established, that nothing short of annihilation of the governments where they
have been so long tolerated can abolish the institution.

FROM the situation and vicinity of the nations of Europe with respect to each
other, the different extent of territory rendering it more difficult to repel
an invasion from some countries than others, for the celerity of defense and
the more complete security of extensive countries; from these and similar
considerations, even wise politicians have defended the propriety of the
establishment; but let their motives be ever so pure, the ambitious and the
aspiring have views extensive and ruinous; they have felt the charms and
experienced the utility of this engine, and are not wanting in their exertions
to support its existence.

OUR fortunate alliances in Europe have secured us from any danger of invasion
from thence; this security is der^ved from considerations of the best policy
and true intered of the allied powers.

THE new and glorious treaty, concluded, since the last anniversary, with the
States of Holland, whose manners, laws religion, and bloody contes^ for
freedom, so nearly resemble our own If there was ever among nations a natural
alliance, one may be formed between the two republics. The first planters of
the four northern states found in this country an a^ylum from persecution, and
resided here from the year one thousand six hundred and eight, to the year one
thousand six hundred and twent^, twelve years preceding their migration. They
ever entertained and have transmitted to posterity, a grateful remembrance of
that protection and hospitality, and especially of that religious liberty they
found here, having sought it in vain in England.

"The first inhabitants of two other states, New York and New Jersey, were
immediate emigrants from this nation, and have transmitted their religion,
language, customs, manners and character: and America in general, until her
connexions with the house of Bourbon, has (...) considered this nation as her
first ^end in Europe, whose ^y, and the great characters it exhibits, in the
various arts ^ace, as well as achievements of war by sea and land, have ^en
particularly, studied, admired, and imita^ in every state.

"A similitude of religion, although it i^ not deemed so essential in this as
in former ages, to the alliance of (...), is still, as it over will be thought,
a desirable circumstance. Now it may be said with truth, that there are no two
(...), whose worship, ^trine and d^scipline, are more alike than those of the
two republics. In this particular therefore, as far as it is of weight, an
alliance would be perfectly natural.

"A similarity in the forms of government, is usually considered as another
circumstance which renders alliances natural: and although the constitutions of
the two republics are not perfectly alike, there is yet analogy enough between
them, to make a connection easy in this respect.

"The originals of the two republics are so much alike, that the history of one
seems but a transcript from that of the other: so that every Dutchman
instructed in the subject, must pronounce the American revolution just and
necessary, or pass a censure upon the greatest actions of his immortal
ancestors: actions which have been approved and applauded by mankind, and
justified by the decision of heaven.

"If therefore an analogy of religion, government, original manners, and the
most extensive and lasting commercial interests, can form a ground and an
invitation to political connexions, the subscriber flatters himself, that in
all these particulars, the union is so obviously natural, that there has seldom
been a more distinct designation of Providence to any two distant nations to
unite themselves together."

Extracts from the memorial to their High Mightinesses, the States General of
the United Provinces of the Low Countries, by that great statesman and patriot,
his Excellency JOHN ADAMS, Esquire Minister Plenipotentiary at the Hague, dated
Leyden, April 19, 1781.


, affords a happy presage of lasting security. We may add, the situation of our
country, with respect to other dominions, is so secured by nature, that no one
can feign pretensions sufficiently plausible to convince the people of America,
of the propriety of supporting a standing army in a time of peace; whilst
memory retains the exploits of our brave citizens in the field who have joined
the standard of freedom, and successfully defended her injured altars and her
devoted rites. The community will be assured, that upon the basis of a
well-regulated militia, an army may be raised upon all future occasions
sufficient to oppose the most formidable invaders.

HERE, were it pertinent, I would express a confidence; that when the army
shall be disbanded, justice, with impartial scale, will distribute due rewards
to those who have jeoparded their lives in the high places of the field.

EVERY American is conscious of the effects produced by the knowledge of the
people in the use of arms, and from that experience need not be exhorted to an
attention to their militia.

WHEN we consider our own prosperous condition, and view of the state of that
nation, of which we were once a part, we even weep over our enemy, when we
reflect that she was once great; that her navies rode formidable upon the
ocean; that her commerce was extended to every harbor of the globe; that her
name was revered wherever it was known; that the wealth of nations was
deposited in her island; and that America was her friend, but by means of her
standing armies, an immense continent is separated from her kingdom A doubt may
be entertained of the truth of this assertion; but we can hardly believe that
it would have entered into the head of a minister or parliament, to collect a
militia in Great Britain to enforce their acts in America; so that in our view,
had the army been disbanded at the end of the last war, America and Britain a^
this moment would have been parts of the same kingdom.
, and that once-mighty empire, ready to fall an untimely victim, to her own mad
policy.

NEAR eight full years have now rolled away, since America has been cast off
from the bosom and embraces of her pretended parent, and has set up her own
name among the empires. The assertions of so young a country, were at first
beheld with dubious expectation; and the world were ready to stamp the name of
rashness or enterprise according to the event.

BUT a manly and fortunate beginning, soon ensured the most generous
assistance. The renowned and the ancient Gauls came early to the combat -- wise
in council -- mighty in battle! then with new fury raged the storm of war! the
seas were crimsoned with the richest blood of nations! America's chosen legions
waded to freedom through rivers dyed with the mingled blood of her enemies and
her citizens; through fields of carnage, and the gates of death!

AT length independence is ours -- the halcyon day appears! ^o from the east I
see the harbinger, and from the train, it is peace herself; and as attendants,
all the gentle arts of life: commerce displays her snow-white navies fraught
with the wealth of kingdom^; plenty from her copious horn, pours forth her
richest gifts. Heaven commands! the east and the west give up, and the north
keeps not back! all nations meet! and beat their swords into ploughshares and
their spears into pruning hooks, and resolve to learn war no more. --
Henceforth shall the American wilderness blossom as the rose, and every man
shall sit under his vine and under his fig tree, and none shall make him afraid.

FINIS.
AN ORATION, DELIVERED AT THE KING'S-CHAPEL IN BOSTON, APRIL 8, 1776, ON THE
RE-INTERMENT OF THE REMAINS OF THE LATE MOST WORSHIPFUL GRAND-MASTER JOSEPH
WARREN, ESQUIRE; PRESIDENT OF THE LATE CONGRESS OF THIS COLONY, AND
MAJOR GENERAL OF THE MASSACHUSETTS FORCES WHO WAS SLAIN IN THE BATTLE OF
BUNKER'S-HILL, JUNE 17, 1775.

BY PEREZ MORTON, M. M.

BOSTON, PRINTED BY PETER EDES, IN STATE-STREET. M,DDC,LXXXV.

AN ORATION.
ILLUSTRIOUS RELICS!
WHAT tidings from the grave? why have thou left the peaceful mansions of the
tomb, to visit again this troubled earth! art thou the welcome messenger of
peace! art thou risen again to exhibit thy glorious wounds, and through them
proclaim salvation to thy country! or art thou come to demand that last debt of
humanity, to which your rank and merit have so justly entitled you -- but which
has been so long ungenerously withheld! and art thou angry at the barbarous
usage? be appeased, sweet ghost! for though thy body has long laid
undistinguished among the vulgar dead, scarce privileged with earth enough to
hide it from the birds of prey; though not a kindred tear was dropped, though not
a friendly sigh was uttered, over thy grave; and though the execration of an
impious foe, were all thy funeral knells; yet matchless patriot! thy memory has
been embalmed in the affections of thy grateful countrymen; who, in their
breast, have raised eternal monuments to thy bravery!

BUT let us leave the beloved remains, and contemplate for a moment, those
virtues of the man, the exercise of which have so deservedly endeared him to
the honest among the great, and the good among the humble.

IN the private walks of life, he was a pattern for mankind. -- The tears of
her, to whom the world is indebted for so much virtue, are silent heralds of
his filial piety; while his tender offspring, in lisping out their father's
care, proclaim his parential affection: and an ADAMS can witness with how much
zeal he loved where he had formed the sacred connection of a friend: -- their
kindred souls were so closely twined, that both felt one joy, both one
affliction. In conversation he had the happy talent of addressing his subject
both to the understanding and the passions; from the one he forced conviction,
from t^ other he stole assent.

HE was blessed with a complacency of disposition, and equanimity of temper,
which peculiarly endeared him to his friends; and which, added to the
deportment of the gentleman, commanded reverence and esteem even from his
enemies.

SUCH was the tender sensibility of his soul, that he need but see distress to
feel it, and contribute to its relief. He was deaf to the calls of interest
even in the course of his profession: and wherever he beheld an indigent
object, which claimed his healing skill, he administered it, without even the
hope of any other reward than that which resulted from the reflection of having
so far promoted the happiness of his fellow-men.

IN the social departments of life, practicing upon the strength of that
doctrine, he used so earnestly to inculcate himself, that nothing so much
conduced to enlighten mankind, and advance the great end of society at large,
as the frequent interchange of sentiments, in friendly meetings; we find him
constantly engaged in this eligible labor; but on none did he place so high a
value, as on that most honorable of all detached societies, THE FREE AND
ACCEPTED MASONS: into this fraternity he was early initiated; and after having
given repeated proofs of a rapid proficiency in the arts, and after evidencing
by his life, the professions of his lips -- finally, as the reward of his
merit, he was commissioned the most worshipful GRANDMASTER of all the ancient
Masons, through North America. -- And you brethren, are living testimonies,
with how much honor to himself, and benefit to the craft universal, he
discharged the duties of his elevated trust; with what sweetened accents he
courted your attention, while, with wisdom, strength, and beauty, he instructed
his lodges in the secret arts of Freemasonry; what perfect order and decorum he
preserved in the government of them; and in all his conduct, what a bright
example he set us, to live within compass, and act upon the square.

WITH what pleasure did he silence the wants of poor and pennyless brethren;
yea, the necessitous every where, though ignorant of the mysteries of the
craft, from his benefactions, felt the happy effects of that institution which
is founded on faith, hope, and charity. And the world may cease to wonder, that
he so readily offered up his life, on the altar of his country, when they are
told, that the main pillar of masonry, is the LOVE OF MANKIND.

THE fates, as though they would reveal, in the person of our GRAND-MASTER,
those mysteries, which have so long lain hid from the world, have suffered him,
like the great master builder in the temple of old, to fall by the hands of
Ruffians, and be again raised in honor and authority: we searched in the field
for the murdered son of a widow, and we four him, by the turf and the twig,
buried on the brow of a hill, though not in a decent grave. -- And though we must
again commit his body to the tomb, yet out breasts shall be the burying spot of
his masonic virtues, and there -- "An adamantine monument we'll rear,"
"With this inscription," Masonry "lies here." --


IN public life, the sole object of his ambition was, to acquire the conscience
of virtuous enterprises; amor patriae was the spring of his actions, and men's
conscia recti was his guide. -- And on this security he was, on every occasion,
ready to sacrifice his health, his interest, and his ease, to the sacred calls
of his country. When the liberties of America were attacked, he appeared an
early champion in the contest; and though his knowledge and abilities would
have insured riches and preferment (could he have stooped to prostitution) yet
he nobly withstood the fascinating charm, tossed Fortune back her plume, and
pursued the inflexible purpose of his soul, in guiltless competence.

HE sought not the airy honors of a name, else, many of those publications,
which in the early period of our controversy served to open the minds of the
people, had not appeared anonymous. In every time of eminent danger, his
fellow-citizens flew to him for advice; like the orator of Athens, he gave it,
and dispelled their fears: -- twice did they call him to the rostrum, to
commemorate the massacre of their brethren; and from that instance, in
persuasive language, he taught them, not only the dangerous tendency, but the
actual mischief, of stationing a military force, in a free city, in a time of
peace. -- They learnt the profitable lesson, and penned it among their
grievances.

BUT his abilities were too great, his deliberations too much wanted, to be
confined to the limits of a single city, and at a time when our liberties were
most critically in danger from the secret machinations and open assaults of our
enemies, this town, to their lasting honor, elected him to take a part in the
councils of the state. -- And with what faithfulness he discharged the
important delegation, the neglect of his private concerns, and his unwearied
attendance on that ^etrustment, will sufficiently testify: and the records of
that virtuous assembly will remain the testimonials of his accomplishments as a
statesman, and his integrity and services as a patriot, through all posterity.

THE Congress of our colony could not observe so much virtue and greatness
without honoring it with the highest mark of their favor; and by the free
suffrages of that uncorrupted body of freemen, he was soon called to preside in
the senate -- where by his daily counsels and exertions, he was constantly
promoting the great cause of general liberty.

BUT when he found the tools of oppression were obstinately bent on violence;
when he found the vengeance of the British court must be glutted with blood; he
determined, that what he could not effect by his eloquence or his pen, he would
bring to purpose by his sword. And on the memorable 19th of April, he appeared
in the field, under the united characters of the general, the soldier, and the
physician. Here he was seen animating his countrymen to battle, and fighting by
their side, and there he was found administering healing comforts to the
wounded. And when he had repelled the unprovoked assaults of the enemy, and had
driven them back into their strongholds, like the virtuous chief of Rome, he
returned to the senate, and presided again at the councils of the fathers.

WHEN the vanquished foe had rallied their disordered army, and by the
acquisition of fresh strength, again presumed to fight against freemen: our
patriot, ever anxious to be where he could do the most good, again put off the
senator, and, in contempt of danger, flew to the field of battle, where, after
a stern, and almost victorious resistance, ah! too soon for his country! he
sealed his principles with his blood -- then -- " Freedom wept, that MERIT
could not save,"
But WARREN's manes "must enrich the grave."
Enrished indeed! and the heights of Charlestown shall be more memorable for
thy fall, than the Plains of Abraham are for that of the hero of Britain. For
while he died contending for a single country, you fell in the cause of virtue
and mankind.

THE greatness of his soul shone even in the moment of death; for, if fame
speaks true, in his last agonies he met the insults of his barbarous foe with
his wonted magninimity, and with the true spirit of a soldier, frowned at their
impotence.

IN fine, to complete the great character -- like HARRINGTON he wrote -- like
CICERO he spoke -- like HAMPDEN he lived -- and like WOLF he died.

AND can we, my countrymen, with indifference behold so much valor laid
prostrate by the hand of British tyranny! and can we ever grasp that hand in
affection again? are we not yet convinced "that he who hunts the woods for
prey, the naked and untutored indian, is less a savage than the king of
Britain"! have we not proofs, wrote in blood, that the corrupted nation, from
whence we sprang, (though there may be some traces of their ancient virtue
left) are stubbornly fixed on our destruction! and shall we still court a
dependence on such a state? still contend for a connection with those who have
forfeited not only every kindred claim, but even their title to humanity!
forbid it the spirit of the brave MONTGOMERY! forbid it the spirit of immortal
WARREN! forbid it the spirits of all our valiant countrymen! who fought, bled,
and died for far different purposes: and who would have thought the purchase
dear indeed! to have paid their lives for the paltry boon of displacing one set
of villains in power, to make way for another. No. They contended for the
establishment of peace, liberty, and safety to their country; and we are
unworthy to be called their countrymen, if we stop at any acquisition short of
this.

Now is the happy season, to seize again those rights, which, as men, we are by
nature entitled to, and which, by contract, we never have and never could have
surrendered: -- but which have been repeatedly and violently attacked by the
king, lords and commons of Britain. Ought we not then to disclaim forever, the
forfeited affinity; and by a timely amputation of that rotten limb of the
empire, prevent the mortification of the whole? ought we not to listen to the
voice of our slaughtered brethren, who are now proclaiming aloud to their
country -- Go tell the king, and tell him from our spirits,
That you and Britons can be friends no more;
Tell him to you all tyrants are the same:
Or if in bonds, the never conquered soul
Can feel a pang, more keen than slavery's self,
It Is where the chains that crush you into dust,
Are forged by hands, from which you hoped for freedom.


YES, we ought, and will, -- we will assert the blood of our murdered hero
against thy hostile oppressions, O shameless Britain! and when "thy cloud-cap'd
towers, thy gorgeous palaces" shall by the teeth of pride and folly, be
levelled with the dust -- ^d when thy glory shall have faded like the western
sunbeam -- the name and the virtues of WARREN shall remain immortal.

A POEM, etc.
THE following masterly piece of original composition is from the pen of JAMES
ALLEN, of Boston, in the state of Massachusetts, Esquire and was written when his
feelings, like those of every other freeborn American, were all alive at the
inhuman murders of our countrymen, in the streets of that town, on the evening
of the fifth of March, 1770, and which gave birth to several of the preceding
orations, in which that act of British violence and brutality is, in strong
colors* depicted. Although this poem is now re-published without the previous
knowledge or consent of the author, the printer hopes he shall not incur the
author's displeasure hereby, especially when it is made known to him, that the
present re-publication is at the request of several of the printer's customers,
who are desirous to convince the British that true classical English poetry,
may be produced in other parts of the world, as well as in their own little
island.

FROM realms of bondage and a tyrant's reign,
Our GOD-like father's bore no slavish chain,
To Pharaoh's face the inspired Patriarchs stood,
To seal their virtue, with a martyr's blood:
But lives so precious, such a sacred seed,
The source of empires, heaven's high will decreed;
He snatched the SAINT from Pharaoh's impious hand,
And bade his chosen seek this distant land:
Then to these climes the illustrious exiles sped,
'Twas freedom prompted, and the Godhead led.
Eternal woods the virgin soil defaced,
A dreary desert, and an howling waste;
The haunt of tribes no pity taught to spare,
And they opposed them with remorseless war,
But heaven's right arm led forth the faithful train,
The guardian Godhead swept the insidious plain,
'Till the scoured thicket amicable stood,
Nor dastard ambush, trench'd the dusky wood:
Our sires then earned no more, precarious bread,
Nor midst alarms their frugal meals were spread,
Fair boding hopes inured their hands to toil,
And patriot virtue nursed the thriving soil,
Nor scarce two ages have their periods run,
Since over their culture smiled the genial sun;
And now what states extend their fair domains,
Over fleecy mountains and luxuriant plains;
Where happy millions their own fields possess,
No tyrant awes them, and no lords oppress;
The hand of rule divine discretion guides,
And white-rob'd virtue over her paths presides,
Each polic'd order venerates the laws,
And each ingenuous speaks in freedom's cause;
The Spartan spirit, nor the Roman name,
The patriot's pride, shall rival these in same;
Here all the sweets that social life can know,
From the full font of civil sapience flow;
Here golden Ceres clothes the autumual plain,
And art's fair Empress holds her new domain;
Here angel Science spreads her lucid wing,
And hark, how sweet the newborn Muses sing;
Here generous Commerce spreads her liberal hand,
And scatters foreign blessings tound the land.
Shall meagre Mammon, or proud lust of sway,
Reverse these scenes -- will heaven permit the day:
Shall in this era all our hopes expire,
And weeping freedom from her fanes retire?
Here shall the tyrant still our peace pursue,
From the pained eye-brow drink the vital dew;
Not nature's barrier wards our FATHER's foe,
Seas roll in vain, and boundless oceans flow. --
STAY, Pharaoh The king of Great Britain.
, that impious hand forbear,
Nor tempt the genius of our souls too far;
How often, ungracious! in thy thankless stead,
'Mid scenes of death our generous youth have bled;
When the proud Gaul thy mightiest powers repelled,
And drove your legions trembling from the field,
We rent the laurel from the victor's brow,
And round your temples taught the wreath to glow The taking of Louisbourg in
1745, by General PEPPERELL.
,
Say, when thy slaughtered bands the desert died,
Where the lone Ohio rolls her gloomy tide,
Whose dreary banks their wasting bones enshrine,
What arm avenged them? -- thankless! was it thine The same year the king's
troops were surprised near the banks of the Ohio; when our illustrious General
WASHINGTON covered the retreat, and saved the destruction of the whole army. A
body of French were repulsed at an assault of the Provincial lines, at the
westward, their General taken prisoner, and their whole army compelled to fly
back to Canada.
?
But generous valor scorns a boasting word,
And conscious virtue reaps her own reward,
Yet conscious virtue bids thee now to speak,
Though guilty blushes kindle over your cheek:
If wasting war, and painful toils at length,
Had drained our veins, and withered all our strength,
How could thou, cruel, form the vile design,
And round our necks the wreath of bondage twine!
And if some lingering spirit roused to strife,
Bid ruffian murder drink the dregs of life:
Shall future ages ever forget the deed?
And shall not for this imperious Britain bleed?
When comes the period heaven predestines must,
When Europe's glories shall be whelmed in dust,
When our proud fleets the naval wreath shall wear,
And over her empires hurl the bolts of war,
Unnerv'd by fate, the boldest heart shall fail,
And 'mid their guards auxiliar kings grow pale;
In vain shall Britain lift her suppliant eye,
An alien'd offspring feels no filial tie,
Her tears in vain shall bathe the soldier's feet,
Remember, ingrate, Boston's crimsoned street The massacre of the 5th of March,
1770.
;
Whole hecatombs of lives the deed shall pay,
And purge the murders of that guilty day The poet seems to have been very
prophetic in this beautiful passage.
.
BUT why to future periods look so far,
What force ever faced us, that we feared to dare;
Then, can thou think, even on this early day,
Proud force shall bend us to a tyrant's sway;
A foreign foe opposed our sword in vain The extirpation of the Neutrals from
Nova Scotia.
,
And thine own troops we have rallied on the plain The Provincials covered the
retreat from the French lines, at Ticonderoga, when the British General,
Abererombie, was then defeated by the Marquis Montcalm, in 1758.
.
If then our lives your lawless sword invade,
Think thou, enslaved, we'll kiss the pointed blade?
Nay let experience speak -- be this the test,
It Is from experience that we reason best. --
When first thy mandate showed the shameless plan,
To rank our race beneath the class of man,
Low as the brute to sink the human line,
Our toil our portion, and the harvest thine,
Modest but firm, we plead the sacred cause,
On nature bas'd and sanction'd by the laws?
But your deaf ear the conscious plea denied,
Some demon counseled -- and the sword replied;
Your navy then our haven covered over,
And armed battalions trespassed on our shore,
Through the prime streets, they marched in war's array,
At noon's full blaze, and in the face of day:
With dumb contempt we passed the servile show,
While scorn's proud spirit scoul'd on every brow;
Day after day successive wrongs we bore,
'Till patience wearied could support no more,
'Till slaughtered lives our native streets profaned,
And thy slave's hand our hallowed crimson stained,
No sudden rage the ruffian soldier tore,
Or swam the pavements with his vital gore,
Delib'rate thought did all our souls compose,
'Till veiled in glooms the low'ry morning rose;
No mob then furious urged the impassioned fray,
Nor clam rous tumult dined the solemn day,
In full convene the The town-meeting at Faneuil-hall.
city-senate sat,
Our FATHER's spirit ruled the firm debate;
The freeborn soul no reptile tyrant checks,
It Is heaven who dictates when the people speaks;
Loud from their tongues the awful mandate broke,
And thus inspired the sacred senate spoke;
Ye miscreant troops be gone! our presence fly,
Stay, if ye dare, but if ye dare, ye die!
Ah! too severe, the faithful Chief The infamous Governor Hutchinson.
replies,
Permit one half -- the other instant flies --
No pale, avaunt, or by our FATHER's shades,
Your recking lives shall glut our vengeful blades,
Ever morning's light begone, -- or else we swear,
Each slaughtered corse shall feed the birds of air!
Ever morning's light had streaked the skies with red,
The Chieftain yielded, and the soldier fled,
It Is thus experience speaks -- the test forbear,
Nor shows these states your feeble front of war,
But still your navies lord it over the main,
Their keels ^re natives of our oaken plain;
Even the proud mast that bears your flag on high,
Grew on our soil, and ripened in our sky:
"Know then thyself, presume not us to scan,"
Your power precarious and your isle a span. --
Yet could our wrongs in just oblivion sleep,
And on each neck revived affection weep,
The brave are generous, and the good forgive,
Then say you have wronged as, and our parent live Her tyrants were too
self-conceited, and too obstinate to take the advice of men of the best sense
and understanding. -- The consequence has been the establishment of liberty and
universal commerce in America.
;
But face not fate, oppose not heaven's decree,
Let not that curse, our MOTHER, light on thee.

