THE SECOND PART OF THE MEMORIAL TO JUSTIFY PETER LANDAI'S CONDUCT, DURING THE
LATE WAR.

NEW YORK: PRINTED BY SAMUEL LOUDON, AT HIS OFFICE, No. 5, WATER-STREET.

MEMORIAL, etc.
IT was reported to me, that every method was practiced by lawless people on
shore, to sacrifice me and the service to their disappointment and vengeance.

That one of the Alliance's bargemen was put in prison by Mr. Dale and Mr.
Williams, for saying, that said barge (being at L'Orient) was Captain Landai's
barge.

That one of the sergeants of the marines received five French guineas, and
several marines sixty l^res, and some other seamen more or less, by the
direction of Captain Jones, for acknowledging him to be their Captain; and they
said they had promises to be paid all their prize-money (and were directed to
tell the same to every man on board) if they would return to their duty,
meaning, I suppose, if they would deliver the frigate to him.

Some of the Bon-homme Richard's people formerly, who made part of the
Alliance's crew then, having received intelligence of Captain Jones's promises
made by his agent, were heard to say they would cut the cables in order to have
the frigate drove on shore.

A whole crew of one of the Alliance's boats being sent on duty to L'Orient,
were taken, and put by force on board the Ariel.

Mr. Moylan stopped and prevented the Alliance's stores and provisions from
coming on board.

Mr. Blodger, the Alliance's purter, was confined by Captain Jones for some
days, on board the Ad^ ship. -- By all which proceedings the Alliance's crew
would soon have been bribed and deterred from their duty; and being reduced in
numbers, become incompetent to the ship's service, and insufficient and
incapable to defend her against the enemies.

By these dangers attending the sending the boats on shore to L'Orient, I was
compelled to have part of the fresh water brought on board with great
difficulty from Groay island.

The Bon-homme Richard's people on board, discovered so much dissatisfaction,
and evinced a spirit of mutiny to such a degree, that, though I was not fully
manned, I sent seventeen of them to Captain Jones.

The stores and provision came at last on the 30th June on board, and were
taken in during the night time. Lieutenant Elwood, of the marines, had two
hogsheads of wine brought on board; I was so precise to the orders I had
received from the Navy-Board at Boston, to let no private goods be brought in
the ship, that I ordered they should not be stowed in the fish-room or hold,
that they might not be carried to America.

Besides the abovementioned dangers, of being deprived of the crew by their
being forcibly put on board the Ariel -- of being reduced to want of provisions
on board, by the opposition made on shore to their coming off -- having already
the crew almost bribed, by the promises made on shore to them by Captain
Jones's agents, to do any thing against my command -- the said frigate was
exposed to the storms in an open road, and moreover to the surprise or superior
force of the enemies; which concurrence of plots and dangers made her sailing
necessary. -- But though I had been already better than two weeks waiting for his
Excellency Dr. Franklin's order, and for his answer to the people about their
prize-money, I wanted yet to stay a little longer on these accounts.

Mr. De Gourlade sent on board three small boxes, not weighing together above
fifty pounds, for the Chevalier De la Luzerne, the French Minister
Plenipotentiary at Philadelphia; I thought that Congress would approve my
receiving them, in consequence I ordered the Master to receive and charge them
in his book, and give a receipt for them, being the only private goods on board
to my knowledge.

Two days before our sailing, Capt. Bell's brother and Capt. P^rk came upon
deck, and the former told me that he had a letter from Mr Moylan for me; I
^wered, (...) no business whatever with Mr. Moylan, and he might do what he
pleased with said letter, as I would not receive it.

Having waited in vain till the 8th July for his Excellency B. Franklin's
orders, and the expected payment of the crew's prize-money, and perceiving
plainly that he would give neither -- seeing also the dangers the frigate had
been and was still exposed to in that road -- the solid reasons of the
Honorable A. Lee, Esquire contained in his letter to me of the 25th June ult. for
sailing -- the Congress's order for the Alliance's return to Philadelphia --
and the real blame I should incur in staying longer without the positive order
of his Excellency B. Franklin, determined me to sail immediately.

Accordingly, at one o'clock, P. M. having in company the ship Lu^e, Capt.
Bell; a brig, Mr. Montgomery; a chasse maree, Mr. Smith; and a schooner, Mr.
Kerdie, which had asked me to sail along with the Alliance. I had the signal to
get under way made, and we did the same in the Alliance; the ship's company
being all in high spirit, consisted of two hundred and fifty men, besides
passengers. The ship had been loaded too much by the stern; she being very
foul, I had her bottom well hogg'd fore and aft the day before, and the barrels
of gunpowder which had been imprudently stowed, were put in another place, out
of danger in case of an engagement, by the gunner.

M. De la Grandville, acting Intendant of the Navy at L'Orient, had given me
intelligence when there, that an English fleet of five and twenty line of
battle ships had been seen off O^essant, about the 12th ult. but since had not
appeared -- having also read in the papers, that the enemies had sent two
two-deckers and some frigates, to cruize about the western islands; -- judging
the naval English fleet was gone off Finisterre, in order to prevent the
junction of the French and Spanish fleet together; to avoid meeting which, and
those about the Western Islands, I thought it was best to keep in high
latitude, where there was little danger, but to meet with a single ship at a
time, which we might take or engage with, to defend the vessels in company:
Besides which, we should thereby avoid the calm and extreme heat, consequently
the greatest dangers of the enemies, sickness among the ship's company, and
have a shorter passage to the banks of Newfoundland, where I intended to have
the ship's bottom hogg'd again, before we made directly for Philadelphia.

Few days after we got under sail, being at dinner, the Honorable A. Lee, Esquire
said he had never been to Boston, nor had he ever seen the Eastern States,
which induced him to wish that I would go thither; two of the Marquis de la
Fayette's Aids de Camp and his Secretary joined with him, saying, it would
spare them much fatigue and great expenses to which they must be exposed to go
from Philadelphia to Rhode Island, at which place the Marquis was then known to
be. Others supported them, magnifying the dangers of going to Philadelphia. To
all which I could answer nothing, but that the order of Congress was to carry
the frigate there, whither then we must go: -- Nevertheless, though I had shown
to the Honorable Arthur Lee, Esquire and his nephew, Ludwell Lee, Esquire these orders
at L'Orient, before I resumed my command, as may appear by what he mentioned in
a letter to me, dated there June 15th, and in which he mentioned also, that an
officer is guilty whenever he does not obey his superiors order, they and
others tried to persuade me to the contrary; and finding they could not, they
grew peevish on all occasions: -- And I suppose, from subsequent transactions,
which will be seen in the sequel, that the Honorable Arthur Lee, Esquire had
already devised the plan to have the frigate carried to Boston, with or against
my consent.

On the 11th July, the chasse maree sprung and carried away some of her spars,
Mr. Smith determining thereon to go back to France, the Honorable A. Lee, Esquire
desired me to take on board his nephew, Mr. Lewis Lee, and some other
passengers who had embarked in this vessel, which I did instantly, by sending a
boat to bring them on board, having nothing more at heart, next to the service,
than to oblige him in all I could.

The Honorable A. Lee, Esquire for whom I had all the deference and complaisance
due to his rank and former character as Minister, having let him choose the best
state-room in the cabin, and all other accommodations that could be procured
on board; notwithstanding, began to wrangle with me on all accounts,
particularly every day at table, complaining and applying, with bitterness and
haughtiness, to me as the author that the water stank -- the meat and other
things were either too much or not done enough, etc. etc. I represented to him,
that the reason why the water was not good, was that the casks had not been
properly cleansed before they were filled, and it was taken in a place that was
not clean, as they washed their linen, etc. but I could not help it, as it was
put on board before I resumed the command. -- However, though the ship was
already very crank, with a design to please him if possible, I ordered a
water-tub holding two hogsheads to be filled and fixed close to the mainmast
on the quarter deck, and there filled every morning, to air the water, and take
off as much as possible its bad smell; at the same time ordered a centry to
stand by to make every body observe cleanness in taking the water out of said
tub for any purpose: the petty officers were also to take a quart of water
thence every day for tea. -- I sent at almost every meal for the cook, and
recommended him to have the meat more or less done, according to the taste of
the Honorable A. Lee, Esquire but all I did to keep in peace, though far beyond my
duty, was in vain, as he had probably a plan in his head which he wanted to
begin by wrangling. He had to second him in the first place his two nephews,
Messirs. Lewis Lee and Ludwell Lee, and Mr. Livingston, Lieutenant of a man of
war, (who was then passenger, and had helped him with his testimony against
Silas Deane, Esquire) all three devoted to his will, and fit persons to work on the
mind of the other passengers and officers, and promote the execution of his
projects.

The ship having been from the beginning too much loaded by the stern, besides
the ward-room filled since with officers and passengers trunks, I represented
to the Honorable A. Lee, Esquire (who had his birth filled also with his trunks)
the case, that the ship did not sail so well as usual, that she was crank by
having too much weight aloft, and that his trunks were in the way of two of the
guns, which might prove of bad consequence in a sudden engagement; that he
might tell his servant to put all his necessary things for sea in one of his
trunks, which he might keep in his birth, and the others should go with mine
and all the rest amid ship between decks, under the guard of a centry; he
assented to it in appearance, and I ordered not only the trunks to be put amid
ship, but also all the boxes of small-arms and lumber between decks to be put
forward; and after all that had been done, the ship was hardly in good trim. --
But soon after every body, from the Honorable A. Lee, Esquire to the seamen, began
to grumble at having made this change, though for the best, by which I perceived
the whole crew was worked upon by somebody or other, but I could not find out
who were the movers.

On the 13th inst. every one but the Honorable A. Lee, Esquire and myself being
gone to bed, he asked me what I wanted to do by chasing every vessel we met
with in our way? I answered, I wanted to fulfill my first orders from the
Navy-Board of Boston, which were to take or destroy all the enemy's vessels I
could. His next question was, whether I would attack an English frigate of the
same force we were? I said yes, by all means; that we were provided with all
things for that purpose, and better manned than an English frigate of the same
rate, therefore we should have a good chance to take her. He said, he advised
me to the contrary, and even to avoid and fly before any enemy's ship, and
consider whom I had on board; that I had two Aids de Camp, and the Secretary of
the Marquis de la Fayette, and how unhappy it would be if they or other
passengers had an arm shot off. I replied, I would be very sorry if any body on
board met with any accident whatever; but that the dangers to which every
person must necessarily be exposed in the frigate, should have been considered
before they came on board: -- And observed, that though the Alliance was fitted
out on purpose to carry over to France the Marquis de la Fayette, I had orders
to attack, engage and take any ship from the enemies I could meet with, and the
Marquis himself was never against it, but quite to the contrary. -- Then he
said, but what would be the fate of my servant, if he had an arm shot off? I
told him, I knew not what the fate of his servant would be, but that I supposed
when he took him in his service, he had warned him of the dangers he might
undergo, and pay him in consequence. But said he, have you reflected what a
loss it would be to America, if the Alliance should be taken? Yes, sir, said I,
and I conceive it would be a great one; But if an American man of war always
run away before an English one, she never can take the latter; and if the
latter chase and can come up with the former, she must naturally take her, as
the crew in the ship that runs away loses half their courage, while the crew of
the other ship who chases gains it, by imagining some reasons to be the cause
of her flight. -- Finding he could not convince me by these reasons, he tried
another way, saying, that if he were in my place, he would think of nothing but
sailing as fast as possible to Philadelphia, because, though my case was never so
good against Captain Jones, if he arrived there before me, he and his friends
would make the story against me take ground; but if I arrived first, it would
be the contrary. I replied, that on all occasions I would venture my life for
the good of the service, and in this case I would even venture my reputation in
discharging my present duty; and that I relied entirely on the justice of
Congress. -- Thus the conversation between us to the same meaning lasted till
very late, when I wished the Honorable A. Lee, Esquire a good night. He appeared to
be dissatisfied with my reasoning and sense of duty; but though I was very sorry
for it, I could not comply with his desires, which were so diametrically
opposite to my duty. It is to be suspected that he took that time when no
person was present to witness the conversation, to speak to me thus, in case
that had I complied with his wishes, he might have denied these counsels after,
if he had found it necessary.

Almost every one, passengers and officers, on board the Alliance and other
vessels in company, wanted to keep a course suitable to his opinion; some would
have gone by the small latitude, to take the trade wind, others by the middle
one, etc. without considering the season we were in, and other circumstances.
Capt. Bell, of the Luzerne, always steering more toward the south than the
course given, tried to draw us in lesser latitude.

The Honorable A. Lee, Esquire as the headmost of the passengers, was the speaker
who always made the motions, being certain to be supported, right or wrong, by
all officers and passengers. One day being at table, he asked me why I kept the
ship in 47 degrees latitude north? I explained to him all the advantages which
we should derive from it, and particularly, that we should avoid the calm, and
consequently have a shorter passage. He replied, that it could not be, as the
shortest way from one point to another, was to steer the course only that lead
to it. -- I told him it was not always the case, and that chiefly two courses
of the compass were oftener the shortest way to go from one point to the other.
He said, he would be glad if I would prove it and all the others laid the same.
I took a twelve-pound shot, and with some chalk drew a parallel supposed by
eighty degrees north latitude; on it one point supposed to be the first
meridian, and another to be 180 degrees longitude, and said, the (...) way to
go from one of th^se points to the other, was to steer north to the pole
arctic, and thence south to the other point; and that these two courses were
shorter than due east or west, which would also lead from one of these points
to the other: I allowed that we were not wholly in that case, but by running
^ver the degrees of longitude in high latitude, where they were shorter than in
lesser; as going upon Newfoundland and thence to Philadelphia, we lengthened
but little our way, and would by these courses gather all these advantages
heretofore mentioned. But all I said was out of regard and complaisance to the
Honorable A. Lee, Esquire as I was the only one answerable to a court martial for
the same. Nevertheless, he and the others could or rather would not understand
so plain a demonstration.

On the 14th inst. the wind at north by east, and the sea very smooth, being
upon deck before supper, seeing the weather braces ran in, and the ship going
one point large, I told Lieutenant Degge thereof, and ordered him to have the
sails trimmed properly, and the ship kept close to the wind, which he did.
After supper, when I went back on deck, I found that he had the weather braces
hall'd in again, and the ship going large; I repeated my order to him, but he
not being rational after supper, fell in a passion and ordered to brace the
yards fore and aft; and stamping with his foot on the quarter deck, said that I
wanted to lose sight of the ship Luzerne, which was not a mile distant on our
lee quarter. I told him to mind how he charged me in public with bad intention;
he repeated the same; I ordered him to go and keep under an arrest in his
cabin; he swore he would not go, and no body could make him. I went to him,
and assured him he had better go, or he should be forced to it. He took me by
the collar of my coat, and asked whether I would force him? I ordered
Lieutenant Warren, who was on watch, with two marines, to force him to go down
in his birth. Lieutenant Degge left me and went on the forecastle, soon after
Lieutenant Warren came to tell me that Lieutenant Degge had a pike brandishing
in his hand, threatening to run it through any body who would offer to come to
him. I told him to follow me; when Lieutenant Degge saw that I went directly to
him, he let fall the pike, and got over the rail on the cathead, saying, he was
going to jump into the sea. I went back on the quarter deck, after having
repeated my order to Lieutenant Warren, who came to tell me, soon after, that
Lieutenant Degge was in his birth.

I daily perceived a great change in the crew's behavior toward the service
and myself; instead of the high spirit, activity and obedience they showed at
first, they gradually grew remiss, backward, and grumbled in proportion as the
Honorable A. Lee, Esquire and other passengers and officers grew peevish,
licentious and undutiful; and I saw plainly the former were enticed by the
latter, but could not tell how, nor know positively who actuated them so, as
they kept all their proceedings secret from me: Besides, I was determined to
suffer personally from the Honorable A. Lee, Esquire for whom I had yet the same
regard, rather than to act with a right authority that would have been
supported by no body, thinking he would never attempt any thing against the
service.

The Honorable A. Lee, Esquire and his two nephews, always kept company with
Messieurs De Pontgibeau and La Colomb, the two Aids de Camp to the Marquis de
la Fayette, and M. Poire, his Secretary, all three young men, who were easily
prevailed upon by the art and suggestion of the former, and brought to be
zealots in their party.

One day, as two of them were playing at chess together, M. De la Colomb told
the Honorable A. Lee, Esquire that M. de Chavane, Captain of the French frigate the
Sensible, had told him that when all a ship's company agreed to take the
command from their Captain, the only reason that can justify them is, to say,
all together, that the Captain was crazy.

Another time M. De Pontgibeau said, that when the Captain of a ship was
unwilling to do that which all the rest wanted to be done, there was always
some body that could do for him at once. -- The next day after he brought his
pistols from the ward-room into the cabin, and put them in the state-room of
the Honorable A. Lee, Esquire Mr. Poire asked him if they were loaded? He answered
they were. All that was said and done in the Honorable A. Lee, Esqr's presence;
who, to encourage it, quibbled, and used double meaning -- words to the same
intent and purpose, but concealed his true meaning with more art and cunning
than the former: But of all the passengers on board, Mr. Ludwell Lee
distinguished himself in that way above the others; and besides, he altered and
subverted all that I said: He had acquired such a credit on that account, and I
suppose in their private assemblies, that they called him the lawyer; and the
French officers repeatedly paid him the compliment, in my hearing, that from a
bad cause he would make appear a good one.

On the 16th inst. Mr. Montgomery, in the brig in company bore away to the
southward, and left us.

On the 17th inst. at daybreak, Mr. Buckley came to acquaint me of a sail
being in sight, bearing S. W. from us. I ordered to bear upon her, and have all
sails set. I went up and saw she was a large ship, close to the wind on the
larboard tack, under topsails only, which proved she was a ship of war
cruising. As soon as she perceived we chased her, she bore away and crowded all
sail in a very short time to run away from us. Perceiving that the officers,
far from being anxious to make all sail to come up with her, were very remiss
at it, I told Mr. Lynd to attend and have the driver set; he answered, he knew
not how. Seeing his unwillingness to do it, I called a quartermaster, and
ordered him to set the driver, before Mr. Lynd. I went forward to have all sail
set there, seeing the officers were unwilling to do it; but while I was looking
and ordering a sail set, they had another halliard let go; and it was ten
o'clock, A. M. before we were under all sails. We gained little upon the chase,
when Mr. Larcher, followed by other officers, came to tell me that if all the
trunks and boxes of arms were put aft again, we should soon come up with her.
Though I knew the contrary, I consented to it; for if I had refused, they would
have said I missed that ship by my own fault. (We lost sight a-stern of the
Luzerne ship about two o'clock, P. M.) At seven o'clock the chase had gained
from us; I then gave up the chase, and went to visit a Portuguese snow, which
had passed along-side of the chase, which he said had four and twenty guns upon
her main-deck, and six or eight upon her quarter deck: -- So we missed the
chance of taking a fine frigate, by the undutifulness of the officers.

One day, going upon the quarter deck, I observed for a while Mr. Livingston
and James Pratt, quartermaster, leaning together on the rail, whispering to
each other. This quartermaster had of late, and was the only one who had, his
hammock hung under the quarter deck, in order to be found there at once when
wanted, as will appear in the sequel. He was also the man who knocked down with
a handspike several hogs, I heard since, to shorten fresh provisions, with a
design to oblige us to go to Boston.

Once, when I was walking alone on the quarter deck, Mr. Brown, a passenger
gentleman of Charleston, accosted me, and said if I would give up chasing any
vessels, all the passengers together would make me a present of a handsome sum
of money. I looked at him with disdain, and asked him if he wanted to attempt
to bribe me out of my duty. They tried thus all means to ensnare me.

The Honorable A. Lee, Esquire finding that I took no notice of his and others
quibbling language, changed it gradually into the grossest insults, in order to
provoke me at last to act with him with the severity, it required, being sure
that his abettors would alter and invert all to his and their advantage, and
give it out to the crew and others in their own way.

Once, at dinner time, he began by applying to me as usual, complaining with
bitterness of all that was upon the table, the water, etc. I made my usual
apology, in order to satisfy him, if possible, saying, that there was at every
dinner three dishes of different fresh meats, besides salted ones, which I had
always ordered the cook to dress to his own liking; there was also three
different sorts of wines, punch and beer; I acknowledged the water was not
good, but all that could be done to make it better had been practiced, and
added, that I could not have done more for a King, had he been on board, than I
had for him: -- That he had chosen and took the best state room; used the
cabin as his own, diverting in it himself, with such company and whenever he
pleased, whether I was busy in writing in it or not: -- That at table I never
offered to help myself, but as soon as the meats were carved, or the desert
upon table, I always observed to hand him the dishes one after another, but had
also observed that after he had taken out that which pleased him best, he
handed it round the table that I might have it the last; that I mentioned that
last part no other ways than to let him know I was sensible of his affected
disregard for me, nevertheless, all that was on board was at his service, but I
could procure him no better, he said, with scurrility, it was good enough for
me, and desired I would take his state room from him; I said, it was not my
intention, but he insisted and repeated several times that he wished it; I told
him to give me in writing that his wish and desire was such, he said I was an
ass, and when in America I should have my ears cut off; I told him I knew his
views in abusing me thus, that I was determined not to resent any thing
whatever, when on board, but when on shore, any body that would offer to fight
me either with sword or pistols, should have a satisfaction; but if any there
threatened to cut my ears, I would then actually horsewhip him, and I instantly
rose from table.

After that had passed, the other passengers and officers grew altogether
progressively more licentious, and the crew more undutiful.

On the first of August, Mr. Buckley came at 6 o'clock, A. M. to acquaint me of
a sail being in sight, I went up and found that she was lying to on the
starboard tack, bearing N. W. of us, at two leagues distance, I ordered to
chase her, she bore away, and made all sail she could steering west, the wind
blowing fresh, I ordered a reef to be taken in the main-top sail, but they were
better than an hour in doing it; Mr. Lynd having gone aloft on purpose, I
suppose to prevent its being done sooner, and when it was finished the weather
earing was so loose that it kept better than half an hour more before it was
hauled taught to the yard-arm, during all which time the main-top sail being on
the mast, and the chase making all the sail she could bear, we gained none upon
her, and an hour after a thick fog coming on, we lost sight of her, however I
continued the chase until noon, when I ordered Mr. Lynd, who took the watch, to
have the three top-sail yards lowered on the caps, and then come to the course,
which was W. N. W. close reef the topsails; and having been wet through all
the time of the chase, I went down to shift my clothes, but Mr. Lynd, instead
of doing that, as I had ordered him, came close to the wind before the top-sail
yards were lowered, by which the ship lay on her lee broadside, and the main
mast sprung: I went on the quarter deck and ordered the helm a-weather, and the
three topsails and mizen clewed up, the main-top gallant must to be launched,
and preventer stays to be p^t, and sat, on the main mast, and the carpenters to
fish it; the next morning the mouldings round it were made, and every thing
rigged as before.

On the 5th instant, having a lightning conductor ready made, by the armourer,
I ordered the carpenter, about 7 o'clock, A. M. to have it fixed to the main
royal m^st head, as may appear by the following, viz.

Alliance frigate a^ sea, Aug. 5, 1780.
This may certify, that Capt. Landais sent for me this morning, between seven
and eight o'clock, (Mr. Larcher commanding the watch upon deck) to put the
electring rod upon the main-top gallant royal mast; I brought a boat mast on
the quarter deck for the Captain, to show me in what manner he would have it
put in the royal mast head, the carpenters could not do it without launching
the most, which I immediately acquainted Captain Landais with, whereupon
Captain Landais told me to tell the commanding officer upon deck to launch it,
which was accordingly done.

(Copy signed) JAMES BRAGG.


The main-top yard being necessarily lowered on the cap, and the wind small,
the ship not steering, the fore-topsail yard was also lowered on the cap.

Mr. de Pontgibeau went to awake the Honorable A. Lee, Esquire, at half past seven
o'clock, he got up directly and went out of the cabin. Some time after my
steward told me, that some of the crew being assembled under the quarter deck,
wanted to speak with me; I sent immediately for my clerk, had the regulation
for the navy, with pen, ink and paper on the table, when Mr. Lynd, who had just
taken the watch, came to tell me the same, I answered, he might tell them to
come five at a time in the cabin; the Honorable A. Lee came in, and James
Pratt behind him held the door open, about thirty seamen were assembled under
the quarter-derk; James Pratt said, they would speak to me all at once and on
the quarter deck, and added, they would make more sail, and one of the fore-top
men said, let us go and make more sail, and accordingly they went forwards to
do it.

I bid my clerk to take the pen, ink and paper, and follow me on the quarter
deck, where we found part of the passengers, and the Honorable A. Lee, Esquire and
the rest following me: I saw part of the crew who had been under the
quarter deck, hoisting the fore-top sail yard, I ordered Lieutenant Elwood of
the marines, who was on watch, to have instantly all the marines under arms, he
did not so much as answer me, but continued to walk with an air of
indifference, fore and aft, by which conduct I perceived I had no more help to
expect from him than from all the rest of the officers who were all absent but
Mr. Lynd, who had the watch: I guessed the presence of all the passengers was
premeditated to encourage the people to mutiny.

Though I saw plainly by the countenances of the passengers, and absence of the
officers, that this mutiny was concerned amongst themselves, and carried on
only by a small part of the crew, that I could not expect to be supported by
any body; nevertheless, I thought it my duty to try all means to stop it, if
possible: I therefore sent for Captain Park, Messrs. Buckley, Larcher and all
the other officers; -- word was brought me that they were shaving themselves,
etc.

James Pratt, who was on the starboard gang-way, ordering the others how to
make more sail, seeing me on the quarter deck, called to some of them to follow
him, and they came there; I asked him if he knew what he was about, and the
consequence thereof, he answered yes, and if I would not make more sail, they
would choose a better Captain than I was, looking at master Livingston: I told
my clerk to read to them the regulation for the American Navy; James Pratt
said, there was no need therefore, as they knew them all being made by them; I
asked his name, he told it, I ordered my clerk to write it down, as I had told
him to write down my questions and his answers, but he would neither write his
name, nor a syllable of what was said: I don't mention all James Pratt's
abusive language to me, and the satisfaction which appeared in the countenance
of the Honorable A. Lee, Esquire and other passengers, that part being easily
imagined, and useless to be related; at last James Pratt said to the others,
let us go and make more sail, the fore-top man mentioned heretofore, repeated
the same, and they went again forward.

At last Capt. Park came up from the ward room, I ordered him to have all the
marines under arms, and if they did not obey at the first call, to have them
called name by name, as they were wrote on his list, and to write the
disobedience of any one that would not obey, before his name; he answered, he
had not the list; I replied, he or some other officer of marine had it, he said
it was in the marines birth; I told him to send for it, he said he had no body;
I told him then to go himself for it, at last, after he had evaded as long as
he could from doing his duty on that account, he sent a sergeant therefore: by
all that conduct of his, instead of anticipating my orders to have the marines
ready to stop the mutiny, as was his particular and immediate business, I was
convinced that said mutiny was preconcerted and supported by both passengers
and officers.

I told Mr. Lynd to go and let fly the fore-topsail yard hallyards, he
answered, the people had wrecked the fore-top yard ties and back stays
together, I told him to go and unwreck them. -- Sometime after the list of the
marines was brought to Captain Park, I repeated my order to him, and went
forward to Mr. Lynd, whom I told to let go one of the fore-top yard hallyards,
while I let go the other, I let my side one fly, but he kept his side one fast
to give time to a man to wreck it again, as he did. Though I had not been more
than two minutes absent when I returned on the quarter deck, I found Captain
Park doing nothing, I asked him why he did not call the marines, he answered he
had, but they had all refused to come, and he promised he would give me a copy
certified of said list, with their disobedience annexed to each name, as they
had been called.

I ordered Mr. Lynd to take all the petty officers to help him to shorten sail,
he answered, what can a man do when all are of one mind against him; though I
understood very well that he meant all the officers were in the general plot, I
asked if any officer had refused to obey, he said nothing: Messrs. Buckley and
Larcher appeared then, I told them to take with them all the officers and to
lower the fore-top sail yard, the former came soon after to tell me, they held
him and prevented his doing it; I told him to give me the name of any one who
had touched him, he would not, but went again forward, and came back to tell me
that twenty of the sailors held the hallyards and would not let them go, and
added, what in the name of God can a man do against three hundred. (N. B.) That
the only seamen which appeared in mutiny, were not forty in number, that had
the officers of marines, sergeants and corporals took arms, they might have
stopped the mutiny at once, and had all the sea officers and petty officers
opposed these seamen, they were capable by their number to stop also the
mutiny; but instead of that I surprised them smiling at one another, and at the
passengers, which made me sensible they were not only in the plot, but that
they made ridicule of it, and of the orders I gave thereon. -- Wherefore I told
them I had seen and heard enough to convince me that they would do nothing to
help me to stop the mutiny, that, it being impossible for me to do it alone, I
was going, and accordingly went down.

The Carpenter came to ask me what he should do with the lightening rod, as he
could not fix it, I told him to put it down again, and that we must go without
it.

Half past eleven o'clock, when I went to observe the sun at meridian, I found
Mr. Livingston and James Pratt walking and ^sing together on the quarter deck,
in presence of the Honorable Arthur Lee, Esquire and other passengers and officers,
but when they saw me they parted.

Half past two o'clock, P. M. Messrs. Buckley, Larcher and others, came to ask
me what course I chose to steer, and said the people had altered the course, I
told them the same, being certain it had not been altered, they asked me what
sail they must carry, I told them as much as ship and masts could bear.

These demands of orders with regard to the course and sail which I chose to
make, were new proofs that all that had been done in the morning was by the
officers directions; for had the crew really got masters of the ship against
the officers endeavors, when the latter had all the arms, etc. at command, they
would not have been so positive in asking my orders, when the crew had already
got masters of the ship, and consequently of all that was on board.

Next morning Mr. Buckley came to acquaint me, we had sounding on the bank of
Newfoundland by thirty five fathom, I ordered him to fill sail again, without
loss of time, but not seeing the ship come to her course, I went up and found
Mr Buckley fishing himself with the rest, I put the helm a-weather, and ordered
to let fall the fore sail, and make proper sail. The conduct of the officers
and crew proved they were agreed together to stop the ship or increase her sail
when they pleased.

I sent my Clerk to ask of Capt. Park a copy of the marine list, certified by
him, with their refusal annexed to it. -- Capt. Park refused it, as may appear
by the following certificate.

Alliance Frigate at sea, Aug. 5, 1780.
This may certify, that I the subscriber, according to Capt. Landais's order,
desired Capt. Park, of the marines, to make a list of the marines, as they
were called one by one, who refused coming aft to arm themselves by order of
Capt. Landais, to prevent mutiny; which Capt. Park refused, and said he was not
Captain's clerk.

(Copy signed) F. POOL.


I sent him the following, viz.

To Capt. Matt. Parks, of the Marines.
I having sent for you yesterday morning, perceiving that my orders about nine
o'clock given previously were delayed; I ordered you to have the marines called
aft on the quarter deck and put under arms, I found that you were not in haste
to fulfill them, you told me you had nobody to fetch them, I then told you to
go yourself, one of the sergeants came and brought you word they would not
come, I then ordered you to have them called name by name as they were wrote
upon your muster list, and write their refusal before the name of any one that
would not obey; you told me you had not the list that my clerk had it, I
replied, you had the list of the marines, and it was not my clerk's business to
muster or call the marines in such case: The sergeant, or somebody else, went
for the list, and better than a quarter of an hour was spent before it was
brought up; I then ordered you again to have your marines called, and to have
their refusal wrote before their names, I saw the sergeant go to the binacle to
do it, I went forward, and soon returned on the quarter deck, you then told me
they had all refused: I told you to give me a true copy, certified by you, of
their names and refusal, as they were called, which you promised to do, but as
Mr. Pool I sent, to ask you for the list, tells me you refused it saying, you
was not my clerk! observe that my clerk don't know what marines are centries, or
sick, that are not guilty, and he is only my clerk; I therefore require of you,
to have the said list done, certified by you, and delivered to me, for which
this is my order.

Given on board the ship of war Alliance, at sea, this 6th of August, 1780. P.
LANDAIS.
P. S. Put in the above mentioned list who were centry, and who sick, with a
mark to distinguish them.




I gave the original minute of the above to Lieutenant Warren, to transmit to
Capt. Park, who gave me the following receipt, viz.

Alliance at sea, August 6, 1780.
Received of Captain Landais an order from him, which I promise to deliver to
Captain Matt. Parks.

(Signed) JAMES WARREN.


On the 7th inst. having observed and told the officers, that though I had
ordered the course to be due west, they steered it, when I was absent from the
quarter deck, west by north. I sent them the following written order, viz.

To Messrs. Buckley, Lynd and Larcher. Gentlemen,
It is my order that you keep the course of the ship, west half south, until
you receive my order to alter that course, for which this shall be my order.

Given on board the continental frigate Alliance, at sea, this 7th August,
1780. P. LANDAIS.


On the same evening at about ten o'clock, after I had, as I ever did since I
resumed the command, locked the door before I went to bed; the Honorable A.
Lee, Esquire came to ask me the key of it, I gave it to him; he went out for about
a quarter of an hour, and when he came back I begged of him to lock the door
again, he said he had done it, and laid the key on the table: The next morning
I was surprised to see the steward early in the cabin, who told me he had
found the door unlocked; and some days after he assured me, that when he found
the door so unlocked there was no centry out side of the door as usually; all
which appeared suspicious in the present circumstances. The night following and
every evening after the Honorable A Lee, Esquire: left his birth in the cabin, and
went to lay in the ward room; the true reason of it may be ascribed, by what
happened a few nights after, to the necessity of his being in the ward room
during the night, to promote and encourage the following transactions.

On the eleventh instant, while at table, I felt myself so ill, that I got up
to go to bed, one of the passengers got up also, and went out in a hurry; a few
minutes after, James Pratt having passed the centry out-door, without leave,
opened the cabbin-door and kept it so, I saw about thirty men under the
quarter deck, and James Baily, with another, advanced toward my bed, told me,
they came in the crew's name to represent their home was near Boston, and
begged I would carry them there; I told them I could not comply with their
request, as Congress's order was to carry the frigate Alliance to Philadelphia;
those two men went away without grumbling; but James Pratt said he would go to
Boston, and the fore-top man, mentioned in the first mutiny, repeated the same.

In the afternoon Mr. Buckley came, he said, to represent to me that the wind,
which was then easterly, might and would, in his opinion, shift to the west,
and then we must be a long time before we could get to Philadelphia, that the
greatest danger of meeting the enemies was going there, as they were very thick
on those sea: I answered, that it was probable Congress had considered those
things before they ordered the frigate to go there, and had found the propriety
thereof, and it was not our business to pretend to be wiser than they.

Soon after all the officers brought, (they said in writing) their opinions,
which were contained in a letter as follows, viz.

We, the officers of the ^liance think it our duty to represent to you, that it
is our firm opinion, that in the present state of the ship, and from the
present temper and disposition of the people on board, it is more prudent that
^e should get into the first Port we can make, and that it is very unsafe for
us to continue a moment at sea longer than it is absolutely necessary. -- We
are with respect, Yours, etc.

(Signed) Jms. Buckley, Sam. Lynd, M. Parks, J. Larcher, J. Warren, Ts. Elwood,
B. Pierce, J. Darling, J. Bragg, T. Tynsdale, N. Blodget, J. Thawer, J. Guild,
Jos, Wilson, G. Raymond, J. Carr.
On board the continental frigate Alliance at sea, August 10, 1780.
To Peter Landais, Esquire commander of the frigate Alliance.

I would not read this letter, telling them I had not required their opinion,
Congress having ordered the frigate Alliance's immediate return to
Philadelphia; I would never consent to break their order, upon specious
pretenses; Mr. Blodged pressing me exceedingly to go to Boston, I told him I
was afraid self-interest made him so urgent.

The officers said, and Mr. Elwood in particular, insisted, that if I would
show them my orders, they would cheerfully obey me in going to Philadelphia;
(N. B. the Honorable A. Lee, Esquire who was present had seen them, as heretofore
said, in l'Orient) I replied, that dutiful officers never asked to see the
orders a Captain had to obey him: They then told me to go and speak to the
people, I said I could not, being sick, and I had spoken to them already, and
could say no more than I had, and added, were I well and to go on the
quarter deck, I think I could expect no more assistance from the officers to
help me to persuade the people to do their duty by going to Philadelphia, than
I had experienced when I wanted their help to prevent or stop their mutiny on
the 5th inst. they never offered me any assistance, but asked my orders, which
I told them they had in writing, to keep the course west half south.

Mr. Lynd came again some time after, repeating the same thing; Mr. Buckley had
told me before about the dangers going to Philadelphia, but assured me the
course would not be altered whilst he was on watch; by which I was still more
convinced that the people were only the agents of the passengers and officers,
and would never offer of their own accord to alter the course, if the others
did not join with them; and in that case, I alone, against the passengers,
officers and crew, could not prevent their doing it. All that had passed before
three o'clock; and the officers having exhausted in vain their schemes to
persuade me to break Congress's orders by going to Boston, I expected they
would give up that unwarrantable point.

All being very quiet the remainder of the afternoon, as I had much suffered by
a rheumatic pain or cold over all the body, when it subsided late in the
evening, I fell asleep, when I awoke an hour after looking at my hanging
compass, I saw the course was altered and kept to the N. W. by west, I got up
instantly and crawled up as well as I could on the quarter deck, finding all
asleep but the quarter master and men at the wheel, I asked for the officer of
the watch; the quartermaster went to awake Mr. Buckley, who was lying upon a
gun; I asked him whether he knew that the course was altered, though against my
written order, to keep it west half south, which they had? He said yes. I told
him that he must answer for it. Seeing that tranquillity which was in his
countenance and all over the ship, I judged it had been done by the officers
and passengers consent, without any compulsion of the crew, and that it was out
of my power to oppose it in any way, at least until I knew how it had been
carried on, accordingly I went down, expecting to learn more about it in the
morning, and to consider what could be done in that case.

On the 12th instant, at 5 o'clock, A. M. I sent my Clerk for the master's log
book, but it was refused, until the evening, then I saw therein that the course
had been altered wholly by the passengers and officers concerted wills and
agreed mutiny, and that they had given the command, as to a desperado, to the
already very guilty Lieutenant Degge, whom they had taken out of arrest on
purpose: -- Then it was too manifest, that the officers, passengers and crew
were all mutineers, the latter by the suggestions of the former, and of course
it was impossible to pretend to do any thing against their general revolt, had
I been in a state of health to go upon deck.

Nevertheless I sent a written order to Lieutenant Degge, to go back and keep
under arrest, but he would not obey it.

I sent also the followings, viz.

To Captain M. Parks, and Messrs. Warren and Elwood.
You are to give such orders to your sentinels, that if any boat offers to come
along side, or any to go from the ship, that they immediately call the guard,
so that the sergeant or corporal may acquaint me with it; and put a sentinel in
a proper place for that purpose; for which this is my order.

Given on board the continental frigate Alliance at sea this 13th day of
August, 1781. P. LANDAIS.


This may certify, that the subscriber carried the above order, as directed.
Capt. Parks refused taking it; and Messrs. Warren and Elwood said they received
their orders from Capt. Parks.

(Signed) FITCH POOL.


To Messrs. Buckley, Lynch and Larcher, Gentlemen,
You are not to permit any boat to come along side, nor any to go from the
ship, neither to let any person go out of her without first acquainting me with
it, and if any vessel or land appear in sight, let me know of it; for which
this is my order.

Given on board the continental frigate Alliance at sea, this 13th day of
August, 1780. P. LANDAIS.


This may certify, that I the subscriber carried the above written order, as
directed; but they would not receive it, and that Mr. Larcher said, he received
his orders from Mr. Degge.

(Signed) FITCH POOL.


Had they received and obeyed these orders, I would have assumed as much
command as they would have let me, I say as they would have let me, as I could
have it but by their own accord, since the passengers, officers and crew had
taken it alternately from me; and I would have tried to carry the ship into
Rhode Island, whence I could have given the first intelligence of what had
passed to the admiralty at Boston and Philadelphia, and keep every one on
board, until I could have an answer; but by this re^l they prevented that, and
all I would have offered to do.

On the 15th instant, being a little better, I got up, and saw one of the
ship's jolly boat, with James Pratt in it, towing a fishing boat on board; I
went on the quarter deck and ordered Mr. Buckley to let nobody go out of the
ship, and stepped in the cabin where I kept night and day a light ready to
seal my letter for the Navy Board, whenever an opportunity might occur, but
when I came up with it, the boat was off, I called to the people on board to
take my letter, they would not do it.

Seeing then Lieutenant Degge standing on the booms, I ordered him to go to his
birth again under arrest; he looked resolute and undetermined until Mr. Louis
Lee and Mr. de la Colomb whispered with him, after which he said, every one had
put him in command of the ship, and he would keep it, some other passengers
joining them; I saw it was useless to say any more, as he would not, nor any
body else, obey.

About an hour after, the wind being N. W. and the weather very foggy, the ship
being close hauled on the larboard tack, I saw from the cabin the breaks of
Shoals-Islands, bearing N. N. W. within half a mile of us, I went on the
quarter deck, and ordered the helm hard a port, and to shiver the after-sails,
which was done instantly; Lieutenant Degge then came there and ordered the crew
to obey nobody but himself, to which they submitted; I told Lieutenant Degge,
that it looked as if he wanted to lose the frigate, as he ran her so amongst
the shoals, he answered, it was I, and that he would fight me when on shore,
and the passengers backed him, saying, I must fight them all: M. de Pontigbeau,
being very guilty for his former conduct, then spoke in French, abusing me for
a quarter of an hour, in such language that a porter must blush to repeat it,
in order to provoke me to assault him before the crew who did not understand
him, but he lost his time, as I did not even reply a single word, but left him
and went away into the cabin.

As soon as the Alliance came at anchor in Nantasket-Road, on the 16th inst.
most of the passengers and officers went together, unknown to me, in the barge
on shore, and directly, to make their own story good, went to the Navy Board to
complain first against me as a guilty and crazy captain, who had resigned (they
said) the command of the ship, and added to these falsehoods all they thought
could justify their black deeds, and bring blame upon me.

The Honorable Navy Board might have perceived by the conduct and hurry of the
passengers and officers to charge me thus, that it was unnatural to suppose me
really guilty; as had I been so, it must soon have been known without such
parade, which looked rather as though they were themselves guilty, they, with a
preconcerted design came to make the same agreed story, in order to prepossess
said Navy Board against me, that they might not listen to the truth I would say
afterward.

The passengers, satisfied with the credulity of the Navy Board, spread soon
their plotted fabulous tale all over the town; as the seamen did amongst the
seafaring men; which gained so much the more credit, as I could not contradict
it, being kept on board, without my power to have a boat to go, or send my
official letter to the Navy Board.

If the Honorable Navy Board had sent an impartial officer, or other, from
shore, to see whether I was really crazy or not, and if I had any thing to say
in my behalf, it would have enabled them to judge with more propriety the
veracity or falsehood of the passengers and officers story, but instead of that
they wrote a letter to Lieutenant Degge, directing him to bring the ship up,
which implied their approbation of his being in command.

I could find no opportunity to send my official letter to the Navy Board,
until the 18th instant, of which the following are extracts, viz.

At Sea, August 15, 1780.
I acquainted them thus: -- I have had two revolts of the crew, the first one
on the 5th instant, in which I was not supported in endeavoring to prevent it;
and the crew, in appearance, got masters of the ship. -- The second was on the
11th instant, in this one the passengers and officers had hands, as appear per
log book, for it was by them the course was altered, contrary to my written
orders; they advised, requested, and charged with, a Lieutenant to bring the
ship here -- which he has effected, though he was under an arrest: You may see,
gentlemen, by the above proceedings it is to be suspected that a great many are
concerned in these revolts, some out of policy, others by adventurous interest,
and all the guilties in the first revolt, through fear that the occasion of it
would be better searched into at Philadelphia than at Boston. -- I was taken
ill on the 11th instant, all that has been done since, was without even
advising me thereof. There are on board two ringleaders in the first revolt,
but I cannot have them secured till I have somebody to obey me, and I suppose
the intention of every body is to exculpate them. All the officers refused to
receive my written orders; some said they received Mr. Degge's orders, who is
the first Lieutenant chosen for the purpose, etc.

I am with respect, Gentlemen, Yours, etc. P. LANDAIS.


I had taken the following receipt when I gave my official letter for the Navy
Board, viz.

Ship Alliance Aug. 17, 1780.
Received from Captain Landais a letter directed to the Honorable Navy Board at
Boston, which I promise do deliver in their hands.

(Signed) JOHN LARCHER.


The Navy Board sent me the following, viz.

The Navy Board's respects wait on Captain Landais, and acknowledge the receipt
of his letter of the 15th instant.

Aug. 18, Bo.


It is to be observed that the Honorable Navy Board sent me a receipt without a
signature to it, for my official letter to them, which letter, in all
appearance had no effect with them, as Lieutenant Degge was continued in
command, and no order sent to secure the two ringleaders of the first mutiny
mentioned therein.

I had sent them word also, that I had neither men or boat left under my
command, which prevented my going on shore to acquaint them with further
particulars of what had happened; but none was procured me.

When the ship came up to Boston, she was (which was uncustomary) immediately
put along-side the long wharf, as to give the two ringleaders of the first
mutiny an opportunity to escape, as they did; because, had they been stopped
and properly prosecuted, they must have detected the mover of the plots and
some of their accomplices.

Going out of the ship in company with Lieutenant Brown, who had been sent for
me from the Navy-Board, Lieutenant Degge offered me to have the ship's side
manned. I told him I could not accept his offices, being unlawful, having
broken his arrest. He followed me on the wharf, and challenged me to box with
him there. I told him, if he wanted to fight me, he should take a sword as I
had by my side, then I would be his match: But as he did not like to fight this
or any gentleman-like way, he made use of bad language to me all along the
wharf, and left us at the end of it.

Lieutenant Brown being with me at the Navy-Board, we waited a long time before
the Honorable James Warren, Esquire President of said Board, and the Honorable
Arthur Lee, Esquire came out of a private room, where they had, to all appearance,
consulted together about the means to exculpate the guilty.

The Honorable Arthur Lee, Esquire being gone directly, the Honorable James Warren,
Esquire asked me why I did not come sooner on shore? I told him I had let him know
that I had neither boat nor men left under my command to do it, since the
officers and passengers had mutinied and got masters of the ship. He replied,
that they said I had resigned the command. I answered, they must needs say
something to palliate their guilt, if possible; but it was explained in my
official letter to them, that they had taken said command absolutely from me on
the 10th inst. and since had even refused to receive and obey my written orders
to them; and all that because I would not break Congress's order, which was to
carry the frigate Alliance into Philadelphia, and comply with their desires in
coming to Boston.

Lieutenant Brown then related before President Warren and his colleague, Mr.
Vernon, of the Navy-Board, how Lieutenant Degge had just now challenged me to
box with him on the wharf, etc. -- He had hardly ended his narration, when
Lieutenant Warren, of the Alliance's marines, and son of the present President,
came to tell his father that all the centries had left their posts, and
declared they would not do duty any longer, the frigate being at the wharf. --
Any body might have expected the Honorable Navy-Board just after they heard
heard of the new demeanor of Lieut. Degge to me, would have ordered by
Lieutenant Warren Lieutenant Degge to be put under an arrest, and would have
transmitted the command to another officer: -- But instead of such just
conduct, the President sent his son, Lieutenant Warren, to tell Lieutenant
Degge to declare to the marines they should lose so much of their pay for every
day they would omit to do their duty: which implied their continuing him in
full command, and convinced me at once that I had no justice to expect from
them.

The Honorable President Warren had in all appearance several reasons, even if
he had loved justice, to have it not done in this instance; for had it taken
place, the Honorable Arthur Lee, Esquire his intimate friend, and Lieutenant
Warren, his eldest son, must have both suffered as principal; amongst the rest
of the guilty: and besides, he thought to gain popularity, in redeeming so many
culprits, all which had their friends, by sacrificing me, being a foreigner,
seen with jealousy by all the officers in the navy; which views, I suppose,
made him use all means to become the strongest party against me; and his
colleague, though he had but the latter of these inducements, followed his
example.

Those gentlemen told me they did not understand well my letter, being too
concise concerning all that had happened on board the Alliance, during her
passage from France to Boston. I enumerated it as minutely as my memory would
admit, three days successively, for about two hours each day, though my official
letter would have been sufficient for them.

Nevertheless, on the 24th inst. they told me a Court of Enquiry would sit the
next week following, to enquire into the affair. -- As I foresaw it was devised
by them to have the guilty discharged, should their crime be proved ever so
evident before said court, that they might be received as witnesses against me
in an ensuing Court Martial, where, by their junto, and concerted false
evidences, they must have me broken: and that to the contrary, had a Court
Martial immediately taken place, their guilt must have been proved, they be
condemned, and their evidence against me found to be false, and nothing but a
plot, and rejected as such. -- I represented to them, that a Court of Enquiry,
which was sometimes necessary to find out whether there had been some fault in
any body for an event which had happened, was unnecessary in the present case,
wherein, besides all that I had said verbally, there were already extant
charges against the passengers, officers and crew, exhibited in my letter to
the Navy-Board: And seeing they would make no allowance for my just
representations thereupon, I declared I would say nothing until a Court Martial
sat.

All I had said on that account was useless, as the Navy-Board's plan was
determined; and in consequence thereof, having chosen to be Judge Advocate a
young man about 20 years old, whom they could command and direct to their will
in their own way, said Court of Enquiry was ordered to sit on the 29th August.

Said Court being opened that day, I gave them in writing the following
declaration, viz.

Gentlemen of the present Court of Enquiry,
As I don't see nor can find any article that mentions any such court, in the
rules for the regulation of the navy of the United Colonies, but find therein a
court mentioned, which runs as follows; A Court Martial shall consist of three
Captains and three First Lieutenants, with three Captains and three First
Lieutenants of Marines, if there are so many marines present, and the eldest
Captain shall preside. -- As it is said three Captains at least are required to
hold a Court Martial, that is the law, and I insist for the law, and will give
no answer until it is fulfilled; and all that has been said cannot be taken as
an answer from me until then.

On board the Frigate Alliance, Aug. 29th, 1780. P. LANDAIS.

This Court consisted of Captain Daniel Water, Esquire President, Captain Samuel
Tucker, Esquire Lieutenant John Brown. Lieutenant Thomas Simpson, Lieutenant Hez.
Welsh, Lieutenant Jos. Veazey, Seth Baxter, Captain of Marines, Peter Green,
Lieutenant of Marines.



I do not pretend to prove all the falsehood contained in the evidences given,
by the passengers, officers or crew, to clear themselves and to charge me, in
this court: As it is an axiom that a negative of a falsehood, when it is a
possible thing, is impracticable without witness to the contrary! -- For
example, if I was alone in a place, and a person, or several in a plot, having
been there with me, testify that I then said or did any possible thing, though
I did not; having no true witness (which is the present case) it is
impracticable to prove their falsehood, but by their own evidence, as the two
elders were proved to be perjurers against the chaste Susana.

Therefore, by some observations that I will make on that court's conduct, and
on the following extracts of evidences given in said court, taken from the copy
thereof, which the Judge Advocate sold me, I will offer to prove to the reader,
and leave him to judge, the partiality of said court against me, in favor of
these witness, in not trying to draw further the truth of their crime out of
their own mouth; and in their judgment acquitting or at least clearing these
passengers, officers and crew, as much as they could, and charging me with all
their might, though they were evidently guilty of mutiny, etc. and I was
innocent.

To Mr. Degge, Lieutenant. "Question of the court. How long was you confined?"

Answer. "'Till the tenth of August, when I was released by invitation from the
officers and passengers, to take the command of the ship."

Q. "What appeared to you to be their motive in giving you the command?"

A. "Because Capt. Landais had abdicated the command, and retired to his cabin.

OBSERVATION. The first answer of Mr. Degge implies fully that he broke his
arrest, by being released by the invitation from the officers and passengers,
to take the command of the ship, which implies also the general plot and mutiny
of the passengers and officers. In the next answer he said it was done because
I had abdicated the command, etc. but he don't say how I had abdicated it, and
the court did not ask him how to prove it otherwise than by saying I had
retired to my cabin, which is a necessary thing to do when a Captain is sick
or wants to sleep, etc. No other necessary question on that account was made,
to the contrary; here follows the Judge Advocate's note, viz. "Mr. Degge being
the person who took the command, it was improper to be too particular in asking
what might involve himself, he gave therefore only a general history of
matters, there being others who could be particular with more propriety."

By this note it is easy to perceive that the Judge Advocate was already
acquainted with the guilt of Mr. Degge and others, as, far from following the
common course in criminal law, where the first question is -- do you plead
guilty, or not guilty; -- he was afraid that Lieutenant Degge might involve
himself, and discover his guilt, and perhaps the guilt of others; and by the
same principle, though the officers, passengers and crew were all proved
guilty, he did all he could to prevent their guilt appearing.

Mr. Buckley, Master, -- and acting Lieutenant. Answer. "The first appearance
of any kind of disturbance within my knowledge was Mr. Degge's confinement, upon
which a general dissatisfaction arose against Captain Landais, and some of the
men went so far as to say in my hearing, that they would relieve Mr. Degge."

By this evidence it was manifest, that, though Mr. Degge was verily guilty,
for which he deserved to be under in arrest, whether with justice I ordered
him, some of the men threatened to mutiny in releasing him, to which Mr.
Buckley, by his silence on a matter of that nature, gave his tacit consent.

Continuation of Mr. Buckley. A. "Thomas Bailey and James Pratt came to us and
asked our opinion about speaking to Captain Landais, upon altering the course
of the ship, as she then was steering west half sout^; -- but the people
answered, that they themselves would alter her course, if we did not, and said
that they would do nothing on board whilst in her present course, and that they
had rather go to York or Halifax than to Philadelphia. (N B) since Captain
Landai's orders of the seventh, he never took any the least command or gave an
order on board to my knowledge."

Q. "Did Captain Landais ever object to Mr. Degge's command?"

A. "Yes, three days after, viz. Aug. 15th, Captain Landais went upon deck, and
ordered Mr. Degge to his cabin."

By this evidence it is clear that the people went to take the opinion and
direction of the officers in the ward-room, and the officers in not acquainting
^e instantly thereof, proved to be their supporters. -- Mr Buckley says, the
people threatened to do this and that, but besides his keeping it secret from
me when it happened, he don't name or particularise any one to the court who
did it, though there is always some one in those mutinies which are very
distinguishable. He says peremptorily that I gave no orders after the seventh
(which was my order to keep the course to the west half south, which not being
contradicted by another, was in force and extant, and even confirmed verbally
on the 10th, to all the officers when they were in the cabin though his next
answer is, that I gave, three days after, order to Mr. Degge to go to his
cabin; -- and he don't mention his, and all the sea and marine officers,
refusing the written orders I sent to them on the 13th, that prove the
falsehood and misrepresentation of his evidence, and that I had not resigned
the command.

COURT. Mr. Elwood, Lieut. of marines. Q. "Please to relate all you know about
the stores, etc."

A. "The wine was a present from the passengers to the officers in the
ward-room, I brought it, being two ^sks on board, but Capt. Landais would not
suffer it to be put below, saying that I wanted to carry it to America to make
my fortune by it, on which account I was obliged to bottle about two-thirds of
it, and the rest give to the seamen."

This evidence was prevented to be given into the Court Martial, as it would
have been contradictory, and would have proved the evidence of Mr. Blodg^t
about goods, to be false, upon which they framed the second article against me,
as will appear in the sequel.

The Honorable A. Lee said, "Saturday Aug. 5th, Major Pontgibeau, said to the
Marquis de la Fayette, came into my cabin as I was getting up, and told me
that the Captain had ordered the sails to be taken in. -- When I first came
upon deck Mr. Brown of Charleston, South Carolina, said to me, the Captain is
going to make a civil war on board, he has ordered the marines under arms."

This evidence shows, how quick the passengers were to go to the Honorable A.
Lee, Esquire as their leader, to tell him I had ordered to shorten sail, in order
by all appearance that by his influence he might have more sail sat against my
order; but the Honorable A. Lee, Esquire don't say that he ran instantly out of the
cabin and did not come back 'till James Pratt and others followed him, and
these last made an open mutiny and got masters of the ship: It may be observed
also, how they were ready to misrepresent my proper orders in saying I was
going to make a civil war, when I ordered the marines to take arms to stop the
mutiny.

Mr. Blodget said, "The officers deliberated some time before they appointed
Mr. Degge to the command, although they had received a letter from the
passengers, advising them to appoint some one immediately."

It appears also by this evidence, as by the former, that it was the passengers
who directed the officers as well as the crew to mutiny as they did.

Parts of the evidences omitted to be written down by the Judge Advocate, but
which were taken in writing, during said court, by an Attorney, and another
person I had there for the purpose.

Mr. Lynd, acting Lieutenant, said, "The officers said, if the Captain would
show his orders for going to Philadelphia, they would cheerfully obey him."

This evidence is omitted by the Judge Advocate, because it explains positively
that it was in the power of the officers to obey my orders to go to
Philadelphia, had they been willing to do it; but they would not obey me, as I
did not show them my orders: Besides, it implies that I had not abdicated said
command, since I continued to order to go to Philadelphia.

James Bragg, Carpenter. Q "Did you ever hear the people say that they were
determined to go to the first port in America that they could make?"

A. "I have heard the people say that they expected to be carried (...)
Philadelphia"

This is omitted, because it is contradictory to Mr. L. Lee's evidence, that I
had promised the crew to go directly to Boston. Besides, it implies that the
crew submitted by their expectation to be carried to Philadelphia, had not the
passengers and officers taken the ship from me, and brought her to Boston.

Benjamin Pierce, Gunner, said, "The Captain asked me, what number of casks of
powder I thought in the way? I answered, four or five. He said, I might stow
them as I thought proper. I accordingly did, and informed the people they were
not in so much danger as they imagined, provided they were not going to
Philadelphia, but to Boston."

This is omitted, because it proved that the gunner enticed the people against
the Captain's going to Philadelphia.

Lieut. Elwood, of the Marines, said, "On the 10th, one Pratt told me, if I
delivered the keys of the arm-chests up to the Captain, they would take my
life."

This is omitted, because it proved that said Pratt was the ringleader, though
the Honorable Arthur Lee, Esquire had made and given to the Court a dialogue, which
he pretended had passed between said Pratt and myself, to exculpate Pratt. 2
dly. Because Lieutenant Elwood was guilty for not acquainting me with the
threats of said Pratt. 3 dly. Because Lieutenant Elwood had not said Pratt
secured in irons, as soon as arrived in harbor, in order to be brought to
trial. And for all these, and other reasons, Lieutenant Elwood was prevented
from giving his evidence in the succeeding Court Martial.

Honorable Arthur Lee, Esquire said, "I represented to the Captain the necessity of
the vessel's sailing, and using many arguments with him, prevailed on him to
sail."

This is omitted, because it justified my sailing from France as necessary,
though they made an article of it against me, both in the Court of Enquiry and
Martial.

Mr. Livingston, Passenger, said, "He wished to be questioned by the officers
of the ship,"

This is omitted, because it shows that the officers and passengers had agree^
together upon the evidence they would give, if they could be admitted to
question one another.

Capt. Matthew Parks, of the Marines, said, "August 13th, Captain Landais s^t a
letter to Captain Parks, but I would not receive his orders, as he still kept
himself confined. -- Captain Parks then produced an order from Captain Landais,
disapproving his conduct it not forming the marines under arms, agreeable to
his orders of yesterday. -- Captain Parks produced ^y pap^, particularly the
order beforementioned, but the Court refused taking any notice of ^em, saying,
they were of no consequence to the case in hand.

This is omitted, because my letter to Captain Parks, dated August (...) order
of the 15th to Captain Parks, Lieutenants Warren and Elwood, mention^ (...) ^d
heretofore; which last they refused to receive, proved them evidently guilty of
disobe^; and proved also that I had not abdicated the command (as they
pretended) since I had ^ued to send them my orders in writing. And the Court,
though ordered by ^he warrant to e^e into my conduct and that of the officers,
refused to receive these proofs of their guilt, being willing to acquit the
guilty and to condemn me.

Mr. Ludwell Lee then interrupted Mr. Blodget, and informed the Court, "That
Captain Landais, the night before we sailed, went on the fore-castle, and
promised the people he would go directly to Boston."

This is omitted, because it was not supported by the crew's evidence as was
expected, which would have proved Mr. Ludwell Lee an impostor.

Sailors of the Bon-homme Richard. Q. "Which of you was it ha^ applied to the
Captain?"

A. "The man that forced his speech to the Captain is not on board. -- N. B.
Lieutenant Veazy (one of the members of the court) reminded them not to charge
the ringleader, saying, you were all one."

This is omitted, because it would have proved clearly that I had not only the
plots of the officers, passengers and crew, but that I had also against me,
even in the Court, numbers that did not scruple to say openly every thing that
might prevent any one of the crew from charging the guilty.

Q. "Do you know any thing of the course of the ship being altered at the time
of the dispute of making sail?"

A "The course was never altered, and we knew of no orders for altering the
course."

This was omitted, because it proved the evidence Mr Buckly had given that the
people had altered the course on the 5th inst. was false. Moreover it proved
also, that they had no hand in altering the course on the 11th, and that it was
purely and utterly the passengers and officers doings, without any compulsion
of the seamen.

Q "Is there any one among you that Captain Landais promised with his own mouth
that he would carry you to Boston?"

A. "We did not hear Captain Landais with his own mouth say so, but some of the
officers told us, that we were to sail for the first port."

This was omitted by the Judge Advocate; because it would have proved the
evidence of Mr. Ludwell Lee to be a falsehood of his own invention; and at the
same time it would have proved that the officers had made themselves that
promise to the crew to dispose them to mutiny, in order to go to Boston.

The Honorable Arthur Lee, Esquire said, "Upon the 10th of August, being in the
cabin, two sailors came to the door, and mentioned that all the seamen were at
the door without, and wanted to see the Captain, he said, he would not speak to
them, but saying they wanted to go to Boston, he said his orders were to go to
Philadelphia."

Though this is misrepresented, as Thomas Bailey and another came to my
bedside, and said in behalf of the crew (who were under the quarter deck,
whence they could see and hear me, James Pratt holding the door wide open) to
tell me they wanted to go to Boston, as being nigh their home, I answered, I
could not, as Congress's order was to carry the frigate into Philadelphia; but
even as the Honorable Arthur Lee gave it, it proves enough that I had
effectually spoken to the two men sent by the crew in their presence, and had
explained that my orders, which were in consequence of those of Congress, were
to carry the frigate into Philadelphia, which imply all I could have ever said
to the crew, and that I had neither resigned or abdicated my command.

Mr. Thomas Lee said, "Mr. Lynd with Mr. Livingston waited on Captain Landais,
who had retired to his bed, requesting him to come and pacify the men, but was
answered, he had already given his orders."

Though this is misconstrued, there is something in it, as I said to Mr. Lynd I
had already given my answer to two men sent by and in presence of the people,
(as proved by the latter evidence) and when he asked my orders, I told him they
had them already contained in my written order of the seventh instant, as they
really had, which was to keep the course of the ship to the west half south.

Therefore by these two last evidences it is sufficiently proved, that I spoke
and said all I could say to the people, and that I confirmed my former orders,
in order to go to Philadelphia; consequently that I had not resigned the
command, but to the contrary that I gave proper answer to the people, and
continued to give proper orders to the officers.

Besides the embittered and false evidences given verbally against me in court,
the passengers and officers gave some ready wrote, which, as it was manifest
they were in a plot and mutiny together against me, were probably concerted
among themselves to support it, in order to be saved from the punishment they
deserved, and to sacrifice me.

But above all things they gave to the court the following prepared insidious
piece, in order to justify their taking the command from me and giving it to
Lieutenant Degge, viz.

Aug. 10, 1780. On board the Alliance at sea. To the officers of the Alliance.
The conduct of Captain Landais having appeared to us for some time very
suspicious, and he having refused to hear the representations of his officers
when the ship is threatened with a mutiny, but keeping his bed, and professing
himself sick -- We do by this writing bear our testimony to the necessity of
the officers of the frigate choosing one of their members, to conduct her into
the first port of the United States, to prevent the destructive consequences
which are manifestly to be apprehended from leaving her in her present
situation.

(Copy signed) Arthur Lee, Major Pontgibeau, Mr. La Colomb, Mr. Livingston, E.
Brush, Joseph Brown, jun. Joseph Wilkinson, Nathaniel Ingraham, John Rivel,
Eben le Grow, John Middleton, Thomas Elkins, Mr. Common, Mr. Poire, Ludwell Lee,
Thomas Lee.


Though this instrument was concerted and intended by the subscribers to hurt
me, and if possible to hide or paliate the lawless proceeding of those
passengers and officers, conformably to the regulation of the United States,
Article 27th, in any equitable court, this authentic voucher being avowed and
signed by them, would have been an evident proof of their guilt, as the leaders
of that mutiny, and all their specious reasons given therein, would not have
prevented their immediate condemnation, according to that article, without
further trial; as their acknowledged guilt given in that collusive piece was
obvious and stronger against them, than all evidences given by others to the
same purpose could be.

Any one who has read, (in the first part of my memorial) the letter of the
25th of June, of the Honorable Arthur Lee, Esquire to me, wherein he expresses so
well the due obedience of an officer toward his superiors orders, must be
surprised to find that, that gentleman who reasoned so well then, was in this
case the first leader, and will judge whether his declaration and conduct were
consistent.

Here follows the second piece given to the court.
ARTICLES laid to the charge of Captain Peter Landais, by the officers on board
the continental frigate Alliance.

1st. For not coming on deck, on the 10th instant, at sea, when the ship was
threatened with a mutiny on board, and refusing the representation of his
officers, or affording them any assistance, although they all waited on him,
and informed him that the ship was in an alarming situation, but remained in
his cabin, and even retreated to his bed, and in effect resigned entirely his
command.

2d. For abdicating his command the 5th instant, when the people were in great
disorder and conducting so as to create strong suspicion that his intentions
were to promote a revolution on board.

3d. For using unbecoming language to his officers on the quarter deck, before
the common men, so as to have a tendency to make them disagree, and destroy all
confidence, order and obedience on board.

4th. For refusing to stop the ship for an hour to catch fish, according to the
ordinance of Congress, although the total want of fresh provisions made it
necessary for the whole crew, and the surgeon represented to him that the sick
were numerous, and in great want of fresh provisions, and that what he had of
any kind to give them in the place of it, was nearly exhausted.

5th. For endeavoring to go a cruizing to get prizes, though the ship was in
many respects so ill fitted for it, that he ran the most manifest risque of
being taken, and the passengers and crew perishing by diseases.

(Signed) James Degge, Lieut. John Buckly, act. Lieut. James Lynd, act. Lieut.
John Larcher, master, James Bragg, carpenter, Benjamin Pierce, gunner, John
Darling, boatswain, M. Parks, C. Ma. James Warren, jun. Lt. Ma. Thomas Elwood,
Lt. Ma. Thomas Hynsdale, M. M. George Raymond, M. M. Samuel Guild, surgeon,
George Sawyer, M. M. John Thayer, M^n. Fitch Pool, Capt. clerk, Isaac Carr, S.
Mr.


The 2d and 3d of these articles or charges have been so clearly proved false,
and the 4th for stopping to fish on the bank of Newfoundland (the next day
after the crew got masters of the ship, in order to make all sail to America)
so inconsistent, that the Court of Enquiry found they could make no charge of
them against me; the third was likely destroyed in the Court Martial. Therefore
then remains only the first of these articles which may be meant in the 3d
article made against me in the Court Martial; in consequence thereof, I will
defer speaking to it until I vindicate myself against the articles made in said
Court Martial.

I must observe that piece of the officers being without date when, or place
where it was made, has been received thus by the Court of Enquiry, which would
prove their neglect to my prejudice in not asking where and when made; or the
date when, and place where made was omitted designedly. But it was either made
on board the frigate at sea, or since she arrived in Boston, which is a very
important though different case. If made at sea, all these officers were guilty
of the 27th article of the regulation for the United States navy; besides of
the falsehood contained in it. -- If made since the arrival of the frigate, the
Court of Enquiry is culpable in conniving at their plots, in receiving such a
collusive piece.

For was such a piece admissible as evidence, it may be forged and signed by
officers and crew at all times against a Captain, who must suffer though never so
guiltless.

But here follows their undeniable conviction, given also by them to the Court
of Enquiry.

WE, the officers of the continental frigate Alliance, having in body waited on
Captain Landais in a respectful manner, to represent to him the alarming
situation of this frigate from the discontent of the people, which is now of
the most serious nature, being universal, and fomented to a great degree.

Captain Landais refused to receive the foregoing letter, and three several
attempts were made to read it to him, but by a continual vociferous
declaration, that he would neither hear or receive any thing from us, no part
of it could be made intelligible to him, and we were obliged to withdraw
without obtaining the satisfaction of being attended to in this piece of duty,
which we are conscious we owed to him and to our country.

We did again send into the cabin, to desire to represent further to the
Captain the increasing confusion of the ship, and he having refused to hear us,
pleaded himself sick; and we do now, in the most formal manner protest against
the behavior of the said Captain Landais.

And we now, with a view to preserve the ship from the calamitous circumstances
with which she is now threatened, and by the advice of a number of gentlemen
passengers on boards, to appoint somebody to conduct the ship home -- think it
our duty to desire Mr. Degge, our First Lieutenant, to assume the command of
the frigate, and to make for the first port in America, as the most sure and
almost only method remaining of having her returned to our country. --
Accordingly Mr. James Degge, First Lieutenant of the frigate Alliance, is
desired by us the undersigned, to take the command of the said frigate, and
conduct her with all possible expedition into the first port in America that he
can make.

(Signed) John Buckly, M. Parks, James Lynd, John Larcher, jun. James Warren,
jun. Thomas Elwood, B. Pierce, James Bragg, John Darling, Thomas Hynsdale,
James Guild, George Thayer, George Raymont, Isaac Carr, Jos. Wilson, N.
Blodget, Fitch Pool, John Sawin
On board the Alliance frigate at sea, in lat. 41. 30. long. 59.
To Mr. James Degge.

Although the date of this preceding piece is omitted, it is immaterial,
because it was devised, concerted, wrote and signed, before they took from me
the precarious command they had left me, and since the crew got masters of the
ship on the 5th instant.

By the bye I must say, that the passengers and officers, by their artful
foregoing pieces given to the Court of Enquiry, tried to convince them of their
sole good intentions and dutifulness toward their country's service, in their
endeavoring to persuade me to come upon deck and speak to the people, and of my
obstinacy in not complying with it; in having prevented the people from
altering the course, and how they cautioned them of the dangerous consequence
thereof, and that I had abdicated the command.

But they own that they, the officers, by the advice of a number of gentlemen
passengers, appointed Mr. Degge to assume the command of the frigate, and to
make for the first port in America, and really to prevent the people's mutiny
in altering the course, of their own accord and passengers, without any
compulsion of the people -- they altered it clandestinely themselves, at ten
o'clock, P. M. the wind being fair for Philadelphia, where they could by their
number force the people to go, knowing from me that the frigate was ordered by
Congress to that place.

As to my having abdicated the command, it was proved false, even by the
evidence of the Honorable Arthur Lee, Esquire that on the 10th I had spoken to two
of the men, and had told them that my orders were for Philadelphia; which
answer, though not given in all its extent, comprehended all I could say to the
people: And by Mr. L. Lee's evidence, that I had already given my orders; which
answer, though not given also in all its extent, comprehended all I could say
to the officers, as they had my written order of the 7th for the course.

Therefore the evidence given against me to the Court, so far from amounting to
a proof that I had resigned the command, as they pretended to make appear, is
conclusive against them, and clearly proves that they had taken it
clandestinely from me, and given it to Lieutenant Degge, in order to accomplish
their real intention of going to Boston, as they did: By which they were
evidently guilty, as proved also by their own insidious writing, signed and
acknowledged by them, given in the Court of Enquiry, of assembling, plotting
and conspiring against me, in defiance of the 27th Article of the Regulations
of the American Navy, which is applicable both to officers and passengers --
which is in these words, viz.

" Art. 27 th. Any officer, seaman, or marine, who shall begin, excite, cause,
or join in any mutiny or sedition in the ship to which he belongs, on any
pretense whatsoever, shall suffer death, or such other punishment as a Court
Martial shall direct. -- Any person in or belonging to the ship, who shall
utter any words of sedition, or mutiny, or endeavor to make any mutinous
assemblies, on any pretense whatsoever, shall suffer such punishment as a Court
Martial shall direct."

They were guilty of deposing me; they were guilty of breaking Lieutenant
Dogge's arrest, when he was confined for a high crime; they were guilty of
breaking Congress's orders to go to Philadelphia; they were guilty of breaking
my written orders to the (...) have the course steered west half south, and
altering it: They were proved guilty of all the ^me^ by their own evidences,
corroborated by one another, given in the Court of Enquiry.

The Navy-Board, on the other hand, never to my knowledge ^ed to the Court of
Enquiry, though absolutely necessary, my official letter dated Aug. 15th, 1780,
in which the passengers, officers and crew were charged by me; by which th^se
changes were kept out of view, that every one might be cleared to be witness
against me in a ^eeding Court Martial.

The Court of Enquiry refused to receive from Captain Parks my letter to him on
the 13th Aug. because I charged him in it; likewise my orders of the 13th, to
the Lieutenant and Master, were not given to that Court.

Although the Honorable Navy Board and Court of Enquiry had both the undeniable
proofs of my guiltless and dutiful conduct in all respects: The former, in my
letter to them, dated August 15th, 1780, were acquainted that I had written to
ask Doctor Franklin's order, who would give me none; and the necessity for
sailing, corroborated by the Honorable Arthur Lee, Esq's evidence. The latter
had it contained in the evidences given by the passengers, officers and crew on
the one hand -- on the other, they had also authentic proofs of the passengers,
officers and crew's plots and mutinies, contained in said letter and evidences.
-- Nevertheless, the Court of Enquiry, in continuation of the partiality they
had practiced all along in favor of those offenders, and to my utter prejudice,
gave the following report: The following is a copy of the judgment of the Court
of Enquiry on Captain Peter Land^is, viz.
The Court of Enquiry, whereof Daniel Water, Esquire is President, ordered for the
purpose of enquiring into the conduct of Peter Landais, Esquire commander of the
ship Alliance, and of the officers and crew of said ship -- are of opinion,

That for the sake of justice to our country, and to the character of Peter
Landais, Esquire a Court Martial is necessary for the trial of Peter Landais, Esquire
touching his conduct during the late voyage of said ship from L'Orient to
Boston, and immediately previous to her sailing; for giving which opinion the
said Court would offer the following reasons:

1st. The said Peter Landais, Esquire has denied the jurisdiction of the said Court
of Enquiry, instituted according to the orders of the Honorable Navy-Board for
the eastern department, and therefore ought to have the benefit of a Court
Martial, whose jurisdiction no reasonable man in his state can doubt.

2d. If the said Peter Landais, Esquire is innocent, his reputation ought to be
cleared of those charges, or at least popular reflections, under which it now
labors, namely, a breach of those orders of Dr. Franklin, which, by the
express injunctions of said Navy-Board, he was bound to obey; also a continued
series of ill conduct to the passengers, officers, marines and crew of said
ship, during her said voyage: Which conduct, it is said, endangered said ship,
and the lives of many valuable members of society; which, if not noticed, might
encourage future disorders, and injure the public service.

The said Court cannot but repeat, that if the said Peter Landais, Esquire is
innocent as to such charges, his character ought to be rendered fully undoubted
by a Court Martial.

3d. Because the clearance of said Landais may involve the guilt of said crew,
or vice versa.

And the said Court of Enquiry are of further opinion, that whatever the said
Landais's conduct has been, yet another officer, who has opposed him in said
voyage, viz. Lieutenant James Degge, likewise requires the decision of a Court
Martial, and upon these points, viz. whether said Degge has or has not
unjustifiably revolted from said Landais's authority, and unjustifiably
disobeyed said Landais, and usurped the command of the ship.

Touching the conduct of the crew of said ship, the said Court of Enquiry
cannot but observe, that there too clearly appears to have been a spirit of
discontent and disobedience; but when we consider how many instances of
chagrine they have suffered, how long they have been refused their prize-money
which they dearly purchased in a foreign country, and which they have never yet
obtained, and how long they have been detained from their families and
connections, we allow the force of human nature, and do not at present
recommend a Court Martial for the tried of any conduct of said crew.

We conceive that a Court Martial, which to an officer is oftentimes considered
as a benefit, to persons of a lower order is always viewed as an evil, and we
wish not to impose an evil upon those whose errors flow not from their
dispositions.

Upon the whole, the members of said Court of Enquiry, with all possible
respect, submit the evidence which they have collected in the preceding sheets,
with their sentiments and decision thereon; and have the honor to be,

(Signed) John Brown, Thomas Simpson, Joseph Veazy, Peter Green, Daniel Waters,
Samuel Tucker, H. W^, Seth Baxter, Wm. Story, C. N. B. E. Dt.





I must make the following remarks upon the foregoing report, that my reasons
given heretofore of the impropriety of a Court of Enquiry taking place, (after
I had given official charges against the passengers, officers and crew) were
good.

The second article was destroyed in the Court Martial, except sailing without
Dr. Franklin's orders, which part I will explain and vindicate hereafter.

The beginning of the third article, if I understand it, means plainly, that
the court would not clear me, because if they had, the crew must be involved in
their guilt (which is acknowledged by said court, to be apparent) or vice
versa, that is to say, if the crew are cleared, as they were connected together
in guilt, they will be also connected in giving their evidence to charge Peter
Landais, and then partake to make him appear guilty, which appear to have been
the motive of the Navy-Board in ordering that Court of Enquiry.

The court recommends a Court Martial to judge, whether Lieutenant James Degge
has, or has not unjustifiably disobeyed said Peter Landais, and usurped the
command of the ship (for which he was broke.) The reason why it was not
recommended also to try the passengers and officers, who were evidently more
guilty than said Degge, having petitioned, enticed and countenanced him to
break his arrest, and to usurp said command, is the same as above; that is,
because they must be sound guilty, be condemned, and their evidence
inadmissible; but it seems the court wanted their collusive evidence to be
given in the Court Martial, in order to have Peter Landais appear guilty and
condemned.

Now I have given a simple Idea of the Court of Enquiry's conduct against me,
and in behalf of the guilty. I must continue to exhibit that of others and
mine. As on my arrival I had wrote to the Admiralty Board at Philadelphia, an
official letter, similar to the one of the 15th August, to the Navy-Board at
Boston. I wrote again to the Admiralty-Board at Philadelphia, Sept. 13th, 1780,
acquainting them with what had happened on board, since the 15th ult. and the
Navy-Board's conduct toward me, and Lieutenant Degge; and that the Honorable
Mr. Warren, some days after my first visit to the Navy-Board had told me there
was a Court of Enquiry to be held; but as I knew of no such court being
mentioned in the Honorable Congress's resolves about sea regulations, I
insisted according to it, to have three Captains of men of war at least to sit
there, or else I would not say a word; that I conceived a Court of Enquiry
might be proper on different occasions; but when there were capital charges
laid against several persons, as were in my letter to the Navy-Board at Boston,
I thought it required a Court Martial immediately, but it was not so.
Accordingly I said nothing all the time it sat; but if all the evidence had
been fully and fairly noted, as it came from the mouths of the witnesses, it
would sufficiently have brought the truth to light, and with the addition of a
few pertinent questions, have discovered the guilty. I begged their Honors
would order a Court Martial, in which I pledged myself to prove I deserved the
confidence they had placed in me from the beginning to the last.

I represented, that in all courts martial held in the old countries, an
officer is always tried by his peers; urging, that there is little probability
of that Captain's being acquitted, who is to be tried by three Captains not in
command, and whose interest it must be to have him displaced, the probable
consequence of which is that the command of the ship would devolve on one or
other of them.

I told them, that in the report of said Court, they would find that they tried
to discharge the crew; and indeed if the ringleader had been stopped and
examined, I believe he would have declared the plot; but it was prevented: --
And if the lawful support was refused to the Captains of the Navy, all
discipline must be subverted. -- I begged and claimed several sums of money
owing to me by the United States, and that I was confident they would fulfill my
just request, that I remained on board the frigate Alliance until I should be
taken out of her by force or Court Martial and paid, as I had nothing on shore
to live upon.

I wrote the following to the Navy-Board:

On board the continental frigate Alliance, Boston, Sept. 19, 1780. Gentlemen,
I acknowledge the receipt of a paper from your hand yesterday, containing the
following, viz.

Navy-Board, Eastern department, Boston, Sept. 18, 1780. To Peter Landais, Esquire
In consequence of the report of a Court of Enquiry lately held on board the
continental frigate Alliance, that you should be tried by a Court Martial for
certain reasons there given, and by special orders of the Honorable Board of
Admiralty of the United States of America to us given,

We do hereby suspend you from any command in the American navy, until you
shall be tried and acquitted of all charges that have been or may be made
against you.

Signed, William Vernon, J. Warren.


I believe the words, for which this is your order, ought to be written, to
give it the validity of an order.

I have had the honor of writing the 13th inst. to the Honorable Board of
Admiralty of the United States of America, begging of those gentlemen, as a
favor, to order a Court Martial to try, etc. -- advising them that I remain on
board the Alliance, as before, until I am taken out of her by a Court Martial,
and paid, having nothing to live upon on shore.

I am, with great respect, Gentlemen, yours, etc. PETER LANDAIS.

Hon. Gentlemen of the Navy-Board, E. Dt. Boston.

Since the Court of Enquiry had finished, every method had been practiced to
compel me to go out of the ship, that if I had left her, they might have said I
quitted her of my own accord, and they would have never ordered a Court
Martial. In that view the mizen-mast was unship'd, and its apertures left wide
open, to give an entry into the cabin where I kept. I was warned by one of the
men, to take care, for my life was threatened. -- One evening, about 11
o'clock, P. M. when going on board, I was attacked by two of the Bon homme
Richard's men, who began by threatening, and were coming at me; but perceiving
that I put my hand on my sword, they desisted from their attempt. -- A few days
after, at noon, when passing on the quarter deck, going on shore, I saw Mr
Buckley, Lynd, Capt. Parks, Lieut. Elwood, and other officers, standing on the
starboard ga^ (...) to the Long Wharf, where they were well posted to see the
performance of that which (...) intended against my life. I was not above ten
feet from the ship's side on the wharf, when a (...) plank, thrown out of the
main-top at me, fell within three feet of my right foot. I did not so much as
turn my head to see who had thrown it, but continued to walk; immediately after
a brick was thrown likewise at me, which fell so nigh that it made the gravel,
raised from the ground where it struck, fly on my back; I suddenly turned to
see whence it came, the officers then turned their backs all at once, that they
might say they knew not who did it. -- I looked up to the main-top, where I saw
some of the sailors heads, who hid themselves directly. I went to the
Navy-Board, to acquaint them with what had happened, and represented the
necessity of having at least a centry on the gang way, to prevent such doings,
which the officers appeared to encourage. Their answer was, that they had no
soldiers to dispose of. -- In the Afternoon Mr. Vernon told me he had enquired
about the matter, and Mr. Buckley had told him it was no thing but a topmast
clit had fallen nigh me, and the brick was thrown by a journeyman of Salem, who
wrought on board, but whose name was unknown. Thus were palliated all
transgressions done against me. -- Some days after I was at the Navy-Board,
when Captain Barry and Captain Hacker, just arriving from Philadelphia,
delivered a letter to the Honorable J. Warren, who, after reading it, told me,
in their presence, the former was appointed Captain of the Alliance, and the
latter to go in her as second Captain. I answered, Capt. Barry might take that
command whenever he pleased, and even possession of the cabin and state-room
where my bed was, which was also at his service; and that I would lay in the
other state-room until I was tried and paid. -- Captain Barry replied, he had a
bed of his own.

On the 22d of September Mr. Parks, Captain of Marines, came into the cabin,
and said he had an order in writing from the Navy-Board to deliver me, which he
laid on the table, and added, it was to order me immediately out of the ship.
As I did not believe the Navy-Board would have acquitted him without being
tried, being charged by me, nor give him an order to bring to me, having others
by whom they might more properly have transmitted their orders, I did not look
at the paper, thinking if I had, it would have been interpreted as my
acknowledgment of his being clear of the charges I ^d laid against him.

The next day he came again to read some orders, he said, to which I would not
hearken, telling him, he could not be in activity, being accused by me in my
letter to the Admiralty and Navy Board at Boston. He threatened he would bring
armed soldiers to force me out of the ship. I replied, if he did, being charged
by me, I should look upon it as an attempt to assassinate me, and in my defense
would shoot him.

I begged as a favor that one of the two new Lieutenants of the Alliance, which
were present, would go and tell the N. B. to send a proper officer to declare
or bring me their order, and I would surrender myself to him to do what they
pleased with me. -- Accordingly came a corporal with two soldiers, the former
told me he had orders to carry me immediately to the Navy Board; I followed
them, but when out of the ship, the corporal told me to go thither alone.

Being there, I told the gentlemen thereof, I was come to them by the direction
of the Corporal they had sent to me, and (...) ^at they wanted of me, they
answered, nothing but my leaving the ship; I represented to (...) again, that I
had wrote to the Admiralty-Board, and had claimed to be paid the sums of money
which were owing to me by the United States, but had yet no answer, and having
no money left of the sum I brought from France, as I had spent it all, either
to have a copy written of the evidence given in the court, or buying a copy of
that which the Judge Advocate had wrote down, etc. Moreover, that knowing
nobody who kept lodgers -- the night coming on, I requested they would let me
pass the night in the Navy-Board, even in the entry thereof. Mr. Warren went
out, and (though a few days before they had told me they had no soldiers to
dispose of, when my life was attempted by the people of the ship) soon returned
with an officer and two soldiers, whom he ordered to force me out of doors. --
Reduced to despair by such insolent treatment, I entreated the soldiers to run
their bayonets through me, that it might put an end to all the injustice I
underwent; instead of that the two soldiers took hold of me to push me out, I
told them to desist, but being encouraged by Messrs. Warren and Vernon, they
persisted, till they had exhausted their strength in vain, and at last gave up
their attempt; -- as soon as they had left me I went out, full of indignation
at the Navy-Board gentlemen's base conduct, who did all this to provoke me to
some excess, in order to make new charges against me.

Though the officers which were charged by me, kept on board the ship until the
Court Martial was held, I suppose to agree upon the evidence they would give, I
was turned out of the ship, and afterward in the street, without money, not
knowing where to go, exposed to be met in the night by some gang of the
Alliance's crew, incited against my life, or to find them in the house where I
might apply for lodging, without having even a cane to defend myself. -- I
roved thus from one house to another, not finding any shelter, till half an
hour past ten o'clock, in the evening, when I found a negro man, who carried me
to an old lady, who received me with much ado, not knowing who I was.

The next morning after, my steward came and told me, that as soon as I was out
of the ship, he went on board and found the officers in the cabin, and a great
deal of the provisions and stores which were there, had been plundered and
carried away, and two of my trunks were broke open. -- I sent him to fetch my
trunks, where I found many things had been stolen out of the two which were
broke open. I found also in one of them eleven old table cloths and twenty-five
towels, which had been kept there since they were sent to me before I sailed,
(having the Marquis de la Fayette passenger) belonging to the ship. Having no
pen or ink. I immediately sent the steward to acquaint the Navy-Board that
those things, having always been kept in my trunks, were brought to my lodging
in one of them, and to acquaint them at the same time, that the cabin stores
and provisions were plundered, and that I would deliver the old linen as soon
as a full discharge, either from the Navy-Board, or Captain Barry for the
things left in the cabin, should be transmitted to me; but neither the
Navy-Board nor Captain Barry would give me said discharge, though it was one or
the other fault for not sending somebody to take care of those stores and
provisions in the cabin when I was forced out of the ship.

I have been very particular in enumerating all that passed between the Navy
Board and me, because Messrs. Warren and Vernon not yet fully satisfied with
all the conduct to my prejudice they had kept since my arrival at Boston; being
convinced, I suppose, I should in a fair Court Martial easily clear myself of
the charges made against me in the Court of Enquity; and point out palpable
charges of the greatest magnitude, already known and proved against the
passengers, officers and crew, in order to prepossess as much against me as
they possible could, said Navy-Board malignantly and basely misrepresented what
I had done by composing the following charges:

Navy-Board, E. D. Boston, Nov. 10, 1780.
To John Barry, Esquire Captain and Commander in the Navy of the United States of
America, and the Court Martial of which he is president, appointed to sit on
board the ship Alliance, on the 17th instant, for the trial of Peter Landais,
Esquire late commander of said ship, for sundry matters, in the warrant for calling
said court expressed.

The Navy-Board exhibit the following charges against the said Peter Landais,
Esquire for their consideration in addition to such as are contained in the report
of the Court of Enquiry, held on the conduct of said Captain Landais, viz.

1st. His disobedience of the orders of said Navy-Board, in sundry instances,
particularly his refusing to deliver the said ship Alliance, more especially
her cabin and furniture to John Barry, Esquire when appointed to the command of
said ship by the Honorable Board of Admiralty.

2d. His indecent and ^gentle ^anlike conduct, particularly in rejecting and
refusing to read sundry letters and orders sent him by (...) Navy Board, and in
obliging them to cause him to be taken out of said ship by ^e, and (...) ^ing
them to cause him to be turned out of their office in the same manner, to the
scandal (...) of his own rank, and the character and reputation of said navy.

3d. In withholding (...) requisitions and orders of the said Navy-Board,
sundry articles of cabin furniture an^ (...) ^ing to said ship, thereby
robbing said ship, defrauding the public, and setting an evil example.

(Signed) J. Warren, Wm. Vernon.
A (...), T. Dawes, jun.


Any body may judge (...) impossible it was for me to defend and justify my
character, when such false, misrepresented and amplified charges were made by
such enemies, invested with all the power, and judged by others who had no more
delicacy, and had also self-interest to destroy it. I say false, because I
never refused to deliver said Alliance -- quite the contrary. I said, in
presence of the Navy-Board, Captain Barry and Captain Hacker, that Captain
Barry might take said command whenever he pleased, and never said a word to the
contrary. -- I did not refuse to deliver the cabin stores, consisting of old
table-linen, and white paper -- quite the contrary; I offered to deliver it
instantly, if they or Captain Barry would give me a full discharge for the
stores and provisions I had left on board, which was but just and requisite.

I say misrepresented and amplified, because I never refused to receive letters
or orders sent me from the Navy-Board by proper persons; but twice only I
refused to listen to Captain Parks, when he said he had orders from them to
transmit to me, because I could not believe they would use so improper a method
(he being charged by me and not tried) to send me their orders; which was the
reason I did not receive their orders to quit the ship. When the Corporal came
to tell me to go to the Navy Board, I did it directly; and my wanting to pass
the night in the Navy-Board office or entry, was owing to the distress. I was
reduced to, not knowing where to go, exposed in the night to the fury of a gang
of seamen, who had already attempted my life; and being without money, of which
I had before acquainted the Admiralty; which condition they might have changed
with justice, in giving me some of the money due to me by the United States.

I say malignantly and basely, in accusing me of robbing said ship, in
withholding sundry articles belonging to the cabin; which said old linen and
white paper were unknowingly brought to me in one of my trunks. I had, as
already said, offered to deliver it as soon as they or Captain Barry would give
me a discharge in full for all the cabin stores and provisions I had left
there.

The Judge Advocate brought me the following, viz.

To Peter Landais, Esquire late Commander of the ship Alliance, -- greeting.
By virtue of a warrant from the Honorable Navy-Board, I am directed to summon,
and hereby summon you, Peter Landais, Esquire to appear on board said Alliance, on
Monday next, at 10 o'clock, A. M. at which time and place your trial is to
commence, touching your conduct immediately previous to your sailing from
L'Orient, during your late passage from thence, and since your arrival at
Boston.

(Signed) Thomas Dawes, jun. J. A.
Boston, 18th Nov. 1780.

The bad weather prevented said Court's assembling before the 20th inst. It was
composed of John Barry, Esquire President, Capt. of the Alliance, Captains.
Hoystead Hacker, Esquire the 2d Capt. of Alliance, Captains. Samuel Nicholson, Esquire
Captains. Silas Devet, Lieuten's. Patrick Fletcher, Lieuten's. Nich. Gardner,
Lieuten's. Samuel Prichard, Lieutenant of Marines. Thomas Dawes, jun. Judge
Advocate.


There were therefore four out of the seven members setting in the Court
Martial, who had the greatest interest to have me broken, as they were to sail
in the Alliance, if they could make me appear guilty; but who must be without
employ, had I been acquitted and restored to the command of the Alliance, as
justice required.

Besides all the seven members of said Court Martial had signed with all the
other officers in the American navy, a petition sent to the Admiralty against
my commanding the Alliance before I sailed in the Alliance January 6th 1779, by
which they proved their jealousy and prejudice against me.

I had much reason to complain against the Judge Advocate's conduct, during the
Court of Enquiry, but to whom? Nobody would listen to my just grievances, it
would have availed me nothing.

I therefore said nothing on these important points; but being sensible, on one
hand, of the disadvantage I must undergo being tried by such court, composed of
men declared thus against me out of natural prejudice, and who had
self-interest to destroy me, in having me condemned; and, on the other, if I
objected against it, that another set of officers or Court Martial would be
refused to me; and my challenging these officers might have been misrepresented
by my enemies, as a proof that I was guilty; besides, I must have remained
without judgment, under the disgraceful report of the Court of Enquiry:
Therefore I was obliged to submit with those disadvantages, and told them, that
I could have challenged every one of the members sitting, because they had
shown their prejudice against me better than two years before, sending a
petition to Philadelphia against my commanding the frigate Alliance, which they
had all signed but Captain Barry (as he had told me of it in the time.) Captain
Nicholson replied, that Captain Barry had signed said petition one of the
first: However I continued, and said, I could have challenged Captain Barry,
Captain Hacker, and two Lieutenants, out of the seven officers sitting, as they
were to ship in the Alliance, were I condemned; but that I was so clear in my
own conscience, of any charge whatever made against me, and so confident in the
honor and equity of the officers sitting, that I submitted to their justice. I
soon perceived that I had misplaced my confidence.

During the Court Martial when there was no bystanders, very often Captain
Barry had words with the Judge Advocate, being sure of the members prejudice
against me, saying he altered, omitted or amplified the evidences as he
pleased; all which I suppose was done to incense and make me interfere in it,
which, had I done it, they would have readily impeached me with disrespect to
the Court Martial, etc.

During six weeks the court lasted, Capt. Barry several times in the morning
when the members were assembled, told me disobliging things, to put me out of
temper, and had the court opened on a sudden, with a design, I suppose, that I
might answer him some words in the same way, of which he would have took
advantage. With the same intention he several times recommended to the court to
keep the oath they had given, as if it had been a secret; but I was confident,
it was either a snare laid to make me enquire what that oath could be, or it
was really a secret resolution against me transmitted to him before hand.

When I cross-questioned Mr. Lynd, acting Lieutenant, about the chase which he
had given in the Alliance to a 32 gun frigate, I made him own that I having
ordered him to have the driver sat, he answered me, that he knew not how to rig
it, upon which I called a quartermaster to have it done before him, that he
might learn how to do it. As they had made a great stress against me for my
ordering a quartermaster to show an acting Lieutenant how to rig a sail
without explaining why -- the Court of Enquiry, having no solid foundation
where to build had made an article thereupon, wherein I was impeached of ill
usage to the officers.

But Mr. Lynd, by owning his ignorance, or unwillingness to obey me, justified
my reproof thereon, and destroyed that part of the Court of Enquiry's report:
Upon which Capt. Barry said, I should not cross-question thus, and moved to the
court to oblige me to give them in writing the cross-questions I would put to
the evidence, and they would do it themselves. I represented that I had an
undeniable right to cross-question the evidences against me in such manner as I
thought best, to draw the truth from them; Captain Barry then enjoined the
evidences to answer only yes, or no, by which it was impossible to draw any
thing from them.

I begged of the Court Martial, that they would ask from, and have transmitted
to them my official letter to the Navy Board, dated August 15th, 1780; but the
Navy Board denied having such a letter, thinking I had nothing to prove they
had it, but their receipt which was not signed; but after three whole weeks
denial, I exhibited a letter from the Navy Board, directing me to deliver said
letter to Mr. Larcher, and the receipt for that letter from Mr. Larcher; at
last it came into the court, but they took no notice of it, as it was too
obvious, strong and explicit against the officers, passengers and crew to be
confuted. I will repeat hereafter some extracts of it.

I begged also, that the court would be pleased to order Lieutenant Elwood to
come and give his evidence, but I could never obtain it, because it would have
proved anew my strictness against allowing any body to have any private goods
on board, and that the officers kept from me the plots and threats they knew of
the mutineers, but the court's intention was not to summon him to come, as his
evidence given in the Court of Enquiry would have prevented two articles which
the Court Martial made against me.

When the court had received all the evidences they thought fit against me, I
applied to them for a warrant to oblige Stephen Wates, Captains steward, to
come and give his evidence, as the said Stephen Wates had given me in writing
that Lieutenant Livingston, one of the passengers, had given to James Pratt,
(the ringleader who had carried on the first mutiny on board) six guineas, and
a suit of new clothes, and had told me moreover, that the other passengers had
given to said James Pratt some money also; and that whenever he should be
ordered, he would give his evidence more extensively thereon, and on other
similar material points.

The Judge Advocate went himself to Salem, in search of Stephen Wates, in order
to speak to him, though I objected as much a^ I could against his going; but I
sent word to Stephen Wates by Mr. Vary, (the Salem Stage's owner) to come to
the court next Monday following, to give his evidence. Mr. Vary having
delivered his errand to Stephen Wates before the Judge Advocate had found him,
told me after, that Stephen Wates had told him, he would come and tell the
truth, for which the officers of the Alliance must suffer. But after the Judge
Advocate had found and had spoke to Stephen Wates, the case was quite altered
when he gave his evidence in the court; for be said that the six ^uineas and
sait of new clothes, which Lieutenant Livingston had given to James Pratt, were
given as a reward to the latter, for landing the former's t^unk, and said no
more.

That witnesses being thus tampered with, and evidence of the adversaries
perverted, suppressed and misrepresented to their advantage, it is easy to
conceive what must be my state.

Having had no copy of the evidences given to the court during seven weeks
against me, it being impossible for me to recollect all that had been said, I
made the following request, viz.

I request of the Court Martial, now convened as per adjournment, that you be
pleased to order a further adjournment of the court, for the following reasons.

That having been deprived of the help of Mr. Richards, Mr. Richards, who had
sat as Judge Advocate in several Court Martials, having heard of my trial,
offered to assist me in writing my defense, which I readily accepted, as he was
a capable writer in such cases, and I unable to write it in proper English as
it ought to be, he was seven or eight days perusing my papers, during which
time the Judge Advocate of the Court Martial happened to see him at my lodging
writing, he was soon after sent for, and the next day he left me, having done
nothing, telling he was going to Newbury to ship in the Thorn privateer.
(by reasons which the court may be acquainted with) it has been impossible
with all my endeavors to finish my defense.

That not having perused the evidences given in this court, I would be glad if
any new charges are to be added to those of the Court of Enquiry, and those of
the Honorable Navy Board, that the Judge Advocate would let me have them in
writing.

I further beg the favor of the court, that the adjournment be appointed to
Monday next.

Boston, Dec. 26, 1780. P. L.


But the court would neither order a copy of the evidence, nor of the new
charges given in it, to be given me to make my defense by. I was therefore
compelled to trust to my memory for what I recollected, and to Providence for
the rest.

I began my defense by demonstrating obviously that the evidences of the
passengers and officers given against me were inadmissible. As it was
conspicuous they were proved guilty by their own insidious instruments produced
by them in the Court of Enquiry, which condemned them without trial, one signed
by the Honorable Arthur Lee, Esquire and all the other passengers, petitioning the
officers to name one to take the command of the Alliance from me, though there
was then extant a written order from me, which the officers assented to; by
another they signed also, which was given likewise in said court; and in
connection of their common guilt, they gave the command to Lieutenant Degge, by
which they broke his arrest, broke the said extant written order for the course
to be kept west half south for Philadelphia; according to the order of
Congress; and instead of that came to Boston; and their pretensions, as an
excuse of my having resigned the command, proved false by my said written
order, as one of their own evidences had acknowledged that I had told them that
I had given my orders, and by the other written orders I sent them after, which
they refused to receive on the 13th August, it was coroborated that I never
showed the least inclination to resign my command; and what proves it more
still, is their taking it from me clandestinely in the night; therefore being
proved thus connectedly guilty against my orders, commands, and consequently
against me, their evidence could be looked upon but as a series of their
connected guilt against me, consequently could have no force, credit or
validity against me; moreover their evidence against me must be considered as
an expedient to palliate their crime, in charging me, and satiate their
animosity in having me condemned, by which means my evidence could not be
turned against them.

I exhibited my letters to his Excellency Benjamin Franklin, Esquire previous to my
resuming the command on board the Alliance at l'Orient, and those I wrote to
him after, and his receipts therefore, the letter from the officers of the
Alliance to entreat me to resume my command on board of her, and the opinion in
writing of the Honorable Arthur Lee, Esquire and of commodore Gillon of my right
and duty to resume it.

I declared that the Honorable Arthur Lee, Esquire wanted me to have his post
chaise brought in the ship, that being not practicable, the ship being too full
when I resumed my command; I told him to sell it, and with the amount to
purchase some silks, stuffs, or even a box of tea, that I thought Congress
would not disapprove it, but that he refused my offer; that there were brought
on board the ship, three small boxes, belonging to the French Minister at
Philadelphia, whereof I had acquainted the Admiralty there, and the Navy Board
at Boston as soon as arrived.

I protested I never gave any permission to Mr. Blodget to bring any goods in
the Alliance, and that might be verified by the Master's book.

I exhibited the letter of the Honorable Arthur Lee, Esquire to me, on the exigency
of sailing for America, and enumerated the concurring reasons for it, and
dangers the frigate underwent, which made it necessary, besides Congress's
order for her immediate return to Philadelphia, of which I had a copy; all
reasons which justified my sailing in her from L'Orient, having had no order to
the contrary from Dr. Franklin, though I had advised him of my intention to
fulfill Congress's order, of which I had received a copy; but he would neither
give me any to stay or to sail, which implied his tacit approbation to sail.

I gave the reasons why Captain Parks was put under arrest, and that he was
released therefrom as soon as he assented to do his duty. I gave also the
reasons why Lieutenant Degge was ordered and kept under arrest, till he broke
them to usurp the command from me.

I related how the peevishness and bad humor of the Honorable Arthur Lee, Esquire
(and of other passengers and officers by his example) began a few days after we
sailed from Europe, and progressively augmented disputing with me, on account
of all the victuals brought upon the table, even with the course and police of
the ship, and after his quibblings and insulting words to me at table. How he
enticed me not to give chase to the sails we met with, but even to avoid them
-- How the crew became more and more undutiful, the cause of which I could not
prevent, nor even know, as the officers kept from me all the licentiousness of
the crew, which they heard, and which they have given in as their evidences to
the Court of Enquiry. I submitted the course I had ordered to be kept, to the
Court's judgment, giving them the reasons why I kept it thus, and proved I had
always ordered proper sail to be made. I related how I was not obeyed nor
seconded by the officers in making sail, when we chased a 32 gun frigate, and
some days after a brig.

I produced the certificate of the Carpenter, how the sail was shortened on the
6th of August, 1780, in order to fix a lightning-rod to the main-top-royal-mast
head, when some of the crew assembled, and wanted to speak to me; that I sent
them word to come five at a time in the cabin to do it; that James Pratt, who
headed about 30 of them, said he would not, but they would speak to me all at
once on the quarter deck; and said to the other, let us go and make sail; --
that one of the foretop-men repeated the same words, and accordingly they went
forward; -- that I told my Clerk to take with him pen, ink, and paper, and the
Regulation for the American Navy, and follow me on the quarter deck, where I
found the passengers already assembled together, and saw part of the crew
forward in an open mutiny, making sail; that the first word I uttered was to
Mr. Elwood, Lieutenant of Marines on watch, whom I ordered to have all the
marines instantly under arms; that he would nor do it; that there being but Mr.
Lynd, acting Lieutenant, upon watch, I sent orders to Captain Parks and all the
other officers to come upon deck; that word was brought me, that they were
shaving, etc. and they came not till long time after; that James Pratt, who
commanded and directed the others how to set the sails, came from the gang-way
upon the quarter deck, followed by a number of seamen; that I spoke to them in
the best manner I could to impress them with a sense of duty; that I told my
Clerk to read to them the Regulations for the Navy; James Pratt's answers, and
his threats to choose another Captain; that I ordered my Clerk to take down
what he said, and his unwillingness to do it; how said Pratt went again with
the other seamen to make more sail, etc. that Captain Parks being come at last,
I ordered him to have all the marines under arms, and if any refused, to call
them by their names, and if they would not obey, to write their disobedience on
the list before their names; -- how at first he ^d to elude my order and never
performed it, and that he promised me a copy of the marines refusal to obey;
that I went myself to Mr. Lynd forward, in order to lower the fore topsail;
how, in fine, after I had given all possible and proper orders to have the
mutiny stopped, seeing I was seconded by nobody; having heard Mr. Lynd say, "
What can a man do against 300 that are of the same mind?" -- Mr. Buckly say, "
What, in the name of God, can a man do against three hundred?" which were hints
that I was alone against all on board, which were of the same mind: -- Not
obeyed by officers of marines, as I could do no more, the crew being masters of
the ship, and I could not take it alone myself from them, I went down.

I related, that when I went to observe the sun at meridian, I saw Lieutenant
Livingston and James Pratt walking together on the starboard side of the
quarter deck, but perceiving me, they parted; how the same afternoon Mr. Buckly
and others came to tell me the course was altered, though it had not been, and
they asked my orders.

How the next day after the mutiny for making more sail, having soundings, I
ordered Mr. Buckly to fill again; but instead of that I found him fishing, and
was compelled myself to put the helm a-weather.

I showed the certificate of Mr. Pool, of the 6th of August, how I had sent him
to ask Captain Parks to send me a copy, certified by him, of the list of the
marines as they were called to take arms the day before, with their refusal
before their name, which Captain Parks refused to give, saying, he was not my
clerk.

I likewise showed my letter and order to him of the same day, and on the same
topic, by which I upbraided and charged him of having not done his utmost on
the preceding day, to have the marines under arms, as I had ordered him, in
order to stop the mutiny; and I finished it by ordering him to have said list
made, an exact copy of the one they were called by, and their refusal to obey
wrote before their name, and those who were centry then mentioned, and that it
should be signed by him and delivered to me: -- Which order I sent him by Mr.
Warren, Lieutenant of Marines, whose receipt I produced.

I exhibited my written orders, given on the 7th August 1780 to Messrs.
Buckley, Lynd and Larcher, to have the course steered west half south, until I
should order to alter it, which was the due course to the entry of the
Delaware, and which order was extant and in force when the ship was taken from
me. I related, that on the eleventh instant, being taken suddenly sick at
table, I arose in order to go to bed, that a passenger at the same time in a
hurry, (though dinner was not ove^) went out of the cabin; that soon after
James Pratt passed without being opposed by the centry at the cabin door, and
without leave opened and held the cabin door so, whilst James Baily and
another came toward my bed, and said, they came in the crew's, name, who were
under the quarter deck, to ask me to go to Boston; that I answered I could not
comply with their desire, Congress having ordered the frigate's return to
Philadelphia, that they went back, I saw about 30 of them under the deck, --
that James Pratt said, he would go to Boston, and the top man before mentioned
repeated the same. -- That Mr. Buckley first came to incite me to break
Congresses order -- that he was not gone long before he came back with the
officers to bring me their opinion to the same intent and purpose, and they
would obey me cheerfully in going to Philadelphia if I would show them my
order; afterward they told me to go on the quarter-de^ck and speak to the
people, though I told them I was sick and had told the people I could not break
Congress's order, and could say no more; that Mr. Lynd asked my orders, and I
answered, they had them already in writing, which was to keep the course west
half south -- which course he said would not be altered during his being on
deck.

That afterward all was quiet, and by all what I had seen and heard, I was
confident to a certainty that the people would never alter the course, had the
officers been averse to it, but I suspected both passengers and officer had
self-interest to prevent the ship's going to Philadelphia, for fear the first
mutiny would be searched thorougly into there, where they were in some respects
strangers more than in Boston; so that in fact, without any compulsion of the
crew, the officers and passengers of their own accord having assembled,
concerted and collectively agreed to take the command from me; and they had, at
ten o'clock in the night, without any noise, clandestinely altered the course,
and made it for Boston; all which proved obviously at the same time my
willingness to keep the command, and the preconcerted wilful mutiny of the
passengers and officer and their plot to take said command from me. That as
soon as I perceived it I crawled as well as I could upon deck, found Mr. Buckly
quiet in mind asleep, lying upon a quarter deck gun; that I called to him, and
being awoke by the quarter master, told him to mind the course was altered, he
answered very well, I told him he should answer for it; that seeing plainly it
was done by the officers and passengers, I judged it was impossible to recall
them to any sense of honor to which they were lost and, not being able to have
evident proofs how this affair was transacted until next day, and suffering a
rheumatic pain all over the body I went down. -- Next morning I sent for the
log-book, which was refused, I could not obtain it until late in the evening,
when I saw it I found the mutiny had heen carried on as I had foreseen, by the
passengers and officers connected together, who had chosen Lieutenant Degge to
command the ship: that it was impossible for me to do any thing against
passengers, officers and the crew, which latter were seduced by the former;
that I sent an order to Lieutenant Degge to keep under arrest -- then I
produced also the order of the ^3th instant, to the three acting Lieutenants,
and the order to the Captain and two Lieutenants of marines, which they all
refused to receive. -- That being sick -- still nobody that would obey my
orders, I kept below, as it would have been useless for me to offer to do any
thing against every one on board, had I been well. -- That on the 16th, being
better, I got up and saw one of the ship's boats out, with James Pratt in her,
who went and brought on board a fishing boat, I went upon the quarter deck,
where seeing Lieutenant Degge, I ordered him again under arrest, but he would
not go. I went down to seal my official letter to the Navy-Board of Boston, but
coming up again the fishing boat was off, and her people refused to take my
letter, that some time after, hearing a noise, I looked out of one of the
ports, saw the breakers in the winds eye by the larboard bow, went up and
ordered the helm a-weather, when Lieutenant Degge coming up, ordered the people
to obey nobody but himself, threatened me when on shore, and all the
passengers joined with him, (in particular a French one) till I went down; that
being at anchor in Nantasket-Road, the barge went to Boston with the passengers
and officers, without my knowledge, and that I could not have my letter
transmitted to the Navy-Board until the 18th; and I told the court, that there
was even in the evidence given by men, who were connected in the concerted plot
against me proof enough that I had done all I could possibly do for the good of
the service; but my orders being prevented taking place by their general
opposition, disobedience and mutiny, I had detected them and told them all I
knew about it, either in writing or verbally.

As to the charges made against me by the Honorable Navy Board, eastern
department, at Boston, I said that Captain Barry, who sat then president in the
court, knew that I had never opposed his commanding the Alliance, nor
interfered with it by words or facts whatever; that he knew also, that the old
table linen, which had been brought to me at my lodging in one of the trunks, I
had offered to deliver him as soon as he, or the Navy Board would give me a
general discharge for the stores and provisions that were in the cabin when I
was ordered out of her; that I never refused to receive and submit to their
orders when consistent with equity, reason and the regulations of the navy;
that it was proved I had received and submitted to their suspension, and had
delivered some wine and other articles to Captain Bass by their verbal order
only, and had left the ship as soon as they had sent me their verbal order by a
proper channel -- but that I had I been unwilling to speak in the Court of
Enquiry, it being inconsistent with reason and the regulation of the Navy, as
there were real charges against the passengers, officers and crew contained in
my official letter to the Navy-Board at Boston, dated August 15, 1780; that I
had refused their orders by Captain Parks, as he was charged by me and not
tried, consequently not acquitted, and of course not till then in a capacity to
act, that I earnestly desired passing a night in the Navy-Board entry, not
knowing where to go, and being exposed to the fury of a crew exasperated
against me, which they knew had attempted my life already, and that it was as
iniquitous, cruel and disgraceful in them, as humiliating for me, when I had no
money, (though so much due to me by the United States) to be forced in the
streets in a country where I had no security for my life, nor credit, without
affording me any means to be lodged and have subsistence (as ought to have been
done, and the cost thereof deducted out of the money owing to me) until I was
tried.

The Court rose and parted, without being willing to stay till the Judge
Advocate had verified several orders and other papers contained in part of my
defense, or rather the confession I had given the Court in writing, and I had
others which I had only mentioned in the Court, that I wanted also to be
verified by him; but being dinnertime, he said he could not stay, so it ended
there.

Not being able to learn in Boston the judgment of the Court Martial concerning
my trial, I wrote to the Admiralty, and begged from them to let me know my
fate, but had no answer: I determined to go myself in May, in order to know it.
-- Being there, I applied to the Admiralty Board; they said they could tell me
nothing about it. I applied to the Secretary of Congress, and had it, of which
this is a copy, viz.

At a Court Martial assembled on board the Alliance, in Boston harbor, on the
20th November, 1780, pursuant to a warrant from the Honorable Navy-Board E. D.
to John Barry, Esquire Captain and Commander in the navy of the United States, and
continued by several adjournments to the 6th day of January, 1781, to enquire
into the conduct of Peter Landais, Esquire

PRESENT, John Barry, Esquire President, Captain. Hoysted Hacker, Esquire, Captain.
James Nicholson, Esquire Captain. Nicholas Gardner, Lieutenant. Silas Devat,
Lieutenant. Patrick Fletcher, Lieutenant. Sam. Pritchard, Lieut. of Mari.
Thomas Dawes, jun. Judge Advocate.


The Court having collected all the admissible evidence in their power,
touching the conduct of Peter Landais, Esquire late commander of the Alliance,
during her late voyage from L'Orient to Boston, immediately previous to her
sailing, and since her arrival at Boston, are unanimously of opinion, that said
Peter Landais, Esquire is guilty of a breath of the orders of Congress, and of the
Honorable Navy-Board. (...) dated Boston, Dec. 1778, ^t said Landais directed,
in coming away with the said ^ly ^ll^ (...) the permissi^ of Dr. Franklin, the
American Minister there: But the said P^ Esquire, ^n coming away without leave as
aforesaid, took the advice of the Honorable Arthur Lee, (...) man learned (...)
the l^, and late high in office, and so far is entitled to fa^or; which advice,
together with the motives that urged it, will appear by copies of certain
letters from said Honorable Arthur Lee, Esquire and transmitted herewith.

2d. That said Peter Landais, Esquire is guilty of a further breach of the orders
of Congress, and of said Navy-Board, in suffering certain private goods to be
brought in said ship from France, and by that means creating an interest on
board said ship repugnant to the public service.

3d. That said Peter Landais is guilty of a breach of the first and
thirty-seventh articles in the rules for the regulation of the navy of the
United States, in not exerting his utmost abilities to inspect the behavior of
the passengers, of his officers and crew, to detect and bring to punishment
offenders on board, and in not setting an example to his officers in
discharging their duties.

4th. That said Peter Landais, Esquire is guilty of a breach of the orders of said
Navy Board, in not delivering up the ship Alliance, her cabin and cabin
furniture, when by said Board ordered to deliver them up: But said Court,
taking into consideration the peculiar circumstances of Captain Landais, that
he was then without credit or money in this country, that he had no comfortable
resort but to said ship, recommend said Landais to indulgence.

Said Court conceiving it to be their duty so to do, beg leave further to
report, that Captain Landais has nevertheless greatly suffered from a mutinous
disposition in both passengers and officers, and from a real mutiny in the crew
of said ship.

The SENTENCE.

The Court Martial adjudge the said Peter Landais, Esquire to be broke, and
rendered incapable of serving in the American navy for the future.

(Signed) JOHN BARRY, President. T. DAWES, J. A.

After which the Court was dissolved.

A true copy, examined with the original

(Signed) GEO. BOND.




Having been condemned by the above sentence, following four specious articles,
made by an unanimous Court Martial, there remains to prove, by resuming the
reasons given in my defense, and the parts of the evidences which justify my
conduct, and destroy those articles; that the said Court was either wilfully
unjust, or incapable in their judgments: And that I was clear and innocent of
the charges contained in the articles preceding said sentence. I am not bound
to prove negatives; but by all that I will gather from the circumstances, and
of the evidences given, I will prove the falsity of them.

With regard to the first article,

When I resumed my command on board the Alliance frigate, in the road of
Penmaneck, at L'Orient, on the 13th June, 1780, according to her officers and
crew's request, and the opinion of Commodore Gilion and the Honorable Arthur
Lee, Esquire of my duty and right thereon -- The frigate was ready loaded, having
her hold full, besides 67 boxes of muskets between decks. The crew was employed
at that time to bend her three topsails to the yards; and Captain Jones had
told the officers that very day, he was going to America as soon as the ship
could be ready to sail; which implied he had Doctor Franklin's orders so to do.
By the letter of John Brown, Esquire Secretary of the Admiralty, to me, I was
acquainted with Congress's orde^ for the Alliance's immediate return to
Philadelphia. In order to accomplish which I wrote, June 15th and 16th, to his
Excellency Benjamin Franklin, Esquire (which are in the first part of this
memorial) that I had resumed my command, would make all possible expedition to
have the Alliance ready to sail for America according to Congress's order
(which I imparted to him) and asked his in consequence; by which conduct it is
proved that though he had previously used me with manifest injustice, I did not
forget my duty to him and the service; but he would give me no other answer but
leave the ship immediately, which was no order, but a continuation of his abuse
of power, and of course tyranny toward me.

As he had given me no order since I had resumed my command, I could not
disobey them; for where there is no order there can be no disobedience; but to
the contrary, as he had probably given orders to Captain Jones to sail in the
Alliance for America as soon as ready; as I had acquainted him with the order
of Congress for the Alliance's immediate return to Philadelphia, and my
willingness to fulfill them being coincident together, his silence, and no order
to the contrary was his tacit consent, that I should sail according to
Congress's order, as it is an axiom incontrovertible in that case, that my
sailing according to Congress's order not being prohibited, was permitted.
Therefore if any one was guilty for my sailing without order from France, as
his Excellency B. Franklin could have his orders transmitted to me in five days
time, and that I waited for them from the 14th June till the 8th of July, it
was his Excellency's fault, as he would give me none, being exasperated that in
vain he had done all he was capable of to take me out of command, in order to
place Captain Jones, knowing that had he given me any order consistent with the
service, it would have justified my having resumed the command and put me in a
station and situation, whence I might have showed his previous abuse of power
toward me.

But in this case would not any equitable court have judged, being deprived of
his Excellency's order, whether it was not better to sail for America as I did,
when I knew Congress's order for the Alliance's return, and that it was
probable his Excellency had given similar orders to Captain Jones: when all
circumstances and dangers heretofore enumerated, which the frigate underwent,
concurred to make her sailing necessary, or to stay always for his orders to
sail, which in all appearance he would never have given me.

Had I stayed, a court with justice might have said, that I was guilty for
staying in France without permission of his Excellency Benjamin Franklin and
against Congress's order to carry the ship immediately to Philadelphia, which I
knew and all other circumstances which concurred to make her sailing necessary,
-- moreover the court which condemned me, acknowledged in the said article,
that I had motives and advice which urged me to sail, but they could not say
that I had any to stay.

Therefore of the two, of which one must unavoidably be done, I determined on
the only one justifiable. According to this precedent, whenever a superior will
have an inferior found guilty, he will be sure of the means by giving him no
orders, as the inferior must do something, or remain still, in either of which
cases he will be condemned for having done it or remained still without his
superior's permission.

With regard to the second article.

In the first place, there was no goods belonging to me brought in the
Alliance, and it is not probable I would have suffered any there belonging to
others, when I had orders to the contrary.

In the Court of Enquiry, nobody had mentioned that any goods had been brought
in the Alliance. But in the report of said court it was said, that "the
clearance of Captain Landais might involve the guilt of the crew, and vice
versa," by which it may be understood, that I must be condemned, otherwise the
crew must be involved in their own guilt; and as they knew they could not make
me appear guilty but by their imposition, the following was framed, and Mr.
Nathan Blodget (Purser) gave the following evidence:

N. B. I copy it exactly, with the interlineations, as it was wrote by a writer
I had in the Court, which ought to be observed.

The material questions from the Court to Mr. Blodget, were as follows:

Q. Court. "Was there any merchandise on board belonging to any of the
officers?"


Mr. Blodget's answer. "None, except what belonged to me."


2 Q. "Was there any private property on board besides your own?"


A. "Yes; Mr. Livingston had some in his trunk, which he took out of Capt.
Smith at sea."


3 Q. "What value had you on board?"


Mr. Blodget. "I had some upon my own account, some on account of Mr. Arthur
Lee, and some for my friends in Boston, all of which was consigned to myself,
but it would not all fill more than five trunks."


4 Court. "What was the sterling amount of what you purchased, and of what was
consigned to you?"


Mr. Blodget's Ans. "It was to the amount of 550 Louis."


5 (N. B.) Court. "Who commanded the ship when the goods were brought on board?


Mr. Blodget's Ans. "Captain Landais."


6 Court. "Was it by Captain Landai's consent or knowledge they were brought on
board?"


Mr. B's Ans. "He knew that I had goods on board."


7 Court. "Did you ask his liberty to bring those goods on board?"


Mr. B's Ans. "No -- I informed him, the Captain, after some of the goods were
on board that I had, and that I depend upon bringing the rest on board, was my
design in going Purser. Mr. Warren, of the Navy-Board, told me that if I
brought no more than my birth would hold, nobody would take notice of it; and
the Captain told me not to let him know of it."


8 Capt. Landai's Quest. "Did you ask my leave to bring goods on the account of
M. Lee and others?"


Mr. B's Ans. "No."


9 Court. "Does Mr. Lee pay freight for those goods, or not?"


Mr. B's Ans. "No," Mr. Blodget observed to the Court, that "it was by his
advice that Mr. Lee invested 500 Louis in goods, as I informed that I could
bring it in my privilege, and that it would be no damage to any one."


10 Court. "Were those goods to be sold for Mr. Lee's interest?"


Mr. B's Ans. "Yes."


11 Court. "Did five trunks contain all the value you have mentioned?"


Mr. B's Ans. "Yes, and more."


12 Court. "Where was the ship when the conversation took place between you and
the Captain, respecting his telling you not to let him no that had goods on
board?"

on board ship


Mr. B's Ans. "In L'Orient; but before he came on board, he told me he should
not take notice of any thing that was done before he came on board, because I
told him Doctor Winship's chief reason for not being in his interest, was, for
fear that Captain Landais would turn out the property that he had on board."


13 Court. "Who is Doctor Winship?"


Mr. B's Ans. "The Surgeon of the ship."


14 Court. "Did he come to America in the ship?"


Mr. B's Ans. "No."


15 Court. "You say he had some goods on board?"


Mr. B's Ans. "Yes."


16 Court. "Who had the care of them on board?"


Mr. B's Ans. "Three have told me that they had the charge of them, viz. Dr.
Gild, Mr. Winship, etc."


17 Court. "Did Captain Landais know that those goods were on board?"


Mr. B's Ans. "I don't know."

" The Court adjourned to Monday, ten o'clock, A. M. 27 th Nov. 1780."

"The Court prohibits Captain Landais from making any queries before his taking
command at L'Orient."


This evidence, though artfully contrived to make me appear guilty, shows its
design and falsehood at first examination; for had I really given Mr. Blodget
any consent whatever to his shipping goods on board the Alliance, it is
unnatural to suppose that of his own accord, four months after the arrival of
the Alliance, he would have confessed his own guilt of bringing goods, which
would have proved his ingratitude, without alleviating his crime.

It must be observed, that in the foregoing questions of the Court, which were
chiefly put to the evidence by Captain Barry, or the Judge Advocate, and in the
answers to them made by Mr. Blodget, that neither are made or answered directly
to know or prove, 1st, That I was in command of the Alliance when Mr. Blodget
spoke to me about goods. 2d. Whether or not I gave him leave to bring goods in
the ship* To the contrary, the questions are made for the indirect answers
given; as if they had been agreed upon, and what questions they would make, and
what the evidence should answer, in order to make me appear guilty: And by the
addition of a few interlined words to the written evidence, prevent me of the
right to cross-question on those material points.

(N. B.) In the 6th question, if the interlined words ( or knowledge) were
suppressed, there remains an indirect answer; as I may have even knowledge of a
thing, and yet not consent to it.

In the 7th question, if the interlined words, I depend upon bringing the rest
on board, are suppressed, it may be understood, that after Mr. Blodget's goods
were on board without informing me thereof, he informed me that he had, and
that was his design in going Purser, to bring goods on board; and that Mr.
Warren told him, that if he brought no more than his birth would hold, nobody
would take notice of it: Which evidence, in that sense, is true, as far as he
told me about a month before I resumed the command; (and in the time that
conversation passed, I had no certainty or even expectation of resuming the
command, as may be seen in the first part of this memorial, by the date of the
invitation of the officers, and the opinions of the Honorable Arthur Lee, Esquire
and Commodore Gillon, about resuming the command,) that Mr. Warren or the
Navy-Board had given him leave to bring goods; but they having given me orders
to the contrary, and I had such an high opinion of those gentlemen's integrity,
that I may have answered to not let me know it, as he had no writing from them
to justify what he said. -- But to the contrary, in admitting the interlined
words to make park of the answer, and taking the sense Mr. Blodget wanted to be
understood, to make it appear I gave a tacit assent in saying not to let me
know it, after he had just let me know it, could not be taken for an answer,
but for an absurdity.

The 8th question and answer prove positively that I gave no leave whatever to
bring goods on account of Mr. Lee and others.

The 9th question's answer is remarkable, as it proves that the honorable
Arthur Lee, Esquire had to the amount of 500 Louis in goods on his own account, in
the 550 Louis in goods Mr. Blodget had in all on board, and in saying it was by
his advice that Mr. Lee invested these 500 Louis in goods, etc. but what can be
meant by his privilege that would be no damage to any one? It cannot be the
absurdity he pretends I told him, not to let me know it, for every one on board
had the same right; but if he meant that privilege which he said Mr. Warren had
given him, if true, it was really a privilege to him, as nobody else had the
same, and I had even orders from the Navy-Board to the contrary: Therefore, as
he said I gave him no leave to put Mr. Lee's and other goods on board, I was
not guilty for his putting them in his privilege.

If the 10th question means, as it may be understood, "Did five trunks contain
all the goods you have mentioned." The answer, "Yes, and more," is positive;
and if believed as well as that all the goods Mr. Blodget had belonging to him
and to others amounted but to the sum of 550 louis, and that Mr. Lee had for
his particular account for 500 louis in that sum -- remains only for the
account of Mr. Blodget and others for 50 Louis of goods, which is the 11th part
of the total sum; and if all those goods were about the same value for the same
bulk, it may be computed that Mr. Blodget's and other goods, without those of
Mr. Lee, would not fill more than half a trunk; and that Mr. Blodget, being
Purser, had opportunity and place to hide such small quantity of goods, without
acquainting me with it.

The 12th question, though there is a whole word and a letter omitted in its
last sentence, supposing it to mean this, "Where was the ship when the
conversation took place between you and the Captain, respecting his telling you
not to let him know that you had goods on board?" if so, and the interlined
words, on board ship, are omitted, as they must be, otherwise it would not be
an answer to the question; as it would be, Qu. Where was the ship,? etc. Ans.
On board the ship, etc. but if omitted, the answer is, In L'Orient, but before
he came on board; which six words after the comma are relatives to In LOrient,
as well as to the rest of the answer; therefore it was previous to the time I
went on board and resumed my command (as the ship had been there three months
before) as I never went on shore since; which part of the answer is true in
that sense, that the ship was in L'Orient; when long before I went on board,
not knowing that I should ever resume my command, a transient conversation took
place between Mr. Blodget and me, about his telling me he had leave of the
Navy-Board to bring, goods, and my answering, I had their order to the
contrary, and I never said otherwise. And what proves that I never varied from
that principle, is that my first queries, being on board the ship, in the
presence of Mr. Blodget and all the officers, was, What goods were on board?
upon which I was answered, that in the hold were cannons and barrels of powder,
and between decks boxes of small-arms. As his telling me that he supposed Dr.
Winship's chief reason for not being in my interest, was for fear Captain
Landais would turn out the property he had on board. This part of his answer,
if it was true, would prove him to be an informer and accuser against a friend
and countryman, to be added to his other unrighteousness; and proves that he
answered so merely to charge me, that he had acquainted me with Doctor
Winship's having goods on board; as in his last answer of that day he said, he
did not know whether I knew those goods were on board.

The 17th and last question of that day made by the Court, is contrived for the
answer, as if the questioner had known the falsehood of the evidences given
before to charge me, and had been willing to give opportunity to Mr. Blodget to
deny his evidences about goods whatever, so that the charges should stand
against me; for in the 12th answer, Mr. Blodget intimated that he had
acquainted me that Dr. Winship had goods on board, therefore the question
cannot be for those goods in particular; but if it is made in general for all
the goods mentioned, the answer must also be general, and must be a denial that
I knew of any goods being on board the ship.

The Court being met again the following Monday, there were put to Mr. Blodget
on the same subject these questions, viz.

Q Court. "What did you mean when you said all the goods were consigned to you?"


A. Blodget. "I mean all those that belonged to other people that were
consigned to me."


Court. "Did not you think it most for your interest to come to Boston?"


Blodget. "Yes."


As these two last answers contain nothing particular, and the rest of Mr.
Blodget's evidence related things which took no place in the articles made
against me, I take no notice of them.

When Mr. Blodget had ended his evidence, I offered to cross-question him upon
these material points, viz. whether I had resumed the command when he said he
had spoken to me about goods, and whether I had then given him any tacit or
explicit assent or encouragement to have goods on board; and whether he had
acquainted me that he or any body else had goods on board? -- but the Court
would not admit my questions, saying, they were already made, and the answers
to them given: I insisted, and went to my writer (who I had never suspected
before) which had wrote down the evidence, to prove by it that the answers were
inconsistent with the questions, and not direct to the purpose; but one may
easier imagine than describe my surprise and indignation when I saw the added
interlined words, which gave to the answers the full extent that was wanted to
make me appear guilty, and prevent my cross-questioning on those point. Though
the cheat was as obvious as gross and black, I could not mend it, as there was
no by-stander, or any body that I could apply to for redress or testimony, and
all I said availed nothing.

Seeing it was in vain for me to contend with those of the Court which appeared
to me to have led the others all along, and whom I had strong suspicion were
the authors of the last deed; I undertook another way to bring Mr. Blodget to
the time of the conversation mentioned. I produced a letter which he had wrote
to me at Paris, and made those questions, viz.

Capt. Landais Q. "Did you write to me while I was at Paris?"


Blodget. "Yes?"


Capt. L. "What was your opinion as to my virtue?"


B. "I had a very favorable opinion of your virtue and humanity in general."


Capt. L. (The Court hearing me ask this question) "How could you make such a
proposal, soon after my arrival at L'Orient, to a man of virtue, to let you
bring goods against his orders?"


Captain Barry did not give me time to finish this question, but said, "The
Court prohibits Captain Landais from making any queries before his taking the
command."

I represented to the Court, that the Court of Enquiry, whose report had made
the Court Martial take place (both the warrants for the two courts prefixing
the same time when to begin) had begun their enquiry from the time I arrived at
L'Orient. Moreover, that the Court sitting had received from Mr. Blodget
evidence against me, alluding to time previous to my going on board to resume
my command, without mentioning how long before; and I showed them the 12th
answer, which contains it. But Captain Barry being against it, fearing, I
suppose, I should bring the truth to light that way, put it to the Court, who
having deliberated on the matter, gave this answer:

"The opinion of the Court being taken, whether Captain Landais should have
liberty to ask Mr. Blodget any questions previous to his taking the command at
L'Orient, was determined in the negative; and Captain Landais not choosing to
ask any questions unless he could be indulged to question Mr. Blodget relative
to his conduct from the time he arrived at L'Orient, Mr. Blodget was
dismissed."

My writer, who wrote this, did not mention my representation to the Court;
neither that I told them since they prevented my cross-questioning Mr. Blodget
from the time he had alluded to in his evidence, I would not cross-question any
body else, being useless for me; being persuaded, by the conduct of the Court,
of their intention; and seeing it was unnecessary to be there, I begged as a
favor the Court would exempt me from attending there any longer, but they
would not grant my request. -- I dismissed and paid my writer, having
experienced too much his abilities.

I must remind the reader, that though I had asked several times that the Court
would order Lieutenant Elwood to give his evidence, he was the only one of the
officers who did not; because in the Court of Enquiry he had given in his
evidence several depositions which would have proved fully against the articles
the Court Martial designed to make against me; in particular he had said, that
"I would not even permit him (Mr. Elwood) to have two hogsheads of wine for the
ward-room stowed in the hold, for fear he would bring them to America; and that
he had part bottled, and the rest given away." Which would have proved that I
was so far from granting any private thing to be brought to America, that I
opposed thus the officers who I must have ordered to receive Mr. Blodget's
goods on board, which is incompatible and incredible, as they would have
deposed my order thereabouts.

Besides, had the Court been willing to do their duty and justice, it was in
their power, as Mr. Blodget could not put those goods on board without the
Lieutenant on watch knowing it, and the marine officer on guard; and the Master
could not stow them without my leave, unless bribed by Mr. Blodget: and if I
had given leave, the Master would have entered it in his book, which was before
the Court Martial all the time, where there was no such thing mentioned.
Therefore the Court Martial wilfully or ignorantly not only cleared Mr. Blodget
of his evident crime, but charged me with it in making the second article,
though every thing concurred to evince my innocence.

This will be a precedent for any one that will have his Captain condemned
against all proofs to the contrary, to say he has brought goods, and that the
Captain told him "not to let him know it."

I have thought proper to put in this place Mr. Blodget's evidence against me
about goods all at length, and the Court's behavior on that subject, as a
single instance of the Court's conduct during my trial; and how the Court and
Evidences believed me clear of any blame whatever, since they were compelled to
contrive and support such things to have me condemned.

As to the 3d article;

Although I was very sedulous in all branches of my duty, it was in vain, as
the passengers, officers and crew, after the latter were alienated from me by
the influence of the former, and were all so mutinous, so much of the same
mind, so connected together, so watchful to hide one another's crimes from me,
that it was impossible to know what plots they were about between decks, in the
ward-room, or cockpit, when I was on the quarter deck or in the cabin, nobody
acquainting me thereof, as may be seen by the instruments in writing given by
the officers and passengers, in the following evidences given in the Court of
Enquiry, viz.

Mr. Buckly said, "The first instance of any kind of disturbance within my
knowledge, was Mr. Degge's confinement, upon which a general dissatisfaction
arose against Captain Landais; and some of the men went so far as to say in my
hearing, that they would release Mr. Degge."

Mr. Buckly assented to it, and very likely encouraged it from that time, since
he never acquainted me thereof, and effectually concerted, plotted, and signed
the insidious piece with the other officers, given to the Court of Enquiry, for
the release of Mr. Degge, and taking the command of the Alliance from me, as
was done.

Mr. Buckly further said, "Thomas Baily and James Pratt came to us in the
ward-room, and asked our opinion about speaking to Captain Landais upon
altering the course of the ship, as she was then steering west half south."

Mr. Buckley, or any one of the ward-room officers, never acquainted me with
this; which proves that the officers and crew concerted privately together
their plot, since the officers put it in execution.

Parts of the evidences omitted to be wrote down by the Judge Advocate:

Mr. Larcher said, "I enquired of some of the people, whether they would rather
go to York than Philadelphia? They answered, they had rather go to York, for
there they should get exchanged without any great expense."

I was never acquainted with this neither.

Mr. Elwood, Lieut. of Marines, said, "On the 10 th of August one Pratt told
me, if I delivered the keys of the arm-chest to the Captain, they would have my
life."

This proves that officer, and perhaps all others, were parties, or in the plot
of the crew; and I was never acquainted with this, neither with any thing
whatever, relative to what preceded their open mutinies; therefore the officers
were guilty for keeping secret those things from me at least, and very likely
of planning and encouraging them.

Besides, the passengers and officers deposed in the Court of Enquiry, and
owned and gave in writing there, signed by them (in the insidious piece they
made in order to justify their clandestine mutiny in taking the command during
the night from me, and giving it to Lieutenant Degge,) that they consulted and
agreed in the ward-room together upon those facts; (for which crime, upon their
own deposition, they were, by the 27th article of the regulation, proved
guilty, without further trial, and condemnable to suffer death); all which I
was unacquainted with until after in was put in execution: Therefore it was
impossible to inspect things utterly unknown to me, though such was the
behavior of the passengers, officers and crew.

Moreover, being all in the plot against me alone, had they done those things
even in my presence, it was out of my power to prevent or punish them
collectively or separately, and I could have done no more than I did, which was
to protest against their deeds.

I detected, and would have brought to punishment the offenders-on board, had
the Navy Board, Court of Enquiry, or Court Martial been impartial, and willing
to have justice done; since on my arrival, by my official letter dated on
board, August 15, 1780, to the Hon. Navy-Board at Boston, and which was before
the Court Martial, I acquainted said Navy-Board, "that I had two revolts of the
crew, the first on the 5 th instant, in which I was not supported in
endeavoring to prevent it:" -- By which the crew are not the only detected, but
also the officers in general for not supporting me, and the officers of marines
in particular, as it was in them that the executive power laid in that case,
which I ordered in vain to be put in execution. -- "The second on the 11 th
instant; in this the passengers and officers had hands (as per log-book) for it
was by them the course was altered, contrary to my written orders; they
advised, requested, and charged with a Lieutenant to bring the ship here, which
he has effected, though he was under arrest." And I added, " You see,
gentlemen, by the above proceeding, it is to be suspected that a great many are
concerned in this revolt, some out of policy, others by adventure interest, and
all the guilty in the first revolt, through fear that the occasion of it would
be better searched into at Philadelphia than it will be at Boston. I was taken
ill on the 11 th instant. All that has been done since was without even
advising me thereof. Here are two ringleaders of the revolt on board, but I
cannot have them secured till I have some body to obey me, and I suppose the
intention of every body is to exculpate them. All the officers refused to
receive my written orders; some said they received Mr. Degge's orders, who is
the Lieutenant chosen for the purpose. I am, etc."

By which extracts the passengers and officers are impeached of having altered
the course, con^ary to my written orders; of having plotted together for taking
the command from me and giving it to a Lieutenant who was under arrest: all
which was corroborated in the Court of Enquiry by their own evidence. -- I
likewise impeached the two ringleaders of the first mutiny.

Moreover, I likewise impeached the officers also of disobedience, in refusing
to receive my written orders; therefore a detection, and a disposition to bring
the offenders to punishment, could not be more fully made appear than it was in
that official letter which the Court Martial had before them.

Mr. Lynd, acting Lieutenant, in his evidence given in the Court Martial said,
(speaking of L'Orient) "I heard Captain Jones was coming to America, and there
was a letter said to be sent on board, ordering the ship to sail; which letter
was said to be from Congress, ordering the ship to sail for America. I heard
Mr. Elwood say, that the ship was ordered for Philadelphia."

Therefore the officers knew Congress's order, even by the pack of letters that
Capt. Jones had directed to be transmitted to the crew, which were delivered to
me.

He said, about the first mutiny, "I went and informed the Captain that the
people wanted to speak to him; he desired me to tell them to come five at a
time, and he would speak to them. I went up and told them, and they answered,
that if they could not all go none would go. They then went on the
quarter deck, in order to make more sail. I went to acquaint the Captain -- he
came upon the quarter deck, followed by Mr. Pool, his Clerk, holding several
papers. He called the marine officers -- Capt. Parks was not on deck then --
The Captain desired Mr. Elwood to call the Marines, and get them under arms --
Mr. Elwood did not call the marines, that I know of -- I don't recollect seeing
the marine officers open the arm-chests. After Captain Parks came upon deck, I
did not see the marines under arms. The Quartermaster who spoke to the Captain,
and told him to make sail, was James Pratt; but I don't think the name he gave
Captain Landais was his right name. The Captain and I went forward to let go
the hallyards, and found they were racked aloft, and could not get the
fore-topsail down. The Captain went aft and spoke to Mr. Buckly, and begged
that he would go and take a reef in the fore topsail, and desired him to take
the officers with him for that purpose. I went forward with him and Mr.
Larcher; we found it impossible to do it, as the people would not suffer us.
Mr. Buckly asked the Captain, in the name of God what he should do, when there
was so many against him?"

By those extracts of Mr. Lynd's evidence, though he tried to hide the truth
all along, there is enough to prove that I gave proper orders necessary to stop
that mutiny, which were not executed by the officers, through their fear of the
crew, or disinclination to obey me. In the part of the evidence of Mr. Lynd
given in the Court Martial, relating to the plots of the passengers and
officers against, and their taking the command from me and giving it to
Lieutenant Degge, the truth is still more hidden than all the rest; and he
tried all he could to charge me, by misrepresenting things in order to exe^pate
himself and others of their crimes, as might be expected of such guilty
persons, after four months consultation together. -- As there are some
interlined words, I will write them as they are.

Court Q. "How long did Degge remain under arrest?"


Ans. "I don't know that he was ever legally released."


Court Q. "Relate what you know concerning the taking the command of the ship
from Captain Landais."


Ans. "I believe about that time the Captain gave out written orders to the
Lieutenants, but they were such as it was impossible for us to obey. -- The
11th of August the people came aft to speak to the Captain; ^hey returned upon
deck and acquainted me that the Captain would give them no satisfaction; and it
being my watch upon deck, insisted upon my altering the ship's course, and I
told them I would not, and the officers gathered together and informed the
people that it would be very dangerous to do any such thing. I went and
informed the Captain of the uneasiness of the people, and desired him to come
up. What! says he, would you have me speak to rebels? and said he would have
nothing to say to them, and turned into his cott. I returned upon deck, and
acquainted the officers that the Captain would do nothing to quiet the people;
the officers thought that it was necessary that something should be done; and
that if the Captain would not take the command, that they would themselves. --
The officers assembled together, and drew up a request in writing to the
Captain, informing him of the situation of the ship, that the people would not
defend the ship unless he would carry them immediately to America; which
writing Mr. Blodget attempted to read to the Captain, which he would not hear,
nor take notice of; upon which the officers looked upon it that the Captain had
given up his command, therefore thought necessary to appoint some one to take
the command, and that Mr. Degge was the most and we appointed him, suitable
person, and insisted upon his taking the charge of the ship, as none else
would, and he and we all obey him as our Captain took it accordingly."

and you took the command from him


Court Q. "Did you not look upon it as a mutiny when the people refused to obey
the Captain?"


Ans. "Yes."


Court. "It don't appear that there was any pains taken by the officers to
quell the mutiny."


Ans. "Who should have sat the example?"


Court. "Did you ever hear any of the passengers say any thing relative to
altering the ship's course?"


Ans. "Yes, I Have heard some of the passengers say they had rather go into
Halifax or York, than Philadelphia, as they could get sooner home than from the
southward."


These extracts of Mr. Lynd's evidence given in the Court Martial, about the
passengers and officers taking the command of the ship from me, and giving it
to Lieutenant Degge, are so contrived that it would be impossible for me to
justify my dutifulness in that respect, had I not other similar evidences of
the other guilty to have recourse to, as he artfully concealed the truth in his
premeditated answers, either to clear himself and others, or not justify me, by
altering the truth in adding something of his own.

The other extracts of evidences are as follows:

The Honorable Arthur Lee, Esquire in the Court of Enquiry, said, "That on the 10
th of August, being in the cabin, two sailors came to the door, and mentioned
that all the seamen were at the door without, and wanted to see the Captain; he
said he would not speak to them; -- but saying that they wished to go to
Boston, he said his orders were to go to Philadelphia. The two sailors then
went out, and all the seamen were much discontented, uttering high words, to
the effect they would go themselves -- this was at 3 or 4 o'clock, and the
Captain went to bed."

Mr. Buckly, in the Court of Enquiry, said, " That on the 10 th August the
people came to desire me to alter the course of the ship, but I told them no
such thing should be done, and I even drove them away from the quarter deck."

Mr. Thomas Lee, in the Court of Enquiry, said, "On the 10 th August, Mr. Lynd
with Mr. Livingston, waited on Captain Landais, who had retired to his cott,
requesting him to come and pacify the men; but was answered, he had already
given his orders, and he would not speak to a pack of rebels. This I heard
myself."

Mr. Blodget, in the Court Martial, said, "On the 10 th of August he went with
the officers into the cabin; the Captain said he had his orders to go to
Philadelphia; Mr. Elwood asked him to show his orders; the Captain said he
would not, for that was not customary. There was a good deal passed that I
cannot recollect. The Captain said he was sick, but he did not appear to be so."

Court Martial's Question. "Was there any signs of a mutiny at that time?"


Mr. Blodget's Answer. "The officers and passengers said there was."


Court's Question. "Did you ever hear any one passenger in particular advise
the officers to take the command from the Captain, and give it to some one
else?


Blodget's Answ. "At the last revolt, in the last disturbance, we read a
letter, signed by all the passengers, so to do; but Mr. Lee being a person of
consequence, was particularly attended to."


In those extracts of evidences all given, by men known to be my enemies, whose
lives were at stake, there is enough that appears to prove that I had done my
duty. For Mr. Lynd acknowledged that I had given a written order to the
Lieutenants, which was extant on the 10th August 1780 -- having never been
recalled or altered by me, which was to have the ship steered west half south.
The Honorable Arthur Lee, Esquire acknowledged that on the same day two sailors
came into the cabin to speak to me, who mentioned all the seamen's being
without door, who wanted to see the Captain: I said I would not speak to them,
but saying that they wished to go to Boston -- I said my orders were for
Philadelphia -- The two sailors then went out, and all the seamen were much
discontended, uttering high words, to this effect, they would go themselves.
This was at 3 or 4 o'clock, and the Captain went to bed. Mr. Thomas Lee
acknowledged, that on the same day Mr. Lynd came with Mr. Livingston to me,
that I was in my bed, requested me to go and pacify the men, but I answered I
had already given my orders, (which referred to my written order, as I had
given no other.) Mr. Buckly and Mr. Lynd acknowledged, that on the same day the
people desired them to alter the ship's course, that they answered, they would
not, it should not be altered, and Mr. Buckly even drove them from the
quarter deck, (and it is not said, the people desired or attempted to have the
course altered after that.) Mr. Blodget acknowledged that on the same day he,
and all the officers went into the cabin; that I told them I had my orders to
go to Philadelphia; Mr. Elwood asked me, if I would show my orders; that I said
I would not, for that was not customary -- that there was a good deal passed
that he could not recollect; that I said I was sick, but I did not appear to be
so -- that on the same day of the last revolt in the last disturbance, Mr.
Blodget and the officers read a letter, signed by all the passengers, advising
him and the officers to take the command from me and give it to some one else;
but Mr. Lee, (who had signed it first) being a person of consequence, was
particularly attended to.

Therefore, by these extracts it its sufficiently proved, (though the whole
truth is not contained in them, as I have heretofore related in speaking of
that which happened on that day) that I spoke to the people and told them
Congress's order was to carry the Alliance to Philadelphia, ^d that I could say
nothing stronger than that to them to remind them of their duty; that I said
the same to the officers, and confirmed my order to them, to have the course
steered west half south, which was the direct course for Philadelphia, being
then at noon in 42 12 lat. north, and 62 51 west longitude, and consequently
that I did my duty as far as laid in my power, and proved a good example to the
officers by my willingness to obey Congress's order. But that in the
circumstances then had I been well, and done any thing more to prevent the
combined mutiny of the officers passengers and crew, it would have availed
nothing, as the Honorable Arthur Lee, Esquire who was particularly attended to,
during the plot against me held in the ward room, being in all appearance under
fearful apprehensions of going directly to Philadelphia for several reasons,
though it Boston was a safer and easier place to land his goods, and learn from his
friends there what turn his affair with Silas Deane, Esquire had taken before
Congress; and by these reasons, his animosity, and other views against me, he
signed first, and after him all the passengers, that insidious piece against
me, containing his undeniable advice to the officers to take the command from
me and give it to some other person; and accordingly the officers, by another
similar one, assented to it; and it was given in the middle of the night, (when
the ship was going under all sails sat west half south, the wind being pretty
fresh, and the men very quiet) to Mr. Degge, who was under arrest for having
mutined against my order, who was though it the most suitable, and he did not, nor
any of the officers, offer to follow my example, in discharging his duty by
endeavoring to obey Congress's order, to carry the Alliance to Philadelphia,
(though the heavy artillery and powder she was loaded with was suspected to be
for the siege of New York) but to the contrary, followed the Honorable Arthur
Lee, Esquire advice, altered her course for Philadelphia, and carried her to Boston.

I believe I have sufficiently demonstrated, that the Court Martial made
without any foundation whatever, the 3d article against me, by charging me with
the passengers and officers obvious crimes.

By this precedent when the officers of a ship will agree together to take the
command of a ship from their Captain, let him be never so dutiful, they may do
it, (though it is against all nautick laws to do it upon any pretense whatever)
and break all superior orders, and the Captain must be condemned for it.

As to the 4th Article.

Captain Barry, who sat president in the Court Martial to judge me, and who was
already my successor in the command of the Alliance, knew that I never opposed
his taking the command of the Alliance, nor interfered in it by words or
actions whatever. He knew also the old table linen, which had been brought to
me in one of my trunks at my lodging, I had offered to deliver him as soon as
he or the Navy Board would give me a general discharge for the stores and
provisions that were in the cabin, when I was forced out the Alliance by the
Navy Board's order, because part of those had been plundered, as soon as I was
out of the ship, by the neglect of the Navy Board or Captain Barry, in leaving
no body to take care of them.

But though Captain Barry knew those things, he never told it to the court, for
fear I should be acquitted and re-established again, and he debarred from the
command of the frigate Alliance, by its being restored to me; or the court,
convinced that I was guiltle^s of the charges contained in the three first
articles they had made against me, thought proper to make the fourth similar to
them.

It is added in the same article, that said court took into consideration that
I was without credit or money, etc. Indeed I was without money, as I had spent
since the year 1777, when I entered the United States service, all my own
money; and since my last arrival in Boston I had spent 100 Louisdor, that I had
brought for pocket money, to pay the Judge Advocate for giving me a copy of the
evidences he had wrote in the Court of Enquiry -- to pay two writers I had
during said Court of Enquiry for taking down those evidences, etc. But I ought
to have had credit as I was myself a creditor of large sums to the United
States, for which I had applied to the Admiralty Board, as there was one of
those sums due to me in the year 1777, which was ordered by a third resolve of
Congress, in March, 1779, to be paid me; which sums altogether, by a series of
injustice from all parts, though I have since repeated my application to
Congress and their Minister for that purpose, being out of their service, to be
paid, it had been all in vain.

In the supplementary article to the four made by the Court Martial, it is said
that I greatly suffered from a mutinous disposition in both passengers and
officers, and from a real mutiny in the crew of the ship.

1st. Since the Court Martial acknowledged that the passengers and officers
were both of a mutinous disposition, they must have had proof of it; and they
could not have had proof of it, unless the passengers and officers had actually
mutinied against me; and really, though the Court Martial tried with as much
art to exculpate the passengers and officers, as they did to make me appear
guilty, their mutiny on the 10th August was more palpable, obvious, and
undeniable to the Court (as there was my written order for the course to be
steered west half south for Philadelphia, extant, as well as the two insidious
pieces of writing, plotted, concerted, written and signed in the ward-room, one
by all the passengers, the other by all the officers, for taking the command of
the frigate from me, which they effectually did, and broke Congress's order and
mine, in altering the course, and bringing her to Boston) than the other real
mutiny of the crew on the 5th inst. (as there was of this one no testified
proof, signed and acknowledged by the authors, as there was of the other) by
the Court Martial.

Moreover, I suffered from the passengers and officers mutinous temper, because
they mutinied against my willingness to do my duty, in obeying Congress's
order, and did quite the contrary. -- Was ever his Excellency General
Washington condemned, tried, or even impeached, when the Pennsylvania line
mutinied and left the army? No; because he could not prevent it.

I do not pretend to compare my abilities to those of that Great General; but I
may say, my intentions were ever as pure and as good as his Excellency's -- and
in that case he had all the officers, and three quarters of the army left, and
willing to obey him; and I had not a man whatever.

2d. How could the Court Martial admit the evidence against me, of men who had
evidently forfeited their life and could recover it but by charging me, and
whom they acknowledged had made me suffer from their mutinous disposition when
on board the ship; could it be expected that those mutinous disposed persons,
after being kept four months together on board the ship at Boston, would own
the truth, by which I must be acquitted, and they condemned to death? it was
more natural to think the contrary, that since those persons being proved
guilty of having made me suffer from their mutinous disposition when on board,
would continue and increase that disposition in subverting the truth, in order
to charge me and have me condemned to satiate their animosity, and prevent my
evidence against them, and agree to say any thing to save their life. Those
things were palpable. But it appears that the court was all the time
unanimously determined to have the innocent condemned, and the guilty, as much
as they possibly could, acquitted.

3dly. How could the Court Martial make the 2d article against me upon the bare
evidence of Mr. Blodget, (who was one of the principal among those guilty
persons by his interest and enticement to come to Boston) against all the
proofs given heretofore to the contrary.

But it appears that the Court Martial, having no foundation to make any
article against me, was compelled to make one upon his apparent falsehood, in
order to have me condemned.

4thly. How could the Court Martial construe the 3d article against me, wherein
it is said, that I am guilty in not exerting my utmost abilities to inspect the
behavior of the passengers, officers and crew, etc. though, besides all the
proofs I have given to the contrary in the supplementary article, they
acknowledged that I greatly suffered from a mutinous disposition in both
passengers, officers, and from a real mutiny in the crew of said ship, which
demonstrates the impossibility I was in, having every one on board against me,
to inspect the behavior and plots of the passengers, officers and crew, who
being all of the same mind and disposition, kept all secrets from me But the
reason of the Court Martial's making the 3d article against me, may be ascribed
to the same motive which made them make the second.

The fourth article made against me by the Court Martial, though they knew that
I never opposed, in any degree, Captain Barry in his command of the Alliance,
appears to have been made upon the same principle they had made the second and
third -- and the first article proved my dutifulness and judgment in sailing
from L'Orient, as I knew Congress's orders to carry the frigate directly to
Philadelphia; and I had motives that urged me also to do it, and there was none
for staying, having wrote to his Excellency Benjamin Franklin, as soon as I
resumed my command on board the Alliance at L'Orient, acquainting him with
Congress's orders, who would give me none, and of course was the only person
faulty in that case, as his silence was a tacit consent, since he gave me no
order to the contrary.

It is perhaps proper, before I dismiss this subject, that I should remind the
motives which influenced me to make this appeal to the impartial wisdom of the
public. Conscious that I have faithfully discharged my duty in all respects,
through the numerous difficulties I underwent, with all possible disadvantage,
during my command in the American navy. I considered it as the last duty I owed
to that service, to expose to public view the artifices, malice and designs of
my enemies, to show the steps which led to my disgrace -- the powerful
combination formed to ruin me, and the characters most active in this
flagitious business; exposed not only to the jealousy and prejudice of the
officers of the navy in general, which has appeared from the cicumstance of
their petitioning for my removal two years before, and in particular of the
principals of my judges in the Court Martial, who had besides self interest to
destroy me, in order to ensure the command of the Alliance to themselves; I had
the Navy-Board at Boston my declared foes, and a Judge Advocate subservient to
their purposes. I have been, as stated, the marked object of the vengeance of
his Excellency Benjamin Franklin, Esquire and consequently of his partisans,
particularly his all-powerful friend the Honorable Robert Morris, Esquire on one
side, and the Honorable Arthur Lee, Esquire and party on the other.

Guiltless as I am, is it to be wondered that I have fallen a sacrifice to the
malice of my enemies? and to save the guilty, that I have been condemned
without proof, nay contrary to evidences offered in my justification on my
trial? -- my character and reputation as far as their influence extended,
blasted -- that my fortune has been ruined, by having large sums due to me
withheld from me, some since the year 1777, by the immense power and influence
of the Honorable Robert Morris, Esquire and the persons before named, to satisfy
their insatiable malevolence.

I will now conclude this second part; but in justice to the gentlemen of
Boston, cannot forbear to declare the graceful sense I entertain of the
delicacy of their conduct during my trial: Though they were generally
acquainted with what had taken place on board the frigate Alliance, and though
Courts Martial were usually very crowded, yet they did not in any degree
countenance this prosecution, even by their appearance in court, being
confident that a sacrifice was about to take place, and therefore forbore to
attend.

END of the SECOND PART.
ERRATA.
P. Line Read For 4 19 I determined to sail determined me 6 2 I intended wanted
to do 10 38 preconcerted concerted 15 8 Lynd Lynch 18 13 on the contrary to the
contrary 24 21 there they 28 4 this was not done it was not so 37 11 by all
that by all what.


