A DIALOGUE CONCERNING THE SLAVERY OF THE AFRICANS; Showing it to be the Duty
and Interest of the American States to emancipate all their African Slaves.

WITH AN ADDRESS to the owners of such SLAVES.

DEDICATED TO THE HONORABLE THE CONTINENTAL CONGRESS.

To which is prefixed, the Institution of the Society, in NEW YORK, for
promoting the Manumission of Slaves, and protecting such of them as have been,
or may be, liberated.

Open thy mouth, judge righteous^^^^ and plead the cause of the poor and needy.
PROVE. xxxi. 9. And as ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to them
likewise. (...) vi. 31. NORWICH: Printed by JUD^^ P. SPOONER, 1776.

NEW YORK: Reprinted for ROBERT HODGE, M,DCC,LXXXV.

A respectable number of Citizens having formed themselves into a Society for
promoting the Manumission of Slaves, and protecting such of them as have been,
or may be, liberated, the following Extracts from their Proceedings, are
published for the information of the Public.
THE benevolent Creator and Father of men, having given to them all an equal
right to life, liberty, and property, no Sovereign power on earth can justly
deprive them of either; but in conformity to impartial government and laws to
which they have expressly or tacitly consented.

It is our duty, therefore, both as free Citizens and Christians, not only to
regard with compassion, the injustice done to those among us who are held as
slaves; but to endeavor, by lawful ways and means, to enable them to share
equally with us, in that civil and religious Liberty, with which an indulgent
providence has blessed these States, and to which these our brethren are, by
nature, as much entitled to as ourselves.

The violent attempts lately made to seize and export for sale, several free
Negroes, who were peaceably following their respective occupations, in this
city must excite the indignation of every friend to humanity, and ought to
receive exemplary punishment.

The hope of impunity is too often an invincible temptation to transgression;
and as the helpless condition of the persons alluded to, doubtless exposed them
to the outrage^^^^y experienced, so it is probable that the like circumstances
may again expose them and others to similar violences. Destitute of friends and
of knowledge, struggling with poverty, and accustomed to submission, they are
under great disadvantages in asserting their rights.

These considerations induce us to form ourselves into a Society, to be styled
a Society for promoting the Manumission of Slaves, and protecting such of them
as have been, or may be, liberated.

"And that the objects of the Society may be pursued with uniformity and
propriety, we have agreed that it shall be regulated by the following rules:

I. The Society, at their next Meeting, shall elect, by a majority of votes, to
be taken by ballot, a Presiden, Vice President, Secretary, and Treasurer, who
shall respectively continue in office for one year from the time of their
election, at the expiration of which time, and of every succeeding year, there
shall be a new election of officers in the same manner.

II. The President shall have authority to maintain order and decorum at the
Meeting of the Society, and to call a special Meeting at any time upon the
request, of the Standing Committee herein after-mentioned.

III. The Vice President, in the absence of the President, shall have the same
authority given to the President; and in case the President should die or be
displaced, the Vice President shall officiate till a new President be elected.

IV. The Secretary shall keep a record of the proceedings of the Society, in a
book to be provided for the purpose, and shall cause to be published, from time
to time, such part of the proceedings or resolutions as the Society may order,
or the President, with the consent of the Standing Committee, between the
Meetings of the Society, may think proper to direct.

V. The Treasurer, if required by the Society, shall give security for the
faithful discharge of the trust reposed in him, and shall keep regular accounts
of the moneys he has received and paid, observing always to pay no moneys
without an order signed by the President, and a majority of the Standing
Committee, who are prohibited from drawing, between the stated Meetings of the
Society, for a larger sum than Ten Pounds, unless empowered by a special order
of the Society at a previous Meeting.

VI. If any of the officers above named, should die, resign, or be displaced,
the Society shall fill the vacancy in the mode prescribed by the first rule,
and if the President and Vice President, or the Secretary, or Treasurer be
absent at any of the Meetings, the Society may elect one to officiate in his
room, pro tempore.

VII. The Society shall meet once in every quarter, that is to say, on the
second Thursday in February; on the second Thursday in May; on the second
Thursday in August, and on the second Thursday in November in every year, at
such place as shall from time to time be agreed upon, in order to receive the
reports of the Standing Committee, and devise the ways and means of
accomplishing the objects of this Institution.

VIII. That eight Members, with the President or Vice President, be a quorum of
the Society for transacting business.

IX. Every Member, on subscribing these rules, shall pay into the hands of the
Treasurer, the sum of Eight Shillings, and the sum of Four Shillings at the
commencement of each quarter, and all donations to the Society shall be ma^e
through the President, who shall pay them to the Treasurer, and report the same
to the Society at the next quarterly Meeting.

X. Any person desiring to be admitted a Member of this Society, shall be
proposed to the Society at a Quarterly Meeting, and be ballotted for at the
next Quarterly Meeting, and if, upon counting the ballots, two-thirds of the
Members present shall be found to be in his favor, he shall be declared a
Member.

XI. The Society shall have the power of expelling any person whom they may
deem unworthy of continuing a Member of it.

XII. A Standing Committee of six Members, shall be elected by ballot, at the
first Quarterly Meeting, four of the Committee shall be a quorum, and it shall
be their duty, to carry into execution in the recess, and, at the expense of
the Society, the orders given to them by the Society, and generally to pursue
such measures as appear to them best calculated to attain the ends of the
Society. It shall likewise be their duty to report their proceedings in writing
at the next Quarterly Meeting of the Society, at which time, the two first
Members of the Committee named on the Minutes, shall be released from service,
and two other persons elected by ballot, to serve in their room. And at every
succeeding Quarterly Meeting, the same ceremony shall be observed with respect
to two other Members of the Committee in the order which their names stand on
the Minutes.

XIII. The foregoing rules shall be in force without alteration, for the space
of six months, from the first Quarterly Meeting, after which period they shall
be subject to such alterations as shall be agreed upon by a majority of the
Members of the Society at a Quarterly Meeting."

At a Meeting of the Society on the 10th instant, they proceeded to elect by
ballot, their officers and Standing Committee, and on counting the ballots, the
following persons appeared to be elected, to wit.

The Hon. JOHN JAY, Esquire; President. Samuel Franklin, Vice President. John
Murray, Jun. Treasurer. John Keese, Esquire; Secretary.
Standing Committee.
Melancton Smith, Lawrence Embree, Dr. James Cogswell, Ezekiel Robins, William
Goforth, Elijah Cock,
After the Election was closed, the Society ordered, that the Standing
Committee, at their discretion, receive the subscriptions of such persons
desiring to become Members of the Society as were prevented from attending this
Evening; and that the Committee publish the proceedings of the Society in such
manner as they may judge most proper for the information of the Public.

Published by Order of the President, And Standing Committee, JOHN KEESE, Sec'y.
City of New York, Feb. 4, 1785.
At a Quarterly Meeting, of the Society for promoting the Manumission of
Slaves, and protecting such of them as have been, or may be, liberated, held at
the Coffee-House, in the City of New York, on the 10th Day of November, 1785;
Ordered, That the following rule, for the government of the Society, be
substituted instead of the 10th rule, viz.

"Any person, desiring to be admitted a Member of this Society, shall apply to
the standing Committee; who shall propose him to the Society at the subsequent
Quarterly Meeting, when he shall be ballotted for; and if upon counting the
ballots, two-thirds of the Members present, shall be found to be in his favor,
he shall be deemed a Member."

Ordered, That the standing Committee take order for printing two thousand
copies of a Pamphlet, entitled, "A Dialogue concerning the slavery of the
Africans; showing it to be the duty and interest of the American Colonies to
emancipate all the African Slaves, dedicated to the Honorable the Continental
Congress, published at Norwich, in the year 1776, with an Appendix and Notes
thereto."

Extract from the Minutes, By Order of the Society, JOHN KEESE, Sec'y.

At a Meeting of the Standing Committee, of the Society for promoting the
Manumission of Slaves, etc. held the 12th Day of November, 1785.

Resolved, That a Pamphlet, entitled, "A Dialogue on the slavery of the
Africans, etc." be immediately published, agreeable to the Order of the Society.

By Order of the Committee, WILLIAM SHOTWELL, Sec'y.

To the Honorable Members of the CONTINENTAL CONGRESS, Representatives of the
THIRTEEN UNITED AMERICAN COLONIES The reader is desired to observe, that the
first edition of this dialogue was published early in the year 1776, before the
declaration of our Independence.
.
MUCH HONORED GENTLEMEN,
AS God the Great Father of the Universe, has made you the fathers of these
Colonies; and in answer to the prayers of his people, given you counsel, and
that wisdom and integrity, in the exertion of which, you have been such great
and extensive blessings, and obtained the approbation and applause of your
constituents, and the respect and veneration of the nations in whose sight you
have acted, in the important, noble struggle for LIBERTY: We naturally look to
you in behalf of more than half a million of persons in these Colonies, who are
under such a degree of oppression and tyranny, as to be wholly deprived of all
civil and personal liberty, to which they have as good a right as any of their
fellow men, and are reduced to the most abject state of bondage and slavery,
without any just cause.

We have particular encouragement thus to apply to you, since you have had the
honor and happiness of leading these Colonies to resolve to stop the
slave trade; and to buy no more slaves imported from Africa. We have the
satisfaction of the best assurances that you have done this not merely from
political reasons; but from a conviction of the unrighteousness and cruelty of
that trade, and a regard to justice and benevolence, deeply sensible of the
inconsistence of promoting the slavery of the Africans, at the same time we are
asserting our own civil liberty, at the risque of our fortunes and lives. This
leaves in our minds no doubt of your being sensible of the equal
unrighteousness and oppression, as well as inconsistence with ourselves, in
holding so many hundreds of thousands of blacks in slavery, who have an equal
right to freedom with ourselves, while we are maintaining this struggle for our
own and our children's liberty: and a hope and confidence that the cries and
tears of these oppressed will be regarded by you; and that your wisdom and the
great influence you have in these colonies, will be so properly and effectually
exerted, as to bring about a total abolition of slavery, in such a manner as
shall greatly promote the happiness of those oppressed strangers, and the best
interest of the public.

There are many difficulties and obstacles, we are sensible, in the way of this
good work: But when the propriety, importance, and necessity of it, come into
view, we think ourselves warranted to address you, in the words spoken to Ezra,
on an occasion not wholly dissimilar. "Arise, for this matter belongs unto
you; we also will be with you: be of good courage and do it."

The righteous and merciful governor of the world has given the greatest
encouragement to go on, and thoroughly execute judgment, and deliver the
spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor, both in his word, and in the
wonderful things he has done for us since we have began to reform this public
iniquity. But if we stop here, what will be the consequence! --

It is observable, that when the Swiss were engaged in their struggle for
liberty, in which they so remarkably succeeded, they entered into the following
public resolve: "No Swiss shall take away any thing by violence from another,
neither in time of war, nor peace." Dr. ZUBLY's Short Account, P. 4^.
How reasonable and important is it that we should at this time heartily enter
into, and thoroughly execute such a resolution! And that this implies the
emancipation of all our African slaves, surely none can doubt.

In this view, the following dialogue is humbly offered to your perusal, hoping
that it may have your approbation and patronage.

May you judge the poor of the people, save the children of the needy, relieve
the oppressed, and deliver the spoiled out of the hands of the oppressor; and
be the happy instruments of procuring and establishing universal LIBERTY to
white and black, to be transmitted down to the latest posterity! With high
esteem, and the most friendly sentiments, We are, honorable Gentlemen,

Your very humble servants, THE EDITORS.

A DIALOGUE, andC.
A. SIR, What do you think of the motion made by some among us, to free all our
African. slaves? They say, that our holding these blacks in slavery, as we do,
is an open violation of the law of God, and is so great an instance of
unrighteousness and cruelty, that we cannot expect deliverance from present
calamities, and success in our struggle for liberty in the American. colonies,
until we repent, and make all the restitution, in our power. For my part, I
think they carry things much too far on this head; and if any thing might be
done for the freedom of our slaves, this is not a proper time to attend to it,
while we are in such a state of war and distress, and affairs of much greater
importance demand all our attention, and the utmost exertion of the public.

B. Sir, I am glad you have introduced this subject, especially, as you own a
number of these slaves; I shall attend to it with pleasure, and offer my
sentiments upon it freely, expecting you will as freely propose the objections
you shall have against any thing I shall advance. And I take leave here to
observe, that if the slavery in which we hold the blacks, is wrong; it is a
very great and public sin; and therefore a sin which God is now testifying
against in the calamities he has brought upon us, consequently must be
reformed, before we can reasonably expect deliverance, or even sincerely ask
for it. It would be worse than madness then, to put off attention to this
matter, under the notion of attending to more important affairs. This is acting
like the mariner, who, when his ship is filling with water, neglects to stop
the leak or ply the pump, that he may mend his sails. There are at the lowest
computation, 800,000. slaves in British America, including the West India
islands; and a great part of these, are in the colonies on the continent. And
if this is in every instance wrong, unrighteousness and oppression; it must be
a very great and crying sin, there being nothing of the kind equal to it on the
face of the earth. There are but few of these slaves, indeed in New England,
compared with the vast numbers in the islands and the southern colonies; and
they are treated much better on the continent, and especially among us, than
they are in the West Indies. But if it be all wrong, and real oppression of the
poor helpless blacks, we, by refusing to break this yoke, and let these injured
captives go free, do practically justify and support this slavery in general,
and make ourselves, in a measure at least, answerable for the whole: and we
have no way to exculpate ourselves from the guilt of the whole, and bear proper
testimony against this great evil, but by freeing all our slaves. Surely then,
this matter admits of no delay; but demands our first, and most serious
attention, and speedy reformation.

A. I acknowledge the slave trade, as it has been carried on with the Africans,
cannot be justified. But I am not yet convinced that it is wrong to keep those
in perpetual bondage, who by this trade have been transported from Africa to
us, and are become our slaves. If I viewed this in the light you do, I should
agree with you that it is of the highest importance that they should all be
made, free without delay; as we could not expect the favor of Heaven, or with
any consistency ask it, so long as they are held in bondage.

B. I am glad you have attended to the affair so much as to be convinced of the
unrighteousness of the slave trade. Indeed, this conviction has been so spread
of late, that it is has reached almost all men on the continent, except some of
those who are too deeply interested in it, to admit the light which condemns
it. And it has now but few advocates, I believe, being generally condemned and
exploded. And the members of the Continental Congress have done themselves much
honor, in advising the American colonies to drop this trade entirely; and
resolving not to buy another slave, that shall be imported from Africa.

But I think it of importance that this trade should not only be condemned as
wrong, but attentively considered in its real nature, and all its shocking
attendants and circumstances; which will lead us to think of it with a
detestation and horror, which this scene of inhumanity* oppression and cruelty,
exceeding every thing of the kind that has ever been perpetrated by the sons of
men, is suited to excite; and awaken us to a proper indignation against the
authors of this violence and outrage; done to their fellow men; and to feelings
of humanity and pity toward our brethren, who are the miserable sufferers.
Therefore, though I am not able to paint this horrid scene of barbarity and
complicated iniquity, to the life, or even to tell the one half which may be
told, in the short time allotted for this conversation; yet I will suggest a
few particulars; leaving you, if you please, to consult the authors who have
given a more particular description.

Most of the Africans are in a state of heathenism; and sunk down into that
ignorance and barbarity, into which mankind naturally fall, when destitute of
divine revelation. Their lands are fertile, and produce all the necessaries of
life: The inhabitants are divided into many distinct nations or clans; and of
course are frequently entering into quarrels, and open war with each other. The
Europeans, English, French, Dutch, etc. have carried on a trade with them for
above 100 years; and have taken advantage of their ignorance and barbarity, to
persuade them to enter into the inhuman practice of selling one another to the
Europeans, for the commodities which they carry to them, most of which, they
stand in no real need of: but might live as well, or better without them:
particularly spiritous liquors, which have been carried to them in great
quantities by the Americans. They, by this means, have tempted and excited the
poor blacks to make war upon one another, in order to get captives, spreading
distress, devastation and destruction over a vast country; by which many
millions have perished: and millions of others, have been captivated, and sold
to the Europeans and Americans, into a state of slavery, much worse than death.
And the inhabitants of the towns near the sea, are taught to exert all the art
and power they have, to entrap and decoy one another, that they may make slaves
of them, and sell them to us for rum; by which they intoxicate themselves, and
become more brutish and savage than otherwise they could be, so that there are
but few instances of sobriety, honesty, or even humanity, in these towns on the
sea, to which the Europeans have access: and they who live the furthest from
these places, are the least vicious, and much more civil and humane.

They stand in no need of the rum that is carried there in such vast
quantities, by which so many thousands have been enslaved, and which has spread
such infinite mischief among them. And I leave it with you to consider to what
a dreadful degree the Americans have, by this abominable practice, brought the
curse upon them, pronounced by an inspired prophet; and how very applicable it
is to this case. Woe unto him that gives his neighbor drink: that put thy
bottle to him, and make him drunken also, that thou may look on their
nakedness Hab. ii. 15.
. And is not this curse evidently come upon us, in a dreadful degree, in such a
way, as to paint itself out, so that he who runs may read it? We have put the
bottle to our neighbors mouths, by carrying immense quantities of rum to them,
and enticed them to drink, that we might take advantage of their weakness, and
thereby gratify our lusts. By this means multitudes of them have been enslaved,
and carried to the West India islands, there to be kept to hard labor, and
treated ten thousand times worse than dogs. In consequence of which, incredible
quantities of rum, and molasses which has been distilled into rum among
ourselves, have been imported; the most of which is consumed in intemperance
and drunkenness, in such a dreadful degree, as to exceed any thing of the kind
in any part of the world; by which thousands, yea millions, have ruined
themselves, body and soul, for ever. Let any one consider this, and forbear to
confess, if he can, that this woe has fallen heavily upon us, and that in such
a way and connection as to point out the sinful cause.

But to return. This trade has been carried on for a century and more, and for
many years past, above an hundred thousand have been brought off the coast in a
year, so that many, many millions have been torn from their native country,
their acquaintance, relations and friends, and most of them put into a state of
slavery, both themselves, and their children for ever, if they shall have any
posterity, much worse than death. When numbers of these wretched creatures are
collected by the savages, they are brought into the public market to be sold,
all naked as they were born. The more than savage slave-merchant views them,
and sends his surgeon, more particularly to examine them, as to the soundness
of their limbs, their age, etc. All that are passed as fit for sale, are
branded with a hot iron in some part of their body, with the buyers mark; and
then confined, crowded together in some close hold, till a convenient time to
put them on board a ship. When they are brought on board, all are immediately
put in irons, except some of the women perhaps, and the small children, where
they are so crowded together in that hot climate, that commonly a considerable
number die on their passage to the West Indies, occasioned partly by their
confinement, partly by the grief and vexation of their minds, from the
treatment they receive, and the situation in which they find themselves. And a
number commonly die after they arrive at the West Indies, in seasoning to the
climate; so that, commonly, not above seventy in an hundred survive their
transportation; by which means about thirty thousand are murdered every year by
this slave trade, which amounts to three millions in a century. When they are
brought to the West Indies, they are again exposed to market, as if they were
so many beasts, and sold to the highest bidder; where again they are separated
according to the humor of the traders, without any regard to their friendships
or relations, of husbands and wives, parents and children, brothers and
sisters, etc. being torn from each other, without the least regard to any thing
of this kind, and sent to different places, without any prospect of seeing each
other again. They are then put under a task master, by the purchasing planter,
who appoints them their work, and rules over them with rigor and cruelty,
following them with his cruel whip, or appointing one to do it, if possible,
more cruel than himself. The infirm and feeble, the females, and even those who
are pregnant, or have infants to take care of, must do their task in the field
equally with the rest; or if they fall behind, may be sure to feel the lash of
their unmerciful driver. Their allowance of food at the same time is very
coarse and scant, and must be cooked by themselves, if cooked at all, when they
want to be asleep. And often they have no food but what they procure for
themselves, by working on the sabbath; for that is the only time they have to
themselves. And to make any complaint, or petition for relief, will expose them
to some severe punishment, if not a cruel death. The least real or supposeable
crimes in them, are punished in the most cruel manner. And they have no relief;
there being no appeal from their masters sentence and will, who commonly are
more like savage beasts, than rational, human creatures. And to petition for
liberty, though in the most humble and modest terms, is as much as their lives
are worth; as few escape the most cruel death, who presume to hint any thing of
this kind to their masters: It being a maxim with those more than, cruel
tyrants, that the only way to keep them under, and prevent their thinking of
the sweets of liberty, is to punish the least intimation of it in the severest
manner, as the most intolerable affront and insult on their masters. Their
labor is so hard, and their diet so scant and poor, and they are treated in
all respects with such oppression and cruelty, that they do not increase by
propagation in the islands, but constantly decrease, so that every planter must
every year purchase five at least to every hundred he has on his plantation, in
order to keep his number from diminishing.

But it is in vain to attempt a full description of the oppression and cruel
treatment these poor creatures receive constantly at the hands of their
imperious, unmerciful, worse than Egyptian taskmasters. Words cannot utter it.
Volumes might be written, and not give a detail of a thousandth part of the
shockingly cruel things they have suffered, and are constantly suffering. Nor
can they possibly be conceived of by any one, who has not been an eye witness.
And how little a part does he see! They who are witnesses to any part of this
horrid scene of barbarous oppression, cannot but feel the truth and propriety
of Solomon's words: "So I returned, and considered all the oppressions that are
done under the sun: and behold the tears of the oppressed, and they had no
comforter; and on the side of the oppressors there was power; but they had no
comforter. Wherefore I praised the dead, which are already dead, more than the
living which are yet alive Eccl. iv. 1, 2.
:" Solomon never saw any oppression like this, unless he looked forward to this
very instance, in the spirit of prophesy.

A. Sir, there is one important circumstance in favor of the slave trade; or
which will at least serve to counterballance many of the evils you mention; and
that is, we bring these slaves from a heathen land, to places of gospel light;
and so put them under special advantages to be saved.

B. I know this has been mentioned by many in favor of the slave trade: but
when examined, will turn greatly against it. It can hardly be said with truth,
that the West India islands are places of gospel light. But if they were, are
the Negroes in the least benefited by it? Have they any access to the gospel?
Have they any instruction, more than if they were beasts? So far from this,
that their masters guard against their having any instruction to their utmost;
and if any one would attempt any such thing, it would be at the risque of his
life. And all the poor creatures learn of Christianity, from what they see in
those who call themselves Christians, only serves to prejudice them in the
highest degree against the Christian religion. For they not only see the
abominably wicked lives of most of those who are called Christians, but are
constantly oppressed by them, and receive as cruel treatment from them, as they
could from the worst of beings. And as to those who are brought to the
continent, in the southern colonies It can be proved, that since the war begun,
a proposal was made to send some blacks, who were qualified to teach
Christianity, into the southern colonies, to teach the blacks there, and
attempt to Christianize them: but the gentlemen who were better acquainted with
the disposition of slave-holders, in those parts, discouraged the design, and
said the masters of the blacks in general, would not suffer any such thing!
, and even to New England, so little pains are taken to instruct them, and
there is so much to prejudice them against Christianity, that it is a very
great wonder, and owing to an extraordinary divine interposition, in which we
may say, God goes out of his common way, that any of them should think
favorably of Christianity, and cordially embrace it. As to the most of them,
no wonder they are unteachable, and get no good by the gospel; but have imbibed
the deepest prejudices against it, from the treatment they receive from
professed Christians; prejudices which most of them are by their circumstances
restrained from expressing: while they are fixed in the strongest degree in
their minds.

But if this was not the case, and all the slaves brought from Africa, were put
under the best advantages to become Christians, and they were in circumstances
that tended to give them the most favorable idea of Christians, and the
religion they profess Which cannot be the case, so long as they are held in a
state of slavery, or they are brought away from their native country in the
manner they are; so that the supposition is inconsistent, and destroys itself.
; and though all concerned in this trade, and in slavery in general, should
have this wholly in view, viz. their becoming Christians, by which they should
be eternally happy; yet this would not justify the slave trade, or continuing
them in a state of slavery: For to take this method to christianize them, would
be a direct and gross violation of the laws of Christ. He commands us to go and
preach the gospel to all nations; to carry the gospel to them, and not to go,
and with violence bring them from their native country, without saying a word
to them, or to the nations from whom they are taken, about the gospel, or any
thing that relates to it.

If the Europeans and Americans had been as much engaged to christianize the
Africans, as they have been to enslave them; and had been at half the cost and
pains to introduce the gospel among them, that they have to captivate and
destroy them; we have all the reason in the world to conclude that extensive
country, containing such a vast multitude of inhabitants, would have been full
of gospel light, and the many nations there, civilized and made happy; and a
foundation laid for the salvation of millions of millions; and the happy
instruments of it have been rewarded ten thousand fold for all their labor and
expense. But now, instead of this, what has been done on that coast, by those
who pass among the Negroes for Christians For they have no way to get an idea
of a Christian, but from the appearance and conduct of the Europeans or
Americans, in the practice of all their unrighteousness, cruelty, profaneness
and debauchery.
, has only served to produce and spread the greatest and most deep-rooted
prejudices against the Christian religion, and bar the way to that which is
above all things desirable, their coming to the knowledge of the truth that
they might be saved. So that while, by the murdering or enslaving millions of
millions, they have brought a curse upon themselves, and on all that partake
with them, they have injured in the highest degree innumerable nations, and
done what they could to prevent their salvation, and to fasten them down in
ignorance and barbarity to the latest posterity! -- Who can realize all this,
and not feel a mixture of grief, pity, indignation and horror, truly ineffable!
And must he not be filled with zeal to do his utmost to put a speedy stop to
this seven-headed monster of iniquity, with all the horrid train of evils with
which it is attended.

And can any one consider all these things, and yet pretend to justify the
slave trade, or the slavery of the Africans in America? Is it not impossible,
that a real Christian, who has attended to all this, should have any hand in
this trade? And it requires the utmost stretch of charity to suppose that any
one ever did, or can buy or sell an African slave, with a sincere view to make
a true Christian of him It has been often said, in vindication of the slave
trade, that the blacks are so cruel to each other, that they would put their
captives to death, if they could not sell them; so that they who buy them save
their lives, and do them the greatest kindness. And, at the same time, this
trade is of the greatest advantage to the West India islands and the southern
States, and to all in connection with them: For while men cannot do the business
which is done by the blacks, in those hot climates, so that were not the blacks
introduced and improved, all this labor, and the produce of it, must cease.

Answer. These suggestions may be a sufficient vindication of the slave trade
with the interested and inattentive; but the impartial and judicious will see
with how little reason and truth they are urged, when they have attended to the
following observations.

There is no evidence that those people did kill the captives, in general,
which they took in war; but the contrary is evident, from the account given of
them by those Europeans who have traveled and lived longest among them. They
represent those nations, which have not been corrupted by the whites, to be, in
general, industrious, friendly and hospitable; and in a great measure happy in
the enjoyment of society, and the comforts of life. [See A short account of
that part of Africa inhabited by the Negroes, printed at Philadelphia, 1762.]
And there is abundant evidence from history, and testimonies incontestible,
that these nations have been encouraged and induced to carry on most of their
wars, for more than a century past, by the Europeans and Americans, that they
might get captives to sell to traders in the souls and bodies of men; and where
this trade has been the means of saving one life, it has destroyed millions.
Therefore, if professing Christians, instead of encouraging them in their
cruelty, and tempting them to destroy, captivate, and sell each other, had
taken as much pains to teach them humanity and benevolence, as they have to
reduce millions to a state of slavery worse than death; they might have saved
as many lives, as now they have been the means of destroying.

Besides, the cruelty of those savages to each other, is no warrant to the
slave trader to buy those supposed victims, and put them into a state of
slavery, which, by their own confession, is worse than death. This, surely, is
not an act of mercy, but of cruelty. The voice of mercy and humanity is against
selling them as slaves. Who does not know that, "one who was (...) means of
preserving a man's life, is not, therefore, entitled to make him a slave, and
sell him, as he does a piece of goods."

As to other suggestions, viz. That the blacks are necessary to cultivate the
lands in those hot climates, since the whites are not able to labor there, it
may be observed, that there is not the least evidence of this, but much of the
contrary. Whites are healthy, and do the labor in the East Indies, which
blacks do in the West, in the same climate; and that to much greater advantage,
of which authentic accounts have been published. The truth is, most of the
whites which are born in the southern states, or the West Indies, are not
educated to labor, but, great part of them, in idleness and intemperance. The
blacks are introduced to do the work, and it is thought a disgrace for a white
person to get his living by labor. By this means, the whites in general are
vicious, and all imbibe such a haughty and tyrannical spirit, by holding so
many slaves, that they are above labor, and many of them, rather a plague than
a blessing to all about them: And whole families are ruined for ever, by means
of this slavery. Whereas, if African slaves had never been introduced, or this
slavery were now abolished; and every man had his farm or plantation, no more
than he could cultivate to the best advantage, by the help of his children, and
perhaps a few hired men; this would introduce industry, temperance and
economy; the land would produce much more than it does now; and the country be
filled with industrious, virtuous inhabitants, happy themselves, and blessings
to all around them, instead of the comparatively few families now, many of
which are a burden to the earth, and a disgrace to human nature. -- This brings
the words of Solomon fresh to mind, Eccl. viii. 9. "There is a time, when one
man rules over another to his own hurt."

We cannot hesitate to say, this sage observation is verified in the most
striking manner, and to the highest degree, in the slavery under consideration.
It is an unspeakable hurt to the public, to the commonwealth. If it is
inconsistent with republican principles, and tends to overthrow the liberty of
those states, and introduce monarchy and tyranny, to have such slavery
tolerated among us, and so many petty sovereigns and lords, ruling over a
number of vassals with despotic sway. Their children naturally imbibe those
arbitrary principles, and grow up as unfit to be useful members of those free;
republican states, as do the children of the most haughty monarch on the globe.
And those men rule over themselves to their own hurt, and the hurt, the misery
and ruin of their families, temporal and ETERNAL.

But if it should still be thought by any, or it be in fact true, that those
climates cannot be cultivated by whites; let it be remembered, that this is no
justification of the horrid slave trade, and slavery n^w practiced: But it is a
good reason why the whites should abandon the places where they cannot live,
unless it be on the blood of others, as good as themselves; and renounce the
business which is carried on in the exercise of so much unrighteousness and
cruelty. If the blacks only can labor there, the lands are theirs, by right;
and they ought to be allowed to possess them, as freemen, and enjoy the fruit
of their labor.


.

A. All this seems to be little to the purpose; since it was granted in the
beginning of our conversation, that the slave trade, as it has been carried on,
is not to be justified. But what is this to the question we proposed to
consider; which is, Whether it be wrong to hold the blacks we have among us in
a state of slavery, or ought to set them free without delay? To this you have
said little or nothing as yet.

B. All I have said upon the slave trade, to show the unrighteousness, the
cruelty, the murder, the opposition to Christianity and the spread of the
gospel among the Africans, the destruction of whole nations, and myriads of
souls, which are contained in this horrid practice, has been principally with a
view to a more clear and satisfactory, determination of the question before us,
which you have now renewedly proposed -- For I think the following proposition
may be advanced as undeniable, viz. If the slave trade be unjustifiable and
wrong; then our holding the Africans and their children in bondage, is
unjustifiable and wrong; and the latter is criminal in some proportion to the
inexpressible baseness and criminality of the former. For,

FIRST, If they have been brought into a state of slavery, by unrighteousness
and violence, they having never forfeited their liberty, or given any one a
right to enslave and sell them; then purchasing them of these piratical
tyrants, and holding them in the same state of bondage into which they,
contrary to all right, have brought them, is continuing the exercise of the
same unrighteousness and violence toward them. They have yet as much a right
to their liberty as ever they had, and to demand it of him who holds them in
bondage; and he denies them their right, which is of more worth to them than
every thing else they can have in the world, or all the riches the unjust
master does or can possess; and therefore injures them in a very high degree
every hour he refuses or neglects to set them at liberty. Besides,

SECONDLY, Holding these blacks in a state of slavery, is a practical
justification of the slave trade, and so brings the guilt of that on the head
of him, who so far partakes in this iniquity, as to hold one of these a slave,
who was unrighteously made so by these sons of violence. The old addage, "The
partaker is as bad as the thief," carries such a plain truth in it, that every
one must discern it: And it is certainly applicable to this case.

It is impossible to buy one of these blacks and detain him a slave, without
partaking with him who first reduced him to this state, and put it in his
power, thus to possess him; and practically justifying him for so doing, so as
to bring upon himself the guilt of first enslaving him. It is not therefore
possible for any of our slave keepers to justify themselves in what they are
doing, unless they can justify the slave trade. If they fall here, they bring
on themselves an awful degree of the guilt of the whole.

THIRDLY, By keeping these slaves, and buying and selling them, they actually
encourage and promote the slave trade: And therefore, in this view, keeping
slaves, and continuing to buy and sell them, is to bring on us the guilt of the
slave trade, which is hereby supported. For so long as slaves are bought and
possessed, and in demand; so long the African trade will be supported and
encouraged.

A. But there is a stop put to the importation of slaves into the American
Colonies, as they have resolved no more shall be bought. This being the case,
the keeping those we have among us in slavery, is no encouragement to the
slave trade.

B. I grant, if this resolution should be perpetual, and extend to the West
Indies, it would discourage the slave trade; so far as the Americans are
concerned in it: But it would be more effectually discountenanced and
condemned, if slavery was wholly abolished; and it cannot be consistently done
without this. For if it be wrong to import and buy them now, it was always
wrong; and therefore they that are already slaves among us, are injured, and
unjustly enslaved; and we have made them our slaves without the least right;
and ought to retract it, and repair the injury done to them, so far as is in
our power, by setting them free, and compensating them otherwise, so far as we
are able. There is therefore a palpable inconsistency in resolving to import
and buy no more slaves; and yet refusing to let those go out free, which we
have already enslaved, unless there be some insuperable impediment in the way.

The whole I have said concerning the unlawfulness of keeping the blacks in
slavery, if the trade by which they are become our slaves be unlawful, may be
illustrated by the following example.

A number of robbers invaded a certain province, and took off most of their
goods and effects, and carried them to a neighboring province, and sold them
to the inhabitants; and the robbers finding this encouragement, continued the
practice for many years. At length the people of the injured province applied
to their neighbors, who had their goods of the robbers, and were now In
possession of them, and asked them to restore what was taken from them by
violence, and to which they had a good and indisputable right; it being
impossible these robbers could give a right to what they had unjustly taken
from them. But the people in whose possession the stolen goods were found,
utterly refused to deliver them up to the injured people who demanded them.
They told them, they had indeed been greatly injured, and they must condemn the
robbers as very injurious and cruel in what they had done: But as they now had
these goods in their own possession, they intended to keep them, and looked on
themselves under no obligation to deliver them up, though they suffered so
much, and would probably perish for want of them. And they intended still to
buy all the robbers should bring to them.

To this the injured replied, By partaking with these robbers in receiving the
goods at their hands, you practically justify their conduct, and must share
with them in their guilt. For by this means you encourage them, and are
determined to go on to encourage them in this violence and rapine: And by
condemning them, you equally condemn yourselves, and must remain under this
condemnation till you restore the goods we demand; and resolve never to
purchase any thus taken from us by violence.

Upon this they determined to purchase no more of them, but refused to deliver
up what they had already got in possession. But the oppressed told them, they
did right in resolving to injure them no more in that way; but they were now
very inconsistent with themselves; for if it were wrong to purchase any more,
it was as wrong to withhold what they had already gotten in possession: And
they had no other way to justify themselves in detaining their goods, and to be
consistent, but by proceeding to take whatever those robbers should bring to
them in future, and justifying themselves in so doing, and the robbers in all
their depredations.

A. This reasoning looks something plausible, I confess; but the holy scripture
approves of making and keeping slaves; and this surely is sufficient to keep us
in countenance.

B. I hope you will not appeal to the holy scripture, in support of a practice,
which you and every one else must allow to be so inexpressible unjust, inhuman
and cruel, as is the slave trade; and consequently so glaringly contrary to the
whole tenor of divine revelation. And if the slave trade is such a gross
violation of every divine precept, it is impossible to vindicate the slavery to
which the Africans have been reduced by this trade, from the holy scripture. Of
this we have such a certainty a priori, that would be a horrid reproach of
divine revelation, to pretend this practice can be supported by that; or even
to look into it with any hope or expectation of finding any thing there in
favor of it. And if there be any passages in the bible, which are capable of a
construction in favor of this practice, we may be very certain it is a wrong
one. In a word, if any kind of slavery can be vindicated by the holy
scriptures, we are already sure our making and holding the Negroes our slaves,
as we do, cannot be vindicated by any thing we can find there; but is condemned
by the whole of divine revelation. However, I am willing to hear what you can
produce from scripture, in favor of any kind of slavery.

A. You know that a curse was pronounced on the posterity of Ham, for his
wickedness, in the following words, A servant of servants shall he be unto his
brethren. He could not be a servant unto his brethren, unless they made him so;
or at least held him in servitude. The curse could not take place unless they
executed it, and they seem to be by God appointed to do this. Therefore while
we, the children of Japheth, are making such abject slaves of the blacks, the
children of Ham, we are only executing the righteous curse denounced upon them;
which is so far from being wrong in us, that it would be a sin, even
disobedience to the revealed will of God, to refuse to make slaves of them, and
attempt to set them at liberty.

B. Do you think, my good Sir, it was the duty of Pharaoh to make the
Israelites serve him and the Egyptians, and to afflict them, by ruling over
them with rigor, and holding them in hard and cruel bondage, because God had
expressly foretold this, and said it should be done? And was the Assyrian king
blameless while he executed the judgments which God had threatened to inflict
on his professing people? Did God's threatening them with those evils, warrant
this king to distress, captivate and destroy them, as he did? And will you say,
the Jews did right in crucifying our Lord, because by this they fulfilled the
scriptures, declaring that thus it must be! -- Your argument, if it is of any
force, will assert and justify all this; and therefore, I hope, will be
renounced by you, and by all who have the least regard for the holy scripture,
with proper abhorrence.

But if this argument were not so fraught with absurdity and impiety as it
really is, and it were granted to be forcible, with respect to all upon whom
the mentioned curse was denounced; yet it would not justify our enslaving the
Africans, for they are not the posterity of Canaan, who was the only son of Ham
that was doomed to be a servant of servants. The other sons of Ham, and their
posterity, are no more affected with this curse, than the other sons of Noah,
and their posterity. Therefore this prediction is as much of a warrant for the
Africans enslaving us, as it is for us to make slaves of them. The truth is, it
gives not the least shadow of a right to any one of the children of Noah to
make slaves of any of their brethren If it should be asked, why Canaan should
be singled out from the other sons of Ham, and cursed for the sins of his
father? May we not conclude that the curse fell on all Ham^s posterity, and
that Canaan only is mentioned, as including all the rest? It must be answered,
No, by no means. We have no warrant to do this. The father sinned; and God
might justly have cursed all his posterity. But in his wisdom and sovereign
goodness, he cursed only one branch of the family. And how effectually this has
taken place, the scripture informs us.
.

A. The people of Israel were allowed by God to buy and make slaves from the
nations that were round about them, and the strangers that lived among them;
which could not have been the case, if this was wrong and unjust. And why have
not we an equal right to do the same?

B. -- And why have not we an equal right to invade any nation and land, as
they did the land of Canaan, and destroy them all, men, women and children, and
beasts, without saving so much as one alive? It was right for the Israelites to
do this, because they had a divine permission and direction to do it, as the
God of Israel had a right to destroy the seven nations of Canaan in what way he
thought best, and to direct whom he pleased to do it. And it was right for them
to make bond-servants of the nations round them, they having an express
permission to do it from him who has a right to dispose of all men as he
pleases. God saw fit, for wise reasons, to allow the people of Israel thus to
make and possess slaves; but is this any license to us to enslave any of our
fellow men, any more than their being allowed to kill the seven nations in
Canaan, is a warrant to us to kill any of our fellow men, whom we please, and
are able to destroy, and take possession of their estates? This must be
answered in the negative, by every one who will allow himself a moment's
reflection. God gave many directions and laws to the Jews, which had no respect
to mankind in general; and this under consideration has all the marks of such
an one. There is not any thing in it, or relating to it, from whence can be
deduced the least evidence that it was designed to be a regulation for all
nations through every age of the world, but every thing to the contrary. The
children of Israel were then distinguished from all other nations on earth;
they were God's peculiar people, and favored on many accounts above others;
and had many things in their constitution and laws that were designed to keep
up their separation and distinction from other nations, and to make the special
favor of Heaven toward them more apparent to all who had any knowledge of
them* And this law respecting bondage, is suited to answer these ends. This
distinction is now at an end, and all nations are put upon a level; and Christ,
who has taken down the wall of separation, has taught us to look on all nations
as our neighbors and brethren, without any respect of persons, and to love all
men as ourselves, and to do to others as we would they should treat us; by
which he has most effectually abolished this permission given to the Jews, as
well as many other institutions, which were peculiar to them.

Besides, that this permission was not designed for all nations and ages, will
be very evident, if we consider what such a supposition implies: For if this be
so, then all other nations had a right to make slaves of the Jews. The Egytians
had a right to buy and sell them, and keep them all in bondage for ever. And
the nations round about Canaan, had a right to bring them into bondage, as they
sometimes did. And the Babylonians and Romans had a good warrant to reduce them
to a state of captivity and servitude. And the Africans have a good right to
make slaves of us and our children. The inhabitants of Great Britain may
lawfully make slaves of all the Americans, and transport us to England, and buy
and sell us in open market, as they do their cattle and horses, and perpetuate
our bondage to the latest generation. And the Turks have a good right to all
the Christian slaves they have among them; and to make as many more slaves of
us and our children, as shall be in their power; and to hold them and their
children in bondage to the latest posterity. According to this, every man has a
warrant to make a bond slave of his neighbor, whenever it lies in his power;
and no one has any right to his own freedom, any longer than he can keep
himself out of the power of others. For instance, if the blacks now among us,
should by some remarkable providence have the power in their hands to reduce
us, they have a right to make us and our children, their slaves; and we should
have no reason to complain.

This would put mankind into such a state of perpetual war and confusion, and
is so contrary to our loving our neighbor as ourselves, that he who has the
least regard for his fellow men, or the divine law, must reject it, and the
principle from which it flows, with the greatest abhorrence. Let no Christian
then, plead this permission to the Jews to make bond slaves of their
neighbors, as a warrant to hold the slaves he has made, and consequently for
universal slavery.

A. But what will you do with those passages in the new testament, which are in
favor of slavery, and suppose Christian masters to have Christian slaves; and
the masters are so far from being directed to free them, that it is supposed
they may hold them in bondage; and their mutual duties in this relation are
inculcated? Paul the Apostle is so far from being disposed to have servants
made free, that he says, Let as many servants as are under the yoke, count
their own masters worthy of all honor 1 Timothy vi. 1.
! And in the following words supposes that believing masters had servants, whom
he exhorts to serve such masters with the more cheerfulness, out of respect to
their Christian character.

B. Before I make a direct answer to this, I beg leave to remind you, that
whatever other kind of slavery these passages will vindicate, they certainly
will not support the slave trade, and that slavery of the negroes into which
they have been brought by this trade, which is manifestly unrighteous from
beginning to end; and therefore can be nothing to our present purpose, viz. to
justify Christian masters among us in holding the blacks and their Children in
bondage.

I grant there are bond servants who are made so, and may be held in this
state, consistent with justice, humanity and benevolence. They are such, who
have forfeited their liberty to the community of which they are members, by
some particular crimes, and by debt, in some instances: and are for this
condemned to servitude for a longer or shorter time, and sold by the civil
magistrate. And persons may put themselves into this state by their own
voluntary act. There were doubtless such in the Apostle's days; and if master
and servant, in this case, were converted to Christianity, the servant would
still be under the yoke, and the Apostle's exhortation highly proper. Therefore
if every master, when he embraced Christianity, was obliged to free all his
servants who had not evidently forfeited their liberty, and not one who refused
to do this, was admitted into a Christian church; yet there might be many
masters and servants in the first Christian churches: And the passages of
scripture under consideration prove no more than this: And therefore will not
justify any master holding one servant in bondage against his will, so much as
an hour, who has not evidently brought himself into this state by his own
crimes, and been adjudged to it, after proper trial, by the civil magistrate.
These scriptures therefore are infinitely far from justifying the slavery under
consideration; for it cannot be made to appear that one in a thousand of these
slaves has done any thing to forfeit his own liberty. And if there were any
such, they have never been condemned to slavery by any who are proper judges,
or had any authority to act in the affair. But if this were the case of any,
they certainly could not forfeit the liberty of their children, and cause them
to be born slaves.

But it may be further observed, that it might be difficult in many cases at
that day, to determine what servants were justly in a state of bondage, and who
had a right to their liberty (which is not the case with respect to the slaves
whose cause I am now pleading). And the Apostles did not think it their
business to examine into every instance of slavery, and find the original
ground of it, in order to determine, whether the servant ought to be set free
or not; and as it was taken for granted by all, or most, that the slavery which
then took place was generally just: And if every one who embraced Christianity,
and had slaves must undergo a strict examination, and be obliged to dismiss his
servants, unless he could produce good evidence that they had forfeited their
liberty; this, as circumstances then were, would have greatly prejudiced the
world against the Christian religion and tended to retard its propagation: I
say, considering all these things, the Apostles might be directed not to
intermeddle in this affair, so far as to enquire into every instance of
slavery, whether it was just or not; but to treat it as if it were so, unless
there were particular, positive evidence of the contrary in any instances; only
giving general rules for the direction and conduct of masters and servants,
which, if applied and put into practice, would not only render this relation
comfortable, where it ought to subsist; but would effect the liberty of all the
servants, who were evidently reduced to that state unjustly; and were suited to
put an end to slavery in general. Thus the Apostle Paul, speaking to masters,
says, Masters give unto your servants that which is just and equal Col. iv. 1.
. The master who conformed to this rule, must not only treat his servants with
equity, in all instances; but must set at liberty all who were evidently
unjustly enslaved, and therefore had a right to their freedom. And if any
Christian master refused to do this, he would bring upon him the censure of the
church, for disregarding this Apostolic rule 2 Thessalonians. iii. 6.
. And the same Apostle says to the servant, If thou may be made free, use it
rather 2 Cor. vii. 21.
? In these words it is declared, that slavery is, in itself considered,
undesirable, and a calamity, in every instance of it; and therefore that it
ought to be avoided and abolished, as far as possible. And not only the servant
is warranted and commanded to desire and seek to be made free; but the master
is also implicitly required to set him at liberty, if there be no insuperable
impediment in the way; for if the servant ought to desire and attempt to obtain
his freedom, the master ought to desire it also, and assist him to obtain it,
if it can be effected; and will do it, if he loves his servant, as himself: And
the church to which the servant belongs, and every member of it, ought to do
all in their power to procure the freedom of every such servant; for will any
one say they ought not to do their utmost in assisting their poor suffering
brother to obtain his liberty, which God has commanded him to desire and seek?
This Apostolic command therefore, being properly regarded, would soon put an
end to most instances of slavery in the Christian church, if it did not wholly
abolish it; especially at this day, when many of the impediments in the way of
freeing slaves, which were in the Apostles days, are removed. And it may be
left to the consciences of all slave holders among us, whether, if it had been
left to them, such a direction and command would ever have been given to any
servant whatever, as is here given by the Apostle; and whether, now it is
given, they approve of it, and practice accordingly. So far from it, that most
of them, even professing Christians, hold their servants at such a distance,
and treat them in such a manner, that the poor servant dare not so much as
treat with his master about his freedom; and if (...) should say a word, is
pretty sure to receive nothing but angry frowns, if not blows. And if any one
undertakes to plead the cause of these oppressed poor, whose right is turned
aside in the gate, and they have no helper, he may expect to feel the
resentment of almost every keeper of slaves, who knows him. And is there one
church now in this land, who are ready to do what is in their power to obtain
the freedom of the slaves which belong to them; or are willing calmly to
consider and debate the question among themselves, whether it be right to hold
the Negroes in bondage? Where is the church that has done any thing of this
kind Since the first edition of this Dialogue, a number of Churches in
New England, have purged themselves from this iniquity, and determined not to
tolerate the holding of the Africans in slavery. If all the Churches in these
United States would come into the same measure, and imitate the Friends, called
Quakers, in this article, would they not act more like Christian Church then
they now do?
? And how few churches are to be found, that would not be greatly disturbed,
and filled with resentment, if the question were seriously proposed, and urged
to be considered?

Let none who are conscious, all this is true, urge the Apostle Paul's
authority in favor of the slave-keeping which is practiced in British America.

But to return. The Apostle seems to have conducted in this case, as he did in
that of civil government. He considered this as a divine institution, and
pointed out the end and design of it, and the duty of civil rulers, and of the
subject, without particularly applying it to the government Christians were
then under, so as expressly to justify or condemn the particular form of
government that then took place; or the conduct of those who then had the civil
authority in their hands; and that for very obvious reasons, grounded on the
state and circumstances of the Church and of public affairs at that day. We may
as well infer from this, that the civil governors of that day were not unjust
and tyrannical, which is most contrary to known fact, as we can, that the
slavery which then took place was in general just and right, from his pointing
out the duties of masters and servants, without mentioning and condemning any
particular instances of unjust slavery.

A. You well observed that the apostles did not intermeddle with the affair of
slavery, so as to condemn masters for holding their slaves; or tell the
servants their masters had no right to keep them in bondage; but ought to free
them, etc. I wish all were as wise and prudent now; especially ministers of the
gospel: But all are not so. Many make such a clamor about holding our Negroes
in bondage; and some ministers have of late said so much in public about
freeing our slaves; and have so inveighed against the African slave trade, and
even keeping our blacks in slavery, that many of the negroes are become very
uneasy, and are much more engaged to obtain their liberty than they used to be.

I think, if any thing be said on this subject, it should be in private; and
not a word of this kind should be lisped in the hearing of our servants; much
less ought ministers to say any thing about it in public; lest the blacks
should all take it into their heads that they are treated hardly, and never be
easy till they are set at liberty.

B. -- It has been observed, there were reasons, peculiar to the state of
things at that time, why the apostles should not be so particular on this head:
which reasons do not take place now. The slavery that now takes place is in a
Christian land, and without the express sanction of civil government: And it is
all of the same kind, and from one original; which is most notoriously unjust;
and if it be unrighteous in one instance, it is so in almost every instance;
and the unrighteousness of it is most apparent, and most masters have no color
of claim to hold their servants in bondage. And this is become a general and
crying sin; for which we are under the awful frowns of Heaven. These things,
which make the case so different from the slavery which took place in the
apostles days may be a good reason of a different conduct; and make it duty to
oppose, and bear testimony, both in public, and more privately, against this
evil practice, which is so evidently injurious to individuals, and threatens
our ruin as a people.

As to making servants uneasy, and desirous of liberty, etc. I would observe,
that most of them do not want to be informed that they are greatly injured and
oppressed; that they are reduced to a state of slavery, without the least
color of justice. They have sense and discerning enough to be sensible of
this, without being told; and they think much of it almost every day, though
they are obliged to keep it to themselves, having none to pity them, or so much
as hear their complaints. They have a thousand times more discerning and
sensibility in this case than their masters, or most others. And their aversion
to slavery, and desires of liberty, are inextinguishable. Therefore their
hearing it asserted that they ought to be set at liberty, gives them no new
light and conviction, except it be, that he who asserts it, has some discerning
of what they have long known, and most sensibly felt; and has courage enough to
assert that in their favor, which they have long felt the truth of; but dared
not so much as lisp it out. -- But if by this means any of your servants should
be more fully convinced of their ^ight to liberty, and the injustice done them
in making them slaves, will this be such a dreadful evil? Would you desire they
should be held in ignorance, that you may exercise your tyranny, without
opposition or trouble from any quarter? As reasonably might Pharaoh be angry,
and complain of Moses and Aaron, for saying a word to those whom he had reduced
to slavery, about their cruel bondage, and their obtaining their liberty.

It has always been the way of tyrants to take great pains to keep their
vassals in ignorance, especially to hide from them the tyranny and oppression
of which they are the subjects. And for this reason they are enemies to the
liberty of the press, and are greatly provoked when their conduct is set in a
true light before the public, and the unrighteousness they practice, properly
exposed. The complaint we are now considering, seems to be of the same kind
with this, and well becomes all those petty tyrants, who have slaves in their
possession, which they are conscious they cannot vindicate, but the
unrighteousness will be detected, if free enquiry and freedom of speech cannot
be suppressed. And this complaint is of the same kind with the conduct of the
masters of slaves in the West Indies, in opposing their being taught any thing
of christianity; because they know every gleam of this light carries a
discovery of the unrighteousness of the treatment they receive.

The present situation of our public affairs, and our struggle for liberty, and
the abundant conversation this occasions in all companies; while the poor
Negroes looks on, and hear what an aversion we have to slavery, and how much
liberty is prized; they often hearing it declared publicly and in private, as
the voice of all, that slavery is more to be dreaded than death, and we are
resolved to live free or die, etc. etc. This, I say, necessarily leads them to
attend to their own wretched situation, more than otherwise they could. They
see themselves deprived of all liberty and property, and their children after
them, to the latest posterity, subjected to the will of those who appear to
have no feeling for their misery, and are guilty of many instances of hard
heartedness and cruelty toward them, while they think themselves very kind;
and therefore to make the least complaint, would be deemed the height of
arrogance and abuse: And often, if they have a comparatively good master now,
with constant dread they see a young one growing up, who bids fair to rule over
them, or their children, with rigor.

They see the slavery the Americans dread as worse than death, is lighter than
a feather, compared to their heavy doom; and may be called liberty and
happiness, when contrasted with the most abject slavery, and unutterable
wretchedness to which they are subjected. And in this dark and dreadful
situation, they look round, and find none to help -- no pity -- no hope! And
when they observe all this cry and struggle for liberty for ourselves and
children; and see themselves and their children wholly overlooked by us, and
behold the sons of liberty, oppressing and tyrannizing over many thousands of
poor blacks, who have as good a claim to liberty as themselves, they are
shocked with the glaring inconsistence, and wonder they themselves do not see
it. You must not therefore lay it to the few who are pleading the cause of
these friendless distressed poor, that they are more uneasy than they used to
be, in a sense of their wretched state, and (...) a desire of liberty; there is
a more mighty and irresistible cause than this, viz. all that passes before
them in our public struggle for liberty.

And why should the ministers of the gospel hold their peace, and not testify
against this great and public iniquity, which we have reason to think, is one
great cause of the public calamities we are now under? How can they refuse to
plead the cause of these oppressed poor, against the cruel oppressor? They are
commanded to lift up their voice, and cry aloud, and show the people their
sins, etc. Have we not reason to fear many of them have offended Heaven by
their silence, through fear of the masters, who stand ready to make war against
any one who attempts to deprive them of their slaves; or because they
themselves have slaves, which they are not willing to give up?

Might they not fully expose this iniquity, and bear a constant testimony
against it, in such a manner as would have no tendency to influence our
servants to behave ill in any respect; by giving them at the same time proper
cautions and directions?

A. It is impossible to free all our Negroes; especially at once, and in
present circumstances, without injuring them, at least, many of them, and the
public to a great degree. Why then is this urged so vehemently now? I think
this proceeds from a zeal, not according to knowledge.

B. If it be not a sin, an open flagrant violation of all the rules of justice
and humanity, to hold these slaves in bondage, it is indeed folly to put
ourselves to any trouble and expense, in order to free them. But if the
contrary be true; if it be a sin of a crimson dye, which is most particularly
pointed out by the public calamities which have come upon us, from which we
have no reason to expect deliverance till we put away the evil of our doings,
this reformation cannot be urged with too much zeal, nor attempted too soon,
whatever difficulties are in the way. The more and greater these are, the more
zealous and active should we be in removing them. You had need to take care,
lest from selfish motives, and a backwardness to give up what you unrighteously
retain, you are joining with the slothful man to cry, there is a lion in the
way! A lion is in the streets Prove. xxvi. 13.
! While there is no insurmountable difficulty, but that which lies in your own
heart.

No wonder there are many and great difficulties in reforming an evil practice
of this kind, which has got such deep root by length of time, and is become so
common. But it does not yet appear that they cannot be removed, by the united
wisdom and strength of the American colonies, without any injury to the slaves,
or disadvantage to the public. Yea, the contrary is most certain, as the slaves
cannot be put into a more wretched situation, ourselves being judges, and the
community cannot take a more likely step to escape ruin, and obtain the smiles
and protection of Heaven. This matter ought doubtless to be attended to by the
General Assemblies, and Continental and Provincial Congresses; and if they were
as much united and engaged in devising ways and means to set at liberty these
injured slaves, as they are to defend themselves from tyranny, it would soon be
effected. There were without doubt many difficulties and impediments in the way
of the Jews liberating those of their brethren they had brought in to bondage,
in the days of Jeremiah. But when they were besieged by the Chaldeans, and this
their sin was laid before them, and they were threatened with desolation if
they did not reform: They broke through every difficulty, and set their
servants at liberty.

And how great must have been the impediments, how many the seeming
unanswerable objections, against reforming that gross violation of the divine
command in Ezra's time, by their marrying strange wives, of which so many of
the Jews were guilty, and the hand of the princes and rulers had been chief in
this trespass! Yet the pious zeal of Ezra and those who joined with him, and
their wisdom and indefatigable efforts conquered every obstacle, and brought
them to a thorough reformation. Would not the like zeal, wisdom and resolution,
think you, soon produce a reformation of this much greater abomination, by
finding out an effectual method to put away all our slaves? Surely we have no
reason to conclude it cannot be done, till we see a suitable zeal and
resolution, among all orders of men, and answerable attempts are thoroughly
made.

Let this iniquity be viewed in it is true magnitude, and in the shocking light
in which it has been set in this conversation; let the wretched case of the
poor blacks be considered with proper pity and benevolence; together with the
probable dreadful consequence to this land, of retaining them in bondage, and
all objections against liberating them would vanish. The mountains that are now
raised up in the imagination of many, would become a plain, and every
difficulty surmounted.

Pharaoh and the Egyptians, could not bear to think of letting the Hebrews go
out free from the bondage to which they had reduced them; and, it may be
presumed, they had as many weighty objections against it, as can be thought of
against freeing the slaves among as. Yet they were at length brought to drop
them all, and willing to send them out free; and to be ready to part with any
thing they had, in order to promote it It may be well worthy our serious
consideration, whether we have not reason to fear the hand of God, which is now
stretched out against us, will lie upon us, and the strokes grow heavier,
unless we reform this iniquity, so clearly pointed out by the particular manner
in which God is correcting us; and whether we have any reason to hope or pray
for deliverance, till this reformation takes place.
.

If many thousands of our children were slaves in Algiers or any parts of the
Turkish dominions, and there were but few families in the American colonies
that had not some child, or near relation in that sad state, without any hope
of freedom to them, or their children, unless there were some very
extraordinary exertion of the colonies to effect it; how would the attention of
all the country be turned to it! How greatly should we be affected with it!
Would it not become the chief topic of conversation? Would any cost or labor
be spared, or any difficulty or hazard be too great to go through, in order to
obtain their freedom? If there were no greater difficulties than there are in
the case before us; yea, if they were ten times greater, would they not be soon
surmounted, as very inconsiderable! I know you, Sir, and every one else, must
answer in the affirmative, without hesitation. And why are we not as much
affected with the slavery of the many thousands of blacks among ourselves,
whose miserable state is before our eyes? And why should we not be as much
engaged to relieve them? The reason is obvious. It Is because they are Negroes,
and fit for nothing but slaves; and we have been used to look on them in a mean
contemptible light; and our education has filled us with strong prejudices
against them, and led us to consider them, not as our brethren, or in any
degree on a level with us; but as quite another species of animals, made only
to serve us and our children; and as happy in bondage, as in any other state.
This has banished all attention to the injustice that is done them, and any
proper sense of their misery, or the exercise of benevolence toward them. If
we could only divest ourselves of these strong prejudices, which have
insensibly fixed on our minds, and consider them as, by nature, and by right,
on a level with our brethren and children, and those of our neighbors, and
that benevolence, which loves our neighbor as ourselves, and is agreeable to
truth and righteousness, we should begin to feel toward them, in some measure
at least, as we should toward our children and neighbors in the case above
supposed, and be as much engaged for their relief.

If parents have a son pressed on board a King's ship, how greatly are they
affected with it! They are filled with grief and distress, and will cheerfully
be at almost any cost and pains to procure his liberty: and we wonder not at
it, but think their exercises and engagedness for his deliverance very just,
and stand ready to condemn him who has no feeling for them and their son, and
is not ready to afford all the assistance in his power, in order to recover
him. At the same time we behold vast numbers of blacks among us, torn from
their native country, and all their relations, not to serve on board a man of
war for a few years, but to be abject, despised slaves for life, and their
children after them; and yet have not the least feelings for them, or desire of
their freedom! These very parents perhaps, have a number of Negro slaves, on
whom they have not the least pity; and stand ready highly to resent it, if any
one espouses their cause so much as to propose they should be set at liberty.
What reason for this partiality? Ought this so to be? An impartial person, who
is not under the prejudices of interest, education and custom, is shocked with
it beyond all expression. The poor Negroes have sense enough to see and feel
it, but have no friend to speak a word for them; none to whom they may complain.

It has been observed, that if the General Assemblies, etc. of these American
colonies, would take this matter in hand in earnest, with a concern and
resolution answerable to its real importance; and the whole community were
properly disposed and engaged, the freedom of the slaves among us might soon be
effected, without injury to the public, or those who shall be set at liberty;
but greatly to the advantage of both. But if this should be neglected, will it
excuse individuals who have slaves, in their continuing to hold them in
bondage? I think not. If you, Sir, had as many children in slavery at Algiers,
as you have African slaves in your house, would you take no pains, and devise
no method to obtain their liberty, till the public should make some provision
for the emancipation of all slaves there? If any opportunity should present, to
obtain their liberty, would you not greedily embrace it, though at much hazard
and expense? And if their master should refuse to let them go free, till there
was a general emancipation of the Christian slaves in that country, would you
justify him as acting a proper, humane, and benevolent part? I trow not. How
then can you excuse yourself, and deliver your own soul, while you have no
compassion for these black children in your house, and refuse to break the
yoke, the galling yoke, from off their necks, because your neighbors will not
be so just and humane to theirs!

Some masters say, they will give up their slaves, if all masters will do the
same; but seem to think they are excused from setting their's free, so long as
there is not a general manumission. What has just been observed is suited, I
think, to show the insufficiency of this excuse. Besides, if you desire to have
all our slaves freed, why do you not set an example, by liberating your own?
This might influence others to do the same; and then you might, with a good
grace, plead the cause of these poor Africans. Whereas, while you retain your
own slaves, your mouth is stopped, and your example serves to strengthen
others, and keep them in countenance, while they practice this abominable
oppression.

A. My servants have cost me a great deal of money, and it is not reasonable I
should lose all that. If the public will indemnify me, and pay me what my
servants are worth, I am willing to free them; and none can reasonably desire
to do it, on any other consideration.

B. If your neighbor buys a horse, or any beast, of a thief who stole it from
you, while he had no thought that it was stolen, would you not think you had a
right to demand your horse of your neighbor, and pronounce him very unjust, if
he should refuse to deliver him to you, till he had received the whole sum he
had given for him? And have not your servants as great a right to themselves,
to their liberty, as you have to your stolen horse? They have been stolen and
sold, and you have bought them, in your own wrong, when you had much more
reason to think they were stolen, than he who bought your horse had to mistrust
he was trading with a thief. Though your horse has passed through many hands,
and been sold ten times, you think you have a right to demand and take him, in
whose soever hands you find him, without refunding a farthing of what he cost
him; and yet, though your Negroes can prove their right to themselves, and
constantly make a demand upon you to deliver them up, you refuse till they pay
the full price you gave for them, because the civil law will not oblige you to
do it. -- Thou Hypocrite! -- Luke xiii. 15.

Had you not been amazingly inconsiderate and stupid, you would have concluded
these men were stolen; and known that no man had a right to sell them, or you
to buy them And must they be for ever deprived of their right, which is worth
more to them, than all you possess, because you have been so foolish and wicked
as to buy them, and no one appears to prevent your losing by the bargain! You
would do well to consider the awful denunciation by Jeremiah. Woe unto him that
builds his house by unrighteousness, and his chambers by wrong; that uses
his neighbor's service without wages, and gives him not for his work! He who
refuses to free his Negroes, that he may save his money, and lay it up for his
children, and retains his slaves for them to tyrannize over, leaves them but a
miserable inheritance -- infinitely worse than nothing!

Besides, if indifferent persons were to judge, it would doubtless be found
that many of your servants, if not all, have much more than earned what they
cost you; some of them double and treble, yea, ten times as much; and in this
view, you ought to let them go out free; and not send them away empty; but
furnish them liberally out of your store, agreeable to the divine command; they
having a much better right to part of your estate, than your children, and, it
may be, much more likely to make a good improvement of it.

A. You speak of servants earning so much; but for my part, I think not so much
of this. Mine have never been much profit to me, and most of them do not pay
for their victuals and clothes, but are constantly running in debt.

B. The master is not a proper judge in this case. How common is it for men who
hire others, to complain that the laborers do not earn the wages they give;
and that they are continually losing by all the labor they hire? And if it
were wholly left to him who hires what wages he should give the labourer, and
he was accountable to none, how soon would his hire be reduced to little or
nothing. The lordly selfish employer would soon find out that his laborers
hardly earned the food he was obliged to find them. Let your uninterested,
judicious neighbors, judge between you and your servants in this matter, and
we will give credit to their verdict. And surely you have no reason to expect
we will rely on yours, as you seem not really to believe it yourself, since it
looks like a contradiction to your own declaration and practice. For you have
been speaking of your servants as of as much worth to you, at least, as their
first cost, and represented it as giving up your interest, if you should free
them without a compensation. Whereas, if what you now say be true, you will
lose nothing by freeing them immediately; but rather get rid of a burden now on
your hands. And if this be true, why do you not free them without delay? Your
holding them in slavery, is a practical contradiction to what you have now
suggested.

I grant, what is evident to all the discerning who attend to it, that the
introduction of such a number of slaves among us is a public detriment, an
injury to the commonwealth; and therefore, in this view, the practice ought by
all means to be discouraged and abolished by our legislators: This, however, is
consistent with individuals getting estates by the labor of their slaves; and
that they are in fact, in many instances, very profitable to their owners, none
can deny. And if this was not so, I should be very certain of obtaining what I
am pleading for, even a general manumission.

A. You have repeatedly spoke of our slaves being hardly treated and abused.
There may perhaps be some instances of this among us; but I believe they are
generally treated very well, and many of them much better than they deserve. My
servants, I am sure, have no reason to complain; they live as well as I do
myself, and in many respects much better.

B. We will take it for granted, for once, that all you have said is true; and
that your slaves are treated as well as they can be, while they are held in a
state of slavery. But will this atone for your making them your slaves, and
taking from them that which it better to them than not only the best living,
but all the riches on earth, and is as much to be prized as life itself, THEIR
LIBERTY? As well, yea, with much more reason, may a highway-robber, tell a
gentlemen from whom he has taken all his money, he has no reason to complain,
since he had spared his life, which was at his mercy, nor had wounded him, or
stripped him of his clothes; and go away pleased with the thought that he had
treated him with great kindness and generosity.

If a ruffian should seize, ravish and carry off a young virgin from all her
relations and friends, into some lonely cave in the wilderness; and when he got
full possession of her there, should treat her with great kindness providing
for her every necessary and comfort she could have in that situation. And when
he was told of his violence and cruelty, and urged to restore her to her former
liberty; he should refuse to release her, and to justify himself, allege his
kind treatment of her, that she had all the comforts of life, and lived better
than himself, etc. Would not this be so far from justifying him in the sight of
the world, or being the least excuse for his barbarous treatment of her, that
his offering it as such, would be considered as a striking evidence of his
stupidity, and that he was an unfeeling, inhumane wretch? Whether such an
instance is in any measure applicable to the case before us, I leave you to
judge.

But I must now ask leave to take back, what was just now granted; and observe,
that you are not a proper judge of your treatment of your slaves; and that you
may think you treat them very well, in some instances at least, if not in a
constant way, they justly think themselves used very hardly, being really
subjected to many hardships, which you would very sensibly feel and resent, if
you were in their place, or should see one of your children a slave in Algiers
treated so by his master. There are but few masters of slaves, I believe, who
do not use them in a hard, unreasonable manner, in some instances at least; and
most do so in a constant way; so that an impartial, attentive by-stander will
be shocked with it, while the master is wholly insensible of any wrong. They
who from us have visited the West Indies, have beheld how servants are used by
their masters there, with a degree of horror, and pronounced them very
unreasonable and barbarous; while the master, and perhaps his other domestics
have thought they were used well, being accustomed to such usage, and never
once reflecting that these blacks were in any sense on a level with themselves,
or that they have the least right to the treatment white people may reasonably
expect of one another; and being habituated to view these slaves more beneath
themselves, than the very beasts really are. And are we not, most of us,
educated in these prejudices, and led to view the slaves among us, in such a
mean despicable light, as not to be sensible of the abuses they suffer; when,
if we or our children should receive such treatment, from any of our fellow
men, it, would appear terrible in our fight? The Turks are by education and
custom, taught to view the Christian slaves among them so much beneath
themselves, and in such an odious light, that while they are treating our
brethren and children, we being judges, in the most unreasonable and cruel
manner, they have not one thought that they injure them in the least degree.

Are you sure your slaves have a sufficiency of good food, in season; and that
they never want for comfortable clothing and bedding? Do you take great care
to deal as well by them in these things, as you would wish others would treat
your own children, were they slaves in a strange land? If your servants
complain, are you ready to attend to them? Or do you in such cases frown upon
them, or do something worse, so as to discourage their ever applying to you,
whatever they may suffer, having learned that this would only be making bad
worse? Do you never fly into a passion, and deal with them in great anger,
deciding matters respecting them, and threatening them, and giving sentence
concerning them, from which they have no appeal, and perhaps proceed to correct
them, when to a calm by-stander you appear more fit to be confined in Bedlam,
than to have the sovereign, uncontrollable dominion over your brethren, as the
sole lawgiver, judge, and executioner? Do not even your children domineer over
your slaves? Must they not often be at the beck of an ungoverned, peevish child
in the family; and if they do not run at his or her call, and are not all
submission and obedience, must they not expect the frowns of their masters, if
not the whip?

If none of these things, my good Sir, take place in your family, have we not
reason to think you almost a singular instance? How common are things of this
kind, or worse, taking place between masters and their slaves? In how few
instances, if in any, are slaves treated as the masters would wish to have
their own children treated, in like circumstances? How few are fit to be
masters? To have the sovereign dominion over a number of their fellow men,
being his property, and wholly at his disposal; who must abide his sentence and
orders, however unreasonable, without any possibility of relief?

A. I believe my slaves are so far from thinking themselves abused, or being in
the least uneasy in a state of slavery, that they have no desire to be made
free; and if their freedom were offered to them, they would refuse to accept it.

B. I must take leave to call this in question, Sir; and I think you believe
it, in contradiction to all reason, and the strongest feelings of human nature,
till they have declared it themselves, having had opportunity for due
deliberation, and being in circumstances to act freely, without the least
constraint, or fear.

There are many masters (if we believe what they say) who please themselves
with this fond opinion of their goodness to their slaves; and their choice of a
state of slavery, in preference to freedom, without the least foundation, and
while the contrary is known to be true by all who are acquainted with their
slaves. If they really believe this, they by it only discover great
insensibility, and want of proper reflection. They have not so much as put
themselves in the place of their slaves, so as properly and with due
sensibility to consult what would be their own feelings, on such a supposition.
Have they themselves lost all desire of freedom? Are they destitute of all
taste of the sweets of it; and have they no aversion to slavery, for themselves
and children? If they have these feelings, what reason have they to conclude
their servants have not?

But it seems most of those masters do not fully believe what they so often say
on this head: For they have never made the trial; nor can they be persuaded to
do it. Let them offer freedom to their servants: and give them opportunity to
choose for themselves, without being under the most distant constraint. And if
they then deliberately choose to continue their slaves, the matter will be
fairly decided, and they may continue to possess them with a good conscience
But this will give them no right to make slaves of their children, even if the
parents themselves should expressly consent to (...); for the parent can have
no right to sell the liberty of his children.
.

Slaves are generally under such disadvantages and restraints, that however
much they desire liberty, they dare not so much as mention it to their masters.
And if their master should order them into his presence, and ask them whether
they had a desire to be made free, many would not dare to declare their choice,
lest it should offend him, and instead of obtaining their freedom, bring
themselves into a more evil case than they were in before, as the children of
Israel did, by desiring Pharaoh to free them.

In this case such precaution ought to be taken, as to give the slaves proper
assurance that they may without any danger to themselves, declare their choice
of freedom: and that it shall be done to them according to their choice.

A. If slaves in general were made free, they would soon be in a worse state
than that in which they now are. Many of them know not how to contrive for
themselves, so as to get a living; but must soon be maintained by their former
masters, or some others: And others would make themselves wretched, and become
a great trouble to their neighbors, and an injury to the public, by their
unrestrained vices. This would doubtless be the case with most of mine, were
they set free; and some of them are by no means able to maintain themselves.

B. I confess this objection, at first view, seems to have some weight in it.
But let us examine it, and see if it be sufficient to hold so many thousands in
slavery, and their children after them, to the end of the world. Would you have
all the white people, who are given to hurtful vices, or are unwilling or
unable to maintain themselves, made slaves, and their children after them, and
be bought and sold for life like cattle in the market? Would you willingly give
up your own children to this, to be slaves for ever to any one who should be
willing and able to purchase them, if they were as vicious, or helpless as you
suppose many of the blacks would be if set at liberty? I am sure you will not
answer in the affirmative. And by answering in the negative, as I know you
must, you will entirely remove the reason you have now offered for holding the
blacks in this slavery; till you can show why the latter should be treated so
very differently from the former, which I am confident you will not attempt.

A state of slavery has a mighty tendency to sink and contract the minds of
men, and prevent their making improvements in useful knowledge of every kind:
It sinks the mind down in darkness and despair; it takes off encouragements to
activity, and to make improvements, and naturally tends to lead the enslaved to
abandon themselves to a stupid carelessness, and to vices of all kinds. No
wonder then the blacks among us are, many of them, so destitute of prudence and
sagacity to act for themselves; and some are given to vice. It is rather a
wonder, there are so many instances of virtue, prudence, knowledge and industry
among them. And shall we, because we have reduced them to this abject,
helpless, miserable state, by our oppression of them, make this an argument for
continuing them and their children in this wretched condition! God forbid! This
ought rather to excite our pity, and arouse us to take some effectual method
without delay, to deliver them and their children from this most unhappy state.
If your own children were in this situation, would you offer this as a good
reason why they and their posterity should be made slaves for ever? Were some
of your children unable to provide for themselves through infirmity of body, or
want of mental capacity; and others of them were very vicious, would you have
them sold into a state of slavery for this? or would you make slaves of them
yourself? Would you not be willing to take the best care of them in your power,
and give them all possible encouragement to behave well; and direct and assist
them in proper methods to get a living? I know you would. And why will you not
go and do likewise to your slaves? Why will you not take off the galling yoke
from their necks, and restore them to that liberty, to which they have as good
a claim as you yourself and your children; and which has been violently taken
from them, and unjustly withheld by you to this day? If any of them are
disposed to behave ill, and make a bad use of their freedom, let them have all
the motives to behave well that can be laid before them. Let them be subject to
the same restraints and laws with other freemen; and have the same care taken
of them by the public. And be as ready to direct and assist those who want
discretion and assistance to get a living, as if they were your own children;
and as willing to support the helpless, infirm and aged. And give all proper
encouragement and assistance to those who have served you well, and are like to
get a good living, if not put under peculiar disadvantages, as freed negroes
most commonly are; by giving them reasonable wages for their labor, if they
still continue with you, or liberally furnishing them with what is necessary in
order to their living comfortably, and being in a way to provide for
themselves. This was the divine command to the people of Israel; and does it
not appear, at least, equally reasonable, in the case before us? When one of
their brethren had served them the number of years that were specified, they
were commanded to let him go out free; and then the following injunction is
added: And when thou se^dest him out free from thee, thou shall not let him go
away empty: Thou shall furnish him liberally out of thy f^ock, and out of thy
floor, and out of thy wine press: Of that wherewith the LORD thy GOD has
blessed thee, thou shall give unto him, Deuteronomy. xv. 13, 14.

If all who have slaves, would act such a just, wise, and benevolent part
toward them, and treat them in any measure as they would desire their own
children and near relations should be treated, our slaves might all be set
free, without any detriment to themselves or the public; and their masters
would be so far from losing by it, that they would be abundantly rewarded for
all their benevolence to these injured poor. And if our legislators would lend
their helping hand, and form such laws and regulations, as shall be properly
suited to protect and assist those that are freed, and so as in the best manner
to deter and restrain them from vicious courses, and encourage their industry
and good behavior; this would be an additional security to the public against
any imagined evil consequence of a general manumission of our slaves; and but a
piece of justice to these poor dependent creatures, whom we have made so by our
own unrighteousness and oppression. This would encourage masters to free their
slaves, and leave the objection we are now considering without the least shadow
of foundation.

A. You are doubtless sensible, Sir, that the legislatures in these colonies,
are so far from giving this encouragement to manumit our slaves, that the laws
are rather a clog or hindrance to any thing of this kind, as they require the
master to give security for the maintenance of his slaves, if they should ever
want any assistance, before he is allowed to make them free.

B. I am sorry to say there is too much truth in this. I hope our legislatures
will soon attend with proper concern to this affair; and in their justice,
wisdom and goodness, enter upon measures which shall encourage and effect a
general emancipation of our slaves.

But if this should not be, I think it appears from the course of this
conversation, that this will not excuse those who have slaves from setting them
at liberty, even though they should be obliged to maintain them all their days.
If any slave-holder can lay his hand on his breast, and sincerely say, if his
children were slaves at Algiers, he would not desire their master to free them,
unless he could do it, without any risque of their ever being a charge to him;
then let him still hold his slaves in bondage with a quiet conscience.
Otherwise, I see not how he can do it.

A. If it were granted that our slaves ought to be freed, if times and the
public state of the American colonies would admit. Yet in our present peculiar,
calamitous, distressing state, it may be very imprudent and wrong, and tend to
great evil to adopt this measure. Most of the slaves in populous seaport
places, have now little or no business to do; and are supported by their
masters, while they earn little or nothing. And if they should be dismissed by
their masters, they could not maintain themselves, and must suffer. And the
attention and exertion of the public is so necessarily turned to the defense of
ourselves; and this civil war introduces such calamity and confusion, that it
cannot be expected; yea it is quite impossible, that there should be any proper
care of the public, so as to make the provision and regulations which would be
absolutely necessary in this case. Though I suggested this in the beginning of
our conversation, yet I think you have paid little or no attention to it. I
wish this might be well considered.

B. I think the facts you have now alleged, as reasons against freeing our
slaves at present, will, if duly considered, afford arguments for the very
thing you are opposing. The slaves who are become unprofitable to their
masters, by the present calamitous state of our country, will be with the less
reluctance set at liberty, it is hoped; and if no public provision be made for
them, that they may be transported to Africa, where they might probably live
better than in any other country; or be removed into those places in this land
where they may have profitable business, and are wanted, now so many are called
from their farms to defend our country. -- I say, if this be not done, the
masters, by freeing them, would lose nothing by it, even though they continue
to support them, till some way shall open for them to help themselves. I must
here again desire every owner of slaves to make their case his own, and
consider, if he or his children were unjustly in a state of slavery, whether he
should think such an objection against their being set at liberty of any
weight? Would he not rather think it reasonable that the masters who had held
them in bondage, against all right and reason, would consider their being, by
an extraordinary providence, rendered unprofitable to them, as an admonition to
break off their sins by righteousness and their iniquity by showing mercy to
these poor? And that it ought to be a greater satisfaction to them, thus to do
justice without delay, and relieve these oppressed poor, than to possess all
the riches, honors and pleasures of this world? And if these masters should
disregard such an admonition, and neglect this opportunity to set them at
liberty, putting it off to a more convenient season, would it not be very
grievous to him, and overwhelm him in despair of their ever doing it? Is it not
very certain that they who make this objection against freeing their slaves
without delay, would not free them, if the times should change, and they again
become profitable! If they must maintain them, can they not do it as well when
they are free, as while they are slaves; and ought they not to do it with much
more satisfaction?

And as to the public, all necessary regulations and provision might easily,
and very soon be made even in our present distressing circumstances,
effectually to emancipate all our slaves, were the minds of men in general
properly impressed with their misery, and they sufficiently engaged to do
justice, and show mercy God is so ordering it in his Providence, that it seems
absolutely necessary something should speedily be done with respect to the
slaves among us, in order to our safety, and to prevent their turning against
us in our present struggle, in order to get their liberty. Our oppressors have
planned to gain the blacks, and induce them to take up arms against us, by
promising them liberty, on this condition; and this plan they are prosecuting
to the utmost of their power, by which means they have persuaded numbers to
join them. And should we attempt to restrain them by force and severity,
keeping a strict guard over them, and punishing them severely, who shall be
detected in attempting to join our opposers; this will only be making bad
worse, and serve to render our inconsistence, oppression and cruelty, more
criminal, perspicuous and shocking, and bring down the righteous vengeance of
Heaven on our heads. The only way painted out to prevent this threatening evil,
is to set the blacks at liberty ourselves, by some public acts and laws; and
then give them proper encouragement to labor, or take arms in the defense of
the American cause, as they shall choose. This would at once be doing them some
degree of justice, and (...) our enemies in the scheme they are prosecuting.
.

This objection might be urged with much greater show of reason by the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, against freeing their servants when they were not
only in a state of war, but shut up, and closely besieged in that city; yet we
find it was their duty to free them immediately, as the only way to escape
threatened destruction; and as soon as they had done this, they had respite,
and would have obtained final deliverance, had they not returned to their old
oppression, and again brought their freed servants into bondage.

This leads me to observe, that our distresses are come upon us in such a way,
and the occasion of the present war is such, as in the most clear and striking
manner to point out the sin of holding our blacks in slavery, and admonish us
to reform, and render us shockingly inconsistent with ourselves, and amazingly
guilty if we refuse. God has raised up men to attempt to deprive us of liberty;
and the evil we are threatened with is slavery. This, with our vigorous
attempts to avoid it, is the ground of all our distresses, and the general
voice is, "We will die in the attempt, rather than submit to slavery." But are
we at the same time making slaves of many thousands of our brethren, who have
as good a right to liberty as ourselves, and to whom it is as sweet as it is to
us, and the contrary as dreadful! Are we holding them in the most abject,
miserable state of slavery, without the least compassionate feeling toward
them or their posterity; utterly refusing to take off the oppressive galling
yoke! Oh, the shocking, the intolerable inconsistence! And this gross,
barefaced inconsistence, is an open, practical condemna^^^^ of holding these
our brethren in slavery; and in these circumstances the crime of persisting in
it becomes unspeakably greater and more provoking in God's sight; so that all
the former unrighteousness and cruelty exercised in this practice, is
innocence, compared with the awful guilt that is now contracted. And in
allusion to the words of our Savior, it may with great truth and propriety be
said, "If he had not thus come in his Providence, and spoken unto us,
(comparatively speaking) we had not had sin, in making bondslaves of our
brethren; but now, we have no cloak for our sin."

And if we continue in this evil practice, and refuse to let the oppressed go
free, under all this light and admonition, suited to convince and reform us;
and while God is evidently correcting us for it, as well as for other sins,
have we any reason to expect deliverance from the calamities we are under? May
we not rather look for slavery and destruction, like that which came upon the
obstinate, unreformed Jews? In this light, I think, it ought to be considered
by us; and viewed thus, it affords a most forcible, formidable argument, not to
put off liberating our slaves to a more convenient time; but to arise, all as
one man, and do it with all our might, without delay, since delaying in this
case is awfully dangerous, as well as unspeakably criminal. This was hinted in
the beginning of our conversation, you may remember, and I am glad of an
opportunity to consider it more particularly.

A. You have repeatedly spoken of the attempt that is made to oppress and
enslave the American colonies, and the calamities this has introduced, as a
judgment which God has brought upon us for enslaving the Africans, and say we
have no reason to expect deliverance, but still greater judgments, unless this
practice be reformed. But is not this supposition inconsistent with the course
of divine Providence since this war began? Have we not been strengthened and
succeeded in our opposition to the measures taken against us, even beyond our
most sanguine expectations; and a series of events, very extraordinary, and
almost miraculous, have taken place in our favor, and so as remarkably to
disappoint our opposers, and baffle them in all their plots and attempts
against us. How is this consistent with the above supposition? If these
calamities were brought on us for our sin in enslaving the Africans, and an
expression of God's displeasure with us on that account, would he in such a
signal manner appear on our side, and favor, protect and prosper us; even so
that those of our enemies, who are considerate and attentive, have been obliged
to acknowledge God was for us; I say, could this be, while we persist in that
practice so offensive to him?

B. When I speak of our being under the divine judgments for this sin of
enslaving the Africans, I do not mean to exclude other public crying sins found
among us, such as impiety and profaneness -- formality and indifference in the
service and cause of Christ and his religion -- and the various ways of open
opposition to it -- intemperance and prodigality; and other instances of
unrighteousness, etc. the fruits of a most criminal, contracted selfishness,
which is the source of the high handed oppression we are considering. But that
this is a sin most particularly pointed out, and so contrary to our holy
religion in every view of it, and such an open violation of all the laws of
righteousness, humanity, and charity, and so contrary to our professions and
exertions in the cause of liberty, that we have no reason to expect, nor can
sincerely ask deliverance, so long as we continue in a disposition to hold fast
this iniquity. If we should be delivered while we continue in this evil
practice and obstinately refuse thoroughly to execute judgment between a man
and his neighbor, but go on to oppress the stranger, the fatherless, and the
widow, we should, agreeable to the spirit of what you have just said, improve
such deliverance, as God said the Jews would have done, had he delivered them,
while they refused to reform. "Will ye steal, murder, etc. and come and stand
before me in this house, which is called by my name, and say, We are delivered,
to do all these abominations? See Jer. vii. 5, -- 10.
" Surely this is not to be expected or desired. Even the prayer for such
deliverance must be an abomination to the Lord.

But your objection is worthy of a more particular answer. -- It has been
observed, that there has been a general resolution to suppress the slave trade
in these colonies, and to import no more slaves from Africa. This is a
remarkable instance of our professed regard to justice, and a wise and notable
step toward a reformation of this evil; and, as has been observed, a complete
reformation will be the unavoidable consequence, if we will be consistent with
ourselves. For no reason can be given for suppressing the slave trade, which is
not equally a reason for freeing all those who have been reduced to a state of
slavery by that trade; and that same regard to justice, humanity and mercy,
which will induce us to acquiesce in the former, will certainly oblige us to
practice the latter. Have we not, therefore, reason to think that the
righteous, and infinitely merciful Governor of the world, has been pleased to
testify his well-pleasedness with that regard to righteousness and mercy which
we professed, and appeared to exercise, in refusing to import any more slaves;
and which is an implicit condemnation of all the slavery practiced among us, by
appearing on our side in the remarkable, extraordinary manner you have
mentioned; by which wonderful interposition in our favor, he has at the same
time given us the greatest encouragement not to stop what we have begun, but to
go on to a thorough reformation, and act consistently with ourselves, by
breaking every yoke, and doing justice to all our oppressed slaves; as well as
to repent of and reform all our open, public sins? So that God is hereby
showing us what he can do for us, and how happy we may be, under his
protection, if we will thoroughly amend our ways, and our doings; and loudly
calling us to a thorough reformation, in this most kind and winning way.

But if we obstinately refuse to reform, what we have implicitly declared to be
wrong, and engaged to put away the holding the Africans in slavery, which is so
particularly pointed out by the evil with which we are threatened, and is such
a glaring contradiction to our professed aversion to slavery, and struggle for
civil liberty; and improve the favor God is showing us, as an argument in
favor of this iniquity, and encouragement to persist in it, as you, Sir, have
just now done, have we not the greatest reason to fear, yea, may we not with
great certainty conclude, God will yet withdraw his kind protection from us,
and punish us yet seven times more? This has been God's usual way of dealing
with his professing people; and who can say it is not most reasonable and wise?
He then acts the most friendly part to these colonies and to the masters of
slaves, as well as to the slaves themselves, who does his utmost to effect a
general emancipation of the Africans among us: And in this view I could wish
the conversation we have now had on this subject, if nothing better is like to
be done, were published and spread through all the colonies, and had the
attentive perusal of every American.

AN ADDRESS TO THE OWNERS OF NEGRO SLAVES, IN THE AMERICAN COLONIES.
GENTLEMEN,
SINCE it has been determined to publish the preceding dialogue, it was thought
proper it should be attended with a particular address to you, who are more
immediately interested in the slavery there considered.

It would be injurious, it is confessed, to consider you as the only persons
guilty or concerned in this matter. The several legislatures in these colonies,
the magistrates, and the body of the people have doubtless been greatly guilty
in approving and encouraging, or at least conniving at this practice. Yea,
every one is in a measure guilty, who has been inattentive to this oppression,
and unaffected with it, and neglected to bear proper testimony against it. And
it is granted, the public ought to go into some effectual measures to liberate
all the slaves, without laying an unreasonable burden on their masters. But
though this be not done, such neglect will not excuse you in holding them in
slavery; as it is in your power to set them free, and your indispensible duty,
and really your interest, to do them this piece of justice, though others
should neglect to assist you, as they ought.

It is hoped, you will not be offended with the plainness of speech used on
this subject; and that, though you should at first think some of the epithets
and expressions which are used, too severe, and find the subject itself
disagreeable; this will not prevent your attentively considering it, and
weighing what is offered, with the utmost impartiality, and readiness to
receive conviction, how much soever you may find yourselves condemned. For, if
your practice is here set in a true light, in which it must appear to all
impartial, judicious, good men; and in which it will appear to all, at the day
of judgment; you must be sensible you cannot too soon admit the conviction, and
reform. And here it cannot be improper to remind you of your liableness to
strong prejudices, which tend to prevent your seeing what in itself may be very
plain. Our divine teacher says, " Every one that does evil, hates the light,
neither comes to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved." If you are
indeed doing evil, according to the import of the preceding dialogue, these
words of Christ are so far applicable to you, and are suited to awaken your
jealousy of yourselves, and lead you to attend to the subject with great
concern, circumspection, and earnest prayer to the Father of lights, for that
discerning and wisdom, by which you may, in the case depending, come to the
knowledge of the truth. And is it not worthy your serious consideration, that
they who are not interested in this practice, and have no slaves, are
generally, if not every one, fully convinced it is wrong? Are they not, at
least many of them, as capable of judging in this matter, as you yourselves
are; and therefore more likely to judge right than you, as they are
uninterested and impartial? The conviction of the unjustifiableness of this
practice has been increasing, and greatly spread of late; and many who have had
slaves, have found themselves so unable to justify their own conduct in holding
them in bondage, as to be induced to set them at liberty. May this conviction
soon reach every owner of slaves in North America!

To this end you are desired to consider, what is more than once urged in the
dialogue, viz.

The very inconsistent part you act, while you are thus enslaving your fellow
men, and yet condemning, and strenuously opposing those who are attempting to
bring you and your children into a state of bondage, much lighter than that in
which you keep your slaves; who yet have at least as good a right to make
slaves of you and your children, as you have to hold your brethren in this
state of bondage. Men do not love to be inconsistent with themselves: and
therefore this is so evident and glaring, that if you will only suffer
yourselves to reflect a moment, it must give you pain, from which you can find
no relief; but by freeing yor slaves, or relinquishing the cause of public
liberty, which you have thought so glorious, and worthy to be pursued at the
risk of your fortunes and lives.

A general assembly of one of these colonies, RHODE ISLAND. This is a preamble
to a proposed act, "prohibiting the importation of Negroes into this colony,
and asserting the rights of freedom of all those hereafter born or manumitted
within the same." It is observable, at first view, that the reason given for
this act, is equally a reason for actually freeing ALL the Negro slaves in the
colony, without delay. As Rhode Island has been more deeply interested in the
slave trade, and has enslaved more of the poor Africans, than any other colony
in New England, it has been to the honor of that colony, that they have lately
made a law prohibiting the importation of any more slaves How becoming,
honorable and happy would it have been, had they acted up to the truth
asserted in the preamble mentioned, and taken the lead of all the united
colonies, in effectually providing for the freedom of all their slaves!

Since the above was published, the General Assembly of that State, have made a
law, by which all the blacks born in it after March 1734, are made free. And
the masters who have slaves under 40 years old, are authorized to free them,
without being bound, or liable to maintain them, if afterward they should be
enable to-support themselves.


have expressed their conviction of this inconsistence, and given it as a
reason for freeing our slaves, in the following words, Whereas the inhabitants
of America are generally engaged in the preservation of their own rights and
liberties, among which that of personal freedom must be considered as the
greatest; and as those who are desirous of enjoying all the advantages of
liberty themselves, should be willing to extend personal liberty to others:
Therefore, be it enacted, etc. -- Is it possible that any one should not feel
the irresistible force of this reason? And who would be willing to practice
this glaring self-contradiction, rather than let his servants go out free even
though he should hereby give up the greatest part of his living, yea, every
penny he has in the world! With what propriety will all such inconsistent
oppressors be addressed, by HIM before whom masters and their slaves will
shortly stand, as their impartial judge? " Out of thine own mouth will I judge
thee, thou wicked servant!"

Be entreated also seriously to consider, how very offensive to God,
unrighteousness and the oppression of the poor, the stranger and fatherless, is
represented to be, in the holy scripture. This is often spoken of as the
procuring cause of the calamities that came on God's professing people of old,
and of their final ruin. It may suffice to quote a few passages of this tenor,
and refer you to places where others are to be found. Jer. xxi. 12. "O house of
David, thus says the LORD, Execute judgment in the morning, and deliver him
that is spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor, lest my fury go out like
fire, and burn, that none can quench it, because of the evil of your doings."
Ezekiel. xxii. 29, 30, 31. "The people of the land have used oppression, and
exercised robbery, and have vexed the poor and needy: yea, they have oppressed
the stranger wrongfully. -- And I sought for a man among them, that should make
up the hedge, etc. -- but I found none. Therefore have I poured out mine
indignation upon them," etc. -- Amos ii. 6. "Thus says the Lord, For three
transgressions of Israel, and for four, I will not turn away the punishment
thereof, because they sold the righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of
shoes." Zech. vii. 9. -- 14. "Thus the Lord of hosts, saying, Execute true
judgment, and show mercy and compassions every man to his brother. And oppress
not the widow, nor the fatherless, the stranger nor the poor; and let none of
you imagine evil against his brother in your heart. But they refused to hearken
-- yea, they made their hearts as an adamant stone -- Therefore came a great
wrath from the Lord of hosts," etc See to the same purpose, Isa. iii. 14, 15.
x. 1, -- 4. Jer. v. 27, -- 29. vi. 6, 7. xxii. 13, -- 17. Amos iv. 1, 2. v. 11,
12. viii. 4, -- 8.
.

Are not the African slaves among us the poor, the strangers, the fatherless,
who are oppressed and vexed, and sold for silver? And will not God visit and
punish such oppression? Are you willing to be the instruments of bringing
judgments and ruin on this land, and on yourselves and families, rather than
let the oppressed go out free?

On the contrary, mercy, deliverance and prosperity were often promised them,
if they would leave off their oppressions, and do justice, and show mercy, in
delivering the oppressed, and showing kindness to the stranger and the poor.
Isa. i. 16, -- 18. "Cease to do evil learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve
the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow -- Though your sins be
as scarlet, they shall be white as snow -- If ye be willing and obedient, ye
shall cat the good of the land." Jer. vii. 1, -- 7. "Stand in the gate of the
Lord's house, and proclaim there this word, and say -- If ye thoroughly amend
your ways, and your doings; If ye thoroughly execute judgment between a man and
his neighbor, if you oppress not the stranger, the fatherless and the widow,
and shed not innocent blood in this place -- then will I cause you to dwell --
in the land I gave to your fathers, for ever and ever." Jer. xxii. 1, -- 4.
"Thus says the Lord, Execute judgment and righteousness, and deliver the
spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor; and do no wrong, do no violence to
the stranger, the fatherless, nor widow -- For if ye do this thing indeed, etc
See also Isa. xxxiii. 15, 16. lviii. 6, etc. Jer. v. 1.
.

How can we attend to the voice of God in these sacred writings, and not see
that you are most clearly pointed out. And will you be affronted, or even
disregard us, while we entreat and conjure you, by all that is important and
sacred, so far to regard these threatenings and promises, and pursue your own
highest interest and that of the public, as to let your oppressed slaves go out
free! Do not say, "This is too great a sacrifice for us to make; who will
indemnify us, if we give up our servants? The sovereign owner of all things has
promised you indemnity; yea, infinitely more, deliverance from the awful curse
which comes upon the oppressor; and his protection and blessing. And here it
may be proper to remind you of the divine answer to the king of Judah, when,
being ordered to dismiss the mercenaries he had procured to assist him, he
asked, what he should do for the hundred talents which this army had cost him?
"And the man of God answered, The LORD is able to give thee much more than
this." 2 Chronicles. xxv. 6, -- 9.

Consider also, how very inconsistent this injustice and oppression is with
worshipping God through Christ, and attending on the institutions of religion;
and how unacceptable and abominable these must be, while you neglect to let the
oppressed go free, and refuse to do justice, and love mercy. The bible is full
of declarations of this Read Isa. lviii. and chapter i. v. 10, -- 18. Amos v. 21,
-- 2.
.

"To do justice and judgment, is more acceptable to the LORD than sacrifice."
Without the (...) the latter is nothing but gross hypocrisy, and abomination to
God; for he "will have mercy, and not (...)." He requires no devotion, or
attendance on any religious right or institution, which is inconsistent with
mercy, or that is done without the love and exercise of mercy; but rejects all
such prayers and service, as most dishonorable and abominable to him. And when
we consider, that Christianity is the greatest instance and exhibition of
righteousness and mercy that was ever known, or can be conceived of: And the
great Author of it is, in the most eminent and glorious degree, THE JUST GOD
AND THE SAVIOR; we shall not wonder that no offering can be acceptable to him,
which is without the exercise and practice of righteousness and mercy: And that
"he shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy."

You who are professors of religion, and yet the owners of slaves, are
entreated well to consider, how you must appear in the sight of God, and of all
who view your conduct in a true light, while you attend your family and public
devotions, and sit down from time to time, at the table of the Lord. If your
neighbor wrong you of a few shillings, you think him utterly unfit to attend
that sacred ordinance with you; but what is this, to the wrong you are doing to
your brethren, whom you are holding in slavery! Should a man at Algiers have a
number of your children his slaves, and should, by some means be converted, and
become a professor of Christianity, would you not expect he would soon set your
children at liberty? And if after you had particularly dealt with him about,
it, and offered abundant light and matter of conviction, of the oppression and
cruelty of which he was guilty, he should be deaf to all you could say, and
resolve to hold them and their children in slavery, what would you think of
him, when you see him at his prayers, and attending at the Lord's supper? Would
you think he was more acceptable to God, than if he neglected these
institutions, and yet had been so just and merciful, as to set all his slaves
at liberty? Yea, would you scruple to say, his devotion and attendance on the
holy supper were hypocrisy and abomination? If Nathan the prophet was here, he
would say, " Thou art the man It is granted this oppression has been practiced
in ignorance by many, if not the most, who have been owners of slaves: And
though this has been a very criminal ignorance; yet professors of religion, and
real christians may have lived in this sin through ignorance, consistent with
sincerity, and so as to be acceptable to God through Jesus Christ, in their
devotions, etc. But though God has in time passed, suffered us, ignorantly, to
walk in this wicked way, he is NOW using special means to open our eyes, and
commands all, every where, to repent of his iniquity. And they who persist in
this sin, in opposition to the clear light, and alarming admonitions which are
now set before us, will greatly aggravate their own guilt, if they do not
hereby give just reason to suspect the sincerity of their profession. Some, who
are in the scriptures, declared to be good men, lived in evil practices,
consistent with sincerity in their attendance on divine institutions; in which
practices no Christian can now live, consistent with his Christian character;
because we enjoy much greater light than they had, and these evil ways are more
fully exposed and condemned.
."

The Friends, who are commonly called Quakers, have been for a number of years,
bearing testimony against this oppression, as inconsistent with Christianity;
and striving to purge themselves of this iniquity, rejecting those from
fellowship with them, who will not free their slaves. They indeed do not attend
the Lord's supper; and it is granted, they are herein neglecting an important
institution of Christ: But ought it not to alarm you to think, that while you
are condemning them for this neglect, your attendance, in the omission of that
righteousness and mercy which they practice, is inexpressibly more dishonorable
and offensive to Christ, than their neglect! These things you ought first to
have done, to let the oppressed go free, and break every yoke; and then not
leave the other undone.

May you all, in this day of your visitation, know and practice the things that
belong to your peace, and the safety and happiness of the united American
colonies, by no longer oppressing these poor strangers wrongfully, and doing
violence to them; but by executing judgment, relieve the oppressed, and deliver
the spoiled out of the hands of the oppressor! May this counsel be acceptable
unto you, and you break off this your sin, and all your sins, by righteousness,
and your iniquities by showing mercy to these poor; that it may be a
lengthening of the tranquillity of yourselves, your families, and of this now
distressed land!

APPENDIX
To the Second Edition of the Dialogue, concerning the Slavery of the Africans.

SINCE the first edition of the foregoing dialogue, peace has been restored to
the American States; in which they have obtained all that for which they have
contended, and more; and are become free and independent. Thus we have had
prosperity, and the smiles of Heaven, in our attempts, while the slavery of the
Africans has not been wholly abolished by us. This may be considered by some,
as an evidence that this slavery, and even the slave trade, are not so great
and heaven-provoking sins, as they are represented to be in the dialogue; and
that the repeated declarations there, that we could not reasonably expect
prosperity, until this iniquity was reformed, were groundless and rash.

The following observations, it is hoped, will serve to give a just view of
this matter.

I. Since the publication of the dialogue, many things have been done, and
steps taken, toward a reformation of this evil. In the states of the
Massachusetts and New Hampshire, the slavery of the blacks is wholly abolished.
And it is one of the fundamental articles in the constitution of the proposed
state of Vermont, that no slavery shall be tolerated there. The states of
Rhode Island, Connecticut, Pennsylvania, and the lower counties on Delaware,
have provided for the gradual abolition of slavery; and ordered that all the
blacks who shall be hereafter born in those states, shall be free at a certain
age. And that no more slaves shall be introduced among them. And the state of
Virginia has repealed a law, which was formerly in force there against the
freeing of blacks; and now allows the masters of slaves to free them when they
please. Thus all the states but five, have manifested a disposition to promote
the freedom of the Africans. And numbers of slaves, have been liberated by
their masters, under a conviction of the unrighteousness of holding them in
slavery.

This is a great advance in the desired reformation, and has given ground to
hope, that slavery will be wholly abolished in all the United States of
America. And may it not be considered as one reason why the omniscient,
long-suffering Governor of the world has spared and prospered us, as he has
done?

II. Though we have been thus saved and prospered, evil may, and we have reason
to fear it will come upon us, if we do not proceed to a thorough reformation of
this sin; especially upon these states in which there is no degree of
reformation. What has taken place since the peace, chiefly by our own
imprudence, extravagance and folly, by which our trade is almost ruined, and
these states are in a great measure drained of their money, and many evils are
introduced, is enough to show us how easily, and how soon, we may be made
miserable and be ruined as a nation, after all that God has done for us; and,
at the same time, is an evidence that he is displeased, and has a controversy
with us.

And we may easily account for this, notwithstanding the partial reformation
respecting slavery, which has been mentioned, when we consider that amidst
other open sins and instances of unrighteousness, we are again going into the
practice of that sevenfold abomination, THE SLAVE TRADE: against which, in the
beginning of the war, we bore public testimony, and entered into a united and
solemn resolution wholly to renounce it, and all connection with those who
should persist in this evil practice. A number of vessels have been sent from
some of the states in New England, and from other states, to Africa, to procure
slaves, and they are in such demand in the West Indies, and some of the
southern states, especially South Carolina, that several successful voyages
have been made, and thousands of slaves brought into these United States, and
sold at an extraordinary price, by which others are tempted and encouraged to
go into this trade; and there is a prospect that it will take place to as great
a degree as it has heretofore, unless it should be suppressed by those in
public authority, or by the people at large.

Are not the story and denunciations of evil, which we have in the prophecy of
Jeremiah, chap. xxxv. applicable to this case? The inhabitants of Jerusalem
were besieged by the army of the King of Babylon, and brought into great
distress and fears of utter ruin: Upon which, being convinced of their sin in
the practice of slavery, which had taken place among them, they being led to it
by their King and princes, entered into a resolution and solemn covenant to
free all their slaves. Soon after this their enemies raised the siege, and they
thought themselves delivered; but when their fears and distress were thus
removed, they returned to their former practice, and reduced to slavery the
servants they had set at liberty. God then directed Jeremiah to tell them, that
since they had returned to their former iniquity, which they had solemnly
promised to relinquish, and refused liberty to their brethren, he would
proclaim a liberty for them; even a most dreadful liberty to the sword, to the
pestilence, and to the famine, and cause them to be removed into all the
kingdoms of the earth, etc. If this barbarous trade should go on, and slavery
be still encouraged and promoted in these states, and yet we escape the
destruction which came on the inhabitants of Jerusalem, or evils that shall be
as great, it must be ascribed to mere, sovereign, distinguishing mercy, which
we have no reason to expect.

FINIS.
To be Sold, on very reasonable Terms, by ROBERTHODGE, No. 38, MAIDEN-LANE,
Three Doors from Queen Street, a large and choice collection of BOOKS;
INSTRUCTING and ENTERTAINING,
Consisting of

HISTORY, Divinity, Law, Philosophy, Mathematics, Biography, Geography, Poetry,
Physic, Surgery, Agriculture, Nautical Books, Dictionaries, Architecture,
Novels, Miscellanies, Plays, etc. etc.

BEAUTIFUL Family and Pocket BIBLES, common ditto, School Books, small and
entertaining Books for Children, etc.

LIKEWISE,

BROWN'S Bible, 2 vols. Burkit on the New Testament, Flavel's and Ambrose's
works, Brown on the Romans, His System of Divinity, Harmony of the Scriptures,
Dictionary of the Bible, History of the British Churches, Practical Piety,
Christian Journal, Scripture Metaphors, On the Types, Large David's Psalms with
Notes, Small ditto, Pike's cases of conscience, Doddridge's Rise and Progress
of Religion in the Soul, Rutherford's and Dickenson's religious Letters,
Blackwall's sacred scheme, Disney's portion of God's people, Confession of
faith, Hale's contemplations, Whitefields sermons, Stackhouse's body of
divinity, Watson's ditto, Drelincourt on death, Dr. Clarke's sermons,
Erskine's, Hervey's and Tillotson's works, Mackarsie's catechism, with a large
assortment of other religious books.

ALSO, An Excellent Assortment of STATIONARY. viz.

LEDGERS, Journals, Waste, Letter and Blank B^^ks of all sizes, Writing-paper,
from Twelve Shillings (...) F^urteen Pounds per Ream, Receipt books, neat Cases
of Mathematical Instruments, Gunter's Scales, Bonnet, Wrapping, and pressing
Paper, Quills, Penknives; -- a variety of Pocket books and (...), Ass-skin
Memorandum-books, Parchment, C^^pting-house Files, Rulers, red and black Ink,
Pewter (...) best Sealing-wax and Wafers, Slates, Lead and Slate Pencils,
Message and Compliment Cards, Patent Blacking Cakes, etc. etc.

*** BOOK-BINDING performed at the above Store, with neatness and expedition.

Good American manufactured Spelling-books, cheaper than can be imported.

Commissions from the country thankfully received and carefully executed.


