A SERMON OCCASIONED BY THE EXECUTION OF ALEXANDER WHITE, RICHARD BARRICK and
JOHN SULLIVAN.

Paradise promised by a dying SAVIOR to the penitent Thief on the Cross. A
SERMON Delivered at CAMBRIDGE, On Thursday the Eighteenth of November,
immediately preceding the Execution of ALEXANDER WHITE, RICHARD BARRICK and
JOHN SULLIVAN. WITH AN APPENDIX, Exhibiting some Account of their Conversation
and Behavior in Prison, etc.

By TIMOTHY HILLIARD, A. M. Pastor of the First Church in CAMBRIDGE.

BOSTON: Printed and Sold by E. RUSSELL, in Essex-Street, next Door to
Liberty-Pole. M,DCC,LXXXV.

LUKE XXII. 42, 43. And he said unto JESUS, LORD remember me when thou come
into thy Kingdom. -- And JESUS said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, Today
shall thou be with me in Paradise.
THIS memorable request to the LORD JESUS CHRIST, was made by one of the
malefactors which were crucified with him. One of these persons joined with the
surrounding multitude in insulting the suffering Savior in his last moments.
One of the malefactors which were hanged, railed on him, saying, If thou be the
CHRIST save thyself and us. Matthew and Mark mention both these persons as
joining in this railing accusation. -- It is common in the Scripture for a
single thing to be expressed in the plural number, especially when it is not
the design of the writer to be very particular. -- That is said to be written
in the Prophets, which is written only in one of them. It is observed of
Jeptha, that he was buried in the cities of Gilead, meaning one of those
cities. Mark i. 2. Judges xii. 7.


THESE two Evangelists, not designing particularly to relate the circumstances
of those which were crucified with JESUS, express themselves in general terms:
But St. Luke gives an exact detail of what passed respecting these persons, and
represents the one as having acted a very different part from his
fellow-sufferer. -- He answering, rebuked him, saying, do not thou fear GOD,
seeing thou art in the same condemnation? And we indeed justly: For we receive
the due reward of our deeds; but this man has done nothing amiss. -- And he
said unto JESUS, LORD remember me when thou come into thy kingdom. Some
suppose that this request implied nothing more than that CHRIST would exert his
miraculous power in delivering him from his present sufferings, and that he
would give him a place in a temporal kingdom on earth. But if we consider, that
our LORD's disciples had given up all hopes of his being the temporal deliverer
of the Jewish nation, it will not appear very probable that this malefactor
retained such a sentiment; especially if we observe that he seemed perfectly
satisfied with the answer which our LORD gave him, Today shall thou be with
me, etc. -- He seems to have entertained just and exalted notions of the
Messiah's kingdom, and to have believed that though CHRIST was suspended on the
cross, he was possessed of spiritual dominion and regal dignity, and had power
to save and to destroy.

LET us consider a little distinctly the request itself, and the gracious
answer which our LORD returned. This person evidently believed in CHRIST as the
promised Messiah, and the Savior of the world. Notwithstanding the ignominy
and disgrace of his situation on the cross, he viewed him as the LORD of life
and glory, and was willing to trust his immortal interests in his hands. He
was, in some way or other, brought to a sense of his absolute, perishing need
of a Savior, and clearly saw that there was salvation in none other but
CHRIST. If he had not firmly believed that CHRIST would be raised from the
dead, and that he would take possession of the kingdom of glory, there would
have been no propriety in such an address. -- By what means soever, we may
suppose that he became acquainted with the character of CHRIST, it certainly
discovered a strong degree of faith to cast himself upon the mercy of one who
was then nailed to the cross, and just ready to give up the ghost. He saw the
divine glory of a suffering Savior; and while one of his immediate disciples
had betrayed him, while another had denied him, and the rest forsaken him and
fled, he says, LORD remember me when thou come into thy kingdom. He
acknowledges that the dying JESUS is LORD of universal nature, and is able to
bestow blessings infinitely superior to any thing that earth can yield. -- The
case with many sinners is, that they do not see any beauty or comeliness in
CHRIST that they should desire him. They fondly imagine that they are rich and
increased in goods, and have need of nothing, when they are really wretched and
miserable, poor, blind and naked.

BUT this penitent thief deeply sensible of the exceeding evil and malignity of
sin, and the fearful consequences of it in a state of retribution, flies to
JESUS the only city of refuge, and casts himself upon his mercy who is able to
save to the uttermost.

To whom else can any sinners go, but to him who has the words of eternal life?
Where can other condemned malefactors who are on the brink of eternity look,
but to him who poured out his most precious life in groans and agonies on the
cross, to save the chief of sinners? By whom can they wish to be remembered,
but by him who has the dignity and glory of a kingdom to bestow, to whom all
power is committed in Heaven and earth? This petition seems plainly to imply
that the thief on the cross was a real friend of CHRIST, and that he was
willing to be saved on the terms of the gospel. -- His conversion might not,
perhaps, in all respects have been so sudden as some have supposed: It is
evident that he had some knowledge of the character of CHRIST from what he said
to his fellow-sufferer, This man has done nothing amiss. It is not impossible
that he might have heard some of our LORD's discourses, and seen some of his
miraculous works.

DURING his confinement in prison he might have been convinced of the evil and
danger of sin, and have had serious thoughts upon death and judgment. -- Some
have supposed that he might have been a good man before the commission of the
crime for which he suffered, and that this single act of gross wickedness which
brought him to an untimely end, was not totally inconsistent with the truth of
grace. But there seems no foundation for such a conjecture. -- The case of this
person is rather recorded as a signal instance of the power and grace of the
Redeemer; to show that no crimes are so great, but that his blood can expiate
the guilt of them; that no heart is so hard, but it may be brought, by his
victorious grace, to the obedience of faith.

"I CANNOT but look upon this happy man," says Dr. Doddridge, (for such, amidst
all the ignominy and torture of the cross, he surely was) as a glorious
instance of the power, as well as the sovereignty of divine grace; which,
perhaps, taking the first occasion from the preternatural darkness, wrought so
powerfully as to produce by a sudden and astonishing growth in his last
moments, all the virtues which could be crowded into so small a a space, and
which were eminently manifested in his confessing his own guilt, in his
admonishing his companion for a crime which he feared would prove fatal to him,
in his vindicating the character of CHRIST, and reposing his confidence in him
as the LORD of a kingdom beyond the grave, when his enemies were triumphing
over him, and he himself, abandoned by most of his friends, was expiring on the
cross.

IT is probable, that the previous knowledge he had of the character of CHRIST
was merely speculative, and that his heart was never effectually changed 'till
this memorable day, in which he was to die on the cross with the LORD of glory.
-- It is quite rational to suppose, that the divine Savior whose life was a
series of wonders, who went about doing good to the souls and bodies of men,
and who delighted above all things in acts of benevolence and mercy, should, in
a dying hour give some striking instance of the power of his grace.

WE cannot pretend to determine the exact time or manner of his conversion. But
it cannot be denied, that the power and grace of CHRIST are sufficient at any
time to bring a sinner out of darkness into marvelous light, and to raise a
soul, guilty, deprest and polluted to the joyful hope of immortality and glory.
A Being of infinite wisdom and goodness, does not confine himself to any
particular mode of operation. He is sometimes found of them that seek him not
and prevents men with the blessings of his grace, while they are running on in
a mad career of vice. In every age, there may be some signal monuments of the
power of his grace, to show that nothing is too hard for him to effect to whom
Omnipotence belongs.

THIS instance of the penitent thief cannot however, afford sufficient matter
of encouragement to others to persist in sin, hoping to obtain pardon and life
in their last moments. He had not sinned against such clear light and strong
convictions as persons in general do, who enjoy the Gospel: It would be
presumption for those to take comfort from this example who have long resisted
the strivings of GOD's spirit; who have broken solemn vows and engagements,
have slighted the promises, despised the threatenings, been deaf to all the
calls of GOD's word, and abused that grace and mercy which has been so freely
offered them? This instance of late repentance, can never justify any who have
been educated under the clear light of the Gospel, in neglecting that great
salvation which it offers, 'till death approaches. A single instance of a late
repentance produced and accepted in the article of death, and this under such
peculiar circumstances as never can occur again, His suffering with CHRIST on
the (...) darkness, etc. are referred to.
is a most precarious basis for any to build their hopes upon.

IF persons retain their sins as long as they possibly can, against the
clearest light and evidence, and call upon CHRIST to remember them when they
have obstinately refused to remember him, can they with any propriety plead the
case of this malefactor in their behalf? The probability is, that he had no
fair opportunity of professing faith in CHRIST 'till he was on the confines of
eternity, and therefore was in a situation far different from those in general,
who have been born and educated under the clear light of the Gospel. Their case
seems to come the nearest to his, who have been educated in total ignorance of
the principles and duties of religion, and whose manner of life has been such,
that they have had few opportunities to hear the word of GOD dispensed. Such a
case as this has existed in our day; such an one is now presented to our view.
Referring to Barrick and Sullivan, who had never been taught to read, and had
heard but few Sermons in the course of their lives. -- See the Appendix.
How fit and necessary is it for persons in this situation to look to the
divine Savior for mercy, and say LORD remember us! etc.

WE come now to consider the gracious and condescending answer which our LORD
returned to this request of the thief on the cross, Today shall thou be with
me in Paradise. What an astonishing mixture of dignity and mercy was here, that
the Son of GOD should speak from the cross as from a throne, and should in the
agonies of death not merely dispense pardons, but dispose of seats in Paradise!
What unspeakable joy and satisfaction must this answer have yielded to the
wretched malefactor! With what calmness and composure could he resign his
departing spirit, after being assured from the mouth of JESUS that to be absent
from the body would be to gain admission to the immortal joys of Heaven!

THE general opinion of the Jews respecting Paradise was, that it was a place
into which pious souls were immediately received after death. This was the
original of that oracle among the Chaldees, Seek Paradise the glorious country
of the soul. This was their benevolent wish for a dying person, Let his soul be
in Paradise. This word is introduced only in two other passages in the sacred
volume; the one is 2 Cor. xii. 4. where St. Paul is said to have been caught up
into Paradise, and to have heard unspeakble words: The other is Rev. ii. 7.
where CHRIST promises to him that overcomes, that he shall eat of the tree of
life which is in the midst of the Paradise of GOD. This expression plainly
alludes to that delightful garden in which our first Parents dwelt while they
retained their innocence; where the tree of life was fixed as a surety and
pledge of immortality. As they would have enjoyed an immortal life, if they had
not sinned, so all the true disciples of CHRIST will be admitted to a state of
glory, honor and immortal blessedness in that Paradise which is above; an
happiness vastly superior to that which the garden of Eden was capable of
yielding; even such as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, and which it has not
entered into the heart of man to conceive of.

LET us however consider for a moment, the account which the Scriptures give us
of the heavenly happiness. It is declared to be a state of perfect freedom from
all evil and misery. They who arrive at the mansions of bliss hunger no more,
neither thirst any more, the sun does not light on them, nor any heat, and GOD
wipes away all tears from their eyes. There will be no danger from without, no
pains and distresses from within to disturb and perplex them. There the wicked
cease from troubling and there the weary are at rest. No (...) evil or
defilement will any more cleave to them, nor will they be tempted any more to
depart from GOD. No seducer or adversary can have access to them. When they
enter the Paradise of GOD, they take their leave of sin and misery forever, and
are fixed in those calm and blissful regions, from whence sighs and tears are
perpetually banished.

IT is not, however, to be supposed that such as die in the LORD, are, in their
separate state, exalted to the highest dignity and glory of the heavenly world:
But as we pass through the several stages of infancy, childhood, youth, etc. in
the present state, so it is probable that the happiness of the next, will be
progressive. It is evident from the general tenor of Scripture, that the
happiness of the saints will be greatly augmented at the resurrection; that
they will be admitted to the complete and everlasting enjoyment of GOD and the
Redeemer. When CHRIST who is our life shall appear, says the Apostle, then
shall ye also appear with him in glory. When the chief Shepher a shall appear,
ye shall receive a crown of glory that fades not away. Col. iii. 4. 1 Pet. v.
4.
It must have been matter of great joy to the penitent thief to hear that he
should be with CHRIST, that glorious Redeemer who was then dying on the cross
to save sinners. The presence of this divine Personage is enough to constitute
Heaven. Father, says he, I will that they also whom thou have given me be with
me where I am; that they may behold my glory which thou have given me. John.
xvii. 24.


THE glory and excellency of CHRIST, and the wonders of redeeming love and
grace afford high delight in this world to all the followers of the Lamb; but
this will be infinitely increased in Heaven, where they will behold his lovely
face, and be forever satisfied with his likeness. In the city of the living
GOD, there will also be the society of an innumerable company of angels, the
general assembly and church of the firstborn, and the spirits of just men made
perfect. The extensive knowledge and enlarged benevolence of these blessed
servants of GOD must render their conversation most pleasant and profitable.
And if we consider that these divine entertainments and enjoyments are of
perpetual duration, it must greatly extend and enlarge our ideas of the
heavenly blessedness. It is said expressly that they are ever with the LORD;
that these pleasures are forevermore, and that it is an exceeding and eternal
weight of glory. 1 Thessalonians iv. 17. Ps. xvi. 11. 2 Cor. iv. 17.
How immensely rich, how inconceivably great must that grace and love be which
confers such a glorious reward on sinful, unworthy creatures! Eternal life is
the free, unmerited gift of GOD through our LORD JESUS CHRIST.

THE time which our LORD mentions for conferring the blessings of Paradise on
the penitent thief is worthy of particular notice, Today shall thou be with
me, etc. Some who deny conscious existence in the intermediate state, put this
construction upon the words, Today I say unto thee, etc. But this is a very
forced and unnatural sense; for there could be no question whether these
gracious words were uttered on that particular day, or at any other time. --
Others imagine that the phrase is used indefinitely, and intends only the
certainty of his future happiness without fixing any time for the commencement
of it, just as it was said to our first Parents, in the day thou eatest
thereof, etc. But this seems to be taking more freedom with Scripture than can
be justified, in order to support a favorite opinion. The plain and obvious
sense is more likely to be the true one. Our LORD undoubtedly spoke in such a
sense on this important occasion, that the thief would be likely to apprehend
his meaning. And as he was a Jew, he would naturally understand him according
to their commonly received notions respecting Paradise, and the admission of
persons into it upon their leaving this world.

THERE are sundry other passages of Scripture which confirm the plain and
obvious sense of this text, which the time will not permit me to enumerate. See
Luke xvi. 22, and on. 2. Cor. v. 8, Phil. i, 21. Heb. vi. 12, etc.
I would only remark, what a happy and glorious change this penitent thief must
have made, when he was removed from the pains and tortures of a cross to the
unspeakable and immortal joys of Paradise!

CAN we suppose that the hand of this Almighty Redeemer is shortened that is
cannot save? Does not he remain the same yesterday, today and forever? In his
exalted state, he views the children of men with infinite tenderness and
compassion, and does in effect say to every true penitent in his last moments,
Today shall thou be with me in Paradise.

WELL may this language cheer your souls, my unhappy Fellow-men, who are now to
be carried to the place of execution to receive the just reward of your deeds.
The crimes for which you are to suffer have been very great, and expose you not
only to the vindictive justice of men, but also to the wrath of Almighty GOD.
Temporal death, though a solemn and momentous change, is a small and
inconsiderable evil, compared with the sad consequences of it to the
impenitent, in a state of retribution. In such a situation where can you look
for help and succor? Whither can you fly but to JESUS the city of refuge for
safety and protection? Can you heartily adopt this prayer of the penitent thief
and say LORD remember us in thy kingdom? If you are deeply sensible as he was,
of the exceeding evil and malignity of sin, and have with all your hearts
renounced it: If you have, like him, from a sense of your undone condition,
cordially accepted of CHRIST in his whole character, and cast yourselves
entirely upon the mercy of GOD through him, you may with safety apply this
precious promise in our text, Today, etc. You see from what has been
discoursed, that mercy at a late hour was extended to one who died by the hand
of justice. He had perhaps run to as great excesses in wickedness as any of
you, and yet through the unspeakable riches of divine grace, he was at death
admitted to the joys of Paradise. The mercy of GOD is great above the Heavens,
and knows no bounds with respect to such as are the proper objects of it. Part
of an Address is introduced here which was delivered to the Prisoners the
LORD'S Day preceding their execution.
He has sent his dear Son to die for sinners, even the chief of them. In him
there is a complete fullness for pardon, peace and eternal salvation. The life
of JESUS abounded with numberless instances of compassion and love. He meets,
says one, the returning prodigal: Looks with compassion on denying Peter:
Rejects not disbelieving Thomas: Admits sinful Magdalen: Pardons the taken
Adultress: And associates to himself in Paradise (where Angels cast their
crowns at his feet) a thief from the cross. Dr. Young.
Multitudes of the most heinous offenders have experienced his superabounding
mercy; and can you doubt that it will be extended to you, in case you are truly
humble and penitent? The Gospel invitation is most free and generous; the
Spirit and the Bride say come, and let him that is athirst come, and whosoever
will, let him come and take of the water of life freely. Suffer not yourselves
therefore to despair of the mercy of GOD through the glorious Savior, but
commit a fresh the keeping of your souls to him who is able to save to the
uttermost. You are to remember that GOD is also a just and holy Being who must
render to all according to their real state and character.

IT is extremely unhappy that some of you were not early instructed in the
first principles of the oracles of GOD. If this however was not owing to any
negligence of your own, there will not be so much required of you as of others,
who had better opportunities for improvement. You have heard much of late of
the excellency of CHRIST, and his ability and readiness to save sinners. The
terms on which pardon and life are to be obtained have been fairly proposed,
and you have been most earnestly entreated to become reconciled to GOD. -- Do
you not heartily believe in, and love this almighty and most compassionate
Savior? Do you not ardently desire to be with him in Paradise after you leave
this world? If you will, like the thief on the cross, cordiallly accept of
CHRIST, you will obtain mercy, though it should be on this very day of
execution. He that believes on the Son has everlasting life, and though he
should be called out of the world instantly, shall not fail of the possession
of it. Those graces and virtues which are fruits of faith shall be accepted,
though they existed only in their spring and source.

WHEREIN any one of you Alexander White appeared very humble and penitent, and
(...) persuasion of his interest in the savor of GOD. See Appendix.
enjoys a good hope of final acceptance and everlasting life, be thankful to
GOD for it, and whatever may have been done for your soul give him all the
glory. Do not depend upon particular feelings and the motions of the animal
spirits, but examine yourself with great care whether you be in the faith, and
whether your hope and confidence are well grounded. Make it your earnest
prayer, O LORD search me and know my heart, try me and know my thoughts, see if
there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting. If you are
in reality what you profess to be, a true I send and disciple of the blessed
JESUS, you will be as a brand plucked out of the burning, a signal monument of
divine grace and mercy. If your hope is built upon the immutable promises of
GOD which in CHRIST are all yea and amen, it will never make you ashamed, but
will soon be changed into the everlasting, frui^^^^ of its glorious object. I
doubt not that you have often adopted that prayer of the penitent, LORD
remember me, etc. GOD grant that you, and each of you, may be found with CHRIST
in Paradise. Be strong in faith, giving glory to GOD: The shield of faith will
not only quench all the fiery darts of satan, but also repel the arrows of
death. Never is the excellence of this grace so fully known as in the strength
and peace which it communicates to a person in the near views of death. When he
is passing the dark valley of the shadow of death, faith like a ray from Heaven
enlightens the gloomy path, and helps him to behold the hills of salvation that
lie beyond it. If your faith is genuine, and your hope established upon its
proper basis, you may now meet death with tranquillity and composure, and break
out in that triumphant language, O death where is thy sting, O grave where is
thy victory? Thanks be to GOD who gives me the victory through our LORD JESUS
CHRIST.

YOU are now, Prisoners of Justice, in a short time to meet your fate. The
season of your departure is at hand, and a boundless eternity lies open before
you. Commend your departing spirits into the hands of your Father in Heaven.
May each of you have much of his presence and grace to support you amidst the
agonies of dissolving nature; and when you shut your eyes upon the light of
this world, may the LORD JESUS receive your souls to the arms of his
everlasting mercy. May you dwell forever with him in the regions of light and
glory, and celebrate the wonders of redeeming love throughout immortal ages.

THIS solemn occasion affords matter of useful instruction to this whole
assembly. We see here the sad and awful effects of sin. How has this defaced
the beauty and glory of the works of GOD! What amazing havoc and destruction
has it made in this revolted world! How ruinous is the influence of unbridled
lusts and passions! How do they prompt men to measures which impair the
understanding and sear the conscience; which are dishonorary to GOD and
injurious to men; which blast reputation and character, and end in misery and
death! How is that awful maxim of wisdom verified, He that sins against me
wrongeth his own soul; all they that hate me love death! What astonishing
progress do men make in vice when they have once cast off the fear of GOD, and
freed themselves from the restraints of conscience! With what quick succession
does one crime follow another, 'till at length a capital offense brings them to
an untimely end.

THE scene before us is truly affecting: Three persons, Not one of the
Prisoners had reached the age of twenty-five.
young, healthful and vigorous, who, had they chosen the paths of wisdom and
virtue, might have been blessings to mankind, cut off in an instant and ushered
into eternity!

WHO that has the least spark of benevolence or even humanity can be unmoved at
this dismal tragedy. Let others be warned and admonished to fly from sin as
their most dangerous and fatal enemy, and excited to walk in virtues pure and
peaceful path. Keep under your bodies and bring them into subjection to your
rational and intellectual powers. Never suffer any covetous, envious or
malicious sentiments to rest in your bosoms. An inordinate thirst after this
world's goods leads men into snares and temptations, and into many foolish and
hurtful lusts which drown them in destruction and perdition. Let such as are in
the prime and vigor of their days be persuaded to flee youthful lusts and
criminal pursuits. Sin can never consist with your interest as men. Its
inseparable companions, if persisted in, are infamy and ruin. "To hate sin is
to honor yourselves, and to abstain from it is your truest glory." Religion or
early piety, will ever promote your best interests in time and eternity. It
yields joy and satisfaction upon reflection, and affords the most reviving and
blessed prospects. It is your best security in life and death.

WE see from what has been discoursed that it is posible to obtain true
repentance in the near approaches of death: But let none be encouraged from
hence to continue in sin that grace may abound, The extreme danger of taking
encouragement from this single instance of the thief on the cross, is pointed
out in a masterly manner by the pious and learned Bishop Hoadly in his Sermons
on Acceptance.
It would be the height of folly and presumption to delay our repentance with
such a fond expectation. We are to expect the grace of GOD in the ordinary
established method. If we seek him with our whole heart, he will be found of
us, but if we forsake him, and refuse to follow the method he has prescribed,
he will cast us off forever.

THE present occasion suggests a powerful motive to engage persons to maintain
family order and government, and to instill the principles of religion and
virtue into the minds of children and others committed to their trust. Families
are the first seminaries of religion; and if due restraint, instruction and
government be neglected, what are we to expect but a general profligacy of
manners and a rapid increase of Public Executions? Religion and virtue are the
life and soul of society, and the welfare of kingdoms and nations can never
flourish but under the sacred influence of them. May the GOD of all grace pour
out his spirit upon this whole people, and his blessings upon their offspring,
that we may have that righteousness which exalts a nation, and those
iniquities which are the reproach and ruin of a people may be taken from us.
May the things which belong to our everlasting peace never be hidden from our
eyes: May we all remember that we are hastening with amazing velocity into
eternity, and may we be engaged so to act our part on the stage of this world,
that when we are summoned hence, we may be remembered by the glorious Savior,
and share to all eternity the ineffable delights of the Paradise of GOD, which
may He of his infinite mercy grant for CHRIST's sake, to whom be glory forever
and ever.

AMEN.
AN APPENDIX, EXHIBITING Some Account of the Conversation and Behavior of
WHITE, BARRICK and SULLIVAN, in Prison, etc.
ALEXANDER WHITE, when brought upon his Trial before the Honorable Supreme
Judicial Court, for Murder and Piracy on the High Seas, pleaded GUILTY. The
Court seemed much affected with his plea, and the rehearsal of his story. They
did not direct his plea to be recorded, but remanded him to prison, informing
him that they would consider further of his case the next morning. Upon his
appearing at the Bar the second time he pleaded as before. The Court were so
tender of his case, that they proceeded to examine sundry witnesses; and after
they had gone through their evidence, White declared that they had related the
circumstances of the affair as nearly as could possibly be expected.

AT the first Pastoral Visit, which was made him in Cambridge, it was
particularly enquired, Why he accused himself before the Court in a trial for
his life? He answered, that his conscience formed him that he was guilty, and
that as (...) life was forfeited, he wished not to retain -- It was then
observed that pleading not (...) before a Court amounts to nothing more in
putting one's self upon trial. -- He said he (...) sensible of that; but
knowing that he had murdered an innocent man, it appeared to him (...) duty to
confess it before GOD and men: he added, that he believed the evidence was
(...) sufficient to convict him, but he chose to (...) the punishment due to
his crime.

IT was then observed to him, that Death was solemn and important event, and
that the (...) of it was a passion deeply implanted in human nature; and
particular enquiry was made (...) what grounds he was so reconciled to it?
(...) said, that he had soon after the commission his crime, framed a story, in
which he endeavored to throw the guilt upon the Passen^^^^; but that after he
was committed to prison at Plymouth, he was brought under deep ^^^viction of
the evil of sin, and was for ^^^^ral weeks in the utmost anguish and (...) that
he read the Word of GOD and other (...) of devotion with the utmost attention
and (...), and frequently received visits from Mr. Rob^^^^ and other Ministers
and Friends, who gave (...) the best counsel and advice in their power; (...)
also that he heard sundry Sermons which (...) well adapted to his case. He
further (...) that as he was mourning on account of (...) with penitential
sorrow, he had a very lively and affecting view of the mercy of GOD through
JESUS CHRIST, and that he found (...) himself a strong and ardent desire to
submit CHRIST in the character of a Savior. The appeared to him to be a great
change in (...) sentiments and views. He thought that (...) found in his heart
a real love to GOD and JESUS CHRIST, and true benevolence to mankind.

WHEN it was observed to him, that he must be destitute of the most
satisfactory evidence (...) a real change, viz. the fruits of righteousness and
true holiness in the life; he said, he (...) aware of that, but that he felt in
himself (...) a divine temper and disposition, and such (...) hearty
approbation of the ways of GOD (...) religion, that he had strong hope of final
acceptance and everlasting life.

EVERY time the author of the foregoing Sermon visited him, he appeared very
humble, serious and prayerful. He spoke of death with great calmness and
composure, and declare himself perfectly reconciled to it, from a strong
persuasion of his interest in the favor of GOD and a confident hope of a
better life. Who he was asked whether he wished for a Reprieve? He replied that
he did not on his own account; but as his Fellow Sufferers were (...) desirous
of it he would acquiesce in it. He (...) that if the prison-doors were opened
to him, (...) he might have his liberty and life, he should ^^ther wish to die.

SEVERAL other Ministers who saw and conversed with him, were at first very
apprehensive that he was a mere Enthusiast, and that as death approached, he
would change his style: But upon further conversation, when the time of
execution was at hand, they seemed much more satisfied of his sincerity. It is
worthy of particular notice, that he took great pains to enlighten his
Fellow Sufferers, by reading to them the Scriptures and other good books; by
counsels and exhortations, and that he often prayed with and for them.

As he was going to the place of execution, he was asked, Whether he now
heartily approved of the method of salvation through JESUS CHRIST, and could
trust in his merits and mediation for pardon and eternal life? He said that it
appeared to him most wise and excellent, and that he had not the least wish for
any other way of life than that through JESUS CHRIST, and that he did entirely
depend on the rich grace and mercy of GOD, through him, for pardon and
salvation. When enquiry was made, Whether his faith and hope continued as
strong and vigorous as ever? He said they really did, and that he viewed death
with the utmost complacency and satisfaction; and further said, that if these
graces should fail him in his last moments he would openly declare it: He
added, that he ardently wished the prosperity and success of the kingdom of the
Redeemer among men. He prayed very earnestly with his last breath, and died
commending his soul into the hands of GOD.

IN this recital the style of the Prisoner could not be exactly recollected;
but his ideas are represented as nearly as possible. Many other questions were
proposed to him, the recording of which, might too far protract this Appendix.
These facts are submitted, leaving every one to form his own judgment upon so
singular a case.

Richard Barrick and John Sullivan appeared exceedingly ignorant, and owned
that they had never been taught to read. Barrick said that he never knew his
parents, but was sent very young to the foundling-hospital. It was observed to
him that proper provision was made there for the instruction of children. He
said that this was the case in some parts of it; but not so in others. Sullivan
said that his parents were solicitous for the education of their children, and
that of eleven he was the only one which was not taught, and that this was
owing to his refractory temper and his disobedience to his parents. When
enquiry was made whether they believed the Being and perfections of GOD, and
that men would be happy or miserable after death, according to their conduct in
the present state? they answered in the affirmative. They were asked whether
they were sensible of the exceeding evil of sin as it is opposite to a holy
GOD, and their need of pardon and mercy through JESUS CHRIST? They seemed at a
loss for an answer, and said they did not understand it. No small pains was
taken by sundry Ministers to lead them to a proper sense of their state, and to
open to them the way of salvation through CHRIST.

AT the first visit they pretended to deny that they were guilty of the Robbery
at Winter-Hill, for which they had been convicted; but after sentence of death
was pronounced by the Court, they both owned the fact.

HAVING formed an inveterate habit of vice in early life, and been destitute of
instruction and discipline, it was extremely difficult to make any impression
upon them. They said they were afraid to die, sensible that they were
unprepared, and wished for more time.

As the day of execution approached, they seemed considerably affected, and
said they were heartily sorry for all their sins, and wished for mercy through
JESUS CHRIST. As they advanced to the Gallows, they seemed much distressed, and
continued crying to GOD through CHRIST, 'till the moment arrived which ushered
them into eternity. -- Thus much is mentioned with respect to these two unhappy
Men, to show the extreme danger of neglecting the proper education and
government of children, and the necessity of restraining them while young from
sinful excesses.

The following Letters being in the possession of the Printer, he has inserted
it to fill up a vacant page.
Extract of a Letter written by ALEXANDER WHITE, to a Person who had greatly
befriended his spiritual interest while in Plymouth goal.
Cambridge-Goal, Nov. 15, 1784. Dear Friend,
YOU request me, in your last Letter, to send you a particular account of the
workings of my heart since I have condemned myself, by making an open
confession of the abominable sin which I have committed against GOD and my own
soul. I do not reflect on my conduct (in confessing the crime) blessed be GOD
that my hope is grounded on the sure foundation that is laid in Zion. My anchor
is within the veil, and it is utterly impossible for it to be removed by the
hands of man, or the ingenuity of devils -- Nothing can remove my hope. Although
the time draws near and death approaches me, GOD also draws near, and stifles
the pangs of death and gives me an overcoming triumph over the grave. Blessed
be GOD, I have the privilege of going to meeting, and have the advice of sundry
faithful Ministers of the Gospel. And blessed be GOD that I am very well
supplied with the necessaries of life. -- I have not time nor opportunity to
write to all my Friends with you now -- the time draws near that I am to be no
more -- yet what remains of my heart that is not engaged with GOD, I leave with
them, and I hope they have but a small share.

My dear Friend,

THERE are two Malefactors along with me, who are under sentence of death --
and when this comes to hand I, with their consent, would solicit for your
prayers in their behalf. -- My feeble hand, bound with cold iron will not,
allow me to write so long a Letter as I would wish. So I conclude, and remain
your dying friend,

ALEXANDER WHITE.

Copy of another Letter from ALEXANDER WHITE to a Rev. Gentleman at Plymouth.
Cambridge-Goal, Nov. 15, 1784. Rev. Sir,
MY trembling hand I set to paper, to set forth the sentiments of my heart, and
to point out where the ground of my hope lies. My hope is fixed on that rock
that is in Zion, the sure foundation that GOD has laid for the redemption of
sinners. -- Blessed be GOD my mountain stands strong, and the thoughts of death
cannot remove it, nor can any thing be a (...) to me. -- But -- O the thoughts
of my dear Redeemer! -- Dear Sir, excuse the shortness of my observations to
you. -- I am under great obligation to you for the favor of your Letter. It is
now growing dark, and opportunity will not permit me to say any more, so I
remain your dying friend.

ALEXANDER WHITE.


