SANS SOUCI.

ALIAS FREE and EASY OR AN Evening's Peep into a polite Circle AN ENTIRE NEW
ENTERTAINMENT:

In THREE ACTS.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY WARDEN AND RUSSELL M,DCC,LXXXV.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Mr. IMPORTANCE, JEMMY SATIRIST, Doctor GALLANT, Mr. BON TON, YOUNG FORWARD,
LITTLE PERT. Waiter, Servants, etc.
WOMEN.
Madam IMPORTANCE, Madam BRILLIANT, REBUBLICAN HEROINE, Mrs. W -- N.
SCENE -- The Metropolis of the Massachusetts.

SANS SOUCI, etc.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
The HALL. YOUNG FORWARD, and LITTLE PERT. YOUNG FORWARD. SANS SOUCI -- free
and easy! This is high bon ton -- Ante-revolution days -- routs -- drums, etc.
This would do for my Lord Paxton,* that essence of Chesterfield: We want some
of that Sans Souci air and address, which were so conspicuous in that great
character; but however we practice very well in the school of politeness, and a
few years will produce many a BEAU NASH in our modern circles.


LITTLE PERT. D -- n the old musty rules of decency and decorum -- national
characters -- Spartan virtues -- republican principles -- they are all
calculated for rigid manners, and Cromwelian days; -- they are as disgu^sting
as old orthodoxy: -- Fashion and etiquette are more agreeable to my ideas of
life -- this is the independence I aim at -- the free and easy air which so
distinguishes the man of fashion, from the self-formal republican -- the court
style -- the je ne scai quoi -- give me but this and away with all your buckram
of Presbeterianism.


YOUNG FORWARD. I find, my good friend, you have a genuine idea of taste. --
From the many starched sentiments which some of our Old Dons have endeavored
to instill among us by their resolves -- town-meetings, etc. I expected we
should all, at the close of the war, be obliged to be confined to our closets
to learn political creeds and read political disquisitions -- and instead of
balls, concerts and card-parties, we should be employed in writing
dissertations on government: -- Happy reverse! We have now worn off those old
fashion sentiments, and can breathe the free air of gallantry and etiquette.


LITTLE PERT. Can any prospect be more pleasing than the brilliant appearance
of this Hall? -- What a fine arrangement! -- Let me see -- twenty card-tables.
-- Behold those agreeable ladies! -- what animated countenances! -- How the
chance of play gives new vivacity to their eyes! -- How charming this
assemblage of flowers in this garden of beauty! -- What a beautiful variety
adorns this parterre! -- This is an improvement of Eden, there only one fruit
tempted our first parents, but here they hang in such clusters, that we are
surrounded in the circle of temptations.


YOUNG FORWARD. Not only the ladies, but I think the gentlemen appear with a
particular grace. -- We have the happy faculty of blending business and
amusements -- I hate those tare and tret fellows in London, that can only make
a figure in a compting house, and walk a-thrawt a room as clumsy as gross
hundreds, mere avoirdupois weight; -- I like to see a man throw aside his
professional character, and enter a polite circle with the Sans Souci air of a
petit maitre -- and instead of plodding in a Ledger over Dr. and Cr. I like to
see him versed in all the tender style of a billet doux -- not calculated
solely to balance accounts, but to decide with precission the arrangements of
a lady's toilette.


LITTLE PERT. When I was at New York, among the British, I was ashamed to
acknowledge myself a Bostonian -- we had such a particular character -- we were
always pictured as a set of canting presbeterians, who began Sundays before sun
set on Saturday, and held out praying until Monday morning at sunrise -- that
all our diversions were singing psalms, and going to Thursday-Lectures. -- But
thank Heaven we can now hold up our heads amidst the most polite circle at
Raneleigh, or join with full eclat the brilliant assembly at Vauxhall.


YOUNG FORWARD. For the present we will separate* as our extacies may possibly
be observed by the company.


Exeunt. SCENE II.
The DRAWING ROOM. Enter Madam IMPORTANCE and Madam BRILLIANT. Madam
IMPORTANCE. PRAY waiter are there much company this evening?


WAITER. A great deal, Madam.


Madam BRILLIANT. Are they very brilliant in their dress?


WAITER. Very much so, Madam.


Madam BRILLIANT. I am sorry the ladies have been so attentive to their dress,
as I am afraid this will occasion the breaking up this entertainment -- as the
gentlemen will by and bye make this a plea, after they find it is attended with
so great expense.


Madam IMPOTANCE. Don't be apprehensive on this account -- this is the very
thing I was in hopes would take place -- this will serve to si^t down families,
and will be the most effectual means to establish a precedence -- we have for a
long while been too much on a level -- once a fortnight a public assembly,
will for a long time, keep up this equality -- but the oftener we meet, those
which cannot keep pace, will be obliged to resign their pretensions to high
life, and leave a few of us to enjoy the field -- for my own part, I conceive
it to be the happiest plan that could have been adopted -- it ensnares people
in their own trap* which you know, Madam, is the most effectual method to
ensure their destruction.


Madam BRILLIANT. If those are your intentions, Madam, we must carry it much
further, and instead of a few shillings, which I suppose the generality will
play for, we must establish at our own table the rubbers of ten guineas at
least.


Enter Mr. IMPORTANCE and Dr. GALLANT. Doct. GALLANT. Ladies, your servant.


LADIES. Your servant, gentlemen.


Mr. IMPORTANCE. Ladies, shall I be permitted to hand you into the Hall? -- You
will be monstrously pleased with the appearance.


Madam BRILLIANT. Are all the tables full?


Doct. GALLANT. Mostly madam- but a few are reserved for certain ladies -- not
to be taken up by the company, until we know whether cartain characters will be
of the company for the evening.


Madam IMPORTANCE. Very right -- I am glad you have thought to make this
reserve -- as distinctions in all companies are necessary.


Exeunt. SCENE III.
The HALL. Enter Mr. IMPORTANCE, JEMMY SATIRIST, and Doctor GALLANT. JEMMY
SATIRIST. WHAT most surprises me, is, that the plan was so readily consented to
-- the parade of the card-table has been so long out of fashion -- I did not
think they would with so much alacrity, have introduced it into a public
assembly -- however, we are fond of novelty, and the fascinating charms of high
life have too many allurements to be resisted. -- We have made a notable caveat
-- not to play beyond one shilling and six pence upon our HONOR! there is the
rub -- Gaming is like a coy mistress, whose mere smiles we at first think a
happiness -- but when those become familiar, we urge forward to more
substantial joys.


Mr. IMPORTANCE. We have in our professional character, a mighty influence in
carrying any plans we wish to adopt -- for my own part, I endeavor to enforce
every thing with the prerogative of the of the black robes, and dressed in the
sable livery, can establish doctrines of etiquette, with equal decision, as our
brethren of the pulpit can their articles of faith.


Doct. GALLANT. Well it is quite right -- professional characters must be
supported with dignity -- otherways, all distinctions will be lost in the
levelling spirit of republicanism -- therefore, if we expect to support taste
and style, we must keep up this parade, and by assuming an appearance above the
commonality, we may stamp on our characters a superiority of rank. -- This may
appear a new doctrine -- that in order to promote distinction, we must
introduce all into one society -- but depend upon it, a particular deportment
observed at such times, more effectually secures preeminence than shutting ones
self up from the crowd.


Mr. IMPORTANCE. Upon my word, Doctor, you have improved on Chesterfield -- I
have ever thought that keeping aloof, and only appearing at times, when some
important questions were agitated, would be most likely to secure my importance
-- a town-meeting harangue, (for instance) I conceived would produce wonderful
effects -- and then retiring with a peculiar easy air of consequence, would
secure the respectful complaisance of the whole assembly.


JEMMY SATIRIST. No person can dispute with brother Importance his right of
station in the beau monde -- he soon threw off all encumbrances, and like a
true disciple, forsook ALL -- he had no notion of mounting the mere shadow of
Pegasus, but chose rather to prance among the Muses with the nag fully
caparisoned -- however brother, not to be too severe -- but we gentlemen of the
-- sometimes take the liberty to abuse each other, as well as our C -- s --
Indulgencies! -- Indulgencies, brother! -- But let us hasten among the company,
as the tables begin to be filled.


Exeunt. ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter The REPUBLICAN HEROINE and Mrs. W -- N. REPUBLICAN HEROINE. I HAVE been
complimented with a Card for a new Entertaiment called Sans Souci.


Mrs. W -- N. Have you attended?


REP. HEROINE. Upon my word, Madam, I was a long while considering whether it
was a real or imaginary compliment: I could scarcely believe it possible, that
this country, particularly this town, whose name stands foremost in the annals
of America, should so early plunge into the utmost excesses of dissipation: How
will such an account read among the friends of America in Europe. I could
hardly refrain from tears when I entered the Hall, to see the respectable
inhabitants of this metropolis, so wantonly introducing a custom of public
card playing, even at so early a period after the war. Forgive me, Madam, my
expressing my sentiments so freely; but believe me I have hitherto indulged
such pleasing ideas respecting this country, from their public proceedings
during the war, that when I find those sentiments of their virtue turn out mere
chimeras of my own imagination, I cannot but lament my disappointment. The
respect that has been shown me since my arrival, I most gratefully acknowledge,
but often on my retiring from the parade of their entertainments. I cannot but
pity their delusion. I did not carry my enthusiasm so far as to expect to find
the rigid Spartan principles practiced; but I did conceive to be introduced
into societies of frugality and economy: I did expect to find a cultivation of
manners somewhat similar to their public resolves; but again pardon me, Madam,
when I inform you I am greatly disappointed. British gewgaws -- etiquette and
parade, are too prevailing to be easily eradicated, unless some immediate
exertions are made to turn this destructive current: As a stranger, I cannot
with propriety set up to give examples, but on ladies of established characters
in the country, much ought to be expected from them.


Mrs. W -- N. I am very unhappy to find your observations are so just. I cannot
but acknowledge we have too far copied the vices of that nation which we have
so lately opposed: But however, I do not think this late entertaiment will be
long continued; there are many respectable characters among them, who I am
persuaded when they consider the dangerous tendency of this assembly, will
readily discountenance it. We must be convinced how dangerous to the morals of
youth -- how destructive to the happiness of families and individuals, an
introduction of card parties has ever been; therefore though they have become
of the party, which from inattention, rather than from inclination to promote a
spirit of dissipation they at first engaged in it; they will readily give up
the entertainment, and even discountenance the promoters of it.


REP. HEROINE, I wish sincerely you may not be disappointed in your hopes; but,
my dear Madam, 'Vice is a monster of so frightful mein,' etc.


Exeunt. SCENE II.
YOUNG FORWARD, and LITTLE PERT. YOUNG FORWARD I HAVE been to all the
Booksellers in town to purchase Hoyle; but find they have been all bought up.
-- There are proposals in the Drawing Room for a new edition with improvements;
also there is to be kept a minute Book for remarks on the game of whist, as
many particular cases may take place in the course of play which will render it
a valuable collection, as an appendix to this new edition; the whole are to be
revised by our D-r-ct -- s, and dedicated to them.


LITTLE PERT* A good proposal! Let me see the subscription: -- To promote the
work I will subscribe for 100 books. However, we are so d -- d contracted in
this town, we shall never come to a full improvement in the polite arts. -- The
present card party is a mere burlesque on the institution! -- How ridiculous we
appear!- A guinea a corner alarms one half of them: -- There are but few tables
here that dare hazard -- I almost scared one fellow into panicks, and a lady
into hystericks, by offering to bet ten guineas on the rubber: They made answer
they did not play so high. -- Was there any thing ever so laughable? What the
devil do they come here for? Do they come merely to shuffle a pack of cards? We
might as well be in a private party; -- let us be something or nothing: -- A
card party gingling shillings and six pences; Ha, ha, ha. -- The circle of
etiquette with purses of silver; -- this would sound high at BROOKs; -- A
republican card party; quite a political phenomenon. However never mind it,
Rome was not built in a day; -- free and easy is our motto, and we are fond of
consistency -- perseverando.


YOUNG FORWARD. We are often bemoaning the want of plays in this town; -- this
will be a considerable introduction to this entertainment; we can with the
greatest propriety ask permission for a theater after we have been indulged
with a card party; for of two evils, plays must be considered the least; -- so
that we have nothing to do, but to resign for a season our card amusements
until we can get a theater erected, and after that we can return to our present
entertainment by pleading precedents; for we must hold precedents as tenacious
in the polite circle, as we lawyers do authorities in our profession.


LITTLE PERT. But one essential matter I am afraid we shall be deprived of; --
Graham -- the celebrated Doctor Graham; -- the celestial bed; -- hah! -- here
the Cupids would nestle on the downy pillows: Lectures on love; -- these are
Evening Lectures worth attending to: I dare say he would have a thronged
assembly; a full congregation -- zealots -- enthusiasts -- high orthodoxy --
this would be a hopeful school of good breeding -- all well versed in the
principles of galantry -- no awkward modesty, and shame-face'd diffidence --
but full confidence -- polite amors; -- never be afraid, we shall soon pave
the way for this amusement -- lectures surely cannot be disapproved -- who can
object to lectures? -- We could blind one half the old women in town, by
telling them the celebrated Doctor Graham intended to deliver evening lectures
on various subjects -- they would at least think him a second Whitfield.


YOUNG FORWARD. You have a happy faculty at anticipation -- but however let us
be going, for while I attend to your rhapsody, I am losing the present
amusement.


Exeunt. SCENE III.
The DRAWING ROOM. Enter Madam IMPORTANCE and Madam BRILLIANT. Madam
IMPORTANCE. WHAT an awkward piece of business this is! I am really tired. --
The foreign lady This is not pointed at any particular foreign character now
among us, but what is likely may happen in future.
who was at our table, alarmed some of our circle, by laying down a purse of
ten guineas. As our assembly was somewhat similar to those in England -- she (I
suppose) thought we did in some degree practice playing, at least to the amount
of so triffling a sum -- we all stared at each other -- for my own part I did
not like to tell her we did not play so high, or to inform her of our
resolutions to the contrary, as we should make but an indifferent appearance to
her, if we supposed such a sum were extravagant -- however, as it was late, I
pretended to be fatigued, and threw up my hand, with an apology that I was
indisposed; -- she even seemed surprised at my indisposition, and exclaimed --
indisposed at a card-table! I therefore found my complaints were entirely
foreign from etiquette -- however, I still peristed in my indisposition, and
the lady observing my embarrassment, politely declined urging me any further.


Madam BRILLIANT. This is a circumstance of which I was not aware, as we may in
time expect foreigners among us* they will naturally suppose from so polite a
circle, they may bet as at assemblies they have frequented in Europe -- and
being from our stations, introduced to their tables, we shall often be put to
the disagreeable necessity of pleading indisposition -- and indisposition may
in time, become a cant term among the polite circle for declining a bet: --
Free and easy therefore is not very applicable to our present situation.


Madam IMPORTANCE. To morrow we will talk over this affair at our leisure.


Exeunt. ACT III.
SCENE. I.
The HALL. Enter Mr. IMPORTANCE JEMMY SATIRIST, and Doctor GALLANT. Mr.
IMPORTANCE. HOW we can divert ourselves through the several rooms? -- In one
circle we can observe the most agreeable parties of ladies, seated at the
several tables, which look like an assembly of Goddesses! The Graces seem here
to have taken up their residence -- such a beautiful variety displayed in the
arrangement of their dress, adds to the redundancy of their charms: Within this
Hall, I would risque the reputation we have already acquired, of having as fine
a collection of ladies in our assembly, as any th world can produce. --
However, sometimes I can see a little anxiety in a countenance -- it is a pity
to fully one luster amid such a cluster of charms -- but taste and etiquette
must be complied with, however fatal the consequences may be to beauty.


JEMMY SATIRIST. This is a pretty harangue, brother Importance, one would
almost suppose you was fee'd by the ladies -- but I am sensible you have a good
cause, and may be sure of a verdict in your favor. It is a pity you had not
always spoke your mind with so much safety, for nothing is more fatal to a man
of fashion than doing any thing reflecting on the ladies -- it was rather
unfortunate in your first appearing on the public stage, to have such a hue
and cry after you -- but however, not to call to mind things past -- I wish the
ladies had heard this late panegyric.


Doct. GALLANT. While you are attending to the appearance of their persons, you
do not observe the gracefulness of their dancing -- T -- r has a most happy
faculty a^ teaching -- like a limner, he draws every grace of gentility, and
blends ease and address in every feature -- however, let us leave this subject,
and talk on some other. -- Pray have you seen Doctor Price's new publication?


Mr. IMPORTANCE. Yes.


Doct. GALLANT. Well, what do you think of it?


Mr^ IMPORTANCE. The Doctor would do to live in Carthage, Sparta, or Rome in
the most rigid times; but now those sentiments are wholly imaginary ideas of a
Republican's coran -- they are too antiquated -- modern rebublicanism is of a
very different complexion, as contrasted as the severe countenance of Cromwell,
and the pretty smooth face of a petit maitre -- those of the Doctor's are
principles of republicanism of the uncivilized kind -- but now we soften them
down in the school of politeness, and make them wear a more pleasing garb --
the ancient rebublican spirit is like the old principles of religion -- staunch
Calvinism -- but now we have modernized them, and united them with the court
style of taste and fashion.


JEMMY SATIRIST. The Doctor's sentiments did well enough in war times, when we
were under the influence of whig principles -- this mercury did very well in
our political thermometer -- but now we have no occasion for this blood heat --
they were pleasing doctrines to preach up at that time, but now, why are we to
be ding'd with national manners -- national debts -- economy -- industry and
such disagreeable subjects? -- Independence in the original is my idea -- high
court independence -- independent of every restraint which can mar the
pleasures and amusements of life.


Doct. GALLANT. I know the old Dons lift up their eyes with horror, when they
see what they call the old principles subsiding -- they are as tenacious of
their old sentiments, as they are of their white wigs -- but we know better --
we act on the benevolent plan -- why should we ever keep up a d -- n
distinction between whig and tory? -- For my own part, I wish to embrace ^LL,
and this very assembly is one means of introducing to a sociability the several
parties which have been distinct through the war -- let all political
distinctions be buried, and let us with fraternal affection embrace every one
whatever may have been his principles during the war, or however inimical his
conduct -- these are genuine sentiments and agreeable to our modern
republicanism -- We must desist from our political ob^ervations for the present.


Exeunt. SCENE II.
The ENTRY. -- SERVANTS. Cuffy. WAT clok Jack?


Jack. Pass twelbe clok.


Cuffy. Dis be no lik ole Massa tims -- ten clok, go bed -- de gate shot -- go
prarrs -- all de serbants go bed -- Massa put out de fire.


Jack. Yesse Cuffe -- but you be ole fello -- I like bery vel dis setin up --
Massa and Miss brod -- gate open all nite -- why you fool, what optunty for
serbants? But when Massa and Miss kep hom all de ebning, go bed ten clok, what
time for poor serbants frolik.


Cuffy. Massa and Mess come home twelbe clok, scold and hangry -- poor
serbants pay for all -- find falt wid ebery ting -- noting rite.


Jack. You neber been Ningland Cuffe -- dar fin tims -- presenly Bosson lik it
-- masserades -- pantons -- no little Cornshort-Hal for gentry -- presenly
panton -- tea-trays -- flambeaux -- no dribe wid one poor hosse and sha -- but
tree serbants -- no one poor deble lik youself -- but libry serbants.


Cuffy. Me be owl felo Jack -- but I frad too true -- me here notin now but Sam
and Susy -- me don't no wat day mien -- but me here them say, we go Sam and Susy
to night -- d -- n baboon.


Jack. Baboon -- Cuffe wat you say? -- Balloon you mean.


Cuffy, Hah, balloon -- well no matter for dat.


SCENE III.
The HALL. -- A Card Table. Mr. BON TON, Madam IMPORTANCE* Madam BRILLIANT, and
Dr. GALLANT* Madam BRILLIANT. A DIAMOND led, Mr. Bon Ton.


Mr. BON TON. I beg pardon, Madam -- but there is so much laughing, whispering
and talking in the room, that I am quite embarrassed in my play.


Madam IMPORTANCE. I believe, Sir, you have not been used to play in a social
circle -- but rather in places where every idea is absorbed in the game.


Mr. BON TON. Why truly, Madam, I have imbibed the manners of Europe so far,
that I cannot have ears to attend to conversation, and eyes to observe the
variety of objects around me, and at the same time pay so great attention to
the play as to know the disposition of the cards.


Madam IMPORTANCE. I find, Sir, you practice wholly on the strictest principles
of whist; -- but we endeavor to make this game only an evening's amusement.


Mr. BON TON. Amusement, Madam, is not the principle in Europe; possibly the
first institutions of this kind were established on these principles and
suppose the sums to be played for, were limited, as among us; -- but the
company which now visit those places of public resort, do not go for amusement
solely, but to pursue a regular branch of business. -- They have no idea of
playing to pass away a few leisure hours, but to improve the moments for their
profit -- they are their busy hours -- the time on which depends their future
prospects. Therefore no conversation while at play is admitted, but what is on
the subject of the game, and a person would appear equally as ridiculous to be
speaking at that time on any other subject, as to be talking of Hoyle at the
tabernacle.


Madam BRILLIANT. You have quite forgot your play, by your lengthy
observations. -- Hearts are trumps.


Mr. BON TON. And have been so, Madam, ever since you entered the room.


Madam BRILLIANT. I suppose compliments are agreeable to the rules laid down by
Hoyle?


Mr. BON TON. Yes, Madam, and are often played to great advantage.


Madam IMPORTANCE. I always suspect a gentleman's hand when he begins to
compliment the lady he plays against.


Mr. BON TON. I suppose, Madam, you conceive it a finesse; -- at least for the
odd trick.


Madam BRILLIANT. I suppose you calculate by the table of chances?


Mr. BON TON. I do, Madam, but my success depends on your smiles.


Doctor GALLANT. Pray how are we for game?


Mr. BON TON. Nine.


Madam BRILLIANT. Well, Sir, we will for the present be whist, and endeavor to
finish before 12 o'clock.


Mr. BON TON. The hours pass most rapidly; -- but however, Madam, we must not
find fault with time, for in your company eternity can be the only measure of
our happiness.


Madam BRILLIANT. I shall not answer you at present, as it is time to withdraw.


Exeunt omnes.
