AS the following sheets are designed only to show the various sizes of
Printing Types, no attention has been paid to the correctness of the matter
which they contain; and the judicious observer will readily perceive that it
was entirely unnecessary.

A SPECIMEN OF ISAIAH THOMAS's PRINTING TYPES.

Being as large and complete an ASSORTMENT as is to be met with in any one
Printing-Office in AMERICA.

Chiefly MANUFACTURED by that great Artist, WILLIAM CASLON, Esquire Of LONDON.

PRINTED at WORCESTER, MASSACHUSETTS, By ISAIAH THOMAS. MDCCLXXXV.

TO THE LOVERS OF LITERATURE, AND ENCOURAGERS OF PRINTING, (THE FIRST AND BEST
OF ARTS) IN THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS, THIS SPECIMEN IS HUMBLY OFFERED,
FOR THEIR INSPECTION,

BY THEIR VERY HUMBLE SERVANT, I. THOMAS
Worcester, April, 1785.
Eleven Lines Pica.
WI MP 1231

Ten Lines Pica.
bjdl ysgf 1234

Nine Lines Pica.
BW XR acrz nmt

Six Lines Pica.
ABCD abydgi

Five Lines Pica.
ABFPI acmnse bvnutd

Two Lines Great Primer.
ABCDEFGI KLMNOPQ

Two Lines English.
ABCDEFGHJ IKLMNOPQR

Two Lines Pica.
ABCDEFGHIJKP QRSTUWXYZAE

Two Lines Small Pica.
ABCDEFGHIKLT MNOPQRSTUVIP

Two Lines Long Primer.
ABCDEFGHIKLMW NOPQRSTUWXYZS

Two Lines Burgeois.
ABCDEFGHIJKLMNO PQRSTUVWXYZAEPN

Two Lines Brevier.
ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOP QRSTUVWXYZAEWOI

Two Lines Minion.
ABCDEFGHIKLMNOPS QRSTUVWXYZAEOPUI

Two Lines Nonpareil.
ABCDEFGHIKLMNOPQRST UVWXYZAEABCDEFGHIKLI

Two Lines Pearl.
ABCDEFGHIKLMNOPQRSTUVW XYZAEABCDEFGHIKLMNOPQRS

French Cannon.
Quousque tan Quousque tande

Two Lines Great Primer.
Quousque tandem abutere Catilina, patientia nostra? quamdiu nos eti- Quousque
tandem abutere Catilina,

Two Lines English.
Quousque tandem abutere, Catilina, patientia nostra? quamdiu nos etiam furor
iste tuus elu- Quousque tandem, abutere, Catilina, patientia nostra? quamdiu
nos eti-

DOUBLE PICA. NO. I.
DEDICATION.
For one person who can adequately relish, and enjoy a work of imagination,
twenty are to be found who can taste and judge of, observations on familiar
life, and the manners of the age. The satires of Ariosto are more read than the
Orlando Furioso, or even Dante. Are there so many cordial admirers of Spenser
and Milton, as of Hudibras; if we

For one person who can adequately relish, and enjoy a work of imagination,
twenty are to be found who can taste and judge

Great Primer. No. I.
DEDICATION.
For one person who can adequately relish, and enjoy a work of imagination,
twenty are to be found who can taste and judge of, observations on familiar
life, and the manners of the age. The satires of Ariosto are more read than the
Orlando Furioso, or even Dante. Are there so many cordial admirers of Spenser
and Milton, as of Hudibras; if we strike out of the number of these supposed
admirers, those who appear such out of fashion, and not of feeling? Swift's
rhapsody on poetry is far more popular than Aken-

For one person who can adequately relish, and enjoy a work of imagination,
twenty are to be found who can taste and judge of, observations on familiar
life, and the manners of the age. The

DOUBLE PICA. NO. II.
Quousque tandem abutere, Catilina, patientia nostra? quamdiu nos etiam furor
iste tuus eludet? quem ad finem sese effrenata jactabit audacia? nihilne et
nocturnum praesidium palatii, nihil urbis vigiliae, nihil ti- Quousque tandem
abutere, Catilina, patientia nostra? quamdiu nos etiam furor iste tuus eludet?

GREAT PRIMER. NO. II.
Quousque tandem abutere, Catilina, patientia nostra? quamdiu nos etiam furor
iste tuus eludet? quem ad finem sese effrenata jactabit audacia? nihilne te
nocturnum praesidium palatii, nihil urbis vigiliae, nihil timor populi, nihil
consensus bonorum omnium, nihil hic munitissimus habendi senatus locus, ni-
Quousque tandem abutere, Catilina, patientia nostra? quamdiu nos etiam furor
iste tuus eludet? quem ad finem sese

For one person who can adequately relish, and enjoy a work of imagination,
twenty are to be found who can taste and judge of, observations on familiar
life, and the manners of the age. The satires of Ariosto are more read than the
Orlando Furioso, or even Dante. Are there so many cordial admirers of Spenser
and Milton as of Hudibras; if we strike out of the number of these supposed
admirers, those who appear such out of fashion, and not of feeling? Swift's
rhapsody on poetry is far more popular than Akenside's noble Ode to Lord
Huntingdon. The EPISTLES on the Characters of men and women, and your sprightly
Satires, my good friend, are more frequently perused, and quoted, than
L'Allegro and Il Penseroso of Milton. Had you written only these Satires, you
would indeed have gained the title of a man

For one person who can adequately relish, and enjoy a work of imagination,
twenty are to be found who can taste and judge of, observations on familiar
life, and the manners of the age. The satires of Ariosto are more read than the
Orlando Furioso, or even Dante. Are there so

ENGLISH. NO. II.
HISTORY OF ENGLAND.
THE council of England was divided in opinion about the measures to be taken
against the queen of Scots. Some members proposed, that as her health was very
infirm, her life might be shortened by close confinement; therefore to avoid
any imputation of violence or cruelty, the earl of Leicester proposed that she
should be dispatched by poison; but the majority insisted on her being put to
death by legal process. Accordingly a commission was issued for forty peers,
with five judges, or the major part of them, to try and pass sentence upon
Mary, daughter and heir of James the fifth, king of Scotland, commonly called
queen of Scots, and dowager of France.

THIRTY-SIX of these commissioners arriving at the castle of Fotheringay,
presented her with a letter from Elizabeth, commanding her to submit to a trial
for her late conspiracy. Mary perused the letter with great

The council of England was divided in opinion about the measures to be taken
against the queen of Scots. Some members proposed, that as her health was very
infirm, her life

PICA. NO. I.
HISTORY OF ENGLAND.
THE council of England was divided in opinion about the measures to be taken
against the queen of Scots. Some members proposed, that as her health was very
infirm, her life might be shortened by close confinement; therefore to avoid
any imputation of violence or cruelty, the earl of Leicester proposed that she
should be dispatched by poison; but the majority insisted on her being put to
death by legal process. Accordingly a commission was issued for forty peers,
with five judges, or the major part of them, to try and pass sentence upon
Mary, daughter and heir of James the fifth, king of Scotland, commonly called
queen of Scots, and dowager of France.

THIRTY six of these commissioners arriving at the castle of Fotheringay,
presented her with a letter from Elizabeth, commanding her to submit to a trial
for her late conspiracy. Mary perused the letter with great composure; and as
she had long foreseen the danger that hung over her, received the intelligence
without emotion or astonishment.

The council of England was divided in opinion about the measures to be taken
against the queen of Scots. Some of the members proposed, that as her health
was very infirm, her life might be shortened by close confinement; therefore to
avoid any imputa-

ENGLISH. NO. III.
Quousque tandem abutere, Catilina, patientia nostra? quamdiu nos etiam furor
iste tuus eludet? quem ad finem sese effrenata jactabit audacia? nihilne te
nocturnum praesidium palatii, nihil urbis vigiliae, nihil timor populi, nihil
consensus bonorum omnium, nihil hic munitissimus habendi senatus locus nihil
horum ora vultusque moverunt? patere tua consilia non sentis? constrictam jam
omnium horum conscientia teneri conjurationem tuam non vides? quid proxima,
quid superiore Quousque tandem abutere, Catilina, patientia nostra? quamdiu nos
etiam furor iste tuus eludet? quem ad finem sese effrenata jactabit audacia?
nihilne te nocturnum praesidium palatii, nihil

PICA. NO. II.
Quousque tandem abutere, Catilina, patientia nostra? quamdiu nos etiam furor
iste tuus eludet? quem ad finem sese effrenata jactabit audacia? nihilne te
nocturnum praesidium palatii, nihil urbis vigiliae, nihil timor populi, nihil
consensus bonorum omnium, nihil hic munitissimus habendi senatus locus, nihil
horum ora vultusque moverunt? patere tua consilia non sentis? ^^nstrictam jam
omnium horum conscientia tener^ conjurationem tuam non vides? quid proxima quid
superiore nocte egeris, ubi fueris, quos convocaveris, quid consi^i^ ceperis,
quem nostrum ignorare arbitraris? O temp^r^, O mores! Senatus Quousque tandem
abutere, Catilina, patientia nostra? quamdiu nos etiam furor iste tuus eludet?
quem ad finem sese enffre^^a jacta^^^ audacia? nihilne t^ ^^^tur^um (...)
palatii, nihil urbis (...)

SMALL PICA. NO. I.
HISTORY OF ENGLAND.
THE council of England was divided in opinion about the measures to be taken
against the queen of Scots. Some members proposed, that as her health was very
infirm, her life might be shortened by close confinement; therefore to avoid
any imputation of violence or cruelty, the earl of Leicester proposed that she
should be dispatched by poison; but the majority insisted on her being put to
death by legal process. Accordingly a commission was issued for forty peers,
with five judges, or the major part of them, to try and pass sentence upon
Mary, daughter and heir of James the fifth, king of Scotland, commonly called
queen of Scots, and dowager of France.

THIRTY-SIX of these commissioners arriving at the castle of Fotheringay,
presented her with a letter from Elizabeth, commanding her to submit to a trial
for her late conspiracy. Mary perused the letter with great composure; and as
she had long foreseen the danger that hung over her, received the intelligence
without emotion or astonishment. She said, however, that she wondered the queen
of England should command her as a subject, who was an independent sovereign,
and a queen like herself. She would never, she said, stoop to any condescension
which would lessen her dignity, or prejudice the claims of her posterity. The
laws of England, she observed, were unknown to her; she was destitute of
counsel; nor could she conceive who were to be her peers, as she had but one

The council of England was divided in opinion about the measures t^ be taken
against the queen of Scots. Some members proposed, that as her health was very
infirm, her life might be shortened by close confinement; therefore to avoid
any imputation of violence or cruelty, the earl of Leicester proposed that she
should be dispatched by poison; but the majority insisted on her being put to
death by legal process. Accordingly a commission

LONG PRIMER. NO. I.
HISTORY OF ENGLAND.
THE council of England was divided in opinion about the measures to be taken
against the queen of Scots. Some members proposed, that as her health was very
infirm, her life might be shortened by close confinement; therefore to avoid
any imputation of violence or cruelty, the earl of Leicester proposed that she
should be dispatched by poison; but the majority insisted on her being put to
death by legal process. Accordingly a commission was issued for forty peers,
with five judges, or the major part of them, to try and pass sentence upon
Mary, daughter and heir of James the fifth, king of Scotland, commonly called
queen of Scots, and dowager of France.

THIRTY-SIX of these commissioners arriving at the castle of Fotheringay,
presented her with a letter from Elizabeth, commanding her to submit to a trial
for her late conspiracy. Mary perused the letter with great composure; and as
she had long foreseen the danger that hung over her, received the intelligence
without emotion or astonishment. She said, however, that she wondered the queen
of England should command her as a subject, who was an independent sovereign,
and a queen like herself. She would never, she said, stoop to any condescension
which would lessen her dignity, or prejudice the claims of her posterity. The
laws of England, she observed, were unknown to her; she was destitute of
counsel; nor could she conceive who were to be her peers, as she had but one
equal in the kingdom. She added, that instead of enjoying the protection of the
laws of England, as she had hoped to obtain, she had been confined in prison
ever since her arrival in the kingdom; so that she derived neither benefit nor
security from them. When the commissioners pressed her to submit to the queen's
pleasure, otherwise they would proceed against her as con-

The council of England was divided in opinion about the measures to be taken
against the queen of Scots. Some members proposed, that as her health was very
infirm, her life might be shortened by close confinement; therefore to avoid
any imputation of violence or cruelty, the earl of Leicester proposed that she
should be dispatched by poison; but the majority insisted on her being put to
death by legal process. Accordingly a commission was issued for forty peers,
with five judges, or

SMALL PICA. NO. II.
Quousque tandem abutere, Catilina, patientia nostra? quamdiu nos etiam furor
iste tuus eludet? quem ad finem sese effrenata jactabit audacia? nihilne te
nocturnum praesidium palatii, nihil urbis vigiliae, nihil timor populi, nihil
consensus bonorum omn^um, nihil hic munitissimus habendi senatus locus, nihil
horum ora vultusque moverunt? patere tua consilia non sentis? constrictam jam
omnium horum conscientia teneri conjurationem tuam non vides? quid proxima,
quid superiore nocte egeris, ubi fueris, quos convocaveris, quid consilii
ceperes, quem nostrum ignorare arbitraris? O tempora, O mores! Senatus hoc
intelligit, consul vidit: hic tamen vivit. vivit? imo vero etiam in senatum
venit: fit publici consilii particeps: notat and designat oculis ad caedem
unumquemque nostrum. Nos autem viri fortes satisfacere reipub. videmur, si
istius surorem ac tela Quousque tandem abut^re, Catilina, patientia nostra?
quamdiu nos etiam furor iste tuus eludet? quem ad finem sese effrenata jactabit
audacia? nihilne te nocturnum praesidium palatii, nihil urbis vigiliae, nihil
timor populi, nihil consensus bonorum omnium, nihil hic munitissimus habendi
senatus locus, nihil horum ora

LONG PRIMER. NO. II.
Quousque tandem abutere, Catilina, patientia nostra? quamdiu nos etiam furor
iste tuus eludet? quem ad finem sese effrenata jactabit audacia? nihilne te
nocturnum praesidium palatii, nihil urbis vigiliae, nihil timor populi, nihil
consensus bonorum omnium, nihil hic munitissimus habendi senatus locus, nihil
horum ora vult^sque moverunt? patere tua consilia non sentis? constrictam jam
omnium horum conscientia teneri conjurationem tuam non vides? quid proxima,
quid superiore nocte egeris, ubi fueris, quos convocaveris, quid consilii
ceperis, quem nostrum ignorare arbitraris? O tempora, O mores! Senatus hoc
intelligit, consul vidit: hic tamen vivit* vivit? imo vero etiam in senatum
venit: fit publici consilii particeps: notat et designat oculis ad caedem
unumq^emque nostrum. Nos autem viri fortes satisfacere reipub. videmur, si
istius f^rorem ac tela vitemus. Ad mortem te, Catilina, duci jussu con-
Quousque tandem abut^re, Catilina, patientia nos^ra? quamdiu nos eti^m furor
iste tuus eludet? quem ad f^n^m sese effrenata ja^^abit audacia? nihilne te
n^^^urnum pr^^sidium palatii, nihil urbis (...), nihil tim^r p^puli, nihil
consensus (...), nihil (...) habe^di s^natus (...), ni^il h^rum (...) moverunt?
patere (...)? constrictam (...)

BURGEOIS. NO. I.
HISTORY OF ENGLAND.
THE council of England was divided in opinion about the measures to be taken
against the Queen of Scots. Some members proposed, that as her health was very
infirm, her life might be shortened by close confinement; therefore to avoid
any imputation of violence or cruelty, the earl of Leicester proposed that she
should be dispatched by poison; but the majority insisted on her being put to
death by legal process. Accordingly a commission was issued for forty peers,
with five judges, or the major part of them, to try and pass sentence upon
Mary, daughter and heir of James the fifth, king of Scotland, commonly called
queen of Scots, and dowager of France.

THIRTY-SIX of these commissioners arriving at the castle of Fotheringay,
presented her with a letter from Elizabeth, commanding her to submit to a trial
for her late conspiracy. Mary perused the letter with great composure; and as
she had long foreseen the danger that hung over her, received the intelligence
without emotion or astonishment. She said, however, that she wondered the queen
of England should command her as a subject, who was an independent sovereign,
and a queen like herself. She would never, she said, stoop to any condescension
which would lessen her digni^y or prejudice the claims of her posterity. The
laws of England, she observed, were unknown to her; she was destitute of
counsel; nor could she conceive who were to be her peers, as she had but one
equal in the kingdom. She added, that instead of enjoying the protection of the
laws of England, as she had hoped to obtain, she had been confined in prison
ever since her arrival in the kingdom; so that she derived neither benefit nor
security from them. When the commissioners pressed her to submit to the queen's
pleasure, otherwise they would proceed against her as contumacious, she
declared she would rather suffer a thousand deaths, than own herself a subject
to any prince on earth. That, however, she was ready to vindicate herself in a
full and free parliament, as for aught she knew, this meeting of commissioners
was devised against her life, on purpose to take it away with a pretext of
justice. She

The coun^il of England was divided in opinion about the measures to be taken
against the queen of Scots. Some members proposed, that as her health was very
infirm, her life might be shortened by close confinement; therefore to avoid
any imputation of violence o^ cruelty, the earl of Leicester proposed that she
should be dispatched by poison; but the majority insisted on her being put to
death by legal (...) commission was issued for forty peers, with (...)

LONG PRIMER. NO. III.
HISTORY OF ENGLAND.
THE council of England was divided in opinion about the measures to be taken
with the queen of Scots. Some members proposed, that as her health was very
infirm, her life might be shortened by close confinement* therefore, to avoid
any imputation of violence or cruelty, the earl of Leicester proposed that she
should be dispatched by poison; but the majority insisted on her being put to
death by legal process. Accordingly a commission was issued for forty peers,
with five judges, or the major part of them, to try and pass sentence upon
Mary, daughter and heir of James the fifth, king of Scotland, commonly called
queen of Scots, and dowager of France.

THIRTY-SIX of these commissioners arriving at the castle of Fotheringay,
presented her with a letter from Elizabeth, commanding her to submit to trial
for her late conspiracy. Mary perused the letter with great composure; and as
she had long foreseen the danger that hung over her, received the intelligence
without emotion or astonishment. She said, however, that she wondered the queen
of England should command her as a subject, who was an independent sovereign,
and a queen like herself. She would never, she said, stoop to any condescension
which would lessen her dignity, or prejudice the claims of her posterity. The
laws of England, she observed, were unknown to her; she was destitute of
counsel; nor could she conceive who were to be her peers, as she had but one
equal in the kingdom. She added, that instead of enjoying the protection of the
laws of England, as she had hoped to obtain, she had been confined in prison
ever since her arrival in the kingdom* so that she derived neither benefit nor
security from them. When the commissioners pressed her to submit to the queen's
pleasure

THE council of England was divided in op^nion about the measures to be taken
against the queen of Scots. Some members proposed, that as her health was very
infirm, her life might be shortened by close confinement; therefore, to avoid
an^ imputation of violence or cruelty, the earl of Leicester proposed, that she
should be dispatched by poison* but the majority insisted on her being put to
death by legal process. Accordingly a commission was issued for forty peers,
with fi^e judges (...) the major (...) of them* to (...) and (...)

LONG PRIMER. NO. IV.
Quousque tandem abutere, Catilina, patientia nostra? quamd^^ nos etiam furor
iste tuus eludet? quem ad finem sese effrenata jactabit audacia? nihilne te
nocturnum praesidium palatii, nihil urbis vigiliae, nihil timor populi, nihil
consensus bonorum omnium, nihil hic munitissimus habendi senatus locus, nihil
horum ora vultusque moverunt? patere tua consilia non sentis? constrictam jam
omnium horum conscientia teneri conjurationem tuam non vides? quid proxima,
quid superiore nocte egeris, ubi fueris, quos convocaveris, quid consilii
ceperis, quem nostrum ignorare arbitraris? O tempora, O mores! Quousque tandem
abut^re, Catilina, patientia nostra? quamdiu nos etiam furor iste tuus eludet?
quem ad finem sese effrenata jactabit audacia? nihilne te nocturnum pr^efidium
palatii, nihil urbis vigiliae, nihil timor populi, nihil consensus bonorum
omnium, nihil hic muni-

BURGEOIS on BREVIER BODY.
Quousque tandem abutere, Catilina, patientia nostra? quamdiu nos etiam furor
iste tuus eludet? quem ad finem sese effrenata jactabit audacia? nihilne te
nocturnum praesidium palatii, nihil urbis vigiliae, nihil timor populi, nihil
consensus bonorum omnium, nihil hic munitissimus habendi senatus locus, nihil
horum ora vultusque moverunt? patere tua consilia non sentis? constrictam jam
omnium horum conscientia teneri conjurationem tuam non vides? quid proxima,
quid superiore nocte egeris, ubi fueris, quos convocaveris, quid consilii
ceperis, quem nostrum ignorare arbitraris? O tempora, O mores! Senatus hoc
intelligit, consul vidit: hic tamen vivit. vivit* imo vero etiam in senatum
venit* fit publici consilii particeps: notat et designat oculis ad caedem
unumquemque nostrum. Nos Quousque tandem abutere, Catilina, patientia nostra?
quamdiu nos etiam furor iste tuus eludet? quem ad finem sese effrenata jactabit
audacia? nihilne te nocturnum praesidium palatii, nihil urbis vigiliae, nihil
timor populi, nihil consensus bonorum omnium, nihil hic munitissimus ha- AA^A
^E^ II ^O^ Ubreve;U^ aa^aaaa e^eeee ^i^iiii oo^oooo uu^uuuu w wy^ ^t^

MINION. NO. II.
Quousque tandem abutere, Catilina, patientia nostra? quamdiu nos etiam furor
iste tuus elud^^? quem ad finem sese effrenata jactabit audacia? nihilne te
nocturnum praesidium palatii, nihil urbis vigiliae, nihil timor populi, nihil
consensus bonorum omnium, nihil hic munitissimus habendi senatus locus, nihil
horum ora vultu^que moverunt? patere tua consilia non sentis? constrictam jam
omnium horum conscientia teneri conjurationem tuam non vides? quid proxima,
quid superiore nocte egeris, ubi fueris, quos convocaveris, quid consilii
c^peris, quem nostrum ignorare arbitraris? O tempora, O mores! Senatu^ hoc
intelligit, consul vidit: hic tamen vivit. vivit? imo vero etiam in senatum
venit: fit publici consilii particeps: notat et designat oculis ad caedem
unumquemque nostrum. Nos autem viri fortes satisfacere reipub. videmur, si
istius furorem ac tela vitemus. Ad mortem te, Catilina, duci juss^ Quousque
tandem abut^re, Catilina, patientia nostra ^ quamdiu nos etiam furor iste tuus
^ludet ^ quem ad fi^em s^se effr^na^a jactabit audacia? nihilne te nocturnum
(...) palat^^, nihil urbis vigiliae, nihil timor populi, nihil consensus
bonorum (...), nihil hic (...) habendi (...), nihil horum ^ra (...)

BREVIER. NO. I.
HISTORY OF ENGLAND.
THE council of England was divided in opinion about the measures to be taken
against the queen of Scots. Some members proposed, (...) as her health was very
infirm, her life might be shortened by clo^^ confinement; therefore to avoid
any imputation of violence or crue^^y, the earl of Leicester proposed that she
should be dispatched by poison; but the majority insisted on her being put to
death by legal process. Accordingly a commission was issued for forty peers,
with five judges, or the major part of them, to try and pass sentence upon
Mary, daughter and heir of James the fifth, king of Scotland, commonly called
queen of Scots, and dowager of France.

THIRTY-SIX of these commissioners arriving at the castle of Fotheringay,
presented her with a letter from Elizabeth, commanding her to submit to a trial
for her late conspiracy. Mary perused the letter with great composure; and as
she had long foreseen the danger that hung over her, received the intelligence
without emotion or astonishment. She said, however, that she wondered the queen
of England should command her as a subject, who was an independent sovereign,
and a queen like herself. She would never, she said, stoop to any condescension
which would lessen her dignity, or prejudice the claims of her posterity. The
laws of England, she observed, were unknown to her; she was destitute of
counsel; nor could she conceive who were to be her peers, as she had but one
equal in the kingdom. She added, that instead of enjoying the protection of the
laws of England, as she had hoped to obtain, she had been confined in prison
ever since her arrival in the kingdom; so that she derived neither benefit nor
security from them. When the commissioners pressed her to submit to the queen's
pleasure, otherwise they would proceed against her as contumacious, she
declared she would rather suffer a thousand deaths, than own herself a subject
to any prince on earth. That however she was ready to vindicate herself in a
full and free parliament, as for aught she knew, this meeting of commissioners
was devised against her life, on purpose to take it away with a pretext of
justice. She exhorted them to consult their own consciences, and to remember
that the theater of the world was much more extensive than that of the kingdom
of England. At length the vice-chamberlain Hatton vanquished her objections, by
representing that she injured her reputation by avoiding a trial, in which her
innocence might be proved to the satisfaction of all mankind. This observation
made such an impression upon her, that she agreed to plead, if they would admit
and allow her protest, of disallowing all subjection. This, however, they
refused; but they satisfied her, by entering it upon record, and thus they
proceeded to trial.

The council of England was divided in opinion about the measures to be taken
against the queen of Scots. Some members proposed, that as her health was very
infirm, her life might be shortened by close confinement; therefore to avoid
any imputation of violence or cruelty, the earl of Leicester proposed that she
should be dispatched by poison; but the majority insisted on her being put to
death by legal process. Accordingly a commission was issued for forty peers,
with five judges, or the major part of them, to try and pass sentence upon
Mary, daughter and heir of James

BURGEOIS. NO. II.
Quousque tandem abutere, Catilina, patientia nostra? quamdiu nos etiam furor
iste tuus eludet? quem ad finem sese effrenata jactabit audacia? nihilne te
nocturnum praesidium palatii, nihil urbis vigiliae, nihil timor populi, nihil
consensus bonorum omnium, nihil hic munitissimus habendi senatus locus, nihil
horum ora vultusque moverunt? patere tua consilia non sentis? constrictam jam
omnium horum conscientia teneri conjurationem tuam non vides? quid proxima,
quid superiore nocte egeris, ubi fueris, quos convocaveris, quid consillii
ceperis, quem nostrum ignorare arbitraris? O tempora, O mores! Senatus hoc
intelliget, consul vidit: hic tamen vivit. vivit? imo vero etiam in senatum
venit: fit publici consilii particeps: notat and designat oculis ad caedem
unumquemque nostrum. Nos autem viri fortes satisfacere reipub. videmur, si
istius furorem ac tela vitemus. Ad mortem te, Catilina, duci jussu consulis jam
pridem opertebat: in te conferri pestem istam, quam tu in nos omnes jamdiu
machinaris. An vero vir amplissimus, P. Scipio, pontifex maximus, Tiberium
Gracchum mediocriter labefactantem statum reipublicae privatus interfecit:
Catilinam vero orbem terrae caede atque incendiis vastare cupientem nos
consules perfemerus? nam illa nimis antiqua praetereo, quod Q. Servilius A^ala
Sp. Melium, Quousque tandem abutere, Catilina, patientia nostra? quamdiu nos
etiam furor iste tuus eludet? quem ad finem sese effrenata jactabit audacia?
nihilne te nocturnum praesidium palatii, nihil urbis vigiliae, nihil timor
populi, nihil consensus bonorum omnium, nihil hic munitissimus habendi senatus
locus, nihil horum ora vultusque moverunt? patere tua consilia non sentis?

BREVIER. NO. II.
Quousque tandem abutere, Catilina, patentia nostra? quamdiu nos etiam furor
iste tuus eludet? quem ad finem sese effrenata jactabit audacia? nihilne te
nocturnum praesidium palatii, nihil urbis vigiliae, nihil timor populi, nihil
consensus bonorum omnium, nihil hic munitissimus habendi senatus locus, nihil
horum ora vultusque moverunt? patere tua consilia non sentis? constrictam jam
omnium horum conscientia teneri conjurationem tuam non vides? quid proxima,
quid superiore nocte egeris, ubi fueris, quos convocaveris, quid consilii
ceperis, quem nostrum ignorare arbitraris? O tempora, O mores! Senatus hoc
intelligit, consul vidit: hic tamen vivit. vivit? imo vero etiam in senatum
venit: fit publicii consilii particeps: notat and designat oculis ad caedem
unumquemque nostrum. Nos autem viri fortes satisfacere reipub. videmur, si
istius furorem ac tela vitemus. Ad mortem te, Catilina, duci jussu consulis jam
pridem opertebat: in te conferis pestem istam, quam tu in nos omnes jamdiu
machinaris. An vero vir amplissimus, P. Scipio, pontifex maximus, Tiberium
Gracchum mediocriter labefactantem statum reipublicae privatus interfecit:
Catilinam vero orbem terrae caede atque incendiis vastare cupientem nos
consules perferemus? nam illa nimis antiqua praetereo, quod Q. Quousque tandem
abutere, Catilina, patientia nostra? quamdiu nos etiam furor iste tuus eludet?
quem ad finem sese effrenata jactabit audacia? n^hilne te nocturnum praesidium
palatii, nihil urbis vigiliae, nihil timor populi, nihil consensus bonorum
omnium, nihil hic munitissimus habendi senatus locus, nihil horum ora vultusque
moverunt? patere tua consilia non sentis? constrictam jam omnium horum
consci^entia teneri conjurationem tuam non vides? quid proxima, quid superiore
nocte egeris, ubi fu^ris, quos convocaveris, quid consilii ceperis, quem
nostrum ignorare arbitraris? O tempora, O mores! Senatus hoc intelligit, consul
vidit: hi^ tamen vi-

SMALL PICA. Open.
40 EMMA CORBETT.
I CANNOT pursue the subject -- Rouse, rouse yourself, my Emma. For my sake,
let all your fortitude be exerted. We are both young; -- there is the same
protecting Providence by water as by land; in the fields of war as on the
plains of peace. The future is a wide space, and may contain within its circle
a thousand blessings. Struggle then against the storm bravely. Your inferences
are too gloomy: various opportunities will offer, doubt not, to speed your
generous intercourse. The wide world of sentiment and sensation still opens
upon us. By aid of this little friendly instrument, we may range through those
paths which ocean seems to separate. However remote you

LONG PRIMER. Open.
40 EMMA CORBETT.
I CANNOT pursue the subject -- Rouse, rouse yourself, my Emma. For my sake,
let all your fortitude be exerted. We are both young; -- there is the same
protecting Providence by water as by land; in the fields of war, as on the
plains of peace. The future is a wide space, and may contain within its circle
a thousand blessings. Struggle then against the storm bravely. Your inferences
are too gloomy: various opportunities will offer, doubt not, to speed our
generous intercourse. The wide world of sentiment and sensation still opens
upon us. By aid of this little friendly instrument, we may range through those
paths which ocean seems to separate. However remote, you should still learn to
think it a superior blessing, that in some part of animated nature, there
still exists

BURGEOIS on BREVIER BODY. Open.
HISTORY OF ENGLAND.
THE council of England was divided in opinion about the measures to be taken
against the queen of Scots. Some members proposed, that as her health was very
infirm, her life might be shortened by close confinement; therefore, to avoid
any imputation of violence or cruelty, the earl of Leicester proposed that she
should be dispatched by poison; but the majority insisted o^ her being put to
death by legal process. Accordingly a commission was issued for forty peers,
with five judges, or the major part of them, to try and pass sentence upon
Mary, daughter and heir of James the fifth, king of Scotland, commonly called
queen of Scots, and dowager of France.

BURGEOIS on BREVIER BODY. NO. II
HISTORY OF ENGLAND.
THE council of England was divided in opinion about the measures to be taken
against the queen of Scots. Some members proposed, that as her health was very
infirm, her life might be shortened by close confinement; therefore, to avoid
any imputation of violence or cruelty, the earl of Leicester proposed that she
should be dispatched by poison; but the majority insisted on her being put to
death by legal process. Accordingly a commission was issued for forty peers,
with five judges, or the major part of them, to try and pass sentence upon
Mary, daughter and heir of James the fifth, king of Scotland, commonly called
queen of Scots, and dowager of France.

THIRTY-SIX of these commissioners arriving at the castle of Fotheringay,
presented her with a letter from Elizabeth, commanding her to submit to a trial
for her late conspiracy. Mary perused the

THE council of England was divided in opinion about the measures to be taken
against the queen of S^ots. Some members proposed, that as her health was very
infirm, her l^fe might be shortened by lose confinement; therefore, to avoid
any imputation of violenc^ or ^ruelt^, the earl of Leicester proposed that she
should be dispatched by poison; but the ma^ority insisted on her being put to
death by legal (...)

MINION. NO. I.
Then Agrippa said unto Paul, Thou art permitted to speak for thyself. Then
Paul stretched forth the hand, and answered for himself: 2 I think myself
happy, king Agrippa, because I shall answer for myself this day before thee
touching all the things whereof I am accused of the Jews: 3 Especially, because
I know thee to be expert in all customs and questions which are among the Jews;
wherefore I beseech thee to hear me patiently. 4 My manner of life from my
youth, which was at the first among mine own nation at Jerusalem, know all the
Jews, 5 Which knew me from the beginning (if they would testify) that after the
most strai^^st sect of our religion I lived a Pharisee. 6 And now I stand and
am judged for the hope of the promise made of God unto our fathers: 7 Unto
which promise our twelve tribes instantly serving God d^y and night hope to
come, for which hopes sake, king Agrippa, I am accused of the Jews. 8 Why
should it be thought a thing incredible with you that God should raise the
dead? 9 I verily thought with myself, that I ought to do many things contrary
to the name of Jesus of Nazareth. 10 Which thing I also did in Jerusalem: and
many of the saints did I shut up in prison, having received authority from the
chief priests; and, when they were put to death, I gave my voice against them.
11 And I punished them often in every synagogue, and compelled them ^o blaspheme:
and being exceed-

PEARL Roman
^

PEARL Italick.
^

PEARL. Open.
FROM the (...),
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
^
BURGEOIS. Open.
40 EMMA CORBETT.
I CANNOT pursue the subject -- Rouse, rouse yourself, my Emma. For my sake,
let all your fortitude be exerted. We are both young; -- there is the same
protecting Providence by water as by land; in the fields of War, as on the
plains of Peace. The future is a wide space* and may contain within its circle
a thousand blessings. Struggle then against the storm bravely. Your inferences
are too gloomy: various opportunities will offer, doubt not, to speed our
generous intercourse. The wide world of sentiment and sensation still opens
upon us. By aid of this little friendly instrument, we may range through those
paths which Ocean seems to separate. However remote, you should still learn to
think it a superior blessing, that in some part of animated Nature, there
still exists the counter part of Emma -- congenial, as dear; one, whom no
circumstance can change, but ^ho must ever remain true to every touch of joy,
and ^-

LONG PRIMER. Scabd.
LED by revolving thought, my wandering steps
Explored the vale of solitude. A rill
Slow-tinkling, murmured as I passed along,
Its bank gay-rob'd with beauty's balmy train.
Over me the steepy cliffs impending, frowned
Horrifick; from their sides, the mouldering earth
Crumbled, and gradual shook the hanging arch,
Whose dark spire quiver'd over the void below.
Between their gleaming sides, refulgent flamed
The sun's broad orb. As on I walked, the scene
Opened, and from the plain one winding path
(Ragged with stones loud rattling down the height;)
Led to the summit of the cliff. I scaled
The ascent, and wondering, from its brow beheld
A boundless prospect, shagg'd with rising hills,
Rocks, deserts, woods, dales, landscapes, groves, and spires.
Far on the left, a bare and barren heath,
(Save where the wild trees formed a little grove,
Crowned with spontaneous herbage) rushing chilled
My veins. 'Twas all a solemn scene, retired
Like that where ancient Druids lived remote,
Conversing with the moon! and airy shapes
(So Fame reports) beneath the wan dim ray,
Sweep shadowy over the blighted law^, or soar
High on the streamy flame, or ride the winds;
Or hear the murmuring wood, when darkness wraps
Her cloudy curtain ^ound the world, and Fear
Knocks at the heart of Man. -- Such is the haunt
Of fairy ^rains, when silver (...) the hills* --
BURGEOIS. Scabd.
LED by revolving thought, my wandering steps
Explored the vale of solitude. A rill,
Slow-tinkling, murmured as I passed along,
Its bank gay-rob'd with beauty's balmy train.
Over me the steepy cliffs impending, frowned
Horrifick; from their sides, the mouldering earth
Crumbled, and gradual shook the hanging arch,
Whose dark spire quiver'd over the void below.
Between their gleaming sides, refulgent flamed
The sun's broad orb. As on I walked, the seen
Opened, and from the plain one winding path
(Ragged with stones loud rattling down the height;)
Led to the summit of the cliff. I scaled
The ascent, and wondering, from its brow beheld
A boundless prospect, shagg'd with rising hills,
Rocks, deserts, woods, dales, landscapes, groves, and spires.
Far on the left, a bare and barren heath,
(Save where the wild trees formed a little grove,
Crowned with spontan'ous herbage) rushing chilled
My veins. 'Twas all a solemn scene, retired
Like that where ancient Druids lived remote,
Conversing with the moon! and airy shapes
(So Fame reports) beneath the wan dim ray,
Sweep shadowy over the blighted lawn, or soar
High on the streamy flame, or ride the winds;
Or hear the murmuring wood, when darkness wraps
Her cloudy curtain round the world, and Fear
Knocks at the heart of Man. -- Such is the haunt
Of fairy-trains, when silver tips the hills;
That in the deep grove's shadowy gloom disport;
Or hear the wild wind whistle, or reposed, --
Pica Mathematical, Algebraical and Geometrical Characters.

+/- + ^ - andgt; ^ / x andlt; = ^ *

Pica Physical Characters.

lb

Long Primer Mathematical, Algebraical, and Geometrical Characters.

+/- ^ + ^ ^ - ^ ^ / x andlt; ^

Long Primer Astronomical Characters.

{salt}

Long Primer Physical Characters.

lb ss

Burgeois Mathematical, Algebraical and Geometrical Characters.

+/- andlt; + ^ = andgt; ^ / x ^ - *

Burgeois Astronomical Characters.

{salt}

Burgeois Physical Characters.

lb ss

Brevier Mathematical, Algebraical and Geometrical Characters.

+/- andlt; + ^ - * ^ / x = ^ ^

Brevier Astronomical Characters.

{salt}

Brevier Physical Characters.

lb ss

GREEK.
AGDETHIKL NXOPPST YPH PSOGDTHXPSY

(...)

(...)
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
HEBREW.
(...)

Exchange for At sight of this Exchange of the same Tenor and Dale unpaid, pay
to value received, and Charge it, with or without further Advice to

Your most humble Servant, To I. Thomas, print.

Two Lines Great Primer Black.
And be it further hereby enacted, That the Mayors, Bailiffs, or other

Great Primer Black.
And be it further hereby enacted, That the Mayors, Bailiffs, or other head
Officers of every Town and Place corporate, and city within this Commonwealth,
being Justice or Justices of the Peace, shall have the same authority by virtue
of this Act, within

Pica Black
And be it further hereby enacted, That the Mayors, Bailiffs, or other head
Officers of every Town and place corporate, and city within this Realm, being
Justice or Justices of the Peace, shall have the same authority, by virtue of
this Act, within the limits or precincts of their jurisdictions, as well out of
Sessions as at their Sessions, if they hold

SCRIPT. (Circular.)
WORCESTER ss.

To the Select men of the Town of in said County, Greeting^

WHEREAS upon comparing the Votes for the choice of a Register of Deeds, on the
first Tuesday of December instant, no one had a Majority:

These are, therefore, in the name of the Commonwealth of Massachu^e^^^* to
require and direct you forthwith, in du^ manner and form, to convene the
Inhabitants of your Town, qualified as the law directs, to vote for the Choice
of Representatives, to bring in their votes for some discreet suitable Person
to fill the office of Register of Deeds, who possesses a Freehold within said
County of the value at least of ten Pounds lawful money, per annum, and you are
to seal up

Tewksbury. By A. WOOD. Words from Dr. WATTS.
^ ^ I Am tired with Visits, Modes and Forms, And Flatteries paid to Fellow
Worms; Their Conversation cloys: Their ^ ^ ^ ^ vain Amors and empty Stuff. But
I can never enjoy enough -- Of thy dear Company, my Lord, thou Life of all my
Joys. ^ ^

From the Press at Worcester, Typographically, by I. THOMAS.

For value received in the County of promise Robert Trusty, to pay him, or his
Order*

Lawful Silver Money, at Six Shilling^ and Eight Pence per Ounce, on Demand,
with lawful Interest.

Witness Hand L

[These ornamental Types may be varied in a thousand diff^rent forms; but are
here inserted in the simple manner in which they are ^^st.

Double Pica Flowers.


Great Primer Flowers.


English Flowers.


Pica Flowers.


Small Pica Flowers.


Long Primer Flowers.


Long Primer Flowers continued.


Long Primer Flowers continued.


Brevier Flowers.


Nonpareil Flowers.


Pearl Flowers.


Types for ornamenting Advertisements in News Papers.


Appendix to the Flowers.
French Canon.


Two Lines English.


Double Pica.


Great Primer.


English.


Small Pica.


Long Primer.


Brevier.


CHECK. Four Lines Pica.


I. Thomas, Printer, Worcester, Massachusetts, has with the greatest care and
attention furnished himself with the best Printing Materials that could be made
in Europe, and has purchased these articles to a very large amount. -- He has
every thing requisite for neat* elegant* or ornamental Printing, be the work
small or large, and will be happy to execute every command in the way of his
Profession, on the most reasonable Terms, and with Dispatch.


