PRINCIPLES OF POLITENESS, AND OF Knowing the World; By the late LORD
CHESTERFIELD. Methodised and digested under distinct Heads. WITH ADDITIONS, By
the Rev. Dr. JOHN TRUSLER: CONTAINING: Every Instruction necessary to complete
the Gentieman and Man of Fashion, to teach him a knowledge of Life, and make
him well received in all Companies.

For the IMPROVEMENT of YOUTH; Yet not beneath the Attention of any.

NORWICH: PRINTED AND SOLD BY JOHN TRUMBULL. M,DCC,LXXXV.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE late Lord Chesterfield having been universally allowed, to be one of the
best bred men of the age, and most intimately acquainted with the principles
and manners of mankind, the Editor of the following pages humbly apprebends, he
could not do the rising generation a greater service, than by collecting those
valuable precepts that are contained in his celebrated letters (...) his son
digesting them under distinct heads, and thereby forming a system of the most
useful instruction.

To that end, he has diligently selected every observation and remark, that can
possibly improve or inform the mind, within the rules of morality; and where
there seemed a deficiency in any part of the system, from the occasional (...)
in Lord Chester field's correspondence, (...) has endeavored to supply it.
Much might have been said on the subject of ind^^icacy, but a^ i^structions on
that head, to persons possessed of a liberal education, must have been
^^necessary they are here purposely ommitted. Some may b^apt to think that many
things in this work are too frivolous to be mentioned; but when it is remembered
they are calculated for the multitude, it is presumed they will be received as
respectable admonition. In short, it has been the Editors's study to make Lord
Chester field useful to every class of youth; to lay that instruction before
them, which they with difficulty must have found amidst a heap of other matter;
in a word, to give the very essence of his letters, and at a tenth part of the
price those letters s^ll for.

PRINCIPLES OF POLITENESS, etc. ADDRESSED TO EVERY YOUNG GFNTLEMAN.
AS all young men, on their first outset in life are in want of some experience
and friendly hand to bring them forwards and reach them a knowledge of the
world; I think I cannot do the rising generation a greater service, than by
directing the young ma^^'s steps, and teaching him how to make his way among
the crowd. I will suppose him already instructed in the principles of religion
and necessity of moral vi^t^es, (for without these he must be most unhappy) of
course shall in a series of chapters, point out, under distinct heads, the
qualifications necessary to make him well received in the world, without which
he cannot expect to bear his part in life, agreeable to his own wishes, or the
duty he owes to society; and as modesty is the basis of a proper reception, I
shall begin with that.

MODESTY.
MODESTY is a polite accomplishment, and generally an attendant upon merit: It
is engaging to the highest degree, and wins the heart of all our acquaintance.
On the contrary none are more disgustful in company than the impudent and
presuming.

The man who is, on all occasions, commending and speaking well of himself, we
naturally dislike. On the other hand, he who studies to conceal his own
deserts, who does justice to the merit of others, who talks but little of
himself, and that with modesty, makes a favorable impression on the persons he
is conversing with, captivates their minds, and gains their esteem.

Modesty, however, widely differs from an awkward bashfulness, which is as much
to be condemned as the other is to be applauded. To appear simple is as
ill-bred as to be impudent. A young man ought to be able to come into a room
and adress the company without the least embarassment. To be out of countenance
when spoken to, and not to have an answer ready is ridiculous to the last
degree.

An awkward country fellow, when he comes into company better than himself, is
exceedingly disconcerted. He knows not what to do with his hands, or his hat,
but either puts one of them in his pocket, and dangles the other by his side;
or perhaps twirls his hat on his fingers, or fumbles with the button. If spoken
to, he is in a much worse situation, he answers with the utmost difficulty and
nearly stammers: whereas a gentleman who is acquainted with life, enters a room
with gracefulness and a modest assurance, addresses even persons he does not
know, in an easy and natural manner, and without the least embarrassment. This
is the characteristic of good breeding, a very necessary knowledge in our
intercourse with men; for one of inferior parts, with the behavior of a
gentleman, is frequently better received than a man of sense with the address
and manners of a clown.

Ignorance and vice are the only things we need be ashamed of; steer clear of
these, and you may go into any company you will; not that I would have a young
man throw of all dread of appearing abroad, as a fear of offending, or being
disesteemed, will make him preserve a proper decorum. Some persons, from
experiencing the inconveniences of false modesty, have run into the other
extreme, and acquired the character of impudent. This is as great a fault as
the other. A well-bred man keeps himself within the two, and steers the middle
way. He is easy and firm in every company, is modest, but not bashful, steady
but not impudent. He copies the manners of the better people, and conforms to
their customs with ease and attention.

Till we can present ourselves in all companies with coolness and unconcern, we
can never present ourselves well; nor will a man ever be supposed to have kept
good company, or ever be acceptable in such company, if he cannot appear there
easy ^embarrassed. A modest assurance, ^n every part of life, is the most
advantageous qualification we can possibly acquire.

Instead of becoming insolent, a man of sense under a consciousness of merit,
is more modest. He behave himself with firmness, but without the least
presumption. The man who is ignorant of his own merit is no less a fool than he
who is constantly displaying it. A man of understanding avails himself of his
abilities, but never boasts of them; whereas the timid and bashful can never
push himself in life, but will be always kept behind by the forward and
bustling. A man of abilities, and acquainte^ with life will stand as firm in
defen^ of his own rights, and pursue h^ plans as steadily and unmoved, as the
most impudent man alive; but the^ he does it with a seeming modesty. Thus
manner is every thing; wh^ is impudence in one, is proper assurance only in
another; for firmne^ is commendable, but an overbeari^ conduct is disgustful.

Forwardness being the very reve^ of modesty, follow rather than le^ the
company, that is, join in discourse upon subjects rather than start one of your
own; if you have parts, you will have opportunities enough of showing them on
every topic of conversation, and if you have none, it is better to expose
yourself upon a (...) subject of other people's than one of your own.

But, be particularly careful not to peak of yourself if you can help it. An
impudent fellow lugs in himself aruptly upon all occasions, and is ^ver the
hero of his own story. O^ers will color their arrogance with, (...) It may
seem strange, indeed, that I (...) should talk in this manner of myself; it is
what I by no means like, and should never do, if I had not been cruelly and
unjustly accused; but when my character is attacked, it is a justice I owe to
myself, to defend it." This veil is too thin ^t to be seen through on the first
spection.

Others again with more art, will modestly boast of all the principal virtue^
by calling these virtues weaknesse^ and saying they are so unfortunate as to
fall into weaknesses. I cannot see persons suffer, says one of this cast
without relieving them; though my circumstances are very unable t^ afford it.
-- I cannot avoid speaking truth, though it is often very imprudent, and so on.

This angling for praise is so prevailing a principle, that it frequently
stoops to the lowest objects. Me^ will often boast of doing that, which (...)
true, would be rather a disgrace to to them than otherwise. One man affirms
that he rode twenty miles within the hour; it is probably a lie; but suppose he
did, what then? He ha^ a good horse under him, and is a good jockey. Another
swears he has often at a sitting, drank five or six bottle to his own share.
Out of respect t^ him, I will believe him a liar, for (...) would not wish to
think him a beast.

These and many more are the follies of idle people, which, while they think
they procure them esteem, in reality make them despised.

To avoid this contempt, therefore, never speak of yourself at all, unless
necessity obliges you; and even then, take care to do it in such a manner, that
it may not be construed into fishing for applause. Whatever perfections you may
have, be assured, people will find them out; but whether they do or not, nobody
will take them upon your own word. The less you say of yourself, the more the
world will give you credit for; and the more you say the less they will believe
you.

LYING.
OF all the vices, there is no one more criminal, more mean, and more
ridiculous, than lying. The end we design by it is very seldom accomplished,
for lies are always found out, ^t one time or other; and yet there are persons
who give way to this vice, who are otherwise of good principles, and have not
been ill educated.

Lies generally proceed from vanity, cowardice, and a revengeful disposition,
and sometimes from a mistaken notion of self-defence.

He who tells a malicious lie, with a view of injuring the person he speaks of,
may gratify his wish for a while, but will, in the end, find it recoil upon
himself; for, as soon as he is detected, (and detected he most certainly will
be) he is despised for the infamous attempt, and whatever he may say hereafter
of that person, will be considered as false, whether it be so or not.

If a man lies, shuffles or equivocates, for, in fact, they are all alike, by
way of excuse for any thing he has said or done, he aggravates the offense
rather than lessens it; for the person to whom the lie is told has a right to
know the truth, or there would have been no occasion to have framed a
falsehood. This person, of course, will think himself ill treated for being a
second time affronted; for what can be a greater affront than an attempt to
impose upon any man's understanding? Besides, lying, in excuse for a fault,
betrays fear than which nothing is more dastardly, and unbecoming the character
of a gentleman.

There is nothing more manly, or more noble, if we have done wrong, than
frankly to own it. It is the only way of meeting forgiveness. Indeed,
confessing a fault and asking pardon, with great minds, is considered as a
sufficient atonement. I have been betrayed into an error, or, I have injured
you, Sir, and am heartily ashamed of it, and forty for it, has frequently
disarmed the person injured, and where he would have been ou^ ^^^^y, has ^^^e
him our friend.

There are persons also, whose vanity leads them to tell a thousand lies. They
persuade themselves, that, if it be no way injurious to others, it is harmless
and innocent, and they shelter their falsehoods under the softer name of
untruths. These persons are foolish enough to imagine, that if they can recite
any thing wonderful, they draw the attention of the company, and if they
themselves are the objects of that wonder, they are looked up to as persons
extraordinary. This has made many a man see things that never were in being,
hear things that never were said, and atchieve feats that never were attempted,
dealing always in the mavelous. Such may be assured, however unwilling the
persons they are conversing with may be to laugh in their f^^es, th^^ they hold
them secretly in the (...) contempt; for he who will tell a lie thus idly, will
not scruple to (...) where his interest is concerned. Rather than any person
should doubt of my veracity for one minute, I would deprive myself of telling
abroad either what I had really seen or heard, if such things did not carry
with them the face of probability.

Others again will boast of the great respect they meet with in certain
companies; of the honors that are continually heaped on them there; of the
great price they give for every thing they purchase; and this to be thought of
consequence; but unless such people have the best and most accurate memory,
they will, perhaps, very soon after contradict their former assertions, and
subject themselves to contempt and derision.

Remember then, as long as you live, that nothing but (...) truth (...) carry
you through life with honor and credit. Liars are not only disgreeable but
dangerous companions, and when known, will ever be shunned by men of
understanding. Besides, as the greatest liars are generally the greatest fools,
a man who addicts himself to this detestable vice, will not only be looked upon
as vulgar, but will never be considered as a man of sense.

GOOD-BREEDING.
VOID of good breeding, every other qualification will be imperfect unadorned,
and to a certain degree unavailing.

Good breeding being the result of good sense and good nature, is it not
wonderful that people possessed of the one should be deficient in the other?
The modes of it varving according to persons, places, and circumstances, cannot
indeed be acquired otherwise than by time and observation, but the substance is
every where and always the same.

What good morals are to society in general, good manners are to particular
ones; their band and security. Of all actions, next to that of performing a
good one, the consciousness of rendering a civility is the most grateful.

We seldom see a person, let him be ever so ill-bred, wanting in respect to
those whom he acknowledges to be his superiors; the manner of showing this
respect then is all I contend for. The well-bred man expresses it naturally and
easily, while he who is unused to good company expresses it awkwardly. Study,
then, to show that respect which every one wishes to show in an easy and
grateful way; but this must be learnt by observation.

In company with your equals or in mixed companies, a greater latitude may be
take in your behavior; yet, it should never exceed the bounds of decency; for
though no one in this case can claim any distinguished marks of respect, every
one is entitled to civility and good manners. A man need not, for example, fear
to put his hands in his pockets, take snuff, sit, stand, or occasionally walk
about the room; but it would be highly unbecoming to whistle wear his hat,
loosen his garters, or throw himself across the chairs. Such liberties are
offensive to our equals, and insulting to our inferiors. Easiness of carriage
by no means implies inattention and carelessness. No one is at liberty to act
in all respects, as he pleases; but is bound by the laws of good manners to
behave with decorum.

Let a man talk to you ever so stupidly or frivolously, not to pay some
attention to what he says, is savageness, to the greatest degree. Nay if he
even forces his conversation to you, it is worse than rudness not to listen to
him; for your inattention in this case, tells him, in express terms, that you
think him a blockhead and not worth the hearing. Now, if such behavior is rude
to men, it is much more so to women, who, be their rank what it will, have on
account of their sex, a claim to officious attention from the men. Their little
wants and whims, their likes and dislikes, and even their impertinences, are
particularly attended to and flattered, and their very thoughts and wishes
guessed at and instantly gratified by every well-bred man.

In promiscuous companies, you should vary your address, aggreeable to the
different ages of the persons you speak to. It would be rude and absurd to talk
of your amors or your pleasures to men of certain dignity and gravity to
clergy men, or men in years; but still you should be as easy with them as with
others, your manner only should be varied; you should, if possible double your
respect and attention to them; and were you to insinuate occasionally, that
from their observation and experience you wish to profit, you would insensibly
win their esteem; for flattery if not fulsome and gross, is aggreeable to all.

When invited to dinner or supper, you must never usurp to yourself the best
places, the best dishes, etc. but allways decline them, and offer them to
others, except, indeed, you are offered any thing by a superior when it would
be a rudeness, if you liked it, not to accept it immediately, without the least
apology. Thus, for example, was a superior, the master of the table, to offer
you a thing of which there was but one, to pass it to the person next you,
would be indirectly charging him that offered it to you, with a want of good
manners and proper respect to his company; or, if you were the only stranger
present, it would be a rudeness if you would make a feint of refusing it with
the customary apology, I cannot think of taking it from you, sir; or, I am
sorry to deprive you of (...), as it is supposed he is conscious of his own
(...) if he choose not to give it, would not have offered it; your apology
therefore, in this case is putting him upon an equality with yourself. In like
manner it is rudeness to draw back when requested by a superior to pass a door
first, or to step into a carriage before him. In short, it would be endless to
particularise all the instances in which a well bred man shows his politeness
in good company, such as not ^awning, singing, whistling, warming his breech at
the fire, lounging, putting his legs upon the chairs and the like,
familiarities every man's good sense must condemn, and good-breeding abhor.

But, good-breeding consists in more than merely not being ill-bred. To return
a bow, speak when you are spoken to, and say nothing rude, are such negative
acts of good-breeding, that they are little more than not being a brute, would
it not be a very poor commendation of any man's cleanliness to say that he was
not offensive? If we wish for the good will and esteem of our acquaintance, our
good-breeding, must be active, cheerful, officious and seducing.

For example, should you invite any one to dine or sup with you, recollect
whether ever you had observed them to prefer one thing to another and endeavor
to procure that things when at table, say, At such a time I think you seemed to
give this dish a preferrence, I therefore ordered it. This is the wine I
observed you best like, I have therefore been at some pains to procure it.
Trifling as these things may appear, they prove an attention to the person they
are said to; and as attention in trifle is the test of respect, the compliment
will not be lost.

I need only refer you to your ow^ breast. How have these little attentions
when shown you by others, flattered that self-love which no many free from?
They incline and attach us to that person, and prejudice us afterward to all
that he says or does. The declaration of the women in a great degree stamp a
man's reputation of being either ill or well-bred; you must then in a manner,
overwhelm them with these attentions, they are used to them, and naturally
expect them, and to do them justice, they are seldom lost upon them. You must
be sedulous to wait upon them, pick up with alacrity any thing they drop, and
be very officious in procuring their carriages or their chairs in public
places; be blind to what you should not see, and deaf to what you should not
hear. Opportunities of showing these attentions are continually presenting
themselves; but in case they should not you must study to create them.

If ever you would be esteemed by the women, your conversation to them should
be always respectful, lively, and addressed to their vanity. Every thing you
say or do, should tend to show a regard to their beauty or good sense; even men
are not without their vanities of one kind or other, and flattering that vanity
by words and looks of approbation, is one of the principal characters of
good-breeding.

Address and manners, with weak persons, who are actually three-fourths of the
world, are every thing; and even people of the best understanding are taken in
with them. Where the heart is not won and the eye pleased, the mind will seldom
be on our side.

In short learning and erudition, without good breeding, is tiresome and
pedantic; and an ill-bred man is a unfit for good company as he will be
unwelcome in it. Nay, he is full as unfit for business as for company. M^ke
then good-breeding the great object of your thoughts and actions. Be
particularly observant of, and endeavor to instate, the behavior and manners
of such as are distinguished by their politeness; and be persuaded, that good
breeding is to all worldly qualifications, what charity is to all christian
virtues; it adorns merit, and often covers the want of it.

GENTEEL CARRIAGE.
NEXT to good breeding is a genteel manner and carriage, wholly free from those
ill habits and awkward actions, which many very worthy persons are addicted to.

A genteel manner of behavior, how trifling soever it may seem, is of the
utmost consequence in private life. Men of very inferior parts have been
esteemed, merely for their genteel carriage and good-breeding, while sensible
men have given disgust for want of it. There is something or other that
prepossesses us at first sight in favor of a well-bred man, and makes us wi^h
to like him.

(...) an awkward fellow first comes into a room, he attempts to bow, and his
sword, if he wears one, goes between his legs, and nearly throws him down.
Confused and ashamed, he stumbles to the upper end of the room, and seats
himself in the very chair he should not. He there begins playing with his hat,
which he presently drops; and recovering his hat, he lets fall his cane; and in
picking up his cane, down goes his hat again; thus it is a considerable time
before he is a dusted. When his tea or coffee is handed to him, he spreads his
handkerchief upon his knees, scalds his mouth, drops either the cup or the
sacuer, and spills the tea or coffee in his lap. At dinner he is more
uncommonly awkward; there he tucks his napkin through a buttonhole which
tickles his chin, and occasions him to make a variety of wry faces; he seats
himself upon the edge of the chair, at so great a distance from the table, that
he frequently drops his meat between his plate and his mouth; he holds his
knife, fork and spoon differently from other people; eats with his knife, to
the manifest danger of his mouth; picks his teeth with his fork, rakes his
mouth with his finger, and puts his spoon which has been in his throat a dozen
times, into the dish again. If he is to carve, he cannot hit the joint, but in
laboring to cut through the bone, splashes the sauce over every body's cloths.
He generally daubs himself all over, his elbows are in the next person's plate,
and he is up to the knuckles in soup and grease. If he drinks, it is with his
mouth full, interrupting the whole company wi^^ "To your good health, sir," and
"My service to you," perhaps coughs in his glass, and he sprinkles the whole
table. Further, he has perhaps a number of disagreeable tricks, he snuffs up
his nose, picks it with his fingers, blows it and look in his handkerchief,
crams his hands first into his bosom, and next into his breeches. In short, he
neither dresses nor acts like any other person, but is particularly awkward in
every thing he does. All this, I own, has nothing in it criminal; but it is
such an offense to good manners and good-breeding, that it is universally
despised; it makes a man ridiculous in every company, and o^ course, ought
carefully to be avoided by every one who would wish to please.

From this picture of the ill-bred man, you will easily distinguish that of the
well-bred; for you may readily judge what you ought to do, when you are told
what you ought not to do; a little attention to the manners of those who have
seen the world, will make a proper behavior habitual and familiar to you.

Actions that would otherwise be pleasing, frequently become ridiculous by your
manner of doing them. If a lady drops her fan in company, the worst-bred man
would immediately pick it up, and give it to her; the best bred-man can do no
more; but then he does it in a graceful manner, that is sure to please, whereas
the other would do it so awkwardly as to be laughed at.

You may also know a well-bred person by his manner of sitting. Ashamed and
confused, the awkward man sits in his chair stiff and bolt upright, whereas the
man of fashion, is easy in every position; instead of lolling or lounging as he
sits, he leans with elegance, and by varying his attitudes, shows that he has
been used to good company. Let it be one part of your study then, to learn to
sit genteely in different companies, to loll gracefully, where you are
authorized to take that liberty, and to sit up respectfully, where that freedom
is not allowable.

In short, you cannot conceive how advantageous a graceful carriage and a
pleasing address are, upon all occasions; they ensnare the affections, steal a
prepossession in our favor, and, play about the heart till they engage it.

Now to acquire a graceful air you must attend to your dancing; no one can
either sit, stand or wa^k well unless he dances well. And, in learning to
dance, be particularly attentive to the motion of your arms, for a stiffness in
the wrist will make any man look awkward. If a man walks well presents himself
well in company wears his hat well, moves his head properly and his arms
gracefully it i^ almost all that is necessary.

There is also an awkwardness i^ speech that naturally falls under thi^ head,
and ought to, and may be guarded against; such as forgetting names, and
mistaking one name for another; to speak of Mr. What-dye-call-him, or
You-know-how. Mrs. Thingum, What Is her-name, or How-d^ye call her is exceeding
awkward and vulgar. It is the same to address people by improper titles, as for
for my lord, to begin a story without being able to finish it, and break off in
the middle, with "I have forgot the rest."

Our voice and manner of speaking too, should likewise be attended to. Some
will mumble over their words, so as not to be intelligible, and others will
speak so fast as not to be understood, and, in doing this, will sputter and
spit in your face; some will bawl as if they were speaking to the deaf; others
will speak so low as scarcely to be heard; and many will put their face so
close to yours as to offend you with their breath. All these habits are horrid
and disgustful, put may easily be got the better of, with care. They are the
vulgar characteristics of a low-bred man, or are proofs that very little pains
have been bestowed in his education. In short, ^n attention to these little
matters are of greater importance than you are ^ware of; many a sensible man
having lost ground for want of these little graces, and many a one, possessed
(...) these perfections alone, having mad^ his way through life, that otherwi^
would not have been noticed.

CLEANLINESS OF PERSON
BUT, as no one can please in company, however graceful his a^ unless he be
clean and neat in his p^son, this qualification comes next (...) be considered.

Negligence of one's person not only implies an unsufferable indolen^ but an
indifference whether we ple^ or not. In others, it betrays an i^ solence and
affection, arising from presumption, that they are sure pleasing, without
having recourse (...) to those means which many are obli^ed to use.

He who is not thoroughly clean^ his ^^son, will be offensive in all converses
with. A parti^ (...) to the cleanliness of your (...) hands and nails, is but
common decency. A foul mouth and unclean hands, are certain marks of vulgarity;
the first is the cause of an offensive breath, which nobody can bear, and the
last is declarative of dirty work; one may always know a gentleman by the state
of his hands and nails. The flesh at the roots should be kept back, so as to
show the semicircles at the bottom of the nails; the edges of the nails should
never be cut down below the ends of the fingers nor should they be suffered to
grow longer than the fingers. When the nails are cut down to the quick it is a
shrewd sign that the man is a mechanic, to whom long nails would be
troublesome, or that he gets his bread by fiddling; and if they are longer than
his fingers ends, and encircled with a black rim, it foretells he has been
laboriously and meanly employed, and too fatigued to clean himself: a good
apology for want of cleanliness in a mechanic, but the greatest disgrace that
can attend gentleman.

These things may appear too insignificant to be mentioned; but when it is
considered that a thousand litt^ nameless things, which every one fe^ but no
one can describe, conspire (...) form that whole of pleasing, I ho^ you will
not call them trifling. Besides, a clean shirt and a clean pers^ are as
necessary to health, as not (...) offend other people. It is a maxi^ with me
which I have lived to see ve^fied, that he who is negligent at twe^ years of
age, will be a sloven at for^ and intolerable at fifty.

DRESS.
NEATNESS of person, I observed was as necessary as cleanliness; of course,
some attention m^ be paid to your dress.

Such is the absurdity of the time that to pass well with the world, (...) must
adopt some of its customs, (...) they ridiculous or not.

In the first place, to neglect one's dress is to affront all the female part
of our acquaintance. The women in particular pay an attention to their dress;
to neglect therefore yours will displease them, as it would be tacitly taxing
them with vanity, and declaring that you thought them not worth that respect
which every body else does. And, as I have mentioned before, as it is the women
who stamp a young man's credit, in the fashionable world, if you do not make
yourself agreeable to the women, you will assuredly lose ground among the men.

Dress, as trifling as it may appear to a man of understanding, prepossesses on
the first appearance, which is frequently decisive. And indeed we may form some
opinion of a man's sense and character from his dress. Any exceeding of the
fashion, or any affectation in dress whatever, argue, a weakness in
understanding, and nine times out of ten it will be found so.

There are few young fellows but what display some character or oth^ in this
shape. Some would be thought fearless and brave; these wear a black cravat, a
short coat and waistcoat, a^ uncommon long sword hanging (...) their knees, a
large hat fiercely cocke^ and are flash all over. Others affe^ to be country
squires; these will (...) about in buckskin breeches brow^ frocks, and great
oaken cudgels i^ their hands, slouched hats, with the^ hair undressed and
tucked up und^ them, to an enormous size, and imita^ grooms and country boobies
so we^ externally, that there is not the leak doubt of their resembling them as
we^ internally. Others, again, paint and powder themselves so much, and dre^ so
finically, as leads us to suppose they are only women in boys clothes. No^ a
sensible man carefully avoids all this or any other affectation. He dress^ as
fashionably and well as persons o^ the best families and best sense; if h^
exceeds them, he is a coxcomb; if he dresses worse, he is unpardonable.

Dress yourself fine, then, if possible; or plain, agreeable to the company you
are in; that is conform to the dress of others, and avoid the appearance of
being tumbled. Imitate those reasonable people of your own age, whose dress is
neither remarked as too neglected or too much studied. Take care to have your
clothes well made, in the fashion, and to fit you, or you will after all,
appear awkward. When once dressed, think no more of it; show no fear of
discomposing your dress, but let all your motions be as easy and unembarrassed,
as if you was at home in your dishabille.

ELEGANCE OF EXPRESSION.
HAVING mentioned elegance of person, I will proceed to elegance of expression.

It is not one or two qualifications alone complete the gentleman; it must be a
union of many; and graceful speaking is as essential as gracefulness of person.
Every man cannot be an harmonious speaker; a roughness or coarseness of voice
may prevent it; but if there are no natural (...) perfections, if a ^n does not
stammer or lisp, or has not lost his teeth, he may speak gracefully; nor will
all these defects, if he has a mind to it, prevent him from speaking correctly.

^^body can attend with pleasure to a bad speaker. One who tells his story ill,
be it ever so important, will (...) even the most patient. If you have been
present at the performance of a good tragedy, you have doubtless been sensible
of the good effects of a speech well delivered; how much it (...) interested
and affected you; and on the contrary, how much an ill spoken one has disgusted
you. It Is the (...) in common conversation: he who (...) deliberately, distinc^
and correctly: he who makes use of the best words to express himself, and
varies his voice according to the nature of the subject, will always please,
while the thick or hasty speaker, he who mumbles out a set of ill chosen words,
utters them ingramatically, or with a dull monotony, will tire and disgust. Be
assured then, the air, the gesture, the looks of a speaker a proper accent, a
just emphasis and tuneful cadence are full as necessary to please and be
attended to, as the subject matter itself.

People may talk what they will of solid reasoning and sound sense; without the
graces and ornaments of language, they will neither please nor persuade. In
common discourse, even trifles elegantly expressed will be better received than
the best of arguments homespun and unadorned.

A good way to acquire a graceful utterrance is to read aloud to some friend
every day, and beg of him to set you right, in (...) you ^^ad too fast, do not
observe the proper stops, lay a wrong emphasis or utter your words
indistinctly. You may even read aloud to yourself where such a friend is not at
hand, and you will find your own ear a good corrector. Take care to open your
teeth when you read or speak, and articulate every word distinctly; which last
cannot be done, but by sounding the final letter. But above all, endeavor to
vary your voice according to the matter, and avoid a monotony. By a daily
attention to this, it will, in a little time, become easy and habitual to you.

Pay an attention also to your looks and your gesture, when talking even on the
most trifling subjects; things appear very different according as they are
expressed, looked and delivered.

Now, if it is necessary to attend so particularly to our manner of speaking it
is much more so, with respect to the matter. Fine turns of expression, a
genteel and correct style, are ornaments as requisite to common sense, as
polite behavior and an elegant address are to common good manners; they are
great assistants in the point of pleasing. A gentleman, its true, may be known
in the meanest garb, but it admits not of a doubt, that he would be better
received into good company, genteely and fashionably dressed, than was he to
appear in dirt and tatters.

Be careful then of your style upon all occasions; whether you write or speak,
study for the best words and best expressions, even in common conversation or
the most familiar letters. This will prevent your speaking in a hurry, than
which nothing is more vulgar; though you may be a little embarrassed at first,
time and use will render it easy. It is no such difficult thing to express
ourselves well on subjects we are thoroughly acquainted with, if we think
before we speak; and no one should presume to do otherwise. When you have said
a thing if you did not reflect before be sure to do it afterward: consider
with yourself, whether you could not have expressed yourself better; and if you
are in doubt of the propriety or elegancy of any word, search for it is some
dictionary, Johnson's folio Dictionary vo^ will (...) very serviceable, and the
Difference bet^ words reputed sy^onimous; a work in two r^lumes written by me
some years ago, (...) published by D^dsley.
or some good author, while you remember it: never be sparing of your trouble
while you would wish to improve, and my word for it, a very little time will
make this matter habitual.

In order to speak grammatically and to express yourself pleasingly, (...)
would recommend it to you to translate often any language you are acquainted
with into English, and to correct such translation till the words, their order,
and the periods are agreeable to your own ear.

Vulgarism in language is another distinguishing mark of bad company and
education. Expressions may be correct in themselves and yet be vul^ar owing to
their not being fashion^ble, for language as manners are both established by
the usage of people of fashion.

The conversation of a low-bred ^an is filled up with proverbs and ^ackneyed
sayings. Instead of observing that tastes are different, and that ^ost men have
one peculiar to themselves, he will give you "What is ^ne man's meat is another
man's ^oison;" or, "Every one to their ^king, as the old woman said, when (...)
kissed her cow." He has ever me favorite word, which he lugs (...) upon all
occasions, right or wrong; ^h as vastly angry, vastly kind; delish ugly,
divilish handso^, immense-great, immen^ely little. Even his pro^ciation carries
the mark of vulgarity along with it; he calls the earth, earth; finances,
finances; he go^ to wards and not toward such a place. He affects to use hard
words, to gi^ him the appearance of a man of learning, but frequently mistakes
the^ meaning, and seldom, if ever, pronounces them properly.

All this must be avoided, if (...) would not be supposed to have ke^ company
with footmen and house maids. Never have recourse to pr^verbial or vulgar
sayings; use neither favorite nor hard words, but seek for the most elegant;
be careful in the management of them, and depend (...) on it your labor will
not be lost (...) for nothing is more engaging than (...) a fashionable and
polite address.

ADDRESS, PHRASEOLOGY, AND SMALL-TALK.
IN all good company, we meet with a certain manner, phraseology and general
conversation, that distinguishes the man of fashion. This can only be acquired
by frequenting good company and being particularly attentive to all that passes
there.

When invited to dine or sup at the house of any well-bred man, observe how he
does the honors of his table, and mark his manner of treating his company.

Attend to the compliments of co^gratulation or condolance that he pays; and
take notice of his address to his superiors, his equals and his inferiors; nay,
his very looks and tone of voice are worth your attention, for we cannot please
without a union of them all.

There is a certain distinguishing diction that marks the man of fashion, a
certain language of conversation that every gentleman should be master of.
Saying to a man just married, "I wish you joy," or to one who has lost his wife
"I am sorry for your loss." and both perhaps with an unmeaning countenance, may
be civil, but it is nevertheless vulgar. A man of fashion will express the same
thi^ more elegantly and with a look (...) sincerity, that shall attract the
estee^ of the person he speaks to. He will advance to the one, with warmth
(...) cheerfulness, and perhaps squeezing him by the hand, will say, "Belie^ me
my dear sir, I have scarce words (...) express the joy I fe^l, upon your happy
alliance with such or such a family, etc." To the other in affliction, (...)
will advance slower, and with a peculiar composure of voice and countenance,
begin his compliments of condolance with, I hope, sir, you will do me the
justice, to be persuade^ that I am not insensible of you^ unhappiness, that I
take part i^ your distress, and shall ever be afected when you are so.

Your first address to, and indeed all your conversation with, your superiors,
should be open, cheerful and respectful; with your equals, warm and animated;
with your inferiors, hearty, free and unreserved.

There is a fashionable kind of small talk, which however trifling it may be
thought, has its use in mixed companies: of course you should endeavor to
acquire it. By small talk I mean a good deal to say on unimportant matters; for
example foods, the flavor and growth of wines, and the chit-chat of the day.
Such conversation will serve to keep off serious subjects, that might sometimes
create disputes. This chit-chat is chiefly to be learned by frequenting the
company of the ladies.

OBSERVATION.
AS the art of pleasing is to be learnt only by frequenting the best companies,
we must endeavor to pick it up in such companies, by observation; for it is not
sense and knowledge alo^e that will acquire esteem; these certainly are the
first and necessary foundations for pleasing, but they will by no means do,
unless attended with manners and attentions.

There have been people who have frequented the first companies all their
lifetime, and yet have never got rid of their natural stiffeness and
awkwardness; but have continued as vulgar as if they were never out of a
servants hall; this has been owing to carelessness, and a want of attention to
the manners and behavior of others.

There are a great many people likewise who busy themselves the whole day, and
who in fact do nothing. They have possibly taken up a book for two or three
hours, but from a certain inattention that gr^ upon them, the more it is
indulged, know no more of the contents the if they had not looked into it;
(...) it is impossible for any one to ret^ what he (...) ^unless he reflects
and reasons upon it as he goes on. When they have thus lounged away an hour or
two, they will saunter into company, without attending to any thing that passes
there; but if they think at all, are thinking of some trifling matter that
ought not to occupy their attention; thence perhaps they go to the play, where
they stare at the company and the lights, without attending to the piece, the
very thing they went to see. In this manner they wear away their hours, that
might otherwise be employed to their improvement and advantage. This silly
suspension of thought they would pass for absence of mind -- ridiculous!
Wherever you are, let me recommend it to you to pay an attention to all that
passes; observe the characters of the persons you are with, and the subjects of
their conversation; listen to every thing that is said, see every thing that is
done, and according to the vulgar saying have your eyes and your ears about you.

A continual inattention to matters that occur is the characteristic of a weak
mind the man who gives way to it, is little else than a trifler, a blank in
society, which every sensible person overlooks; surely what is worth doing is
worth doing well, and nothing can be well done, if not properly attended to.
When I hear a man say on being asked about any thing that was said or done in
his presence, "that truly he did not mind it." I am ready to knock the fool
down. Why did not he mind it? -- What else had he to do? -- A man of sense and
fashion never makes use of this paltry plea, he never complains of a
treacherous memory, but attends to and remembers every thing that is either
said or done.

Whenever then, you go into good company, that is the company of people of
fashion, observe carefully their behavior, their address and their manner;
imitate it as far as in your power. Your attention if possible, should be so
ready as to observe every person in the room at once, their motions, their
looks, and their turns of expression, and that without staring or seeming to be
an observer. This kind of observation may be acquired by care and practice, and
will be found of the utmost advantage to you, in the course of life.

ABSENCE OF MIND.
HAVING mentioned absence of mind, let me be more particular concerning it.

What the world calls an absent man is generally either a very affected one or
a very weak one; but whether weak or affected he is in company, a ^ery
disagreeable man. Lost in thought, or possibly in no thought at all, he is a
stranger to every one present, and to every thing that passes; ^e knows not his
best friends, is deficient in every act of good-manners, unobservant of the
actions of the company and insensible to his own. Hi^ answers are quite the
reverse of wh^ they ought to be: talk to him (...) one thing, he replies, as of
another. He forgets what he said last, leav^ his hat in one room, his cane in
another, and his sword in a third; na^ if it was not for his buckles, he would
even leave his shoes behind him. Neither his arms nor his le^ seem to be a part
of his body, and his head is never in a right position. He joins not in the
general conversation, except it be by fits and starts, as if awaking from a
dream: I attribute this either to weakness or affectation. His shallow mind is
possibly not able to attend to more than o^ thing at a time; or he would be
supposed wrapped up in the investigation (...) some very important matter. Su^
men as Sir Isaac Newton or Mr. Lock might occasionally have some ^cuse for
absence of mind; it might proceed from that intenseness of thought that was
necessary at all times for the scientific subjects they were studying; but, for
a young man, and a man of the world, who has no such plea to make, absence of
mind is a rudeness to the company, and deserves the severest censure.

However insignificant a company may be; however trifling their conversation;
while you are with them, do not show them by an inattention that you think them
trifling; that can never be the way to please, but rather fall in with their
weakness than otherwise, for to mortify, or show the least contempt to those we
are in company with, is the greatest rudeness we can be guilty of, and what few
can forgive.

I never yet found a man inattentive to the person he feared, or the woman he
loved; which convinces me, that absence of mind is to be got the better of, if
we think proper to make the trial; and believe me, it is always worth the
attempt.

Absence of mind is a tacit declaration, that those we are in company with, are
not worth attending to; and what can be a greater affront? -- Besides, can an
absent man improve by what is said or done in his presence? -- No; he may
frequent the best companies for years together, and all to no purpose. In
short, a man is neither fit for business nor conversation unless he can attend
to the object before him, be that object what it will.

KNOWLEDGE OF THE WORLD.
A Knowledge of the world, by our own experience and observation, is so
necessary, that, without it, we shall act very absurdly and frequently give
offense, when we do not mean it. All the learning and parts in the world will
not secure us from it. Without an acquaintance with ^fe, a man may say very
good things, ^ut time them so ill, and address ^em so improperly, that he had
much ^etter be silent. Full of himself and ^is own business, and inattentive to
^e circumstances and situations of (...) those he converses with, he vents
(...) without the least discretion, says ^ings that he ought not to say, con^es
some, shocks others, and puts (...) whole company in pain, lest what (...)
utters next should prove worse (...) the last. The best direction I ^n give you
in this matter, is rather (...) fall in with the conversation of ^hers, than
start a subject of your ^n; rather strive to put them more (...) conceit with
themselves, than to ^aw their attention to you.

A novice in life, he who knows ^le of mankind, but what he collects ^m books,
lays it down as a maxim, at most men love flattery; in order ^refore to please,
he will flatter. ^t, how? Without regard either to circumstances or occasion.
In^ of those delicate touches, those ^tints that serve to heighten the p^ he
lays on his colors with a he^ hand and daubs, where he means (...) adorn; in
other words, he will fla^ so unseasonably and at the same (...) so grossly, that
while he wishes to pl^ he puts out of countenance, and is (...) to offend. On
the contrary, a m^ the world, one who has made his his study, knows the power
of fla^ as well as he; but, then, he k^ how to apply it; he watches the
^portunity, and does it indirectly, (...) inference comparison and hint.

Man is made up of such a v^ of matter, that, to search him thoro^ly requires
time and attention, for we are all made of the same mat^ and have all the same
passions. (...) from a difference in their prope^ and combination, we vary in
(...) dispositions; what is agreeab^ one is disagreeable to another (...) ^at
one shall approve, another shall ^demn. Reason is given us to con^l these
passions, but seldom does (...). Application therefore to the reason ^f my man,
will frequently prove ineffectual, unless we endeavor at the ^e time to gain
his heart.

Wherever then you are, search into ^e character of men; find out, if ^ffible
their foible, their governing ^ion, or their particular merit; ^e them on their
weak side, and (...) will generally succeed; their ^ailing vanity you may
readily ^cover, by observing their favorite topic of coversation, for every
one ^s most, of what he would be ^ought most to excel^^n.

The time should also be judici^ly made choice of. Every man ^s his particular
times when he may (...) applied to with success, the mollia tempora sandi; but
these times are not all day long; they must be sound out, watched and taken
advantage of, You could not hope (...) success in applying to a man abo^ one
business, when he was taken (...) with another, or when his mind (...) affected
with excess of grief, ang^ or the like.

You cannot judge of others m^ minds better than by studying y^ own; for though
some men ha^ one foible, and another has another yet men in general are very m^
alike. Whatever pleases or offe^ you, will in similar circumstan^ please or
offend others; if you (...) yourself hurt when another man you feel his
superiority, you will (...) tainly upon the common rule of ri^ Do as you would
be done by, take (...) not to let another feel your superio^ ty, if you have
it; especially if (...) wish to gain his interest or estee^ If disagreeable
insinuations op^ contradictions or oblique sneers (...) and anger you, would
you use the where you wished to please? C^tainly not. Observe then, with care,
the operations of your own mind and you may, in a great measure, read all
mankind.

I will allow that one bred up in a cloister or college, may reason well on the
structure of the human mind; ^e may investigate the nature of man, and give a
tolerable account of his head his heart, his passions, and his sentiments: but
at the same time he may know nothing of him; he has not lived with him, and of
course know but little how those sentiments (...) those passions will work. --
He must be ignorant of the various pre^dices propensities and antipathies that
always bias him and frequently determine him. His knowledge is required only
from theory, which dif^ers widely from practice; and if he forms his judgment
from that alone, ^e must be often deceived; whereas a man of the world, one who
collects his knowledge from his own experience and observation, is seldom
wrong, he is well acquainted with the operations of the human mind, prys into
the heart of man reads his words, before they are uttered; sees his actions,
before they are performed; knows what will please and what will displease, and
forsees the event of most things.

Labor then to accquire this intuitive knowledge; attend carefully to the
address, the arts and manners of those acquainted with life, and endeavor to
imitate them. Observe the means they take, to gain the favor and conciliate
the affections of those they associate with; pursue those means, and you will
soon gain the esteem of all that know you.

How often have we seen men governed by persons very much their inferiors in
point of understanding, and even without their knowing it? A proof that some
men have more worldly dexterity than others; they fi^^ out the weak and
unguarded part make their attack there, and the man surrenders.

Now from a knowledge of mankind we shall learn the advantage of two things,
the command of our temper and our countenances; a tri^^ing disagreeable
incident shall perhaps anger one unaccquainted with life, or confound him with
shame; shall make him rave like a madman, or look like a fool; but a man of the
world will never understand what he cannot or ought not to resent. If he should
chance to make a slip himself, he will stifle his confusion, and turn it off
with a jest; recovering it with ^oolness.

Many people have sense enough to keep their own secrets; but from being unused
to a variety of company, have unfortunately such a tell-tale countenance, as
involuntary declares what they would wish to conceal. This is a great
unhappiness, and should, as soon as possible be got the better of.

That coolness of mind and evenness of countenance, which prevents a discovery
of our sentiments, by our words, our actions, or our looks, is too necessary to
pass unnoticed. A man who can not hear displeasing things, without visible
marks of anger or uneasiness; or pleasing one's, without a sudden burst of joy,
a cheerful eye, or an expanded face, is at the mercy of every knave, for either
they will designedly please or provoke you themselves to catch your unguarded
looks, or they will seize the opportunity thus to read your very heart, when
any other shall do it. You may possibly tell me, that this coolness must be
natural, for if not, you can never acquire it. I will admit the force of
constitution, but people are very apt to blame that for many things they might
readily avoid. Care with a little reflection, will soon give you this mastery
of your temper and your countenance. If you find yourself subject to sudden
starts of passion determine with yourself not ^o utter a single word till your
reason has recovered itself; and resolve to keep your countenance as unmoved as
possible. As a man who at a card table can preserve a serenity in his looks,
under good or bad luck, has considerably the advantage of one who appears
elated with success, or cast down with ill fortune, from our being able to read
his cards in his face, so the man of the world, having to deal with one of
those bab^ing countenances, will take care to profit by the circumstance, let
the consequence, to him with whom he deals be as injurious as it may.

In the course of life, we shall find, it necessary very often to put on a
pleasing countenance, when we are exceedingly displeased; we must frequently
seem friendly when we are quite otherwise. I am sensible it is difficult to
accost a man with smiles whom we know to be our enemy: but what is to be done?
On receiving an affront if you cannot be justified in knocking the offender
down, you must not notice the offense; for, in the eye of the world taking an
affront calmly is considered as cowardice.

If fools should attempt at any time to be witty upon you, the best way is not
to know their witticisms are leveled at you, but to conceal any uneasiness it
may give you: but should they be so plain that you cannot be thought ignorant
of their meaning, I would recomend, rather than quarrel with the company,
joining even in the laugh against yourself; allow the jest to be a good one,
and take it in seeming good humor. Never attempt to retaliate the same way, as
that would imply you were hurt. Should what is said wound your honor or your
moral character there is but one preper reply, which I hope you will never be
obliged to have recourse to.

Remember there are but two alternatives for a gentleman; extreme politeness,
or the sword. If a man openly and designedly affronts you, call him out; but,
if it does not amount to an open insult, be outwardly civil; if this does not
make him ashamed of his behavior, it will prejudice every by-stander in your
favor, and instead of being disgraced, you will come off with honor.
Politeness to those we do not respect, is no more a breach of faith, than your
humble servant at the bottom of a challenge; they are universally understood to
be things of course.

Wrangling and quarrelling are characteristic of a weak mind; leave that to the
women, be you always above it. Enter into no sharp contest, and pride yourself,
in showing, if possible, more civility to your antagonist than to any other in
the company; this will infallibly bring over all the laughers to your side, and
the person you are contend^ with will be very likely to con^e^ you have behaved
very handsome^ throughout the whole affair.

Experience will teach us that t^^ all men consist principally of the same
materials, as I before took natice, yet from a difference in the^ proportion,
no two men are uniformly the same: we differ from one ^other, and we often
differ from ou^selves, that is, we sometimes do thing utterly inconsistent with
the gene^tenor of our characters. The wi^ man may occasionally do aweak thin^
the most honest man, a wrong thin^* the proudest man, a mean things and the
worst of men will sometime^ do a good thing, On this accou^^, our study of
mankind should not be general; we should take a frequent view of individuals,
and though (...) may upon the whole form a judgment of the man from his
prevailing passion or his general character, yet (...) will be prudent not to
determine till we have waited to see the operations ^f his subordinate
appetites, and ^mours.

For example; a man's general character may be that of strictly honest. I would
not dispute it, because, I would not be thought envious or ^levolent; but I
would not rely ^on this general character, so as to ^trust him with my fortune
or my (...). Should this honest man, as is (...) uncommon, be my rival in
power, ^rest, or love, he may possibly do ^ings that in other circumstances he
^ould abhor; and power interest and ^e, let me tell you, will often put honesty
to the severest trial, and frequently overpower it. I would then ^^sack this
honest man to the bottom, (...) wished to trust him, and as I ^ound him, would
place my consi^ence accordingly.

One of the great compositions in (...) nature is vanity, to which all men,
^ore or less, give way. Women have an intolerable share of it. No (...) tery
no adulation is too gross for the those who flatter them most, pl^ them best,
and they are most in (...) with him who pretends to most in love with them: and
least slight or contempt of them never forgotten. It is, in some m^ ure the
same with men; they (...) sooner pardon an injury than an in^ and are more hurt
by contempt (...) by ill usage. Though all men, not boast of superior talents,
tho^ they pretend not to the abiliti^ a Pope, a Newton, or a Boli^ broke, every
one pretends to h^ common sense, and to disch^ his office in life with common
dece^ cy to arraign therefore, in any shap^ his abilities or integrity in the
department he holds, is an insult he (...) not readily forgive.

As I would not have your trust (...) implicitly to a man, because the wo^ give
him a good character, so I mi^ particularly caution you against those (...)
speak well of themselves. In ^^eral, suspect those who boast of or ^ect to have
any one virtue above (...) others, for they are commonly im^ors. There are
exceptions however to this rule, for we hear of prudes (...) have been chaste,
bullies that (...) been brave, and saints that have (...) religious. Confide
only where (...) own observation shall direct you; ^ve not only what is said,
but (...) it is said, and if you have any ^etration, you may find out the ^h
better by your eyes than your (...); in short, never take a character upon
common report, but enquire (...) it yourself; for common report, ^^ough it is
right in general, may (...) wrong in particulars.

Beware of those who on a slight acquaintance, make you a tender of (...)
friendship, and seem to place a confidence in you; it is ten to one but they
deceive and betray you; however do not rudely reject (...) upon such a
supposition; you (...) be civil to them, though you do not entrust them. Silly
men are apt (...) solicit your friendship, and unbosom themselves upon the
first acquaintance; such a friend cannot be worth hearing, their friendship
being (...) slender as their understanding; and if they profer their friendship
with design to make a property of yo^ they are dangerous acquaintance (...)
deed. Not but that the little frien^ ships of the weak may be of (...) use to
you, if you do not return (...) compliment; and it may not be (...) miss to
seem to accept of those designing men, keeping them, as (...) were in play,
that they may not be openly your enemies; for their enmity is the next
dangerous thing (...) their friendship. We may certain^ hold their vices in
abhorrence, with out being marked out as their personal enemy. The general
rule is (...) have a real reserve with almost every ^ne, and a seeming reserve
with almost no one: for it is very disgusting to seem reserved, and dangerous
not to be so. Few observe the true medi^m. many are ridiculously mysterious
upon trifles, and many indiscreetly communitive of all they know.

There is a kind of short-lived friendship that takes place among ^ung men,
from a connection in ^eir pleasures only; a friendship too ^^en attended with
bad consequences. This companion of your plea^^s, young and unexperienced,
(...) probably, in the heat of convivial mirth vow a perpetual friendship, ^^d
unfold himself to you without (...) least reserve; but new associati^tions,
change of fortune, or change of lace, may soon break this ill timed ^^nection
and an improper use may (...) be made of it. Be one, if you (...), in young
companies, and bear (...) part like others in all the social festivity of
youth; nay trust them with your innocent frolicks, but keep your serious
matters to yourself; and if you must at any time make them known, let it be to
some tried friend of great experience; and that nothing may tempt him to become
your rival, let that friend be in a different walk of life from yourself.

Were I to hear a man making strong protestations and swearing to the truth of
a thing, that is in itself probable and very likely to be, I should doubt his
veracity; for when he takes such pains to make me believe it, it cannot be with
a good design.

There is a certain easiness or false modesty in most young people, that either
makes them unwilling, or ashamed to refuse any thing that is asked of them.
There is also an ungarded openness about them that makes them the ready prey of
the artful and designing. They are easily led away by the feigned friendships
of a knave or a fool, and too rashly place a confidence in them, that
terminates in their loss, and frequently in their ruin. Beware, therefore, as I
said before, of these proffered friendships; repay them with compliments, but
not with confidence. Never let your vanity make you suppose that people become
your friends upon a slight acquaintance; for good offices must be shown on both
sides to cre^^e a friendship: it will not thrive, unless its love be mutual:
and it requires time to ripen it.

There is still among young people mother kind of friendship merely nominal;
warm indeed for a time, but fortunately of no long continuance. This friendship
takes its rise from their pursuing the same course of riot and debauchery;
their purses are open to each other, they tell one another all they know, they
embark in the same quarrels, and stand by each other on all occasions. I should
rather call this a confederacy against good morals and good manners, and think
it deserves the severest lash of the law: but they have the impudence to call
it friendship. However, it is often as suddenly disolved as it is hastily
contracted; some accident disperses them and they presently forget each other,
except it is to betray and to laugh at their own egregious folly.

In short, the sun of the whole is, to make a wide difference between
companions and friends; for a very agreeable companion has often proved a very
dangerous friend.

CHOICE OF COMPANY.
THE next thing to the choice of friends is the choice of your company.

Endeavor as much as you can, to keep good company, and the company of your
superiors; for you will be held in estimation according to the company you
keep. By superio^s, I do not mean so much with regard to birth, as merit, and
the light in which they are considered by the world.

There are two sorts of good company, the one consists of persons of birth,
rank, and fashion; the other of those who are distinguished by some peculiar
merit, in any liberal art or ^^ence as men of letters, etc. and a mixture of
th^se, is what I would have understood by good company: for it is not what
particular sets of people shall call themselves, but what the people in general
acknowledge to be so, and are the accredited good company of the place.

Now and then per^^ns without either birth, rank, o^ character, will ^^eep into
good company, under the protection of some considerable personage; but, in
general, none are admitted of mean degree or infam^^^ moral character.

In this fashionable good company alone, can you learn the best manners and the
best language: for, as there is no legal standard to form them by, it is here
they are established.

It may possibly be questioned, whether a man has it always in his power to get
into good company, undoubtedly, by deserving it, he has, provided he is in
circumstances which enable him to live and appear in the style of a gentleman.
Knowledge, modesty and good-breeding, will endear him to all that see him; for
without politeness, the scholar is no better than a pedant, the philosopher
than a cynic, the soldier than a brute, nor any man than a clown.

Though the company of men of learning and genius is highly to be valued and
occasionally coveted, I would by no means have you always found in such
company. As they do not live in the world, they cannot have that easy manner
and address which I would wish you to acquire. If you can bear a part in such
company it is certainly advisable to be in it sometimes, and you will be the
more esteemed in other company by being so; but let it not engross you, lest it
should be considered as one of the literati, which however respectable in name,
is not the way to rise or shine in the fashionable world.

But the company which, of all others, you should carefully avoid, is that,
which in every sense of the words may be called low: low in birth, low in rank,
low in parts, and low in manners; that company, who, insignificant and
contemptible in themselves, think it an honor to be seen with you, and who
will flatter your follies, nay your very vices, to keep you with them.

Though you may think such a caution unnecessary, I do not; for many a young
gentleman of sense and rank, has been led by his vanity to keep such company,
'till he ha^ been degraded vilified and undone.

The vanity I mean is that of being the first of the company. This pride, though
too common, is idle to the last degree. Nothing in the world lets a man down so
much. For the sake of dictating, being applauded and admired by this low
company, he is disgraced and disqualified for better. Depend upon it, in the
estimation of mankind, you will sink or rise to the level of the company you
keep.

Be it then, your ambition to get into the best company; and, when there
imitate their virtues, but not their vices. You have, no doubt, often heard of
genteel and fashionable vices. These are whorin^, drinking and gaming. It has
happened that some men, even with these vices, have been admired and esteemed.
Understand this matter rightly it is not their vices for which they are
admired; but for some accomplishments they at the same time possess; for their
parts their learning or their good-breading. Be assu^ were they free from their
vices, they would be much more esteemed. In these mixed characters, the bad
part is overlooked, for the sake of the good. Should you be unfortunate enough
(...) have any vices of your own, add not to their number by adopting the vices
of others. Vices of adoption ^e of all others the most unpardonable, for they
have not inadvertancy (...) plead. If people had no vices but their own, few
would have so many (...) they have.

Imitate, then, only the perfections they meet with; copy the politeness, the
address, the easy manners of well bred people; and remember, let them shine
ever so bright, if they have any vices they are so many blemishes, which it
would be as ridiculous to imitate, as it would, to make an artificial wart upon
one's face, because some very handsome man had the misfortune to have a natural
one upon his.

LAUGHTER
LET us now descend to (...) matters, which though not so important to those we
have mentioned, are still far from inconsiderable. Of these laughter is one.

Frequent and loud laughter is a sure sign of a weak mind, and no less
characteristic of a low education. It is the manner in which low-bred men
express their silly joy, at silly things, and they call it being merry.

I do not recommend upon all occasions a sole (...) countenance. A man may
smile, but if he would be thought a gentleman and a man of sense, he would by
no means laugh. True wit never made a man of fashion laugh; he is above it. It
may create a smile, but as loud laughter shows, that a ^an has not the command
of himself, every one, who would wish to appear sensible must abhor it.

A man's going to sit down, on a supposition that he has a chair behind ^m, and
falling for want of one, ^ccasions a general laugh, when the left pieces of
wit^ could not do it* a ^^fficient proof how low and unbe^ming laughter is.

Besides, could the imoderate laugh^ hear his own noise, or see the faces (...)
makes, he would despise himself for his folly. Laughter being gener^y supposed
to be the effect of gaity, a absurdity is not properly attend^d to; but a
little reflection will ^fily restrain it, and when you are ^ld, it is a mark of
low breeding I persuade myself you will endeavor ^avoid it.

Some people have a silly trick of laughing, whenever they speak; so that they
are always on the grin, and their faces ever distorted. This and a thousand
other tricks, such as scrathing their heads, twirling their hats, fumbling with
their button, playing with their fingers, etc. etc. are acquired from a false
modesty at their first outset in life. Being shame-faced in company, they try a
variety of ways to keep themselves in countenance; thus, they fall into those
awkward habits I have mentioned, which grow upon them, and in time become
habitual.

Nothing is more repugnant likewise to good-breeding than horse play of any
sort, romping, throwing things at one another's heads, and so on. They may pass
well enough with the mob, but they lessen and degrade the gentleman.

SUNDRY LITTLE ACCOMPLISHMENTS.
I Have had reason to observe before, that various little matters, apparently
trifling in themselves, conspire to form the whole of pleasing, as, in a well
finished portrait, a variety of colors combine to complete the piece. It not
being necessary to dwell much upon them, I shall content myself, with just
mentioning them as they occur.

1. to do the honors of a table gracefully, is one of the out-lines of a
well-bred man; and to carve well, is an article, little as it may seem, that is
useful twice every day, and the doing of which ill, is not only troublesome to
one's self, but renders us disagreeable and ridiculous to others. We are always
in pain for a man, who instead of cutting up a fowl gen^ely, is hacking for
half an hour across the bone, greasing himself and bespattering the company
with the sauce. Use with a little attention, is all that is requisite to acquit
yourself well in this particular.

2. To be well received, you must, also, pay some attention to your behavior
at table, where it is exceedingly rude to scratch any part of your body, to
spit, or blow your nose, if you can possibly avoid it, to eat g^ily, (...) lean
your elbows on the table, to (...) your teeth before the dishes are removed, or
to leave the table before grace is said.

3. Drinking of healths is now growing out of fashion, and is very unpolite in
good company. Custom had once made it universal, but the improved manners of
the age now render it vulgar. What can be more rude or ridiculous than to
interrupt persons at their meals, with an unnecessary compliment? Abstain then
from this silly custom where you find it out of use; and use it only at those
tables where it continues general.

4. A^polite manner of refusing to comply with the solicitations of a company,
is also very necessary to be learnt; for, a young man, who seems to have no
will of his own, but does every thing that is asked of him, may be a very good
natured fellow, but he is a very silly one. If you are invited to drink, at any
man's house, more than you think is wholesome, you may say, you wish you could,
but that so little makes you both drunk and sick; that you should only be bad
company by doing it: of course beg to be excused. If desired to play at cards
deeper than you would, refuse it ludiculously; tell them, if you were sure to
lose, you might possibly sit down; but that, as fortune may be favorable, you
dread the thought of having too much money, ever since you sound what an
encumbrance it was to poor Harlequin, and therefore you are resolved never to
put yourself in the way of wining more than such or such a sum a day. This
light way of declining invitations to vice and foolly is more becoming a young
man than philosophical or sententious refusals, which would only be laughed at.

5. Now I am on the subject of cads, I must not omit mentioning the necessity
of playing them well and genteely, if you would be thought to have kept good
company. I would by no means recommend playing of cards as a part of your
study, left you should grow too fond of it, and the consequences prove bad. It
were better not to know a diamond from a club, than to become a gambler; but as
custom has introduced innocent card playing at most friendly meetings, it marks
the gentleman to handle them genteely, and play them well; and as I hope you
will play only for small sums, should you lose your money pray lose it with
temper; or win, receive your winnings without either elation or greediness.

6. To write well and correct, and in a pleasing style, is another part of
polite education. Every man who has the use of his eyes and his right hand can
write whatever hand he pleases. Nothing is so illiberal as a school-boy's
scrawl. I would not have you learn a stiff formal handwriting, like that of a
schoolmaster, but a genteel, legible and liberal hand, and to be able to write
quick. As to the correctness and elegancy of your writing, attention to grammar
does the one, and to the best authors, the other. Epistolary correspondence
should not be carried on in a studied or ^^fected style, but the language
should flow from the pen, as (...) and as easily as it would from the mouth. In
short a letter should be penned in the same style, as you would talk to to your
friend if he was present.

7. If writing well shows the gentleman, much more so does spelling well. It is
so essentially necessary for a gentleman, or a man of letters, that one false
spelling may fix a ridicule on him for the remainder of his life. Words in
books are generally well spelled, according to the orthography of the age;
reading, therefore, with attention, will teach every one to spell right. It
sometimes happens that words shall be spelled differently by different authors:
but if you spell them upon the authority of one, in estimation of the public,
you will escape ridicule. Where there is but one way of spelling a word, by
your spelling it wrong you will be sure to be laughed at. For a woman of a
tolerable education would laugh at and despise her lover, if he wrote to her,
and the words were ill spelled. Be particularly attentive then to your spelling.

8. There is nothing that a young man, at his first appearance in life, ought
more to dread, than having any ridicule fixed on him. In the estimation, even
of the most rational men, it will lessen him, but r^in him with all the rest.
Many a man has been undone by a ridiculous nickname. The causes of nicknames
among well-bred men, are generally the little defects in manner, air, or
address. To have the appellation of ill-bred, awkward, muttering, left-legged,
or any other tacked always to your name, would injure you more than you are
aware of; avoid then these little defects (and they are easily avoided) and you
need never fear a nickname.

9. Some young men are apt to think, that they cannot be complete gentlemen,
without becoming men of pleasure; and the rake they often mistake for the man
of pleasure. A take is made up of the meanest and most disgraceful vices. They
all con^ine to degrade his character and ruin his health and fortune. A man of
pleasure will refine upon the enjoyments of the age attend them with decency
and partake of them becomingly. Indeed, he is too often less scrupulous than he
should be, and frequently has cause to repent it. A man of pleasure, at best,
is but a dissipated being, and what the rational part of mankind must abhor; I
mention it, however, lest in taking up the man of pleasure, you should fall
into the rake: for of two evils always choose the least. A dissolute, flagitious
footman may make as good a rake as a man of the first quality. Few men can be
men of pleasure; every man may be a rake. There is a certain dignity that
should be preserved in all our pleasures; in love a man may lose his heart,
without losing his nose; at table a man may have a distinguishing palate,
without being a glutton; he may love wine without being a drunkard; he may game
without being a gambler; and so on. Every virtue has its kindred vice, and
every pleasure its neighboring disgrace. Temperance and moderation mark the
gentleman; but excess the blackguard. Attend carefully, then, to the line that
divides them; and remember, stop rather a yard short, than step an inch beyond
it. Weigh the present enjoyment of your pleasures against the necessary
consequences of them, and I will leave you to your own determination.

10. A gentleman has ever some regard also to the choice of his amuse^ents, if
at cards, he will not be seen (...) cribbage, all-fours, or putt; or, in sports
of exercise, at skittles, foot^all, leap-frog, cricket, driving of ^aches, etc.
but will preserve a propriety in every part of his conduct; ^owing that any
imitation of the ^anners of the mob, will unavoidably stamp him with vulgarity.
There is another amusement too, which I cannot help calling illiberal, that is,
playing upon any musical instrument. Music is commonly reckoned one of the
liberal arts, and undoubtedly is so; but to be piping or fiddling at a concert
is degrading to a man of fashion. If you love music, hear it; pay fiddlers to
play to you, but never fiddle yourself. It makes a gentleman appear frivolous
and contemptible, leads him frequently into bad company, and wastes that time
which might otherwise be well employed.

11. Secresy is another cheracteristic of good breeding. Be careful never to
tell in one company what you see or hear in another; much less to divert the
present company at the expense of the last. Things apparently indifferent may
when often repeated and told abroad, have much more serious consequences than
imagined. In conversation, there is generally a ^acit reliance, that what is
said will not be repeated; and a man, though ^ot enjoined to secrecy, will be
excluded company, if found to be a ^atler; besides, he will draw himself into a
thousand scrapes, and every ^ne will be afraid to speak before him.

12. Pulling out your watch in company unasked, either at home or abroad is a
mark of ill-breeding; if at home, it appears as if you were ^ired of your
company, and wished them to be gone; if abroad as if the hours dragged heavily
and you wished to be gone yourself. If you ^ant to know the time, withdraw;
besides, as the taking what is called a French leave was introduced, that on
one person's leaving the company the rest might not be disturbed, looking at
your watch does what that piece of politeness was designed to prevent; it is a
kind of dictating to all present, and telling them it is time, or almost time
to break up.

13. Among other things, let me caution you against ever being in a hurry; a
man of sense may be in haste but he is never in a hurry; convinced that hurry
is the surest way to make him do what he undertakes ill. To be in a hurry is a
proof that the business we embark in is too great for us; of course it is the
mark of little minds, that are puzzled and perplexed, when they should be cool
and diliberate; they wish to do nothing. Be steady, then in all your
engagments; look round you, before you begin; and remember that you had better
do half of them well, and leave the rest undone, than to do the whole
indifferently.

14. From a kind of false modesty, most young men are apt to consider
familiarity as unbecoming. Forwardness I allow is so; but there is a decent
familiarity that is necessary in the course of life. Mere formal visits, upon
formal invitations are not the thing; they create no connection, nor will they
prove of service to you; it is the careless and easy ingress and egress, at all
hours, that secures an acquaintance to our interest, and this is acquired by a
respectful familiarity entered into, without forfeiting your consequence.

15. In acquiring new acquaintance, be careful not to neglect your ^ld, for a
slight of this kind is seldom forgiven. If you cannot be with your former
acquaintance so often as you used to be, while you had no others, take care not
to give them cause to think you neglect them; call upon them frequently, though
you cannot stay long with them; tell them you are sorry to leave them so soon,
and nothing should take you away but certain engagements which good manners
oblige you to attend to; for it will be your interest to make all the friends
you can, and as few enemies as possible. By friends, I would not be understood
to mean confidential ones; but persons who speak of you respectfully, and who,
consistent with their own interest, would wish to be of service to you, and
would rather do you good than harm.

16. Another thing I must recommend to you, as characteristic of a polite
education, and of having kept good company, is a graceful manner of conferring
favors. The most obliging things may be done so awkwardly as to offend, while
the most disagreeable things may be done so agreeably as to please.

17. A few more articles of general advice, and I have done; the first is on
the subject of vanity. It is the common failing of youth and as such, ought to
be carefully guarded against. The vanity I mean, is that which, if given way
to, stamps a man a coxcomb, a character he will find a difficulty to get rid of
perhaps as long as he lives. Now this vanity shows itself in a variety of
shapes; one man shall pride himself in taking the lead in all conversations,
and premptorily deciding upon every subject; another, desirous of appearing
successful among the women, shall insinuate the encouragement he has met with,
the conquests he makes, and perhaps boast of favors he never received: if he
speaks truth he is ungenerous: if false, he is a villian: but whether true or
false, he defeats his own purposes, overthrows the reputation he wishes to
erect, and draws upon himself contempt in the room of respect. Some men are
vain enough to think they acquire consequence by alliance, or by an
acquaintance with persons of distinguished character or abilities; hence they
are etern ally talking of their grandfather, Lord such-a-one; (...); their
kinsman, Sir William such a one; or their intimate friend, (...) such-a-one,
with whom perhaps, they are scarce acquainted. If they are ever found out (and
that they are sure to be, one time or other) they become (...) and
contemptible: but even a^^^^itring what they say to be true, what then? A man's
intrinsic merit does not rise from an ennobled alliance, or a reputable
acquaintance. A rich man never borrows. When angling for praise, modesty is the
surest bait, If we would wish to shine in any particular character, we must
never affect that character. An affectation of courage will make a man pass for
a bully; an affectation of wit, for a coxcomb; and an affectation of sense, for
a fool. Not that I would recommend bashfulness or timidity: no; I would have
every one know his own value, yet not discover that he knows it, but leave his
merit to be found (...) others.

18. Another thing worth your attention is, if in company with an inferior not
to let him feel his inferiority; if he discovers it himself without your
endeavors, the fault is not yours, and he will not blame you; but if you take
pains to mortify him, or to make him feel himself inferior to you in abilities,
fortune, or rank, it is an insult that will not readily be forgiven. In point
of abilities, it would be unjust, as they are out of his power; in point of
rank or fortune, it is ill natured and ill-bred. This rule is never more
necessary than at table, where there cannot be a greater insult than to help an
inferior to a part he dislikes, or a part that may be worse than ordinary, and
to take the best to yourself. If you at any time invite an inferior to your
table, you put him during the time be is there, upon an eq^lity with you, and
it is an act of the highest rudeness to treat him in any respect, slightingly.
I would rather double my attention to such a person, and treat him with
additional respect, lest he should even suppose himself neglected. There cannot
be a greater favagness or cruelty, or any thing more degrading to a man of
fashion than to put upon or take unbecoming liberties with him, whose modesty
humility or respect will not suffer him to retaliate. True politeness consists
in making every body happy about you; and as to mortify is to render unhappy,
it can be nothing but the worst of breeding. Make it a rule, rather to flatter
a person's vanity than otherwise; make him if possible, more in love with
himself, and you will be certain to gain his esteem; never tell him any thing
he may not like to hear, nor say things that will put him out of countenance,
but let it be your study on all occasions to please; this will be making
friends instead of enemies, and be a means of serving yourself in the end.

19. Never be witty, at the expense of any one present, nor gratify that idle
inclination which is too strong in most young men, I mean laughing at or
ridiculling the weaknesses or infirmities of others, by way of diverting the
company, or displaying your own superiority. Most people have their weaknesses
their peculiar likings and aversions. Some cannot bear the sight of a cat;
others the smell of cheese and so on; was you to laugh at these men for their
antipathies, or by design or inattention to bring them in their way, you could
not insult them more. You may possibly thus gain the laugh on your side, for
the present, but it will make the person, perhaps, at whose expense you are
merry your enemy for ever after; and even those who laugh with you, will on a
little reflection, fear you and probably despise you; whereas to procure what
one likes, and to remove what the other hates, would show them that they were
the objects of your attention, and possibly make them more your friends than
much greater services would have done. If you have wit use it to please but not
to hurt. You may shine, but take care not to scorch. In short, never seem to
see the faults of others. Though among the mass of men there are doubtless,
numbers of fools and knaves, yet were we to tell every one of these we meet
with, that we know them to be so, we should be in perpetual war. I would detest
the knave and pity the fool, wherever I found him, but I would let neither of
them know unnecessarily that I did so; as I would not be industrious to make
myself enemies. As one must please others then, in order to be pleased oneself;
consider what is agreeable to you, must be agreeable to them, and conduct
yourself accordingly.

20. Whispering in company is anther act of ill-breeding! it seems to insinuate
either that the persons whom we would not wish should hear, are unworthy of our
con^idence, or it may lead them to suppose we are speaking improperly of them;
on both accounts, therefore, abstain from it.

21. So pulling out one letter after another and reading them in company, or
cutting and paring one's nails, is unpolite and rude. It seems to say, we are
weary of the conversation, and are in want of some amusement to pass away the
time.

22. Humming a tune to ourselves, drumming with our fingers on the table making
a noise with our feet, and such like, are all breaches of good manners, and
indications of our contempt for the persons present; therefore they should not
be indulged.

23. Walking fast in the streets is a mark of vulgarity, implying hurry of
business; it may appear well in a mechanic or tradesmen, but suits ill with the
character of a gentleman or a man of fashion.

24. Staring at any person you meet full in the face, is an act also of ill
breeding; it looks as if you saw something wonderful in his appearance, and is
therefore a tacit reprehension.

25. Eating quick, or very slow at meals, is characteristic of the vulgar, the
first infers poverty, that you have not had a good meal for some time; the last
if abroad, that you dislike your entertainment; if at home, that you are rude
enough to set before your friends what you cannot eat yourself. So again,
eating your soup with your nose in the plate is vulgar; it has the appearance
of being used to hard work, and of course an unsteady hand. If it be necessary
then to avoid this, it is much more so that of smelling your meat.

26. Smelling to the meat while on (...) fork, before you put it in your ^outh.
I have seen many an ill-bred ^low do this, and have been so an^y, that I could
have kicked him ^m the table. If you dislike what (...) have upon your plate,
leave it; ^t on no account, by smelling to, examining it, charge your friend
^th putting unwholesome provisions ^fore you.

27. Spitting on the carpet is a nasty practice, and shocking in a man of ^eral
education. Was this to be^ne general, it would be as neces^y to change the
carpets as the ^ble-cloaths; besides it will lead (...) acquaintance to suppose
that we ^e not been used to genteel furni^e; for this reason alone, if for no
^er, by all means avoid it.

28. Keep yourself free likewise ^m odd tricks or habits, such as ^rusting out
your tongue continu^ly snapping your fingers, rubbing your hands, sighing
aloud, an affected shivering of your whole body, gaping with a noise like a
country-fellow that has been sleeping in a hay-loft, or indeed with any noise,
and many others, which I have noticed before; these are imitations of the
manners of the mob, and are degrading to a gentleman.

A very little attention will g^t the better of all these ill bred habits, and,
be assured, you will find your accoun^ in it.

EMPLOYMENT of TIME.
EMPLOYMENT of time, is a subject, that from its importance, deserves your best
attention. Most young gentlemen have a great deal of time before them, and one
hour well employed, in the early part of life is more valuable and will be of
greater use to you, than perhaps four and twenty, some years to come.

Whatever time you can steal from company and from the study of the world; (I
say company, for a knowledge of life is best learned in various companies)
employ it in serious reading. Take up some valuable book, and continue the
reading of that book till you have got through it; never ^urden your mind with
more than one thing at a time: and in reading this book don't run over it
super^cially, but read every passage twice ^wer, at least do not pass on to a
second (...) you thoroughly understand the first, nor quit the book till you
are master of the subject; for unless you do this, you may read it through, and
not re^ember the contents of it for a week. The books I would particulary
recomm^end, among others, ^re, Cardinal Re^'s maxims, Roch^aucaults Moral
Reflections, Bruyere's characters, Fontenell's plurality of worlds, Sir Josiah
Child on Trade, Bolingbroke's works; for style, his Remarks on the history of
England, under the name of Sir John Oldcastle; Puffendorff's Jus Gentium, and
Grotius de Ju^^ Belli et Pacis: the last two are well translated by Bybeyrac.
For occasional half hours or less, read the best works of invention, wit and
humor; but never waste your minutes on trifling authors, either ancient or
modern.

Anybusiness you may have to transact, should be done the first opportunity,
and finished, if possible without interruption; for by deferring it, we may
probably finish it too late, or execute it indifferently. Now, business of any
kind should never be done by halves, but every part of it should be well
attended to: for he that does business ill, had better not do it at all. And,
in any point which discretion bids you pursue, and which has a manifest utility
to recommend it, let not difficulties deter you; rather let them animate your
industry. If one method fails try a second and (...) third. Be active persevere
and you will certainly conquer.

Never indulge a lazy disposition; there are few things but are attended with
some difficulties, and if you are frightened at those difficulties, you will
not complete any thing. Indo^ent minds prefer ignorance to trouble; they look
upon most things as impossible because perhaps they are dif^icult. Even an
hours attention is ^oo laborious for them, and they would rather content
themselves with the first view of things, than take the trouble to look any
farther into them. Thus, when they come to talk upon subjects to those who have
studied them, they betray an unpardonable ignorance, and lay themselves open to
answers that confuse them. Be careful then, that you do not get the appellation
of indolent; and, if possible, avoid the character of frivolous. For,

The frivolous mind is always busied upon nothing. It mistakes trifling objects
for important ones, and spends that time upon little matters, that should only
be bestowed upon ^^reat ones. Knick-nacks, butterflies, ^ells, and such like
engross the attention of the frivolous man, and fill up all his time. He
studies the dress and not the characters of men, and his subjects of
conversation are no other than the weather, his own domestic affairs, his
servants, his method of managing his family, the little annecdotes of the
neighborhood, and the fiddle faddle stories of the day; void of information,
void of improvement. These he relates with emphasis, as interesting matters; in
short, he is a male gossip, I appeal to your own feelings now, whether such
things do not lessen a man, in the opinion of his acquaintance, and instead of
attracting esteem, create disgust.

DIGNITY OF MANNERS.
THERE is a certain dignity of manners, without which the very best characters
will not be valued.

Romping, loud and frequent laughing, punning, joking, mimickry, waggery, and
too great and indiscriminate familiarity, will render any one contemptible, in
spite of all his knowledge or his merit. These may constitute a merry fellow,
but a merry fellow was never yet respectable. Indiscriminate familiarity, will
either offend your superiors, or make you pass for their dependent or to^d
eater, and it will put your inferiors on a degree of equality with you that may
be troublesome.

A joke, if it carries a sting (...) with it is no longer a joke, but (...)
front; and even if it has no (...), unless its witticism is delicate and
facetious, instead of giving pleasure, it will disgust; or if the (...) should
laugh, they will probably laugh at the jester rather than the jest.

Punning is a mere playing upon words, and sar from being a mark of sense: thus
were we to say such a dress is commodious one of these wags would answer
odious; or, that, whatever it has been, it is now be commodious. Others will
give us an answer different from what we should expect, without either wit, or
the least beauty of thought; as, Where Is my lord? -- In his clothes, unless he
is in bed. How does this wine "taste?" -- A little moist, I think." How is this
to be eaten?" With your mouth; and so on, all which (you will readily
apprehend) is low and vulgar. If your witti^isms are not instantly approved by
the laugh of the company, for heaven's sake, don't attempt to be witty for the
future; for you may take it for granted, the defect is in yourself, and not in
your hearers.

As to a mimick or a wag, he is little else than a buffoon, who will distort
his mouth and his eyes to make people laugh. Be assured, no one person ever
demeaned himself to please the rest, unless he wished to be thought the
Merry-Andrew of the company, and whether this character is respectable, I will
leave you to judge.

If a man's company is coveted on any other account than his knowledge, his
good sense, or his manners, he is seldom respected by those who invite him, but
made use of only to entertain. "Let Us have such-a-one, for he sings a good
song, or he is always joking or laughing;" or "Let Us send for such a one, for
he is a good bottle companion;" these are degrading distinctions, that preclude
all respect and esteem. Whoever is had (as the phrase is) for the sake of any
qualification singly, is merely that thing he is had for, is never considered
in any other light, and, of course, never properly respected, let his intrinsic
merits be what they will.

You may possibly suppose this dignity of manners to border upon pride; but it
differs as much from pride, as true courage from blustering.

To flatter a person right or wrong, is abject flattery, and to consent readily
to do every thing proposed by a company, be it silly or criminal is full as
degrading as to dispute warmly upon every subject, and to contradict upon all
occasions. To preserve dignity, we should modestly assert our own sentiments,
though we politely acquiesce in those of others.

So again, to support dignity of character, we should neither be frivolously
curious about trifles, nor be laboriously intent upon little objects that
deserve not a moments attention; for this implies an incapacity in matters of
greater importance.

A great deal likewise depends upon our air, address and expressions; an
awkward address and vulgar expressions; infer either a low turn of mind, or low
education.

Insolent contempt, or low envy, is incompatible also with dignity of manners.
Low bred persons, fortunately lifted in the world, in fine clothes and fine
equipages, will insolently look down on all those who cannot afford to make as
good an appearance, and they openly envy those who perhaps make a better. They
also dread the being slighted; of course are suspicious, and captious; are
uneasy themselves and make every body else so about them.

A certain degree of outward seriousness in looks and actions gives dignity,
while a constant smirk upon the face (that insipid silly smile, which fools
have when they would be civil) and whiffling motions, are strong marks of
futility.

But above all a dignity of character is to be acquired best by a certain
firmness in all our actions. A mean, timid and passive complaisance lets a man
down more than he is aware of: but still his firmness and resolution should not
extend to brutality, but be acompanied with a peculiar and engaging softeness,
or mildness.

If you discover any hastiness in your temper, and find it apt to break out
into rough and unguarded expressions, watch it narrowly, and endeavor to crub
it; but let no complaisance, no weak desire of pleasing, no wheedling urge you
to do that which discretion forbids; but persist and persevere in all that is
right. In your connections and friendships, you will find this rule of use to
you. Invite and preserve attachments by your firmness: but labor to keep clear
of enemies, by a mildness of behavior. Disarm those enemies you may
unfortunately have, (and few are without them) by a gentleness of manner, but
make them feel the steadiness of your just resentment! for there is a wide
difference between bearing malice and a determined selfdefence; the one is
imperious, but the other is prudent and justifiable.

In directing your servants, or any person you have a right to command; if you
deliver your orders mildly, and in that engaging manner which every gentleman
should study to do, you would be cheerfully, and consequently well obeyed: but
if tyrannically, you would be very unwillingly served if served at all. A cool,
steady determination should show that you will be obeyed, but a gentleness in
the manner of enforcing that obedience should make service a cheerful one. Thus
will you be loved without being despised, and feared without being hated.

I hope I need not mention vices. A man who has patiently been kicked out of
company, may have as good a pretense to courage, as one rendered infamous by
his vices, may to dignity of any kind; however, of such consequence are
appearances, that an outward decency and an affected dignity of manners will
even keep such a man the longer from sinking. If therefore you should
unfortunately have no intrinsic merit of your own, keep up, if possible, the
appearance of it; and the world will possibly give you credit for the rest. A
versatility of manners is as necessary in social life, as a versatility of
parts in political. This is no way blameable, if not used with an ill design.
We must, like the cameleon, often put on the hue of the persons we wish to be
well with: and it surely can never be blameable, to endeavor to gain the good
will or affection of any one, if when obtained, we do not mean to abuse it.

RULES FOR CONVERSATION.
HAVING now given you full and sufficient instructions for making you well
received in the best of companies; nothing remains but that I lay before you
some few rules for your conduct in such company. Many things on this subject I
have mentioned before; but some few matters remain to be mentioned now.

Talk, then frequently but not long together, lest you tire the persons you are
speaking to; for few persons talk so well upon a subject, as to keep up the
attention of their hearers for any length of time.

2. Avoid telling stories in company, unless they are very short indeed, and
very applicable to the subject you are upon; in this case relate them in as few
words as possible, without the least digression, and with some apology; as that
you hate the telling of stories, but the shortness of it induced you. And, if
your story has any wit in it, be particularly careful not to laugh at it
yourself. Nothing is more tiresome and disagreeable than a long tedious
narrative; it betrays a gossiping disposition, and great want of imagination;
and nothing is more ridiculous than to express an approbation of your own
story, by a laugh.

3. In relating any thing, keep clear of repetitions or very hackneyed
expressions, such as, says he, or says she. Some people will use these so
often, as to take off the hearers attention from the story; as, in an organ out
of tune, one pipe shall perhaps sound the whole time we are playing, and
confuse the piece, so as not to be understood.

4. Digressions, likewise, should be guarded against. A story is always more
agreeable without them. Of this kind are, "the gentleman I am telling you of,
is the son of Sir Thomas, -- who lives in Harley street; -- you must know him
-- his brother had a horse that won the sweep stakes at the last Newmarket
meeting -- Zounds! ^f you don't know him you know nothing." Or, "He was an
upright tall old gentleman, who wore his own long hair: don't you recollect
him? -- All this is unnecessary; is very tiresome and provoking, and would be
an excuse for a man's behavior, if he was to leave us in the midst of our
narrative.

5. Some people have a trick of holding the persons they are speaking to by the
button, or the hand, in order to be heard out; conscious, I suppose, that their
tale is tiresome. Pray never do this: if the person you speak to is not as
willing to hear your story, as you are to tell it, you had much better break
off in the middle; for if you tire them once, they will be afraid to listen to
you a second time.

6. Others have a way of punching the person they are talking to in the side,
and at the end of every, sentence, asking him some such questions as the
following: -- "Was Not I right in that?" "You know I told you so? What Is your
opinion?" and the like; or perhaps, they will be thrusting him, or jogging him
with their elbow. For mercy's sake never give way to this: it will make your
company dreaded.

7. Long talkers are frequently apt to single out some unfortunate man present;
generally the most silent one of the company, or probably him who sits next to
him. To this man, in a kind of half whisper will they run on for half an hour
together. Nothing can be more illbred. But, if one of these unmerciful talkers
should attack you, if you wish to oblige him, I would recommend the hearing him
with patience: seem to do so at least, for you could not hurt him more than to
leave him in the middle of his story, or discover any impatience in the course
of it.

8. Incessant talkers are very disagreeable companions. Nothing can be more
rude than to engross the conversation to yourself, or to take the words, as it
were, out of another man's mouth. Every man in company has an equal claim to
bear his part in the conversation, and to deprive him of it is not only unjust,
but a tacit declaration that he cannot speak so well upon the subject as
yourself; you will therefore take it up. And what can be more rude? I would as
soon forgive a man that should stop my mouth when I was gaping, as take my
words from me while I was speaking them. Now, if this be unpardonable, it
cannot be less so.

9. To help out or forestall the slow speaker, as if you alone were rich in
expressions and he were poor. You may take it for granted, every one is vai^
enough to think he can talk w^ll, though he may modestly deny it; helping a
person therefore out in his expressions, is a correction that will stamp the
corrector with impudence and ill manners.

10. Those who contradict others upon all occasions, and make every assertion a
matter of dispute, betray by this behavior an unacquaintance with
good-breeding. He therefore who wishes to appear amiable with those he
converses with, will be cautious of such expressions as these, "That cannot be
true, Sir." The affair is as I say. That must be false, Sir. If what you say is
true, etc. You may as well tell a man he lies at once, as thus indirectly
impeach his veracity. It is equally as rude to be proving every trifling
assertion with a bet or wager. "I Will bet you fifty of it, and so on." Make it
then a constant rule in matters of no great importance, complaisantly to submit
your opinion to that of others; for a victory of this kind often costs a man
the loss of a friend.

11. Giving advice unasked is another piece of rudeness; it is in effect,
declaring ourselves wiser than those to whom we give it; reproaching them with
ignorance and inexperience. It is a freedom that ought not to be taken with any
common acquaintance, and yet there are those, who will be offended, if their
advice is not taken. "Such-a-one." say they, is above being advised. He scorns
to listen to my advice; as if it were not a mark of greater arrogance to expect
every one to submit to their opinion than for a man sometimes to follow his own.

12. There is nothing so unpardonably rude, as a seeming mattention to the
person who is speaking to you; though you may met with it in others, by all
means, avoid it yourself. Some ill-bred people, while others are speaking to
them, will instead of looking at, or attending to them, perhaps fix their eyes
on the ceiling, or some picture in the room, look out of the window, play with
a dog, their watch chain, or their cane, or probably pick their nails or their
noses. Nothing betrays a more trifling mind than this; nor can any thing be a
greater affront to the person sp^aking; it being a tacit declaration, that what
he is saying is not worth your attention. Consider with yourself how you would
like such treatment, and I am persuaded you will never show it to others.

13. Surliness or moroseness is incompatible also with politeness. Such as,
should any one say he was desired to present Mr. Such a one's respects to you,
to reply, What the devil have I to do with his respects? -- My Lord enquired
after you lately, and asked how you did, to answer, if he wishes to know, let
him come and feel my pulse; and the like. A good deal of this often is
affected; but whether affected or natural; it is always offensive. A man of
this stamp will occ^sionally be laughed at, as an oddity; but in the end, will
be despised.

14. I should suppose it unnecessary to advise you to adapt your conversation
to the company you are in. You would not surely start the same subject; and
discourse of it in the same manner with the old and with the young, with an
officer, a ^rgyman, a philosopher, and a woman? No: your good sense will
undoubtedly ^each you to be serious with the serious, gay with the gay, and to
trifle with the triflers.

15. There are certain expressions which are exceedingly rude, and yet there
are people of liberal education that sometimes use them; as You don't
understand me, sir. It is not so. "You mistake," You know nothing of the
matter, etc. Is it not better to say? I believe, I do not express myself so as
to be understood. Let us consider it again, whether we take it right or not. It
is much more polite and amiable to make some excuse for another, even in cases
where he might justly be blamed, and to represent the mistake as common to
both, rather than charge him with insensibility or incomprehension.

16. If any one should have promised you any thing and not have fullfiled that
promise, it would be very unpolite to tell him, he has forfeited his word; or
if the same person should have disappointed you, upon any occasion, would it
not be better to say, "you were probably so much engaged, that you forgot my
affair; or, "Perhaps it slipped your memory; rather than, You thought no more
(...) it, or you pay ver^ (...) to your word.

(...) this kind leave a (...). They are a kind of (...) and affront, and very
often bring on lasting quarrels.

17. Be careful not to appear dark and mysterious, lest you should be thought
suspicious; than which there cannot be a more unamiable character. If you
appear mysterious and reserved, others will be truly so with you; and in this
case there is an end to improvement, for you will gather no information. Be
reserved but never seem so.

18. There is a fault extremely common with some people which I would have you
to avoid. When their opinion is asked, upon any subject, they will give it with
so apparent a diffidence and timidity, that one cannot, without the utmost
pain, listen to them; especially if they are known to be men of universal
knowledge. Your lordship will pardon me, says one of this stamp. If I should
not be able to speak to the case in hand, so well as might be wished. -- I Will
venture to speak of this matter to the best of my poor abilities, and dullness
of apprehension. -- I fear I shall expose myself, but in obedience to your
lordships commands, -- and while they are making these apologies, they
interrupt the business and tire the company.

19. Always look people in the face, when you speak to then otherwise you will
be thought conscious of some guilt; besides you lose the opportunity of reading
their countenances, from which you will much better learn the impression your
discourse makes upon them than you can possibly do from their words; for words
are at the will of every one, but the countenance is frequently involuntary.

20. If in speaking to a person, you are not heard, and should be desired to
repeat what you said, do not raise your voice in the repetition, lest you
should be thought angry, on being obliged to repeat what you had said before;
it was probably owing to the hearer's inattention.

21. One word only, as to swearing. Those who adict themselves to it, and
interlard their discourse with oaths, can never be considered as gentlemen;
they are generally people of low education, and are unwelcome in what is called
good company. It is a vice that has no temptation to plead, but is, in every
respect, as vulgar as it is wicked.

22. Never accustom yourself to scandal, nor listen to it; for though i^ may
gratify the malevolence of some people; nine times out of ten, it is attended
with great disadvantages. The very persons you tell it to, will, on reflection,
entertain a mean opinion of you, and it will often bring you into very
disagreeable situations. And as there would be no evil speakers, if there were
no evil hearers; it is in scandal as in robbery; the receiver is as bad as the
thief. Besides, it will lead people to shun your company, supposing that you
will speak ill of them to the next acquaintance you meet.

23. Mimickry, the favorite amusement of little minds has been, ever the
contempt of great one's. Never give way to it yourself, nor ever encourage it
in others; it is the most illiberal of all buffoonery, it is an insult on the
person you mimic; and insults, I have often told you are seldom forgiven.

24. Carefully avoid talking either of your own or other peoples domestic
concerns. By doing the one, you will be thought vain; by entering into the
other, you will be considered as officious. Talking of yourself is an
impertinence to the company, your affairs are nothing to them; besides they
cannot be kept too secret. And as to the affairs of others, what are they to
you? In talking of matters that no way concern you, you are liable to commit
blunders, and should you touch any one in a sore part, you may possibly lose
his esteem. Let your conversation then in mixed companies always be general.

25. Jokes, Bon-mots, or the little pleasantries of one company, will not often
bear to be told in another; they are frequently local, and take their rise from
certain circumstances, a second company may not be acquainted with; these
circumstances, and of course your story may be misunderstood, or want
explaining; and if after you have prefaced it with, -- I will tell you a good
thing; -- the sting should not be immediately perceived, you will appear
exceedingly ridiculous, and wish you had not told it. Never then repeat in one
place, what you hear in another.

26. In most debates, take up the favorable side of the question; however, let
me caution you against being; clamorous that is, never maintain an argument
with heat, though you know yourself right; but offer your sentiments modestly
and cooly, and if this does not prevail, give it up, and try to change the
subject by saying something to this effect; I find we shall hardly convince one
another, neither is there any necessity to attempt it; so let us talk of
something else.

27. Not that I would have you give up your opinion always: no, assert your own
sentiments, and oppose those of others when wrong, but let your manner and
voice be gentle and engaging and yet no ways affected. If you contradict, do it
with, "I may be wrong, but -- I will not be positive but I really think -- I
should rather suppose -- If I may be permitted to say," -- and close your
dispute with good humor, to show that you are neither displeased ^ourself nor
meant to displease the ^erson you dispute with.

28. Acquaint yourself with the character and situations of the company you go
into, before you give a loose to your tongue; for should you enlarge on some
virtue, which any one present may notoriously want; or should you condemn some
vice, which any of the company may be particularly adicted to, they will be a^t
to think your reflections pointed and personal, and you will be sure to give
off^ce. This consideration will naturally lead you not to suppose things said
in general, to be l^velled at you.

29. Low br^^ people, when they happen occasionally to be in go^d company,
imagine themselves to be the subject of every separate conversation. If any
part of the company whispers, it is about them; if they laugh, it is at them;
and if any thing is said which they do not comprehead, they immediately suppose
it is mean^ of them. This mistake is admirably ridicul^ (...) one of our
celebrated comedies. I am sure, says Scrub, they were talking of me, for they
laughed consumedly. Now, a well-bred person never thinks himself disesteemed by
the company, or laughed at, unless their reflections are so gross, that he
cannot be supposed to mistake them, and his honor obliges him to resent it in
a proper manner; however, be assured, gentlemen never laugh at or ridicule one
another, unless they are in joke, or on a footing of the greatest intimacy. If
such a thing should happen once in an age, from some pert coxcomb, or some
flippant woman, it is best not to seem to know it, than make the least reply.

30. It is a piece of politeness not to interrupt a person in a story, whether
you have heard it before or not. Nay, if a well-bred man is asked, whether he
has heard it; he will answer no, and let the person go on though he knows it
already. Some are fond of telling a story, because they think they tell it
well, others pride themselves in being the first teller of it, and others are
pleased at being thought entrusted with it. Now, all these persons you would
disappoint by answering yes. And, as I have told you before, as the greatest
proof of politeness is to make every body happy about you, I would never
deprive a person of any secret satisaction of this sort, which I could gratify
him by a minute's attention.

31. Be not asha^ed of asking questions, if such questions lead to information;
always accompany them with some excuse, and you never will be reckoned
impertinent, But, abrupt questions, without some apology, by all means avoid,
as they imply design. There is a way of ^shing for facts, which, if done
judiciously, will answer every purpose, such as, taking things you wish to know
for granted: this will perhaps lead some officious person to set you right. So
again, by saying, you have heard so and so, and sometimes seeming to know more
than you do, you will often get at information, which you would lose by direct
questions, as these would put people upon their guard, and frequently defeat
the very end you aim at.

32. Make it a rule never to reflect on any body of people, for, by this means
you will create a number of enemies. There are good and bad of all professions,
lawyers, soldiers, parsons or citizens. They are all men, subject to the same
p^ssions, differing only in their manner, according to the way they have been
bred up in. For this reason it is unjust as well as indiscreet, to attack them
as a corpse collectively. Many a young man has though^ himself extremely clever
in abusing the clergy. What are the clergy more than other men? Can you suppose
a black gown can make any alteration in his nature? Fie, fie; think seriously
and I am (...) vinced you will never do it.

33. But above all, let no example, no fashion no witticism, no foolish desire
of rising above what knaves call prejudices, tempt you to excuse, extenuate or
ridicule the least breach of morality, but upon every occasion, show the
greatest abhorrence of such ^roceedings, and hold virtue and re^igion in the
highest veneration.

34. It is a great piece of ill man^ers to interrupt any one while speak^g, by
speaking yourself, or calling (...) the attention of the company to any foreign
matter. But this every ^ild knows.

35. The last thing I shall menti^n is that of concealing your learning, ^cept
on particular occasions. Re^ve this for learned men, and let ^em rather extort
it from you, than ^u be too willing to display it. ^lence you will be thought
modest, ^d to have more knowledge than (...) really have. Never seem wise or
^re learned than the company you ^e in. He who affects to show his learning
will be frequently questioned; and if found superficial, will be sneered at; if
otherwise, he will be deemed a pedant. Real merit will always show itself, and
nothing can lessen it in the opinion of the world, but a man's exhibiting it
himself.

For God's sake revolve all these things seriously in your mind, before you go
abroad into life. Recollect the observations you have yourself occasionally
made upon men and things compare them with my instruction^ and act wisely and
consequentially, as they shall teach you.

FINIS.

