REMARKS ON A PAMPHLET, ENTITLED, "CONSIDERATIONS ON THE Bank of North America."

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED by JOHN STEEL, In Second Street, between Spruce and
Union Streets. M,DCC,LXXXV.

REMARKS, etc.
THE bill, which originated in the The constitution of Pennsylvania has wisely
directed, that, "To the end that laws, before they are enacted, may be more
maturely considered, and the inconvenience of hasty determinations as much as
possible prevented, all bills of a public nature shall be printed for the
consideration of the people, before they are read in general assembly the last
time for debate and amendment; and, except on occasions of sudden necessity,
shall not be passed into laws, until the next session of assembly."
last session of assembly, for repealing the law whereby a charter of
incorporation is granted to the bank in this city, under the name of the Bank
of North America, will be taken up, in a few days, for its final decision. It
respects an object of great and general concern; and requires the serious
consideration of every member of the legislatre.

A gentleman, well known for his professional abilities, has undertaken to
advocate the cause of the bank, in a pamphlet, just published, entitled --
"Considerations on the Bank of North*America." He has gone fully into the
defense of this institution; and has pleaded for his client with his usual
ingenuity.

The writer of the following strictures assures the public, that he has no
inducement to take up his pen, on the occasion, but to offer his candid,
unbiassed sentiments, on the subject to which they relate. He has to lament,
that so little time is afforded him for the purpose: and this, he begs, may be
accepted as his apology, for not going more fully into the matter.

The first position, which the author of the Observations endeavors to
establish, is -- "That the Bank of North America was legally and
Constitutionally instituted and organized, by the charter of incorporation
granted by the United States in Congress assembled."

This we deny -- The second article of the confederation declares. in express
terms, that "Each state retains its sovereignty, freedom, and independence, and
every power, jurisdiction and right, which is not by this confederation
expressly delegated to the United States in Congress assembled." -- The right
of creating a corporation appertains to sovereignty; and every state in the
union, by virtue of this right, exercises the power. It is a power vested in
the legislature of each state. We find that, in England, though a monarchy, the
power of erecting corporations, is a right of parliament. It is true, the king
also possesses this power: but it seems to be rather a permissive prerogative
of the sovereign, which he, as a constituent part of the parliament, has the
privilege of exerting; notwithstanding the forced construction, in favor of
prerogative, which Judge Blackstone makes, in his observations on this
privilege (though not an exclusive one) of the crown -- "The method," says the
learned Judge, "by which the king's consent (to the erection of any
corporation) is expressly given, are either by act of parliament or charter. By
act of parliament, of which the royal assent is a necessary ingredient,
corporations may undoubtedly be created: but it is observable, that most of
these statutes, which are usually cited as having created corporations, do
either confirm such as have been before created by the king, as in the case of
the College of Physicians, erected by charter, 10. Henry VIII -- Which charter
was afterward confirmed in parliament; or they PERMIT the king to erect a
corporation in futuro, with such and such powers, as is the case of the BANK OF
ENGLAND, and the society of the British fishery. So that the immediate creative
act is usually performed by the King alone, in virtue of his royal
prerogative." -- The foregoing quotation naturally suggests the idea of a
distinction, with respect to corporations by charter in England, between the
"immediate creative act," by the king, and a subsequent confirmation in
parliament. This idea will apply to a charter granted by CONGRESS; its
immediate creation may be by them; but, to give it operation, it must be
confirmed by the several states. So far, and no farther, do the powers of
Congress extend, as to the erecting of corporations. And it is evident this was
the idea of the matter, entertained by that body, when they recommended to the
legislature of each state, "to pass such laws as they might judge necessary for
giving the ordinance incorporating the bank its FULL OPERATION." By the 9th
section of the constitution of this commonwealth, there is an express
confirmation of the power of the legislature, "to grant charters of
incorporation." The exercise of this power is an act of "sovereignty;" and as
it is not, by the articles of confederation, " expressly delegated to the
United States in Congress assembled," the "right" to exercise it is exclusively
vested in the legislatures of the several states. Nor can any implication
operate to the extinction of this right, by giving Congress any other power, in
this case, than such as is above defined.

But, could we, for a moment, suppose, that Congress has a power of
establishing corporations, we must admit that solecism in politics, imperium in
imperio. For could they not institute a corporation, whose objects might, to
use the words of the author of the "Observations," be -- "commensurate to the
United States" -- whose operations would extend through all -- and whose
principles, proceedings and police might interfere with the laws and
constitutions of individual states? -- Such a power, Congress neither possesses
nor claims: And though the authority and power of that truly honorable and
respectable body are, without doubt, in many instances, incompetent to the
discharge of the high and important duties annexed to their office; it is to be
presumed, that no man will seriously contend for the propriety of granting them
this prerogative. "Cities and towns" (says Judge Blackstone, I. 472. note h.)
"were first erected into corporate communities on the Continent, and endowed
with many valuable privileges, about the eleventh century: to which the consent
of the feodal sovereign was absolutely necessary, as many of his prerogatives
and revenues were thereby considerably diminished" -- If the Bank of
North America is to be considered as a body corporate within the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, without the "consent" of the legislature, which is the
sovereign power of the state; is not an essential "prerogative" of the state
infringed -- And may not its "revenues" be "considerably diminished" by many of
its citizens vesting their funds in an institution, within the heart of the
state, solely "under the authority and auspices of Congress," and not am enable
to the laws of any single state? -- Might not Congress, on the same principles,
incorporate an East India Company, and grant them great and exclusive
privileges, with an exemption of their imports from all duties and imposts
whatsoever?

The author of the Observations asserts -- That "STATES are corporations, or
bodies politic, of the most important and dignified kind." "New states, says
he, "must be FORMED and established; their extent and boundaries must be
regulated and ascertained" -- And then asks -- "How can this be done, unless by
the United States in Congress assembled."

To this we reply -- That states resemble corporations in their nature and
properties; and, in some respects, may be considered as such. The territory, on
which the new states are to be established, was ceded to the United States, in
consequence of a treaty between Congress and the original proprietors of the
soil; the right of "entering into treaties" being vested in Congress, by the
9th article of the confederation. But, neither the acquisition of the lands,
nor the regulating and ascertaining "their extent and boundaries," constitute
the act of incorporating -- People are the necessary ingredient, (if we may use
the term) which enter into the composition of a body politic: And Congress do
no more than declare, that the settlers on these lands should, in the first
instance, be authorized "to meet together, for the purpose of establishing a
temporary government," FOR THEMSELVES -- and, on an increase of their numbers,
"to establish a permanent constitution and government, FOR THEMSELVES." -- They
are to incorporate, or rather confederate themselves: Congress has nothing to
do with their incorporation The author of the Observations seems to have
derived his idea of the new states being corporations, from Congress having
declared that their resolutions, (respecting, among other articles, the manner
in which the inhabitants of those states are to adopt and afterward form a
government and constitution "for themselves") "shall be formed into a CHARTER
of compact, etc." A charter is defined to be -- "An instrument, or written
evidence, of a thing, under the seal of a prince" (or sovereign power) "whereby
he makes a grant to a person, or community, of some particular and exclusive
privileges, under certain limitations." And, according to Blackstone (I. fol.
45) a compact is a promise proceeding from us. The union of these two words,
therefore, cannot be construed to mean, in this instance, a charter of
incorporation -- nothing is granted to the inhabitants of the new states --
emption gives them a right to the soil; and they enjoy an inherent right to
frame, "for themselves" a constitution, and to administer their government --
Congress recognize this inherent right. Blackstone, treating of the charter
governments, dependent on the British crown, which formerly subsisted in
America, says -- they were "in the nature of civil corporations -- with such
rights and authorities, as were specially given them, in their several charters
of incorporation." The very idea of a corporation supposes its dependence on
some higher power, which cannot apply to sovereign, independent states: -- And,
conformably to this opinion, it is observed by Dr. Turnbull (in his notes to
Heineccius system of universal law) that, "a multitude of people, united under
a common magistracy; but subjected to a large Kingdom or republic, does not
properly come under the name of a republic, but a town incorporate." -- The
just and proper signification of CHARTER OF COMPACT, in the case before us, is
-- a written evidence or "promulgated" testimony, prior to the laying off and
settling the new states, that the inhabitants thereof shall be considered as
citizens of the American confederated republic; -- under which compact or
declaratory promise, and subject to which condition, such persons as may choose
to become inhabitants of those new states, will owe allegiance to, and be
entitled to protection from, the confederacy of all the states: and that
certain articles, constituting the said charter of compact, "shall stand as
fundamental constitutions between the thirteen original states, and each of the
several states now newly described."
, having no agency in this part of the formation of the new states.

To what has been said on this subject, we subjoin the sense of the Council of
Censors, relative thereto. -- "By the first section of the act of assembly to
incorporate the Bank of North America, passed the first of April, 1782, the
claim of Congress to erect incorporations is acknowledged. -- Yet there is no
countenance given to this assumed authority by the confederation."

These arguments, we conceive, are sufficient to show the futility of the
assertion -- "That the Bank of North America was legally and constitutionally
instituted and organized by the charter of incorporation granted by the United
States in Congress assembled."

On what basis, then, does this institution stand? -- It will not be seriously
contended, that any single state in the union has a right to exercise a
legislative power over any one or more of the others; nor that twelve states,
out of Congress, have authority to bind a thirteenth in any case whatsoever. --
The result, in the present instance, is -- that the validity of the
incorporation of the bank depends on the existence of a law of this state,
entitled, "An act to incorporate the subscribers to the Bank of North America."

This point being established, it follows, as a necessary consequence, that the
assembly of Pennsylvania have a right to dissolve the corporation of the bank.
" A corporation (says Judge Blackstone, I. 485) may be dissolved by act of
parliament, which is boundless in its operations." The power of repealing its
own laws, is a right inherent in every legislative body -- it is a right
exercised by the freemen of Pennsylvania, through the medium their
representatives, for the benefit of the whole community; and therefore it
cannot, with any reason, be supposed, that "acts of the state" exerting that
right, will be directed by "every varying gust of politics." The most absolute
and explicit terms of perpetuity, as to the force and operation of a law,
cannot militate against this right: for to suppose the contrary, would, in
effect, be to infer -- either, that the legislature can do no wrong; or that,
having once gone into an error, the people must necessarily submit to the
consequences, be they what they may, without any means of obtaining redress --
The absurdity of such doctrine is too glaring, to need any comment; it being
sufficiently exemplified in the instance before us, of a legislative body
erecting a public bank into a perpetual corporation -- a thing unprecedented in
any free country!

The right of the legislature, to dissolve the corporation of the bank, being
ascertained, our next enquiry shall be -- as to the expediency of the measure.

We shall endeavor to show, as concisely as possible that the Bank is an
institution incompatible with the interest and welfare of the state.

High interest for money is allowed, by all writers, to be extremely
prejudicial to every country where it obtains. It is alike unfavourable to the
farmer, merchant and tradesman. In a country, where the principal source of
their wealth is agriculture and the lands are in a state of progressive
improvement, with a proportionable increase of trade, manufactures and people,
every man must see the necessity of a circulating medium being kept up, in a
due ratio to these increasing uses and demands for money. Such a country is
this: But the balance of trade being against it, that balance must be paid in
gold and silver; and as the addition made to the circulating medium by the
bank, must bear a certain reasonable proportion to its limited and fixed
capital, which cannot be enlarged, so as to keep pace with the growing
pecuniary uses, there must be a progressive diminution of the circulating
medium of the country; operating against its interest, in a compound ratio to
the increasing uses and demands for money: unless, indeed, other paper, besides
that of the bank, be thrown into circulation, as a medium of alienation; which
would be contrary to their interest. This effect will be produced by the high
rate of money; whereby none can possibly be benefited, but the stockholders
themselves, and an inconsiderable number of merchants and traders: while the
farmer is deprived of access to such sums, as are absolutely necessary, toward
enabling him to cultivate and improve his lands, in such a manner, as to
contribute to his own emolument and the wealth of his country; otherwise than
on terms totally inconsistent with those purposes. In what manner will this
operate? In facilitating the importation of foreign commodities; preventing the
settling and improvement of the lands; discouraging emigration of useful
citizens hither, from abroad; and expediting the transportation of gold and
silver to other countries. The great emoluments which would accrue from
banking, under these circumstances would induce men of moderate monied
property, as well as the rich, to vest their funds in bank-stock, to the
discouragement of industry. And, for the same purpose, and to a similar effect,
would the occupier of a landed estate convert it into cash, in order to become
a proprietor in the funds of the bank; that he might draw an interest of eight
or ten per cent. per annum for his money, without any labor, and subject to no
taxes. These allurements might continue for some considerable time; probably
long enough to suffer a long succession of great holders of stock to acquire
independent fortunes, from the accumulation of interest upon interest every six
months. But, finally, all the circulating specie of the country must center in
the bank, and, whilst one of its notes remains in circulation, will be drawn
out to discharge the grand balance of our trade with foreign countries, till
the whole shall be exhausted.

The influence of the bank is not less to be dreaded, than its dangerous
tendency in other respects. By the act of assembly for incorporating the
subscribers to the bank, they are "declared and made able and capable in law to
have, purchase, receive, possess, enjoy and retain lands, rents, tenements,
hereditaments, goods The bank of England is, by its charter, expressly
restricted from trading, or suffering any person or persons, in trust for them,
to trade with any of the effects of the corporation, in the buying or selling
of any merchandise or goods; except in buying or selling gold or silver
bullion, or in selling goods mortgaged to them and not redeemed in due time.
But the bank of North America is not only empowered to " purchase goods,
chattels and effects," -- but also to " sell alien or dispose of, goods,
chattels and effects." -- What is this but a right to trade, in the most
unequivocal terms; and a power which they may exercise, without control? --
what individual merchant has a fair chance in his commercial negotiations,
against this enormous trading company?
, chattles and effects, of what kind, nature or quality soever, to the amount
of ten millions of spanish silver milled dollars" By the same law, this
corporation is to exist for ever. And we are told, "The bank was established
and organized under the authority and auspices of Congress" -- That, "the
directors have a trust and duty to discharge to the United States, and to all
the particular states, each of which has an equal interest in the bank" -- That
"they could not have received, from this state, a charter, unless it had been
similar to that granted by Congress" -- That, " Without the approbation of
Congress, where all the states are represented, the directors would not be
justified in agreeing to any alteration of the institution" -- And, that, " if
alterations are necessary; they should be made through the channel of the
United States in Congress assembled."

Thus, the Bank of North America is an organized body; endowed with certain
rights and privileges FOR EVER; capable of possessing property to the amount of
TEN MILLIONS OF DOLLARS, governed by TWELVE men; situtuated in the metropolis
of the state (indeed, it might be said, of the United States) and claiming an
exemption from the power of its legislature! -- Its interest is distinct from
that of the state; and, in some respects, they are incompatible. The interest
of the state requires a paper currency, for the encouragement of the farmer;
but this would diminish the profits of the stockholders, and therefore they
will continue to oppose it. Here, then, is an interference of interests between
the state and a mercantile corporation. To destroy this competition, the latter
will naturally be led to exert its utmost influence: and, when we consider of
what nature and extent this INFLUENCE may be; -- especially when exercised by
men who suppose themselves, in their corporate capacity, free from the control
of the laws; and who, possibly, may be aliens and even enemies, or under the
direction of such; -- what may not be its effects? -- what have we not to fear?

The people of England, ever jealous of their liberties, were alarmed at the
parliament extending the duration of the charter of their national bank only
ten years beyond its usual term of twenty one! what says Mr. David Hartley on
that occasion (in his letter, dated 22d. June, 1782) to the Lord Mayor of
London? -- "The establishment of a monopoly in any corporation, immense in its
magnitude, of the duration of thirty-one years," (the duration of the Bank of
North America is to ETERNITY) "situated in the very heart of the city of
London, which is the heart of the kingdom, and which may, by that
establishment, be enabled to control the whole national powers of public and
private credit, is an object most seriously deserving the attention of the city
of London" -- "A state bank should be the servant of the state, QUAMDIU SE BEEN
GESSERIT, and under the control of a lease of moderate duration. Those who give
power out of their own hands, are responsible for any subsequent usurparions or
encroachments which may follow." -- "If they were upon any sudden occasion, or
upon any pressing emergence of the state, to refuse the ordinary circulation of
land or malt bills, or of any other articles of public supply, they might have
it in their power to control all the executive faculties of the state, and to
fetter, by their exclusive negative all their vigorous and financial
operations. The extremes likewise, on the other hand, would be equally in their
power. If any daring minister hereafter should meditate some deep design, and
should extend the influence and powers of corruption over some unknown future
set of twenty-four bank directors"(the Bank of North America has but twelve)
"the immense power of their monopoly, thus liberated from fear or control for
an age to come, might become the most formidable engine of state; even so far,
possibly, as by some desperate stroke to render the executive power independent
on the knowledge or consent of parliament, for any required sum of money." And
farther. "If, unfortunately, in any future period in this country, vehement
factions should arise, and that the bank should, incidentally, become an engine
in the hands of any one party, to wreak their vengeance upon their adversaries,
might not some men be prefered to partial favor, while others of equal merit
might be proscribed to bankruptcy? Let every merchant and banker in the city of
London apply this case to his own thoughts, whether he would wish to set it
merely on a cast of lots, on whose head favor or proscription should fall."

This is the language of Mr. Hartley. -- We offer no apology for the length of
the quotations -- They are in point -- And every man, capable of judging, may
draw the parallel, and determine, whether these remarks do not apply with equal
force, if not greater, to the Bank of North America.

This bank, as well as that of England, is founded on the principles of
mercantile credit. Sir James Steuart (in his "Political Economy") tells us --
"The constitution of the bank of England differs essentially, in some
particulars, from that of banks upon mortgage and private credit. It is not so
much calculated for multiplying the currency by melting down private property,
as for facilitating the circulation of the trade of London, and "So early as
1706, the government of England began to borrow at six per cent. upon funds
already engaged. What was the consequence? The exchequer, having no money to
pay the interest as it fell due, paid with tallies; these fell to great
discount. Upon this occasion, they availed themselves of the bank of England.
-- They engaged the bank to discount all tallies issued for interest of debts:
but as public credit was so low that money could not be found to discharge even
the interest of the advance made by the bank, the government consented that all
advances of that kind should bear compound interest quarterly, at 6 per cent.
-- Had banks of circulation upon mortgage been established at that time, money
would have come in, at a moderate simple interest, to individuals, who would
have evailed themselves of them for the payment of all public burdens." --
Steuarts Political Economy, Vol. II.
exchequer of Great Britain" It is, says he, "more useful for promoting
circulation, than augmenting it." -- Where then are the great advantages
resulting to this country from the Bank of North America, to counterpoise its
numerous and great disadvantages? "It is not much calculated for multiplying
the currency." Nor has it testified any disposition to cooperate with
government, in the restoration and support of public credit; as the bank of
England has done: on the contrary, it has fully evinced its determination to
oppose all paper but its own. The author of the observations has exhibited a
list of moneys advanced to the public by the bank -- We wish not to detract
from the merit of the bank: but, on enquiry, it will be found -- that these
sums were advanced on ample securities; and that they received interest for
these advances; although they had the use of a sum not less than 16,000 dollars
belonging to the state, ten or twelve months, without any charge. If the facts
are otherwise, we wish to be set right: they may be ascertained, without much
difficulty.

On a review of what has been said, we apprehend it will be sufficiently
evident, that it would be "wise" and "politic" to repeal the charter granted by
this state to the Bank of North America; and that the legislature would be
justifiable, in so doing, on every principle of equity, expediency, and duty.

It now remains for us to point out a proper substitute for the bank -- some
institution, which shall answer all the purposes of a bank, suited to this
country; which shall not be attended with the disadvantages and dangers of one,
but adapted to promote the interests of the whole community. Such an
institution is a LOAN-OFFICE; on a footing similar to that which obtained in
this state, prior to the revolution. This is, in fact, a state bank, and
analogous, in its operations, to a bank of circulation upon mortgage. A paper
currency is emitted by government -- This is loaned, (in sums not exceeding,
perhaps, two hundred pounds to any one person,) to proprietors of lands within
this state; who mortgage real, substantial property, amounting to double or
treble the value of the money borrowed by them, as a security for the repayment
of the principal with interest, in fifteen or sixteen years, in equal yearly
portions.

The demands for money in every country, will be regulated by its uses: When
the uses are great, the demands will be so; and so, vice versa, in proportion.
The occupiers of the lands, in a new and unimproved country, have continual
uses for money, to stock and improve their farms. Without this, the settlers in
an unimproved country can do nothing; and the improvements of the
partially-cultivated lands must become stationary, or advance but slowly. But
when the farmer is enabled to obtain money, on the favorable terms of a
loan-office he uses it in extending the improvements of his farm; which
improvements become, as it were, the capital stock, from the employment of
which he is enabled to repay, in the limited time, the principal sum borrowed;
together with interest, which must come out of the profits on his capital
stock. -- For instance -- "A farmer borrows, from a public loan-office, one
hundred pounds, on a mortgage of lands double or treble in value; repayable,
with interest, in sixteen yearly instalments. He pays L.142 10, principal and
interest, in that term. As this entire sum of one hundred pounds, in paper
money, originally lent, must be withdrawn from circulation by the state, at the
expiration of the sixteen years, the additional sum of L.42 10, which the
borrower will have then paid, will be produced by the use which he has had,
during that term, of the average sum of L.53 26, per annum, at an interest of
five per centum. Therefore, the borrower of the original sum of L.100, in the
bills of credit, will, by the employment thereof, have created the additional
sum of L.42 10, in actual money. The principal will have been realized by the
borrower in that improved value of his lands, which has furnished such
interest; and that interest will have supplied a fund for public uses."

Nothing is more evident, than, that the objects, which create such uses for
money, are of the most important kind: They promote, in the highest degree, the
national wealth and prosperity. The demands of the farmer, for money, will
continue while he can apply it to such uses with advantage, but no longer; and
so long may the government continue to issue it, without any danger of creating
too great a quantity. While in circulation, there can be no apprehension of its
depreciation, having indubitable and sufficient funds for its redemption.

Loan-office bills of credit anticipate, from time to time, the improvement of
real estates. Money of this kind operates as a stimulus to the borrower, to
procure funds for repayment, whereby a spirit of industry is excited. Add to
this, that a circulating medium is established, adequate to the necessities of
the whole community; our exports increased; domestic trade enlivened;
population promoted; and a revenue furnished to the state. -- "I will venture
to say" (in the words of Mr. Pownall, extracted from his "Administration of the
Colonies") "that there never was a wiser or a better measure, never one better
calculated to serve the uses of an increasing country, that there never was a
measure more steadily pursued, or more faithfully executed, for forty years
together, than the loan-office in Pennsylvania, formed and administered by the
assembly of that province."

A The following extracts from that invaluable work, Sir James Stewart's
Political Economy, serve to elucidate further what has been observed, relative
to banks and paper money. -- The great utility and expediency of some
institution for furnishing men with credit upon the deposit of private
security, are enforced every where by this author, in his observations on banks
of circulation upon mortgage. The principles of this kind of bank may be much
more usefully applied, and with greater practicability, in a new and improving
country circumstanced like this, than in any other. -- I have observed the
great affinity there is between these principles and those of a loan-office.
The reader will see this affinity, and will discern, that the inferences
deduced from the former will suit the latter: he will make his own comments on
the quotations here presented to him, which I submit to his own judgment.

"Banks of circulation upon private credit (such are banks of mortgage) are of
great use in the infancy of industry. In countries where industry is only
taking root, the greatest obstruction it meets with is the scarcity of money.
When money is scarce, payments are (...) made, and when the uses of money
increase, if it be not made to augment its proportion, alienation will cease to
go on, and payments will daily be more precarious. -- Now as every individual
in a state does, more or less, support industry by consuming its produce, money
must be provided for every one, in proportion to the value of his property.
This opens at once the principle of banks upon private credit."

"A circulating value (money) must constantly bear a proportion to allenation.
Circumstances will determine what proportion of coin and what proportion of
paper will be necessary for carrying it on. These circumstances, under banks of
circulation upon mortgage, multiply paper so much, that little coin is
required."

It has been observed in a preceding note, that the bank of England, in 1706,
discounted and circulated exchequer bills and tallies. By this service, the
bank restored the credit of that government-paper; although it had been
depreciated, for want of being punctually paid, (...) 30 and 40 per cent. below
par. "This operation," says sir James Stewart, "was quite similar to banks of
circulation upon mortgage; the bank of England was here employed in converting
into money exchequer bills, secured upon the faith of government. Banks upon
mortgage covert into money the property of individuals, upon private security.
Had therefore, banks upon mortgage been established in England, at this time,
all those who had property would have got credit from them, and would have been
enabled thereby to pay their taxes, and carry on their industry, without
diminishing their consumption. The exchequer would then have had no occasion to
issue discredited bills and tallies for making up deficiencies; because taxes
would have been productive, and the state would have been relieved of the
excessive burden of interest at six per cent. accumulated quarterly in favor
of the bank."


LOAN-OFFICE, then, is the proper succedaneum to supply the place of a bank in
this country.

PHILADELPHIA, Sept. 1, 1785.
FINIS.

