ADDRESS AND RULES OF THE SOUTH CAROLINA SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING AND IMPROVING
AGRICULTURE AND OTHER RURAL CONCERNS.

CHARLESTON: PRINTED FOR A. TIMOTHY, PRINTER TO THE STATE.

M,DCC,LXXXV.

AN ADDRESS TO THE PUBLIC FROM THE SOUTH CAROLINA SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING AND
IMPROVING AGRICULTURE AND OTHER RURAL CONCERNS.
AFTER having gloriously succeeded by the assistance of Divine Providence, and
our own exertions, in terminating a war, which for some years past has laid
waste our country; it is incumbent upon sanguine us equally to endeavor to
promote and enjoy the blessings of peace. This cannot be effected by any means
more interesting and advantageous, than by turning our attention to the
cultivation and improvement of our fields: We ought not only to think of
restoring their former appearance, which has been defaced by the horrors of
war; but, as by the event of that war the fruits of the labor, we shall bestow
upon them, are now secured at our own, and not at a master's disposal, we are
encouraged, and should be induced to make farther exertions for rendering both
their beauty, and their produce greater.

AGRICULTURE was one of the first employments of mankind; it is one of the most
innocent, and at the same time the most pleasing and beneficial of any. By its
variety it keeps the mind amused and in spirits; by its exercise and regularity
it conduces to give vigor and health to the body; and in the end it is
productive of every other necessary and convenience of life. For agriculture is
the parent of commerce; and both together form the great sources, from which
the wants of individuals are supplied, and the principal riches and strength of
every state flow. It becomes the duty therefore, as well as the interest, of
every citizen to encourage and promote it.

BUT although our fellow citizens in this, and indeed almost every other of the
United States, have not been deficient in general exertions of industry in this
line of employment; yet they have been too much satisfied with following the
methods practiced by their fathers, without attempting to discover better by
experiments made by themselves; experiments, which every where else have in the
end been crowned with success.

IT is certain, that in America in general, the mode of planting and of
managing rural concerns has been pretty much the same for fifty years past;
except perhaps in the introduction of one or two new articles of produce in a
few of the states. It is no less certain, that within that period, by various
experiments in Europe, and particularly in GreatBritain, a considerable and
rapid progress has been made in the improvement of every article, which
concerns the holder and tiller of land there; and in consequence a new, and
almost entirely different, system of husbandry has taken place of the former.

THESE experiments, which were generally made at first by individuals for their
own amusement or profit, none but themselves, or their nearest neighbors were
benefitted by. They were at length considered as objects of public utility; and
numbers of patriotic gentlemen not only undertook to collect and publish
accounts of them in different parts of Europe; but by offering prizes,
pecuniary, and honorary, they increased the spirit of such experiments by
emulation and reward, as well as by a knowledge of their success.

WITH the same views we have instituted this society; and to explain and effect
our plan, we have thought proper to publish this address to our countrymen and
fellow-citizens.

WE recommend to the planters in general (and every one has it more or less in
his power) to select a small part of his grounds, in order to make experiments
on it by various methods -- in turning up and preparing the soil -- in planting
it in its natural state, and in adding manure -- in trying the effects of
different crops in succession to each other, instead of continuing the same (as
is commonly practiced here) in the same field for a series of years -- in
tending the crop on the ground by ploughing, hoeing, weeding and watering -- in
managing it after being removed into the barn and yard -- in short, by
attempting every new mode, which fancy or judgment may direct. Nor do we wish
these experiments to be confined merely to the cultivation and improvement of
the earth and its products; but to be extended to every other object which is
connected with a country life -- such as raising and feeding cattle and stock
of all kinds -- planting and growing live fences, and other wood for firing and
building -- contriving mills, carriages, and every implement of husbandry; and
the like.

IN making these experiments it will occasion very little trouble, but it is
absolutely necessary for the planter to keep a regular journal, and to remark
every particular circumstance during the course of them. This will bring the
whole more immediately to his memory, and under his judgment; and will better
enable him to draw up that account of the event, which we request of all such
to communicate to us. -- We likewise invite every other person to favor us
with his sentiments, and observations on these subjects.

FROM these different accounts we may be able to form an opinion of the best
method, which has been attempted; and we shall occasionally publish a
collection of such, as in our judgment will tend most to promote the designs of
the Society; which center in the interest and advantage of every member of the
state, and consequently of the state itself.

THIS society cannot, in its yet infant state, ascertain what prizes they can
afford for the encouragement and reward of the experiments, they recommend. Our
number at present is not large; and our income by subscription, which is fixed
at a low rate to induce others to join us, is in proportion. When both
increase, we shall not be backward in proposing prizes of such value, as may
both excite and reward the merit of the candidates.

The following are the Rules established, principally to model our existence. A
little time and experience, as they will increase our knowledge and our means,
may hereafter produce others for communicating the first, and applying the last.

THOMAS HEYWARD, jun. President.

RULES OF THE SOUTH CAROLINA SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING AND IMPROVING AGRICULTURE
AND OTHER RURAL CONCERNS.
I.
THAT every person inclined to become a member of this society, upon signifying
his desire by letter to the President, be ballotted for at the next quarterly
meeting, when not less than thirteen members are present; and on having a
majority of votes, that he be admitted, and his name be inserted in a book kept
for that purpose.

II.
THAT every member do pay one guinea on his admission, and two guineas on the
third Monday in every February afterward, to be applied as shall be directed
by the society at their meetings.

III.
THAT this society do regularly meet in Charleston, every third Monday in
August, November, February and May, and as much oftener, as they shall be
summoned by the President or Vice President; and not less than thirteen shall
be a quorum to transact the business of the society.

IV.
THAT on the third Monday in February every year, the following officers be
chosen by ballot of the members present, being not less than thirteen in
number, viz. a President, Vice President, Treasurer and Secretary; who are to
exercise the usual powers annexed to those offices.

V.
THAT at the same time, and in the same manner, a Committee of nine members be
chosen; any three of whom, with such of the officers as choose to attend, may
meet and do business: That the Committee so met do receive, consider, digest,
and afterward report to the society all such matters relative to the design of
this institution, as either shall be communicated by others, or be judged
expedient by themselves; and that they do correspond with any other society, or
persons, that they think will contribute to promote the objects which this
society has in view.

VI.
THAT the admission money, the annual payments by the members, and any
donations, which may be made to this society, be appropriated as a fund for the
general purpose of effecting their designs, in such manner as the society shall
occasionally direct.

VII.
THAT a dinner be provided by the direction of the Treasurer at each quarterly
meeting, for such of the members as shall give at least three days previous
notice to him of their intention to dine with the society; and that only such
members, and those, who may otherwise attend, be charged with the expense of
the same. And that an annual dinner be provided on the third Monday in
February, and every member of this society in this slate do pay five shillings
for the same.

N. B. The following Gentlemen were elected a Committee, greeable to the 5th
rule, viz.

The Honorable WILLIAM DRAYTON, The Honorable JOHN MATTHEWS, The Honorable JOHN
RUTLEDGE General CHARLES COTESWORTH PINCKNEY. Esquires.
RALPH IZARD, EDWARD RUTLEDGE, THOMAS BE, AARON LOOCOCK, ISAAC HARLESTON,


