AN ADDRESS, FROM THE PHILADELPHIA SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING AGRICULTURE; WITH A
SUMMARY OF ITS LAWS; AND PREMIUMS OFFERED.



He who can make two ears of corn grow where only one grew before, ranks as a
benefactor to society before all the heroes that ever existed.

SWIFT. M.DCC.LXXXV.

PHILADELPHIA SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING AGRICULTURE.
THE very imperfect state of AMERICAN Husbandry in general, compared with that
of some countries in Europe, is too well known to be controverted.

It was a conviction of our great inferiority, in this respect, which gave rise
to the present Society, formed after the example of institutions in Europe,
whose laudable endeavors to promote the Agriculture of their several
countries, have been rewarded with the happiest effects. And here it may be
observed that, the difficulties those societies had originally to overcome,
were much greater than what we shall have to contend with: they found
Husbandry, generally, in a rude and unprofitable state, and had to recommend
improvements from single instances of more skilful and fortunate management,
until the whole, from the force of imitation, gradually became more perfect. --
But we, instead of solitary examples of extraordinary and successful conduct
amongst ourselves, may have the established practice of entire nations to hold
up, as an encouragement, which we purpose to lay before the public, from time
to time.

The Husbandry of this country, and of England, were fifty years ago both
imperfect, and perhaps nearly alike; -- here it has ever since remained nearly
stationary, there it has been continually advancing: -- A short parallel, drawn
between them in their present state, will show how far they are now apart.

American Method: -- Unproductive fallows precede crops; after crops, the land
is generally given up for a number of years to weeds and poor natural grasses,
until it shall come into heart again; the husbandman, in the mean while,
employing his labors upon his other fields in succession.

English Method, with variations arising from soils and circumstances: -- A
field, when broken up, is manured with all the husbandman's force, and what is
called a fallow crop taken off, that is such a crop as requires the frequent
use of the plough or the hoe, as in turnips, potatoes, beans, etc. the land is
then laid down in some kind of grain and clover, the last continuing sometimes
two or three years, which is succeeded by wheat upon a single ploughing. --
This course, or rotation of crops, is then renewed in the same order, the land
never being idle or resting, as it is called.

This new practice is allowed to possess many advantages over the old, which is
almost entirely renounced in England, but retained in America.

The manures used in the first instance, are applied to produce the best
possible effect; -- they go to benefit the whole course, be it for four or five
years. --

The land is made perfectly mellow, and clean before it is laid down to grass,
or sowed with grain; it being an established maxim, never to do either, until
the earth is well pulverised, and its natural weeds, and those arising from the
dung, fully extirpated by repeated plowings.

The land is neither hardened by rest, nor exhausted by rank weeds, which
impoverish as much as a crop.

A greater abundance of grass, and other food for cattle, is obtained; more
stock maintained, more dung made, and the whole products much greater.

The labor in such a course or rotation, though it requires considerable
accuracy, does not follow so close, is not so hurried, and upon the whole not
so great as in the former management.

And lastly; less land may be employed in culture. --

In this system, we shall remark that, wheat for instance, is produced on the
same field but once during the whole course; but, skilful farmers so distribute
their business, as to have one of their fields every year in wheat, and so of
the other articles of crop -- and of clover, which is supposed to last two
years, of consequence two fields.

As more of art and contrivance, suggested by necessity and long experience, is
manifested in the rural affairs of that country, than in our own, -- it should
not surprise us that the management of their farm-yards is orderly and
systematic; to which are owing such prodigious accumulations of manures, as
will enable the farmer in England to prosecute, to much greater extent and
effect, his mode of Husbandry, than what can be attempted in America, until his
economy in this important article shall, by degrees, be introduced amongst us.

It may not be amiss to lay down in a few words, the general principles of this
management, which will be found as widely different from ours, as is the system
of cropping.

The barn, cattle-houses, sheds, stacks, etc. are so disposed round the
farm-yard, as to afford the best winter shelter for live stock.

No cattle are suffered to run out between November and May, but are all shut
up and fed in the farm-yard -- foddering in the fields occasioning great waste;
and dung not lying there in sufficient heaps to produce fermentation, being
thought of little account in manuring.

To the farm-yard is brought, the whole straw of the farm, sometimes leaves,
fern, etc. -- to be trampled on and converted into manure.

The yard is often bottomed with a layer of the richest earths that can be
found, which is thrown up in the Spring, and mixed with the dung.

Societies abroad have proceeded by occasional communications of improved
methods, and by honorary premiums given for experiments made. It is the design
of this Society to tread in their steps; and they hope, they address themselves
to a people sufficiently liberal to reject no practice they shall recommend,
merely because it is new, or runs counter to former habits and prejudices; --
they freely invite communications, upon all subjects comprehended within their
extensive plan, and hope from their example to promote lesser institutions, of
a similar nature, in different parts of the country amongst neighbors, each
one exciting a spirit of improvement within its proper sphere.

A Summary of the Society's Constitution is subjoined; together with Premiums
offered upon proposed subjects. -- Some of the particulars contending for
premiums, require a length of time, a series of years, to ascertain them by
experiment; others are already experienced by individuals, or may be within the
year.

SUMMARY of the CONSTITUTION.
THE Society's attentions shall be confined to Agriculture and rural Affairs;
especially for promoting a greater increase of the products of land within the
American states. The members are distinguished into Residing Members, or
Members, and Honorary Members, (that is, Corresponding Members.) Members to be
hereafter added, are to be elected out of such persons only as reside within a
ready distance to attend the meetings at Philadelphia with convenience; and
those are defined to be only such as shall reside within ten miles of the said
city, on either side of the Delaware: All Members of Agricultural Societies in
other states or countries, with whom the Society shall correspond, and all
persons of this and other states or countries, who shall be elected for the
purpose by the Society, are to be Honorary (or corresponding) Members, and will
be invited to assist the Society, whenever they come to Philadelphia: Besides
they will have a right to be present at the meetings, without being invited. --
Strangers, who have a propensity to Agriculture, and wish to attend, as
Auditors, may be introduced by a Resident Member. -- The Society will publish
select collections of memoirs and observations on subjects communicated to
them. They will annually propose prizes, upon interesting subjects relative to
actual experiments and improvements, and for the best pieces written on
proposed subjects. -- All claims for prizes are to be in writing; and when
read, the Society will determine, upon every prize, which of the claims are
most worthy to be selected for the definitive judgment on a future comparison
of them: This judgment is to be given on the first Monday in February: -- In
the same meeting is to be determined the subjects to be proposed for prizes the
next year; which will be announced in the public Newspapers. The Society will
promote the establishment of other Agricultural Societies in the principal
places in the country; the Members of these Societies will be requested to
attend the meetings as often as they come to Philadelphia; and the friends of
Agriculture are invited to assist the Society with information of experiments
and incidents in Husbandry. Premiums and prizes are equally due to persons
residing in any of these states, according to the merit of their respective
exhibitions. Honorary Members may be of any nation in the world.

PREMIUMS proposed by the SOCIETY*
1. For the best experiment made of a course of crops, either large or small,
or not less than four acres, agreeable to the principles of the English mode of
farming, mentioned in the aforegoing Address, -- a piece of plate of the value
of two hundred dollars, inscribed with the name and the occasion: and, for the
experiment made of a course of crops next in merit, -- a piece of plate,
likewise inscribed, of the value of one hundred dollars. Certificates to be
produced by the 20th of December, 1790.

2. The importance of complete farm or fold-yards, for sheltering and folding
cattle -- and of a preferable method of conducting the same, for procuring
great quantities of compost or mixed dung and manure, within the husbandman's
own farm, induces the Society to give, for the best design of such a yard and
method of conducting it, suitable to this climate and circumstances of common
farmers, -- a gold medal: -- and, for the second best, a silver medal. The
design to be presented to the Society by the 20th of December next.

3. For the best method of counteracting the injurious effects of frost, in
heaving or spewing up ground, and exposing roots of wheat to the drying winds
of the Spring, -- founded in experience, a gold medal: and, for the second
best, a silver medal. The account to be presented to the Society by the 20th of
December next.

4. The best method of raising hogs, from the pig, in pens or sties, from
experience, their sometimes running in a lot or field not totally excluded, if
preferred, -- a gold medal: and, for the second best, a silver medal. To be
produced by the 20th of December next.

5. The best method of recovering worn-out fields to a more hearty state,
within the power of common farmers, without dear or far-fetched manures; but,
by judicious culture, and the application of materials common to the generality
of farmers; founded in experience; -- a gold medal: and, for the second best, a
silver medal. To be produced by the 20th of December, 178^.

6. The best experiment, in trench-plowing* not less than ten inches deep, --
and account of the effects thereof, already made or to be made, on not less
than one ^^re, -- a gold medal: and, for the second best, a silver medal. To be
produced by the 20th of December, 178^.

7. The best field of clover on a farm, quality and quantity to be considered
with the quantity of the arable of the whole farm, and previous state and
quality of the soil; not less than ten acres of clover; -- a gold medal: and,
for the second best, a silver medal. To be produced by the 20th of December,
1787.

^. The greatest quantity and variety of good manure, collected in one year,
and best managed, from materials common to most farms; regard to be had to the
proportion and goodness of such manure, and the quantity and goodness of the
arable and grass-lands of the whole farm on which it is obtained, -- a gold
medal: and, for the second best, a silver medal. To be claimed by the 20th of
December, 178^.

^. The best information, sounded in actual experience, for preventing damage
to crops by insects; especially the wheat-fly, the pea-bug, and the corn
chinch-bug or fly; -- a gold medal: -- a silver medal for the second best. To
be produced by the 20th of December ^^^^.

^. The best comparative experiments on the culture of wheat, by sowing it in
the common broad-cast way, by drilling it, and by setting the grain, with a
machine, equidistant; the quantities of seed, and produce, proportioned to the
ground, being noticed; -- a gold medal: for the second best a silver medal. The
account to be produced by the 10th of January, 178^.

1^. An account of a vegetable food that may be well procured and preserved,
and that best increases milk in cows and ewes, in March and April, founded ^n
experience, -- a gold medal: for the second best, a silver medal. To be
produced by the 10th of January, 178^.

12. The best method of raising the white and and other thorns from seed, in
clay ground, from experience, -- a gold medal: the second best, a silver medal.
To be produced by the 20th of December, 1787.

^^. The greatest quantity of ground, well fenced, in locust trees or poles of
the sort used for posts and trunnels, growing in 1789, from seed sown after
this time, not less than one acre, nor fewer than 1500 per acre, -- a gold
medal: for the second, a silver medal. To be claimed in December, 1789.

The claim of every candidate for a premium, is to be accompanied with, and
supported by, certificates of respectable persons, of competent knowledge of
the subject: -- and it is required that the matters, for which premiums are
offered, be delived in without names, -- or any intimation to whom they belong;
that each particular thing, be marked in what manner the claimant thinks fit;
such claimant sending with it, a paper sealed up, having on the outside a
corresponding mark, and on the inside the claimant's name and address.

Respecting experiments on the products of land, circumstances of the previous
and subsequent state of the ground, particular culture given, general state of
the weather, etc. will be proper to be in the account exhibited. Indeed, in all
experiments and reports of facts, it will be well to particularise the
circumstances attending them. -- It is recommended that reasoning, be not mixed
with the facts: after stating the latter, the former may be added and will be
acceptable.

PRIZES proposed by the SOCIETY in 1786.
^^. The Society believing that very important advantages would be derived from
the general use of oxen, instead of horses, in husbandry and other services;
and being desirous of facilitating their introduction into all these states;
persuaded also, that the comparative value of oxen and cows must very much
depend on the qualities of their sires and dams; and that by a careful
attention to the subject, an improved breed may be obtained: They propose a
gold medal for the best essay, founded in experience, on the breeding, feeding
and management of cattle, for the purpose of rendering them most profitable for
the dairy and for beef, and most docile and useful for the draught; and for the
next best a silver medal: to be produced by the first of January 178^.

N. B. Among other things, the essay should notice the different breeds of
cattle, and their comparative qualities; as their sizes, strength, facility in
fattening, quantity of milk, etc.

15. It is a generally received opinion, that horses in a team travel much
faster than oxen: yet some European writers on husbandry mention many
instances, in which it appeared, not only that oxen would plough as much ground
as an equal number of horses; but also travel as fast with a loaded carriage;
particularly when, instead of yokes and bows, they were geared in
horse-harness, with such variations as were necessary to adapt it to their
different shape. To ascertain the powers of oxen in these particulars, and the
expense of maintaining them, the society deem matters of very great moment; and
are therefore induced to offer a gold medal for the best set of experiments
undertaken with that view; and for the next best, a silver medal. In relating
these experiments, it will be proper to describe the age and size of the oxen,
their plight, the kinds and quantities of their food, the occasions, manner and
expense of shoeing them* in traveling, the kinds of carriages used and weight
of their loads, the seasons of the year, and the length and quality of the
roads; and in ploughing, the size and fashion of the plough, the quality of the
soil, the depth of the furrows, and the quantities ploughed; and in every
operation, the time expended, and number and sorts of hands employed in
performing it; with any other circumstances which may more fully elucidate the
subject. These experiments will enable the essayist to determine what will be
the best form and construction of yokes and bows, and what of ox harness, to
enable oxen, with the best carriage of their bodies and heads, the most ease,
and quickest step, to draw the heaviest loads; a description of each of which
sort of gears, explained on mechanical principles, must be subjoined to the
account of experiments: to be produced by the first day of January* 178^.

16. For the best method, within the power of common farmers, of recovering old
gullied fields to a hearty state, and such uniformity, or evenness of surface,
as will again render them fit for tillage; or, where the gullies are so deep
and numerous as to render such recovery impracticable, for the best method of
improving them, by planting trees, or otherwise, so as to yield the improver a
reasonable profit for his expenses therein, founded in experience, a gold
medal; and for the next best, a silver medal: to be produced by the first of
January, 1790.

17. For the greatest quantity, not less than five hundred pounds weight of
cheese, made on one farm in any of these states, equal i^ dr^^ess, richness and
flavor, to the Cheshire cheese usually imported from England, and which shall
be produced to the society by the first day of January, 1788, a gold medal; and
for the next greatest quantity, not less than two hundred and fifty pounds
weight, of like quality, a silver medal. Besides which, the society engage to
pay for the cheese so produced, at the rate of 10 per cent. more than the then
current wholesale price at Philadelphia, of Cheshire cheese, of the same
quality.

Note. All the prizes (or premiums) proposed last year, are continued; and in
cases where the claims for prizes were to have been made by the 20th of
December 1785, the time is prolonged to the 20th of December 1786.

Although the society reserve to themselves the power of giving, in every case,
either one or the other of the prizes (or premiums) as the performance shall be
adjudged to deserve, or of witholding both, if there be no merit; yet the
candidates may be assured, that the society will always judge liberally of
their several claims.

TIMOTHY PICKERING, Secretary.


