Mr. FOBES's SERMON, OCCASIONED BY THE CONDEMNATION AND EXECUTION OF JOHN
DIXSON.

The Paradise of God opened to a penitent Thief, in Answer to his dying Prayer
to a dying Savior, considered and improved in A SERMON; THE SUBSTANCE OF WHICH
WAS DELIVERED AT TAUNTON, NOVEMBER 11, 1784. UPON THE DAY OF THE EXECUTION OF
JOHN DIXSON, FOR BURGLARY, AETAT 24. WITH AN APPENDIX, ON THE NATURE AND
ENORMITY OF BURGLARY. AND A SKETCH OF DIXSON's LIFE.

BY PEERS FOBES, A. M. A. A. S. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN RAYNHAM.

'The way of Transgressors is hard,
PROVE. xiii.13. 'He that pursues Evil, pursues it to his own Death,
xi.19. 'The Robbery of the Wicked shall destroy them.'
xxi.7. 'If a Man be found stealing -- that Thief shall die.'
DEUTERONOMY. xxiv.7. PROVIDENCE: PRINTED BY BENNETT WHEELER.

THE following Sermon, with its Appendix, is published at the request of
several characters of distinction in this county, with a large number of people
who attended the execution. The hazardous and uneasy situation of the preacher;
who, for the sake of accommodating a very numerous assembly, spoke from a
gallery window, did very much maim and retrench the hasty composition he had
provided for the occasion. This circumstance added to a scene so rare, singular
and solemn, with the eager and attentive multitudes present, suggested the hope
of utility from its publication in the present enlarged form. The prevailing
sentiments of a considerable number of persons, the ignorance and
licentiousness of others, and the common interests of government, evidently
require a popular dissertation on burglary. A good intention will therefore
justify the following attempt; while the manner of its execution can honestly
plead an excuse, the novelty of the subject; and that it was, a part of the
definition excepted, immaturely the result of the writer's own reflections,
unassisted by any page on the subject he ever saw.

A SERMON, etc.
LUKE, xxiii.42, 43. 'And he said unto Jesus, Lord remember me when thou come
into thy Kingdom; and Jesus said unto him, verily I say unto you, to Day shall
thou be with me in Paradise.'


IN this pitiable object, who stands before us, we behold, at once, an instance
of the folly and wickedness of human nature, and a moving spectacle of wonder
and horror, 'to the world, to angels, and to men.' He is one of our kindred
race, who, for a capital crime, has lately received, from an earthly tribunal,
a sentence of death, which is this day to be carried into final, fatal
execution upon him.

This is the tragical scene, and most solemn occasion, which have brought
together this numerous assembly. O the day, the critical day, is come! the
decisive hour is at hand, which must end a mortal life, and fix an immortal
soul in heaven or hell! before this sun goes down, his body, now vigorous and
active, will be a lifeless ghastly corpse, coffined and buried, deep down among
the sheeted dead, while his ever-existing soul, like the dying miser's in the
gospel, 'this night,' yea, before night, 'will be required of him,' and sent
into the world of spirits, to smile or mourn forever. To this poor prisoner,
therefore, if not to some of us, it is beyond all doubt, that this is the last
opportunity for public worship; and the only message from the gospel of peace,
which he will ever hear in this world. And O may he so hear that his soul shall
live! for this, 'God forbid that any of us should cease to pray,' until he
ceases to breath -- let every heart in this great audience, be lifted up to
heaven, in fervent, united prayer to the 'Father of Mercies,' that the same
'exceeding abundant grace,' which was once so gloriously magnified, and most
triumphantly displayed, in pardoning a penitent thief, may this day reach and
conquer the heart of this malefactor. Oh that the divine Philanthropist, the
inimitable original of all love and compassion to our guilty race, who once
spoke from his own cross, the merciful words recorded in the text, to a dying
criminal, would again speak, 'as the Lord from Heaven,' to another, and 'say
unto him, this day shall thou be with me in Paradise.'

SUCH observations and memoirs, on the life of this penitent malefactor and his
unrelenting companion, as can be made practically useful, I propose to
consider, carefully avoiding all unconcerning speculations, all dry unaffecting
truths, lest I incur upon this occasion the deserved censure of that cruel
father, who, 'when his son asks him for bread will give him a stone.' 'This I
say brethren, the time is short,' every moment is precious beyond comparison,
an immortal soul is at stake; some of the last sands in the glass of a mortal
life are this instant falling upon the very verge of life, just ready to plunge
into eternity; there he stands in jeopardy every hour, yea every passing
minute. Hasten to the point then, let us immediately, the interesting practical
point, which for the sake of method, may be divided and distinctly considered
in the manner following:

I. DESCRIBE the character of this dying thief, as a real penitent.

II. CONSIDER the promise our Lord made to him as such.

III. APPLY the subject to ourselves, and to this criminal in particular.

I. THE person whose character, as a penitent, we are now to describe is by the
sacred penmen styled a malefactor and a thief, by which it is more than
probable that he had been addicted to many other vices besides theft, though
this alone is mentioned. An ascendant vice or ruling passion of some kinds may
possibly be found single and alone in the same person; such as avarice,
intemperance and the like; but whoever well considers the composition of human
nature, will at once acknowledge that those crimes which are the result of
deliberation and forethought (as theft usually is) can but rarely, if ever,
exist alone and unaccompanied with other vices. Common sense has so far
adopted this idea, as to frame a proverbial saying upon its general truth.
'They who steal will lie;' which is further supported by a passage of scripture
well known by the name of Augur's prayer -- 'give me not poverty, lest I steal
and lie, or take the name of my God in vain.' This being considered, it will,
perhaps, be natural to conclude that this thief had been a very lewd, profane,
abandoned creature, one of the mere rabble rout of wretched men; and that he
had spent his days, and now almost finished his life, in a licentious course of
flagrant vice -- 'as in water face answers to face, so the heart of man to
man.' But how far the heart or life of the malefactor here described answers
to that who is here present, is only known to God and his own conscience.
'Cursed be that pride, for it is cruel,' and that pleasure, for it is sordid,
ill-natured and infernal, which too often seek indulgence, in upbraiding and
'tormenting' a fellow-sinner 'before the time.' -- I have suggested a
comparison of characters in this instance, as I may in some others, only for
the sake of salutary conviction. But however vicious and profligate the
malefactor under consideration had been, yet we are from the best authority
assured, that through 'the exceeding abundant grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,'
he was led to repentance, and received a full pardon; and for this cause he, as
well as persecuting Saul and others, obtained mercy, that in them Jesus Christ
might show forth all long suffering, for a pattern to them who should hereafter
believe on him. Let every other relenting criminal look at these patterns of
mercy, and flee, instantly flee, for life, flee for refuge, to lay hold upon
the hope, the same all-glorious hope set before them.

THE evidence upon which we consider this thief as a true penitent, arises from
the subsequent induction of particulars.

1. HE evidently had a sense and conviction of heart that he deserved to die --
'we indeed (says he to his comrade) suffer justly, for we receive the due
reward of our deeds.' This is the language of a penitent, and it implies at
least that he approved of his own sentence, which in case of theft was,
according to the Roman law, death, by crucifixion; nor does it appear that he
once disputed the justice of a law which made his crime, or any other besides
murder, a capital offense. This however has been called in question by too many
among us, and even by this prisoner, who yet owns his desert of death by the
divine law. The thought is indeed painful and degrading, that any should openly
dispute the justice of that sentence, founded as it is upon one of our own
laws, and which they have this day come to see executed upon this unhappy
prisoner. Is there not sufficient cause, my friends, for all the emotions of
benevolent pity, and the most generous compassion toward his person, even
while indignation and horror arise in our hearts against his crime: Certainly
there is; indulge them freely then upon this occasion; our Savior himself
pitied and wept over obdurate Jerusalem, at the very time he expressed his
dislike and abhorrence of her conduct in stoning the prophets. Resentment and
benevolence are 'both joined together in this divine example, let no man put
them asunder.' No man can be tempted to do it, who properly considers the
atrocious nature of burglary (the name of the crime for which this prisoner
must die.) When the tender passions rise, and run before reason, or, if through
inattention, or an ill-judged pity, we do not consider the nature, nor trace
the consequences of a crime, we shall mistake and pronounce that rigor and
cruelty, which is only a necessary guard to life, peace and property. Vide
Appendix
It is worthy of particular notice, that when this penitent thief was actually
nailed to the cross, he frankly owns, for himself and his companion, that the
penalty was just in death; 'we suffer justly,' was his honest confession; and
it looks like true repentance, because it further implies that,

2. HE had a painful and affecting sense of the intrinsic evil and baseness of
his crime, as committed against God, and considered as a violation and contempt
of his law and government. The words in which he expresses his guilt and desert
of punishment, strongly imply a sense and sorrow of heart, not merely because
he had by theft injured his fellow-men and violated a law of his country, which
forbid it, but chiefly because he had, transgressed 'the law of his God,' which
says, 'thou shall not steal' -- 'by this law is the knowledge of sin;' and
here, as in a glass, the penitent beholds all the deformed features of his
depraved soul, and the numberless foul spots and errors of his unhallowed life:
He looks within, and there he finds an heart stupid and stubborn, and full of
the lumber of the world, proud, and prone to rebel, disaffected to God and his
law, deceitful above all things, and above all, deceitful to itself. Here on
his heart lies the burden of his sorrow and complaint. 'The commandment is
exceeding broad,' in his view, reaching every thought of his heart, as well as
every action of his life; and even while he finds himself condemned by this
law, he feels his very heart echoing to it, in all its precepts, prohibitions
and penalties, as 'holy, just and good.' -- This, in a word, paints and places
sin before his eyes, in all its hateful colors and horrid deformity: This
renders it 'exceeding sinful,' and above all, as it is against God, a holy God.
Oh the relentings and remorse of David's broken heart, when he thought on his
crime as committed against such a God. Swallowed up in grief and horror on this
account, he seems almost to have forgotten that ever he had injured Uriah or
Bathsheba, or any other being except God: -- 'Against thee, thee only, have I
sinned, and done this evil in thy sight.' Such a view of sin also made Joseph
prefer a dungeon to forbidden pleasure, and bound him, though in all the heat
and vivacity of youth, 'in cords and fetters,' stronger than the seven cords of
Sampson, or chains of adamant. 'How shall I do this great wickedness and sin
against God.' This, to add one instance more, this pierced deepest into the
heart of the prodigal son, when 'he came to himself,' and thought on a return,
and on what he had been doing; 'father (said he) I have sinned against heaven,
and before thee.' A view of sin like this is an essential ingredient in the
nature of all true repentance; for a person may hate sin, and be very sorry for
it, merely because it has blackened his character, hurt his temporal interest,
disgraced his family, brought pain and punishment on his body, or because it
will ruin his soul forever -- If such sorrow as this were true repentance, then
Judas and Pharaoh and Simon Magus, and almost all malefactors condemned to die,
are true penitents. Self-love, and not the love of God, aversion to pain, and
not to sin as such, are the principles from whence flow all sorrow and
repentance of this kind; while that which deserves the name is a very different
and much more disinterested thing; it springs from a real sense and sight of
the malignity of sin, in its own nature; and hence every true penitent has a
kind of inbred antipathy, a deep-rooted hatred to every sin, to one as well as
another; like David 'he hates every false way,' without one exception, and
without any indulgence to a favorite iniquity.

BUT the sorrows of true repentance, will appear still more kindly and
ingenuous, if we consider

3. THAT a belief of the pardoning mercy of God through Christ is implied in
it; and this is another proof that this thief was really a penitent; for he
addresses our Savior with the title of Lord, 'Lord remember me in thy
kingdom;' which implies a belief of the divinity of his person, his mission and
commission from God, his delegated authority in the kingdom of providence and
grace, with the compleatness of his atonement and perfection of his
righteousness unto all, and upon all that believe. Were it not for the hope of
mercy and forgiveness with God, to a penitent, his would sink under the weight
of numberless, soul crimes, into sullen despair. Adam, without a revelation of
mercy, never would have solicited for pardon, but remained incorrigibly wicked,
like the apostate angels, who being excluded the hope of pardon, are confirmed
in eternal rebellion; from which apostate man is delivered, only by those
reviving beams of hope, which emanating from Jesus, the glorious son of
righteousness, and passing through the gospel, that blessed medium of his
grace, enter the dark ill-boding soul, and dispel the incumbent gloom of
hopeless horror and torpid despair; believing that paradise is open to
repentance, and Jesus has power in heaven, as he once had on earth, to forgive
sins, yea, that he is actually exalted at God's right hand, to give remission
of sins as well as repentance. The guilty offender looks to him for both; to
him who was pierced he looks, and mourns, being himself pierced and melted by
the kindly beams of a Savior's love. On his merits alone he rests, and not on
the merit of his own repentance, prayers, or reformation, to recommend him to
the divine favor; and if pardoning mercy is found, with what rapturous joy and
filial affection, gratitude and admiration, does the pardoned penitent magnify
and extol the divine mercy! Like Niobe, the forgiven female penitent, who at
once melted into a flood of nitential tears, and 'loved much, because much was
forgiven her.' Again,

4. A TRUE penitent is always willing and ready to confess his sins; and this
testimony also have we, that this malefactor's repentance pleased God; for he
made a very humble public confession, and it really looks like an honest one,
because it came from his own mouth freely, Sorrow, upon a real sight of the
turpitude and baseness of sin, does not more freely flow from the heart, than
confession from the mouth will follow: Extorted confessions are always
suspected, and well they may, for Judas, the traitor, made a confession, yea
and restitution also, but they were both good for nothing, unless to prove him
a hypocrite, because they were both forced from him by the rack and torture of
a guilty conscience, and the dread of punishment. This, and not any real
repentance for his crime, wrung them out. This also kindled up such an hell
within as drove him on, in frantic horror, to make his escape, by leaping into
an hell before him. 'I have sinned (says he) in that I have betrayed innocent
blood, and he cast down the pieces of silver, and went and hanged himself.' How
different this, from the bitter repentance of Peter, the confession and
restitution of Zacheus and others, who, from a real and inveterate hatred of
sin, have both confessed and forsaken it. Let every one therefore who hopes to
find mercy of the Lord remember his faults this day, and make confession of
them, both to God and man, to those in particular whom we have at any time
injured, either in name or interest; and 'as much as in us lies,' make all
reasonable satisfaction, relying upon the divine mercy and promise for pardon;
'if we confess our sins, God is faithful and just to forgive them, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness.'

5. THE fear of God, with which the heart of this malefactor was principled and
governed, bears further attestation to the sincerity of his repentance:
Addressing his companion, he said, 'dost not thou fear God.' I fear him, and
therefore dare not affront him, as thou do, by profanely mocking and
railing on his dying son. The fear of God, when sweetened and animated with
love, is that filial reverence and pious passion of the soul, which, in
scripture, is so frequently put for the whole circle of christian graces and
duties. To fear God and keep his commandments is the whole duty of man; it is
one of the most active principles in the composition of a heaven-born soul; it
gently touches all its inmost springs, and sets the soul in motion, rapid
incessant motion, toward its proper object, restraining at once from every
appearance of evil, and constraining to a uniform, universal obedience. Under
the influence of this sacred passion Nehemiah renounced those oppressive
measures which former governors had pursued; 'so did not I, because of the fear
of God;' and 'moved with fear' of the same kind, 'Noah prepared an ark,' in
obedience to the will and warning of his God, Heb. 11. In this, considered
either as a passion or principle, true repentance is evidently implied, and
must in both cases be taken into the account, as a material ingredient; for 'by
their fruits ye shall know them,' as well as other graces in their true
distinctive characters, so far as they can be known; but the fruits of both
fear and repentance are the same, and interchangeably produce each other.
Agreeably when the apostle is enumerating the fruits of godly sorrow and
repentance unto salvation, he gives fear a place in the list; 'what carefulness
it wrought in you, yea, what indignation, yea, what fear, etc.' Upon the other
hand, we read, ' fear the Lord, and depart from evil; stand in awe, and sin
not.' From all which it is manifest, that evangelical obedience and reformation
are equally the fruit both of fear and repentance, and therefore, as this thief
feared God, he was a penitent. But further,

6. THE admonition which he gave to his suffering companion on the cross is an
additional evidence of the genuiness of his repentance: When this impious thief
railed upon Christ, and said, 'if thou be the Christ, come down from the cross
and save thyself and us.' The other looked upon him with anger, being grieved
for the hardness of his heart, and said, 'thou, even thou thyself art in the
same condemnation,' and yet dare thou with thy dying breath thus enhance thy
guilt, and add to all thy other crimes such insolence and outrage, even in the
immediate view of death and the judgment seat. 'Thus he was reproved.' This
faithful reprover having himself tasted, yea, was now actually drinking the
bitter cup, 'the wormwood and the gall,' of a vicious life, and knew full well
that sin was the sting of sorrow as well as of death; 'when he saw this thief,
he consented with him, and was a partaker both of his sins and of his plagues.'
What now can he do more? Nay, what can he do less, than give him a parting
reproof, and bid others take warning? It is the last opportunity, and perhaps
the only way left to make any compensation for the injury he had done his soul,
which was now ready to sink into the bottomless pit: He pities him; his heart
is full of benevolence, and in his tongue is the law of kindness; he opens
his mouth, and a reproof, the reproof of wisdom, is there, with which he makes
his last, his dying effort, to save his wretched comrade, 'pulling him out of
the fire.' Let others ' learn of him to go and do likewise.' Unblameable and
unreprovable in the sight of all men, and pure as the gold of which the
snuffers in the Jewish sanctuary were made, ought they, in general, to be, who
undertake the office of correcting and reforming others; yet 'the day of
death,' the last hour of life, gives to the vilest a kind of license to speak,
and adds weight and energy to their dying words. May they be, in every such
instance, 'the words of truth and soberness,' of admonition and warning to all,
especially to those who have been either principals or accomplices in
wickedness, or who may after all once dare to do as others have done.
Experience, fatal indeed to some, but 'life from the dead' to others, if the
fault be not their own, speaks to our eyes as their words do in our ears; and
the plain language of both is, 'the way of transgression is hard,' 'a companion
of fools shall be destroyed;' and that 'sin, though sweet in the mouth, is
bitter in the belly, and ever will be bitterness in the latter end.'

7. THE tender concern which this malefactor showed for the glory of God, and
the honor and reputation of his injured Son, is another substantial proof of
his real penitence. He 'gave glory to God, by making confession,' and by
vindicating the character of his dear Son. The barbarous treatment which his
innocent Lord received from the rude multitude, the insults offered him, when
suffering the keen tortures of crucifixion, and actually in the agonies of
death, deeply affected him. 'The reproaches of them that reproached him,' fell
heavy upon his heart; it was full, and he opened his mouth and said, 'this man
has done nothing amiss -- we indeed suffer guilty, but he is harmless and
holy.' The other thief joined the multitude in mocking and condemning Christ,
expecting perhaps in that way to get a release -- But this man stands alone,
and dares, in direct opposition to the rooted, rancorous prejudices of the
people, and in defiance of the sentence of two courts against him, he dares
openly justify and acquit him; 'this man has done nothing amiss.' Here is the
honest intrepidity of virtue! And it ever ought to be expected, that every
dying penitent will, in his last moments, and in all his sufferings 'justify
God,' and vindicate, at every risque, those innocent persons and characters
that may have been wronged by their means: This is a debt of restitution, which
every man owes his God and country; yea, commutative justice lays its hands on
every offender, and like the rigorous servant in the parable, takes him by the
throat, saying, 'pay me that thou owe.' Once more,

8. Last. EVERY real penitent, as such, is a man of prayer. 'The Lord is good
and ready to forgive, and plenteous in mercy unto all that call upon him;' and
upon him for mercy the repenting sinner will call with as much fervency as
Daniel prayed in the lion's den, or Jonah in the belly of hell, for
deliverance. Stung with a sense of his guilt, penitent David prays as if the
ghost of Uriah, bespattered with blood was constantly in his sight, and
actually reproaching him for his treacherous cruelty; 'deliver me, O God (says
he) thou God of my salvation, deliver me from blood-guiltiness, have mercy on
me, O Lord; according to the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my
transgression, wash me from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.' This is
prayer, and a proof of genuine penitence. Such proof as this had this condemned
thief, that he was himself a penitent in heart, 'for behold he prays,' 'Lord
remember me in thy kingdom:' This was his prayer, the prayer of a dying thief
to a dying Savior; it was short, but a very comprehensive prayer; it contains,
yea, it really is, the prayer of faith, of humility, and of great importunity;
he addresses Christ as Lord, the Lord of a kingdom which was not of this world:
and this, as already observed, implies faith; he shows great humility in his
prayer to this all-sufficient Savior, 'Lord remember me.' He seeks for no
preferment; he asks not to sit on his right hand or his left in his kingdom, as
others had done; neither does he prescribe any particular way in which he would
be remembered; he only begs a remembrance with Christ, that is all; and for
this he is exceedingly earnest and importunate. He seems to breathe out his
whole soul in the request, 'Lord remember me,' and I have enough, 'remember
me,' and I have infinitely more than I deserve! remember me, O Lord, and I ask
no more. 'For mercy Lord, is my request; this is the total sum; mercy, good
Lord, is all my suit; O let thy mercy come!' Come, come it did; for 'Jesus said
unto him, verily I say unto you, to day shall thou be with me in paradise.'
This was the promise which our Lord made to this praying penitent -- and the
import of it was,

II. THE second consideration in the proposed method of this discourse; to
which I shall now attend in a few words.

THIS promise was indeed made by our divine Lord in person, and addressed to
this thief in particular, while they were both upon the cross; but as Jesus is
now in paradise above, at his Father's right hand, and has still in his own
hand the mediatorial kingdom of grace, and ever lives to make intercession for
us: We may, every person who deserves the character of a true penitent, may
properly and personally apply the same promise to himself, and say in his dying
hour, 'to day shall I be with Christ in paradise.' -- Paradise, in allusion to
that delightful place on earth where our first parents lived in their innocent,
primeval state, is here put for heaven. The river of pleasure, the tree of
life, and other scenes of earthly joy and felicity, that once were in it,
rendered the place, beyond all others, the fittest resemblance of that paradise
above, into which the holy Jesus promised this dying thief an immediate 'and
abundant entrance.' This promise, if connected and compared with other passages
of scripture, implies,

1. THAT there is another life after this, or that the soul will exist, after
the death of the body, in a separate state. 'To day thou' i. e. thy soul '
shall be with me, etc.' And as the soul is said to be not merely with angels
and glorified spirits, but with Jesus himself, who is the same yesterday, to
day, and forever; it further implies,

2. THE immortality of the soul, or that its existence shall never end. And
also,

3. THAT the souls of just men are immediately after death made perfect; being
absent from the body, are present with the Lord in a paradise of everlasting
joy. ' To day shall thou be with me in paradise.' But a particular
consideration of these truths must, for the present, give place to another,
very evidently implied in the promise, and which is indeed the wonder, weight
and glory of it: It is the astonishing grace and condescension of our Lord
Jesus Christ toward perishing men. How willing and ready is the all-loving and
all-lovely Savior, to hear the prayer of the humble and contrite soul, and to
receive it to his everlasting mercy? How soon did the prayer of this penitent
reach the ear of the all-compassionate Redeemer? ' While he was yet speaking,'
Jesus answered 'Amen.' Thy petition is given thee; to the half, yea, to the
whole of my kingdom; in which you shall have not only the remembrance of an
absent friend in my mind, but a seat in my kingdom, yea, a place in my very
bosom; 'that where I am, there you may be also, and behold my glory.' O what a
mavelous mixture of unrivalled mercy and dignity are here displayed in
triumph! Mercy to the dying thief, but dignity and regal majesty, in speaking
to him, from the cross, as from a throne; not only 'to dispense pardons, but
dispose of seats in paradise.' The Savior was now agonizing on the cross, with
every appendage of infamy and distress, deserted by his friends and by his God,
while his merciless enemies were insulting and triumphing over him; yet he
endured all with patience; and with the thunderbolts of their instant
destruction in his hand, this meek, inoffensive Lamb opened not his mouth; he
was deaf and dumb to all the bitter reproaches, both of the multitude and of
this abandoned thief, then expiring at his side; but as soon as the other
addressed him in prayer, he heard, he spoke, and heaven was given him at his
petition! Oh the riches of almighty, unmerited grace! A pardon, a paradise of
eternal happiness given to a thief, offered as freely to the other, and to a
third, yea, to all who will humbly and freely accept what he freely gives. Can
this be possible? He who made the promise foresaw that it 'would be thought a
thing incredible with us,' and therefore he has confirmed it with an oath; '
verily, I say unto you, to day, etc.' This is indeed an instance of the power
of sovereign, surprising grace, at which men and angels will never cease to
admire and wonder; but it stands not alone; other trophies have been erected
beneath the banners of the same cross: Saul, of Tarsus, a bloody persecutor,
the oppressing Zacheus, a publican, murderous Manasseh, the idolater, yea, the
betrayers and murderers of the Son of God at Jerusalem, with that long black
roll of notorious criminals at Corinth. These, 'such were these,' and such have
been numbers more, 'but they are washed,' in the very blood, which some of
their own wicked hands had shed, 'but they are sanctified, but they are
justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God.' And
through the power of the same meritorious blood, peace and pardon await the
guilty still. Grace is yet on the throne, and 'reigns through righteousness
unto eternal life.' Its sphere of benign influence has extended back to the
beginning of the creation of God, and will reach forward to the general
conflagration, 'and nothing is hid from the heat thereof; it is unto all, and
upon all that believe,' without difference either of time, place or character.
Gracious encouragement! joyful truth! and written too, as with a sunbeam, in
the repeated and indefinite invitations of the glorious gospel: 'Whoever will
let him come, and him that comes I will in no wise cast out,' is his language,
who came to bring peace on earth and good will to men: For this he breathed
forth that most pathetical wish, 'O that thou had known in this thy day the
things which belong unto thy peace!' For this he poured out that ardent prayer,
even for his murderers, 'Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.'
For this his tears flowed out with his prayers; 'Jesus wept,' when he beheld
the city of Jerusalem, where his murderers lived; he melted into tears of
compassion over those inhuman wretches who crucified and slew the Lord of
glory: Yea, let higher wonder rise, for he, after all this, made the first
offer of himself as a Savior to those who nailed him to the cross as a
malefactor -- and that none might suspect the sincerity of his heart in all he
has said and done, he has even sworn, that he has no pleasure in the death of
the wicked, but that he turn and live. Now, if the most winning invitations,
solemn oaths, pathetic wishes, affectionate tears, and ardent prayers cannot
sufficiently prove his love and willingness to save, then reject them all,
refuse his oath, and take his blood in proof of the darling point; for this he
shed as well as his tears, this he poured forth as well as his prayers, for
those whose wicked hands spilt and reeked with his vital gore! Is this the
manner of man, O Lord? Are not the chief offenders made examples of justice?
With men they are, but with Jesus they are sometimes the chosen vessels and
examples of his mercy! Be not faithless then, nor suspicious of Christ's
willingness to save; for it is infinitely greater than your own to be saved by
him. That a king on earth should be more ready to pardon than the rebel to
receive it, is incredible indeed; but let Jesus be king, and it is true as the
everlasting gospel which declares it. 'O Jerusalem, Jerusalem (said Christ,
with tears in his eyes) how often would I have gathered thee, but you would
not.' Hear this, with a dull insensibility, or stupid indifference who can?
Believe this, guilty man, and leap for joy, look to Jesus, and immediately lay
hold on eternal life! But this leads me

III. To apply the subject.

1. WHAT a mavelous illustration does the subject give us, both of the
efficacy and inefficacy of the means of grace, upon different persons under the
same circumstances. Here are two men who had committed the same crime, both
thieves, condemned to the same death, and at the same time nailed to the same
cross, at equal distance perhaps from the same Savior, who hung between them
both; and both, for aught appears, enjoyed equal advantages from the
instructions and example of Christ; and yet 'Christ crucified was to the one as
a Savior of life unto life, and to the other of death unto death.' One saw the
Savior in the sufferer, and became a penitent, the other refused, and hardened
his heart. One of them went out of the world praying to the Savior of it, the
other expired reviling and cursing him. -- If he who died a penitent was
unacquainted with Christ before he came to the cross, which is the common
opinion, then his conversion must, and will be acknowledged a rare, but
glorious instance, both of the power and sovereignty of divine grace; as the
other evidently was of the power of sin, and of the sottishness and depravity
of the human heart! The heart of the sons of men is full of evil, and madness
is in their heart while they live.' This thief was now in the most acute pain,
the most pungent distress, having but a few minutes to live, upon the very
point to plunge into eternity; a fellow-sufferer in the agonies of death before
his eyes, whose dying groans doubtless pierced his ears while upon the cross,
to which he was nailed, naked, and exposed to shame and ignominy from the
scoffing, surrounding multitude, a Savior praying for his murderers on his
side, with blood streaming from his mangled body, full in view; and yet, 'be
astonished O heavens,' he was hardened still! 'Bray a fool in a mortar, yet
will not his folly depart from him.' 'So then, neither is he that planteth any
thing, neither he that waters, but God that gives the increase;' to him let
every eye look, in the diligent use of the means of his own appointment, and
not vainly imagine, as some have done, that if they could but enjoy such as
others have enjoyed, or as might be afforded, success would ensue; 'to the law
and the testimony,' these are perfect; but if these 'convert not the soul, nor
make wise the simple,' if Moses and the prophets are not heard; 'neither will
you be persuaded though one rose from the dead;' nay, it would not avail, if
you could this day stand under the very cross of Christ, and have ' all your
raiment stained,' with his blood distilling and streaming fresh upon it; or
were ye even lifted up on the cross, like this thief, with a Savior praying
and dying by your side.

2. How great and affecting is that change, which is made by death in the same
person. This we have often seen with our own eyes; we shall see it again in a
few hours, in the unhappy prisoner before us; and ere long we ourselves must
all feel and undergo it in our own persons: Yes, the fairest forms and finest
features, all the strength and agility of body, the lilly and rose in the
cheek, the sparkling eye and charming glee, must all fade, shortly fade away,
and become lifeless deformity and loathsome putrefaction. Be fond and proud of
dress no more, but 'be ye clothed with humility; put on righteousness; put ye
on the Lord Jesus Christ, as a robe, and for a diadem of beauty.' But great as
is the change, which death makes in the body, it is small and trifling,
compared to the alteration it produces in the state of the soul, in the compass
of one flying moment; it passes from time to eternity, from ease to unceasing
pain, or from pain to eternal bliss; from its existence in a body to a world of
separate spirits; and from earth to heaven or hell. What a transition is this!
How sudden and unknown, how surprising and important is the change! Are we all
ready for it? 'Except a man be born again he cannot see the kingdom of God.'
This is the great preparatory change for heaven; if we have experienced this,
we are prepared for the other, and may, in our dying moments, leave this body,
and 'launch into the great deep' of eternity, with as much safety as Peter left
the ship in a storm, and 'ventured to walk upon the sea to go to Jesus,' not
doubting but the same helping hand which 'caught him will be stretched out to
save us also from sinking' into the lake which burns below, and receive us into
his everlasting kingdom.

3. From this one instance only of a late repentance, let no one presume to
defer his own to some future day, and yet dream of success. To the glory of
divine grace it must be acknowledged, that a true repentance is never too late;
but equally to the glory of divine justice, it must also be owned, that a late
repentance is seldom true: True indeed it was in this thief, according to the
common interpretation; but to risk the immortal happiness of a soul, in pawn of
its being the only true one, is jeopardy and folly that want a name! After all
that has been said in its support, there are yet good reasons to believe, as
some expositors do, that this convert had been acquainted with Christ and the
nature of his kingdom while in prison, and that he actually was converted some
time before he was executed; this they urge ought to be admitted as a fact,
rather than an instantaneous conversion. But to wave all controversy, I will at
present grant what never can be fully proved, viz. That all the divine virtues
which could be crowded into so narrow a space were, by a sudden and astonishing
growth, produced in him, while he was upon the cross, and that he did in
reality obtain mercy with his dying gasp. What then? Is this a pattern for us?
A pattern it may be, but it is without a promise, and is rather a proof of what
Christ can do, than of what he will do in common cases. The case of this thief,
it is certain, was peculiar and extraordinary: He never had, upon the present
supposition, one call to repentance, nor one offer of mercy from Christ before
in all his life; whereas, under the gospel, dying sinners have been long and
often called, and as long despised the means and overtures of grace: 'Because I
have called (says God) and ye refused, therefore I will laugh at your calamity,
and mock when your fear comes.' Besides it was now an extraordinary time;
Christ was on the cross, just coming to the throne, on the point of being
crowned, and installed in his kingdom; his dying, royal groans, penetrated the
regions of the dead, and produced universal darkness and convulsions through
the heavens and earth; all nature was in mourning, and echoed groan for groan
responsive to her dying God. At such a time, and under such circumstances, this
thief on the cross became a convert of the grace of Christ. But for any of us,
at this day, to indulge in wickedness, in expectation of a similar event,
would, in the true estimate of things, be accounted presumption, and hazard
infinitely greater than that of a malefactor, who should voluntarily commit
felony, in expectation of a pardon from his sovereign, merely because on the
joyful day of his coronation he had once pardoned a criminal; or, if in the
neglect of the ordinary means of grace, and 'the still small voice' of reason
and conscience, any should depend upon an earthquake, or the darkness of a
preternatural eclipse of the sun, to convert him, because a certain thief,
almost 1800 years ago, was perhaps, first awakened in such a miraculous way.
The folly of such conduct is too rank and barefaced to need a serious
reprobation! Add to this, that a deep and thorough repentance is a gracious
habit, which, like all others, usually requires time, and a train of gradual
operations, both within and from without, to fix it deep and durable in the
soul. Those hasty resolutions, transient pangs of sorrow, and intermitting fits
of joy, so often mistaken for ' pure religion,' are frequently no more than
certain mechanical operations upon the body, arising from external impressions,
or from the latent seeds of some melancholy distemper, which, like the seeds in
the parable, 'soon sprung up, and soon withered away, because they had no root
or deepness of earth.' Sudden growths and changes in religion, like those in
vegetable nature, are seldom solid and durable; and if one experienced in them
should appear at first very happy and joyful, as 'Jonah was exceeding glad of
his gourd;' yet it is a thing ' for which he has not labored, neither made it
grow,' he may suspect a devouring ' worm is at the root,' if it ever had any,
and as it came up in the night, it will perish in a night, i. e. it may soon be
gone; while the empty pretender, who has mistook a religious mood for a
religious temper, will be left in the very 'gall of bitterness' and censure,
under the dominion of lusts, far more criminal than that 'peevish temper,'
which the prophet discovered at the loss of his pleasant shade. Changes like
these, however, are not more suspicious than it is impious to put off the great
work of religion to the last moments of life. To waste and wanton away upon
your lusts, and the service of this world, the flower and vigor of life, and
then offer the wretched relics of it to the great author and preserver of
life, is a most daring affront. Ungrateful man! foolish and unwise, do you thus
requite the Lord? Is this all the return you make him for all his kindness to
you? Is this thy kindness to thy friend? Is he so cheap, low, and worthless in
your esteem? O! with what angry just resentment might he not say to you, as
once he did to the ungrateful Jews, who bargained away their Lord for thirty
pieces of silver, 'a goodly price that I was prized at of them.' A goodly price
indeed, to offer the sick, the blind and lame, for a Savior in a desperate
case. Offer it now to thy Governor; will he be pleased with such a sacrifice?
No more will thy God, the Governor of the world, be pleased with the dregs of
diseased or decripid age, pressed out by the weight of conscious guilt, and the
torturing fire of a stinging conscience. Fair promises we know are often made
in pain and distress, and as often almost are they recanted in ease and
prosperity; yea, so commonly have the vows and resolutions of a sick bed died
in embrio, where the patient has lived, that if the experience of ages had the
weight of a grain, it would be granted upon every hand, that next to leaping
headlong into hell without any repentance, is the folly of defering it to age,
sickness, or a dying day. But if folly of such color and magnitude should ever
once be found, let not the guilty wretch utterly despond; for in the history of
four thousand years, let him know, that there is one instance left on the
sacred page, that none might despair, and only one, that none might delay.
Every delinquent therefore, whose bosom tells him, even when dying. ' thou art
the man,' let him, I say, look up to the cross, think of a dying penitent
there, and look away all despair; he may cherish to the last a kind of 'forlorn
hope;' for 'the Ethiopian can change his skin, and the leopard his spots: a man
can be born when he is old, and the sinner an hundred years old may not be
accursed;' because 'with God all things are possible.' -- Seize the present
moment then, and give thy heart to God.

4. The absolute necessity of repentance unto life appears from this subject
with the most convincing evidence -- This made that vast difference between the
two thieves on the cross; the paradise of God was opened to one, but for ever
shut against the other; not indeed as a thief merely, but as an impenitent one:
And this, O! this will be to all others the turning point for eternity. Let
every one therefore, now look at his own heart, and with the eyes of an honest
critic, ask himself this one plain question, am I real penitent, or not? Is my
repentance a part of holiness; a part of that holiness without which no man
shall see the Lord? and with which every man's 'sins shall be blotted out, and
times of refreshment come from the presence of the Lord.' Is it a clear case,
that 'fruits meet for repentance,' are the genuine produce of our hearts and
lives every day. Push home this enquiry, and act agreeably. -- But it is time
to speak plainly, and in particular to this poor prisoner, who must very soon
appear before the judgment seat of Christ; and may every heart be touched with
tender concern for him.

UNHAPPY young man, how disappointed in your expectations, how wretched and
forlorn is your condition! 'Have pity, have pity upon you, O my God, and look
down from thy sanctuary to hear the groaning of the prisoner.' Time! your
appointed time on earth is come, and die you must, in all the bloom and vigor
of youth, with breasts full of milk and your bones moistened with marrow. This
day, which to you is the last of days, will form the important crisis that must
determine your happiness or misery for ever. To day you must appear before* the
judgment seat of Christ; on the brink of the grave, on the verge of vast
eternity you no^ stand; and after a few flying minutes more, you will know
beyond a doubt, that there is a God, a heaven and an hell. Behold the numerous
guard A guard of 130 men were ordered to attend the execution. This added to
government a dignity, as well as security, which the Sheriff exemplified in his
own p^^son, with honor and applause, refusing a mercenary executioner, offered
him for a mere pittance, he claimed the office as a part of his duty, and a
proof of his fidelity in it, and with an amiable mixture of soft compassion and
dignity he executed the criminal with his own hands.
about you, the executioners of justice await your doom, the instruments and
appendages of death are in sight, a coffin and a grave for you are open, a
prisoner in chains, and you cannot escape; this, ah all this, have you merited
at the hands of your injured country, by the laws of which your mortal life is
forfeited, and now demanded as the sacrifice; condemned also you are by the law
of God, which extends to the thoughts and intents of the heart. The wages of
sin is death; 'the soul that sins, it shall die, and cursed is every one who
continues not in all things written in the book of the law to do them; this is
the law, with its tremendous sanctions and curses; and these all await you, as
a transgressor of it -- offending in one point, you are guilty of all, and all
heaven and earth will sooner pass away than one jot or tittle of it fail. The
tenor of this law therefore, none can alter, the tone of vengeance you cannot
soften, a God all mercy, and too indulgent to punish the wicked, can never be
found; 'whose heart can endure, or whose hands be strong,' when the sentence of
this righteous law shall be executed -- was the sentence of an earthly judge
lately pronounced, with the meltings of compassion, and the flowing of tears,
ordering you to be hanged by the neck till you are dead; -- was this terrible
to you, how much more so must it be to hear your almighty Judge in righteous
anger pronounce that unalterable sentence, 'depart ye cursed into everlasting
fire.' Is this then your doom and just desert? Is your day and means of grace
just expiring? Have you but a few minutes more to make your peace with an
injured neglected God, and to be made 'worthy to escape all these things, and
to stand before the Son of Man?' Is this your case? In the name of God! what
can be done? What shall I do to be saved? Is this your heart? Are you in
earnest? In earnest then, and in the language of inspiration, I most gladly
say, 'believe on the Lord Jesus Christ; if thou believe with all thine heart
thou shall be saved,' though in point of justice you deserve 'to be punished
with everlasting destruction;' Jesus is the end of the law for righteousness;
he died to redeem us from the curse of the law; 'he was numbered with the
transgressors,' with thieves in his death, that penitent thieves and
transgressors might be pardoned; he died for the ungodly, says an inspired
apostle; he died for the unjust, says another* he came to seek and save that
which was lost, says our Lord; and it is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance, that Christ came into the world to save sinners, even the chief of
them, says the apostle. Now are you ungodly, are you unjust, are you a lost
sinner, or even the chief of sinners; then for you he died, such as these he
will save, save even to the uttermost, if they will come unto God by him; his
blood cleanses from all sin; even though your sins be as scarlet, they shall
be white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool, says
the Lord. Here is the door of hope, this is the door of mercy, and this the
fountain to which the soft voice of invitation calls you, saying, come wash and
be clean, turn and live, repent and be happy; whoever will, let him come, and
him that comes I will in no wise cast out, I beseech you therefore, O Dixson,
by all that your soul is worth through eternity, and by 'the price of blood,
the blood of God,' shed for its redemption, that you immediately hear the
joyful sound, and instantly give your whole heart's consent to the blessed
covenant of gospel grace. Now compose your mind, and make a pause, one solemn,
contemplative pause, and look back, once more upon your wretched life (before
it transpires) and think, with bitter sorrow, and remorse of heart, O think how
you have lived, what you have done, how you have treated the great God, his
holy Spirit and blessed Son; think how you have injured your fellow-men, sinned
against the light of reason, of revelation, and conscience, and thus wronged
your own soul. Then look within, and you will find, you will feel, if not past
feeling, a most vile heart, 'out of which have proceeded evil thoughts,
blasphemies, thefts, etc.' Take one more survey of this heart, and then 'repent
and pray to God, if perhaps the thoughts of thy heart, and the sins of thy
whole life may be both forgiven thee.' I say unto you, 'what thou do, do
quickly;' your feet stand on slippery places, now is your time, now or never,
'now is the accepted time, now is the day, and to you the last, the only day of
salvation; to day therefore, while it is called to day, harden not your heart.
Dixson, you still breathe, your heart and your pulse yet beat, and the vital
current moves, and blessed be God the curse delays, the warning voice is heard,
'you are a prisoner of hope;' turn, turn to the strong holds, for why will you
die, O young man. In fine, justify God, condemn yourself, prostrate your guilty
soul at the foot of the cross; look up there, and plead the merit and the
application of that all-virtuous blood which once pardoned a penitent thief,
who died upon it, and is infinitely sufficient to pardon and save even you; and
having ascended the place of your execution, then rouse, collect and fix all
your thoughts, and breathe out all your soul, in faith, repentance and prayer,
'saying, 'Lord Jesus, remember me in thy kingdom,' God be merciful to me a
dying sinner. Farewell, poor John Dixson, and the Lord have mercy on you; to
day may you be with Christ in paradise; amen, and 'let all the people say amen.'

To this very numerous assembly I will now turn the address, and close my
subject. Who can look around upon the numbers of all ranks, ages, sexes and
complexions here present, and think of the transactions of this day, and not be
reminded of that infinitely more solemn 'day in which God will judge the world
in righteousness, by Jesus Christ.' Then, my friends, and perhaps never before,
shall we meet again, not merely as spectators, but as personally and deeply
interested in all the momentous scenes and decisions that will then take place.
The apostle's wish for his friend, is mine for you and myself; 'the Lord grant
we may all find mercy of him in that day.' To this desirable end, may the
public instructions and warnings of this day be improved, in particular that
exemplary instance of justice upon the prisoner before us, which is this day
under providence set up at the head of this county as a warning piece, let off
(as I may say) from a cannon of our own making, a salutary law of this
Commonwealth, and which speaks aloud in the ears as well as to the eyes of all
that can see or hear, crying from the earth, like the blood of murdered Abel,
for the life of this and for other malefactors. Let all take warning, and while
they see and hear, may they fear and do no more so wickedly; 'let him that
stole, steal no more, but rather let him labor with his hands the thing which
is good.' Then may this stand alone, and for the last, as it is at present the
second instance of a capital execution, and the first for burglary, since this
was a shire town -- youth, as well as parents, are particularly concerned in
the admonitions of this day.

1. HERE is a most affecting instance, my young friends, before your eyes of a
vicious youth, under the age of twenty-four years, brought to a disgraceful,
untimely death, by the vindictive hand of public justice; and it is at once a
warning to you, and a proof that God's own words are words of truth. Look on
this criminal, and believe that 'he who pursues evil, pursues it to his own
death,' and that wicked men shall not live out half their days; believe also
that he who being often reproved hardens his neck, shall himself suddenly be
destroyed, and that without remedy; hearken then to the voice of a reproof from
your parents and friends, from the word and providence of God; take heed to
your ways, shun the vices and paths of the destroyer; 'flee youthful lusts
which war against the soul,' and wound to death your own reputation and the
bleeding hearts of your tender parents; beware, especially beware of gaming,
and that intemperate use of spirituous liquors to which this ill-fated youth
was so infamously addicted, and which, by the confession of his own mouth, had
the principal hand in bringing him to this miserable end. This is indeed a sore
evil under the sun, and it is now common among men; like a pestilence, 'it
walks in darkness and wastes at noon day!' A most pernicious evil, full of
deadly poison to the manners and morals of youth; a detestable Pandora's box,
whence issue whole swarms of plagues, more numerous and fatal than those of
Egypt, to sting and disturb mankind in all their peace of society, both in
towns and families; yea, it now threatens with one mingled mass of ruin, the
health and happiness, the lives, fortunes and souls of the most promising part
of God's creation: 'Who has woe? Who has sorrow? Who has contentions? Who
has babbling? Who has wounds, with and without a cause? Who has redness of
eyes?' Who are poor, and steal, and take the name of the Lord in vain? Who
break up houses, commit murder, are confined to prisons, loaded with irons, and
die upon the gallows? 'They that tarry long at the wine, they that go to seek
mixed wine, and are mighty to drink strong drink.' This execution alas! will
make the third in this county, occasioned by spiritous liquors; two men in a
fit of intoxication committed murder, and suffered the pains of death, at
Bristol, upwards of 75 years ago; these were Indians, and would to God that
human nature might never again be so brutalized and rankly disgraced by any but
Indians alone. Could I speak in thunder, and my voice be heard from pole to
pole, it should be the friendly voice of warning to young men, entreating them,
by every thing that is dear and valuable, to shun the company and the haunts of
tipplers and gamblers; 'come not nigh the door of the house, avoid it, pass not
by it, turn from it and pass away.'

2. THIS example of condign punishment speaks aloud and home to parents and all
who are entrusted with the care and education of children. Next to
intemperance, as a cause, this malefactor ascribes his licentious life and
ignominious death to the want of proper restraint in youth; left to the care of
a mother when young, he had, like too many others, his own way and will without
control. His parent we are told is yet alive, if a parent can live who has
'travailed in birth and drawn out the breasts' to such a son! Can words express
the feelings of a parent's heart on such an occasion; put your soul in her
soul's stead this day, and imagine for once, you who are parents, if the
thought is not insupportable, that this was your own son! a son who had 'made
himself vile, and you restrained him not,' a son, whose education, whose morals
and immortal soul you had neglected, and now is trembling in chains, with the
strangling noose about his neck, and 'made a gazing stock' to thousands around
him -- at length you follow him to the place of execution; there stand the
father who begat him, and the mother who bore him, beholding their son writhing
in the agonies of death, and they for him, in agonies as great of living
distress; O how they wring their hands, and almost gnaw their tongues, while
they cry, 'my son, my son, would to God I might die for thee, O my son, my
son,' I am the criminal, and I the guilty thief; 'his blood be upon us, and not
upon our child;' we are the faulty cause; our cruel neglect of timely
instructions, a good example, and the rod of correction, have murdered our son!
The Bible and experience both told us to train him up in the way he should go,
and that when he was old he would not depart; we were commanded to beat him
with a rod, and not spare for his crying, with a promise that he should not die
an untimely death, and that we should deliver his soul from hell; but Oh! 'we
are guilty, verily guilty, concerning our son, and therefore is this distress
come upon us,' as a just punishment of our folly as well as his own; go now and
write him a monster! pronounce that heart 'an heart of stone, which is not
melted and moved out of its place;' even in sympathy with such pungent parental
distress; and may both the sleeping and waking hours of that parent, be
perpetually haunted with all the tragical operations of this day, who can after
all go home, and neglect the education of his own children; yea, let him take
his rank in future with 'the cruel ostrich in the wilderness,' because he is
hardened against his young, as though they were not his own.

3. THIS public example of justice adds to the proof, already large, of the
existence and wisdom of a special providence: 'Verily there is a God that
judges in the heavens and in the earth.' To deter men from vice, the Deity has
mercifully mingled pain and punishment with the very nature and perpetration of
it; if we look within we shall find, we shall feel a demonstration of this.
Envy and malice, rancor and revenge, etc. are 'a generation of vipers' in the
soul, perpetually stinging and gnawing upon it; yea, they create in that bosom,
which is their nest, a little domestic hell, ' where the worm' of envy ' dies
not, and the fire' of malice ' is not quenched.' Vices torment the soul,
however, not merely from their nature, and when separately indulged, but from
their number and combination. So numerous, and so contrary, in their desires
and separate interests, that they raise a kind of civil war within; for while
one lust is gratified, another is displeased; while the man humors and feeds
his covetousness, he is obliged to starve luxury and affront his pride; and
even should 'Belzebub cast out devils,' or one predominant master lust conquer
a number of its inferiors, there would be even in this infernal conquest an
opposition, which must create pain and vexation. But if to the misery which is
entailed on vice, in its nature and in their jaring numbers, we add that which
both attends and follows vicious actions, we shall still have a greater proof
of the wisdom and goodness of divine providence, by which it is evidently
decreed, that bold transgressors shall not only be punished in this world, but
in numberless instances shall in fact be punished according to the laws of a
strict retaliation. I have seen (says Eliphaz) that they who plow iniquity and
sow wickedness reap the same; his mischief (says the Psalmist) shall return
upon his own head, and his violent dealings shall come down upon his own pate;
and even after conscience has long slept, and no human justice could pursue
the criminal, his own iniquity has at last found him out, and by some
remarkable incident in providence brought him to deserved punishment. In this
view it is worthy of observation, that soon after the commitment of this
prisoner to the goal in this town, he was providentially discovered late in the
night upon the point of an escape from this, as he had before done from every
other prison he had been confined to; this alarmed the sheriff, who knowing and
lamenting the enfeebled state of the gaol, thought it unsafe to risque a second
attempt, and therefore appointed him a guard; and to this single circumstance,
however trifling or accidental it may appear, must be ascribed, under
providence, the memorable event of this day. Rather than wicked men should go
unpunished, by any neglect of government, all wise providence will take
occasion from that neglect, and make a superanuated gaol the very means of
their execution. 'The weakness of God is stronger than men,' and ever will be
too strong for the guilty to escape. Let us, especially of this county, notice
a providence so friendly to government, and remember that this in full cannot
by done until the new proposed gaol shall be completed, with every needful
precaution of strength and security. Finally,

WHEN we look at this unhappy criminal, and think what would the poor wretch
give that he were in our condition: Let none of us indulge, or nourish in our
hearts the pride of the Pharisee, or even so much as think, in a way of
boasting, what he spoke with his mouth, 'God I thank thee, that I am not as
other men, or even as this malefactor;' when perhaps the principal distinction
between him and numbers here present may be nothing more than the gilding of a
coffin or the paint of a sepulcher; and even of some others, the difference may
consist only in this, that he is detected and condemned, but they as yet are
concealed from human eye, while in the eye of God omniscient, both they and we
and 'all have sinned, and come short of his glory.' Condemned therefore by the
same law, guilty before the same God, we are all the prisoners of divine
justice, and equally need repentance and pardoning mercy, through the blood of
the same atonement. 'Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish;' repent
therefore, let us all, and 'be converted, that we may have redemption through
the blood of Christ, even the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of
his grace; and receive in the end the riches of the glory of the inheritance,
in his everlasting kingdom.' Amen.

(The End of the SERMON.)
APPENDIX. ON BURGLARY.
BEFORE the execution of the criminal, which gave occasion to the preceding
discourse, a considerable number, chiefly of the populace, manifested their
doubts and dissatisfaction concerning the lawfulness of the intended execution;
others ' raged and were confident,' that it would be a murderous bloody deed,
and wished he might escape. This suggested the propriety of offering in public
a short vindication of his punishment. It was done, and the consequence proved
to some a present relief, but to others a more violent attack upon those who
were more immediately concerned in it. The judges and jury, the sheriff and
state's-attorney, the prosecutor and the preacher, received in turn, each one
his bitter portion in due season; and as the impetus of zeal and clamor so
furious did evidently strike against government, it was thought necessary in
all reason to give it a check; and could reason do it, the task were easy and
soon finished; if the wisdom and experience of ages, and the wisest nations and
legislators on earth; if all the statutes, customs and codes of uninspired law,
could obtain faith, or had weight, ' as a grain of mustard seed,' the mountain
would be removed, and all clamor cease: But since very little advantage in
this dispute can be expected from this quarter, no apology to the gentlemen of
law or letters can be needed from one of my profession, for an attempt to
justify the penalty of one of our own laws, by ' reasoning out of the
scriptures,' and with arguments plainly adapted to the sense and feelings of
this class of people.

THE crime we call burglary, is the breaking open and entering a dwelling house
in the night, with a design to steal, rob, commit murder, a rape, or some other
felony: This is done by opening a window, coming down a chimney, picking a
lock, removing a bolt, turning a button, or unlosing any other fastening, yea,
by lifting up a latch, and rushing in upon knocking, or even entering at a door
set open by a servant or one of the family, joined in a conspiracy with the
thief. Breaking up and entering either of these ways, into a dwelling house, or
any adjoining part or parcel thereof, though not under the same roof, with an
intention to commit either of the above felonies, whether that intention be
carried into execution or not, is burglary: And that this is indeed an offense
of so henious a nature, even where theft or robbery only is committed, as will
justify a community in punishing it with death, will appear with evidence from
the following considerations.

1. GOD himself has set a peculiar brand of infamy and enormity upon theft. In
various passages of scriptures it is ranked and coupled with robbery and
murder, both which are allowed to be worthy of death. (See John x* 10. Job
xxiv.14. Jer. vii.9, etc.) Now if common theft be a crime of such magnitude,
what must it be when accompanied with those circumstances of aggravation which
denominate it burglary; it is done in the night, and is one of those works of
darkness so often stigmatized by the apostle; in the dead of the night, when
all the creation, except beasts of prey, are at rest, and when man is disarmed
by sleep, and utterly unable to defend himself, his family or property, from
the violence of the midnight thief, who is ' a strong man armed,' and hid from
every human eye and helping hand, under the cover of darkness, and like his
father, the prince of darkness, ' he goes about seeking whom' and whose ' he
may devour.' What mischief in such a case cannot be done? Whose life or
property can ever be safe? Besides my house is invaded by force; and why is a
man's own house called his castle? Why is an abuse offered to a man under his
own roof deemed in law a distinguished offense? Cannot a door be broken open,
even by an officer, under the light of day, to execute a civil process? Why
not? It is because the right of domestic peace and protection are so dear and
sacred to every man; and therefore the laws of nature and of the land,' have
made an hedge about him, and about all that he has, on every side,' and who
but a madman can wish to see it broken down? -- Again, consider,

2. THAT other crimes, apparently less than burglary, have been, by the express
command of God, punished with death. Under the Jewish law we find a large
number, which, according to their different deserts, were punished with
different kinds of death; some criminals were strangled, others burnt alive,
some killed by the sword, and others stoned to death; their capital crimes
amounted to more than thirty in number, which probably sounds large to those
who have had the ignorance and effrontery to affirm, that no crime mentioned in
scripture was ever made capital except murder. In this large number, however,
we may particularly notice the following ones, viz. Adultery, incest, gluttony,
with drunkenness, false prophecy, seducing, sabbath-breaking, cursing and
striking parents, etc. Who will now assert that not one of all these is a less
crime than burglary? Was the striking of a parent, perhaps in a sudden fit of
passion, and before reason had arrived to its full maturity and strength, a
greater offense in a child, whose natural temper and ill-treatment might be a
principal cause, than it is at this day for a man with deliberation and design,
to go and commit such a complicated crime as this? And did the all-wise God, '
whose compassions fail not,' once enact a law that should take away the life of
a child in the above case, and yet may not ' the powers that be' of God, do the
same in another, when it appears necessary to a State, and far more criminal?
Certainly they may do it. Indeed it is already done, in the instances of
robbery and a rape, both which are death, and that without objection or
complaint that we hear: But neither of these, in point of guilt and enormity,
can equal that of house-breaking. In case of a rape the woman has power to cry
for help, and may obtain it. In highway robbery, when the pistol is presented
to a man's breast, and his money is demanded, it may, perhaps, be in his house,
and not in his pocket, or if it is, delivering it up may save his life; yea,
both may be saved by a successful attack upon the robber, or by a sudden flight
from him; this is possible, because the man assaulted is on his horse, or upon
his feet, but in the present case he is in his bed and asleep, with his family
around him, all off their guard, absolutely unable to make the least
resistance, or even so much as to sound an alarm; the thief enters the house*
and every life in it lies wholly at his mercy; should one of the family be
roused, that one perhaps a father, may in the terrors and darkness of night,
kill the wife of his bosom, or one of his own children; or the child, a father
or brother, instead of the thief, who is after all in perfect security, and
with the richest plunder in his hands -- the hard earnings of a whole life, he
is left to make his escape, under the cover of darkness, beyond the probability
of ever being detected. Is this the crime which is thought less than robbery or
a rape? If it is, let one probable supposition more be added to the above, and
that is this, that the father of the family is awaked from sleep, by the
midnight cry of daughters ravished in his own house, a wife in a fright, and
fainting by his side, sons murdered, and weltering in their own gore, and his
house, his own castle of defense, in flames about him, and the villains who
have done it all fled with impunity, and gone, irrecoverably gone, from the
avenging arm of human justice. -- Ravished daughters! women must feel the blush
rise in their faces, and resentment in their hearts, when they think of those
thoughtless creatures of their own sex, who have been extenuating burglary, and
raising an outcry against a law that guards at once the chastity of daughters,
and the doors of their houses, with death. A guard, not too strong for female
virtue, against the brutal lusts of midnight ruffians, nor too great for the
security of life and property at a time when the very dregs of a large
disbanded army are emptied out upon us. Once more, we add

3. That stealing itself was, under certain circumstances, made a capital
offense, when God himself was the legislator of his people. 'If a thief be
found breaking up, and be smitten that he die, there shall be no blood shed for
him.' Exodus 22.2. This passage was cited, on the occasion, both of the
sentence, and execution of the criminal. The judge on the first, and on the
other, I referred to it, in vindication of both. It was however pronounced
impertinent, and by some an imposition on the people. In answer, for myself, I
shall only say, that if quoting a text, is an imposition, unless it answers in
every circumstance, to the occasion on which it is adduced, then there is not
in all the Bible, perhaps, a single text, that can ever be used on any occasion
whatever. This passage was not brought to prove that common theft, or even
house-breaking, was punished with death by the judges of the Jewish State; but
only that it was so under certain circumstances. -- That is, if a thief was
found in the night breaking up an house, he might be killed upon the spot,
without loss of blood in him who should deal the deadly blow: and if this were
only an act of self-defence, it will evidently show, not only the greatness of
the crime, as this appears the only one in which voluntary manslaughter was
tolerated among the Jews, but it shows also, the weakness and futility of
understanding the phrase of breaking up, as some do, to mean the breaking up of
a barn or stall; was any one ever allowed by the Jewish law, or by any other,
to kill a thief in his barn at night, in defense of his cattle? no, it must,
according to the text be in his own house, and in defense of himself and
family; and therefore we may fairly reason thus, and say, if a wise God, in
character of a lawmakers, once saw fit, to put the fatal sword into the hands
of a master, or member of a family for a common defense of that small circle
(in case of burglary) why may not the same sword be committed to the hands of a
civil magistrate for the common security of a larger community? but children
need a protector, as they are weak and helpless; it is granted; and equally
unable may the strongest be, in a case like this, to make a defense against the
superior power of the aggressor. What good reason then can be given, why the
law of a State should not come in to the assistance of the weaker party? and
while it leaves him his natural right of killing the thief, if he can, ought it
not at the same time, to protect and avenge him and his family, when he is
wholly unable to do it himself? Add to this, that if theft by housebreaking in
the night, was not a capital offense in the eye of the Jewish law, let any who
can, make it appear, that it was in fact any crime, or had any punishment at
all. In all the various kinds of theft, the punishment we see is very minutely
specified, and even in this under consideration provided the sun was risen,
full restitution was by law required; but what was the punishment if in the
night or before sunrise? Death it was, or none at all that we can find in the
law of Moses. Should this reasoning upon the text in question be thought
insufficient to prove that stealing was in any case punished with death, I
would mention another, against which there can be no objections: It is Exodus
21, 16, 'He that steals a man, shall surely be put to death.' This is
stealing, and it was death by this statute, here made by God himself. Men and
not goods were indeed, the spoils taken: This however is only a circumstance,
and less too, all things considered, than are some which attend that atrocious
kind of theft, we call burglary, as might (were there room for it) easily be
shown. The confession of the penitent thief on the cross, and the instance of
Achan, who for stealing a wedge of gold and a Babylonish garment was stoned to
death, with others to the like purpose, I omit; and, upon the whole, say, that
if stealing is a crime of such enormity in God's account, as above described;
if under certain circumstances, it has been, by his express command, actually
punished with death; and lastly, if other crimes, which in the true estimation
of things, are less criminal than burglary, have been treated in the same
manner, then it must follow, that a community has, and ought to have, an
indisputable right to punish it with the pains of death.

IT now remains, that we further confirm the point, by answering the objections
which may be brought against it.

1. IF house-breaking is in fact so heinous a crime, why was its punishment
left to the sword of the injured party, and not like others of a capital
nature, made 'an iniquity to be punished by the judges?' The answer is obvious:
The body of the people in Moses's day, were shepherds dwelling in tents. Their
wealth consisted chiefly in cattle, and not in stores of goods, and costly
furniture. Their habitations in common, were only a single apartment, or
lodging place on the ground, made of canvas, often moved from place to place,
and into which, it was next to impossible for one to enter in the night,
without being discovered. On which, and other accounts, neither the lives,
dwellings, nor property of that people, could be, like ours, exposed to
plunderers in the night, And after these tents were exchanged for houses, in
the land of Canaan, even these were so formed and furnished, in those early
times of plainness and simplicity, as did very much frustrate the designs of
house-breakers. When Britain was invaded by Caesar, the houses, we are told,
even in capital towns, were without chimneys, wattled and plaistered over with
clay, and all the furniture and utensils were of wood. The people slept on
straw pallets, with a log of wood for a pillow. And in the infancy, or first
settlement of this, or any new country, when houses are made of logs, without
windows, without partitions, and with but a single door to enter, and no
tempting treasure within; house-breaking, in these circumstances, required not
such a penalty as it really demands in the progress, or advanced age of the
same country; where population and wealth, luxury and idleness, poverty and
vice, have created innumerable temptations to the inhabitants. Agreeably to
this, it ought to be known and remembered, that burglary was not, by law, even
in the second instance of it, punishable by death in this State, for a space of
more than ninety years together: Branding and whipping answered the purpose
until the year 1715, when the legislature, for good reasons, given in the
preamble of the act, made it felony, in the first instance. This at once struck
terror into hardy, determined offenders; and the consequences was, from that
day to the present time, our gallows have been rarely occupied, except by
natives of foreign countries, or neighboring States. And might I here hazard a
conjecture, it should be this, that some even of those, who are now the most
virulent in the opposition, would, upon the adoption of their own plan, soon
clamor as loud in favor of more effectual punishments, as ever they have done
against them; unless it should be a fact, which I hope it is not, that they are
already in the number of criminals, or else, by their present opposition, they
intend for themselves a future license.

2. IT may be further objected, perhaps, that inasmuch as death is the greatest
punishment that ever can be inflicted on any offender, burglary and murder will
lose their proper distinctions, and be treated as equals in criminality.

THIS objection is best answered by an appeal to the feelings of every man,
upon once knowing that his house is broken up in the night, and that a thief is
within the walls of it, Who will venture unarmed to enter where he is? Who will
risque his life upon this, that such an audacious felon has not entered the
house with a murderous, as well as thievish intention? Will the wretch, who is
hardy enough to commit a crime, which he knows is death, ever hesitate to
murder a man, under his own roof, to make an escape? I know it is called cruel,
and wide from all reason and proportion, to take away the life of one, who has
taken away from another, only a few articles of his property. But is this all?
Did a thief ever yet enter an house without a design of being concealed, at all
adventures? And if so then, he never entered without murder in his heart. This
is, and ever ought to be the presumption. Upon this it evidently was, that an
house-breaker, under the Jewish law, might be killed in the night; for the sun
being risen, the presumption was, that he came not to kill, but to steal only,
and therefore blood was upon his head who should smite him. Call not then an
house-breaker, any more by the name of a thief, for it is by interpretation, a
murderer. And though he may often have plundered in the night, without actual
murder; yet this, for aught we know, was owing wholly to his being undiscovered
and unmolested in his wickedness. Reason therefore, and scripture, will both
support me when I affirm, in sacred style, that ' the thief comes not but for
to steal, to kill, and to destroy.' Again,

3. MAKING burglary a capital offense, or any other except murder, does without
necessity, and at once, defeat the main design of punishment, and deprive the
community of a life that might be useful to it. In answer to this it should be
observed, that all the proposed ends of punishment, are reformation,
restitution, and terror to evil doers. The two first of these, it is said, will
be taken away and lost, with the life of the criminal; but this wants proof.
And whoever well considers the nature and progress of those vices, which
usually end in the halter, with the catalogue of crimes which fill up
confessions from the gallows, will perhaps, entertain as high expectations of
reformation in criminals, from the first hour of their sentence, to the day of
their execution, as in a number of surviving years. In general, they are a
number of incurables, except by an exploit of omnipotence; and therefore, life
to them may be a curse, even greater if possible than it is to society; while
the taking of it from them as a punishment, will in reality, tend to discourage
and deter daring offenders more than any other. -- This I know is denied by
some; but the opinion of him, who once said, ' skin for skin; yea, all that a
man has will he give for his life,' is perhaps, in this particular, preferable
to theirs, who can believe, any punishment ever yet practiced in a christian
country, can in general, terrify and deter men equal to the pains of death. By
all winch, however, I mean not to oppose, on the contrary it is most ardently
wished, that we had mines, to enslave for life, or galleys, to chain up the
mischievous hands of such nesarious banditti; or, if possible, that some other
effectual punishments were provided by the State, at least by way of
experiment, instead of death, for some of our capital crimes. But until these
are instituted, and actually take its place, we shall insist upon it, though it
is at the expense of hard names and bitter censures, that ' whosoever will save
his life' in such cases, ' shall lose it' in the whole community; ' and
whosoever shall destroy life,' when forfeited, and full of deadly poison to
society, ' shall find it an hundred fold in this world.' -- Yet may heaven
forbid that government, after all, should ever depend upon severe punishments
alone to prevent the commission of crimes. Unless ' the ax be laid at the root'
of the evil, by proper methods of restraining idleness and luxury, and a due
care to educate the members of a community, to the love of virtue and industry,
and an abhorrence of every thing base and dishonest, in vain are even capital
punishments. The wages of sin may be death, but alone it will not avail to stem
the torrent, and secure the peace and happiness of society.

4. THAT objection, of all others, which by some is thought to have the
greatest weight, but in reality has the least of all, is taken from our
Savior's words to the woman, taken in adultery (John 8.) This woman was, by
the Scribes and Pharisees brought to Jesus, and indicted before him, for a
crime that was death by the law of Moses. In this case they asked his opinion,
with a design, if possible, to ensnare him; i. e. if he said she ought to die,
they intended to have accused him to the Roman governor, for tolerating the
Jews, in the exercise of a judicial power. But if he had acquitted her, they
would represent him an enemy to the law of Moses, Knowing their design, he at
first waves an answer: But when they insisted upon it, he replies, 'let him
that is without sin cast the first stone.' This at once, fixed upon their
consciences such painful convictions, that they immediately left him and the
woman alone; to whom he said, 'hath no man condemned thee?' she said no man,
Lord: Jesus replies, 'neither do I condemn thee; go and sin no more.' Thus
their snare was broken; and not the penalty of Moses's law, in the case of
adultery, taken away, as some have strangely inferred from this passage.
'Christ came not to destroy the law, but to fulfill all righteousness.' He never
once set himself up 'as a judge or divider,' in civil affairs; on the contrary
he was an eminent pattern of obedience and subjection to government, 'rendering
unto Caesar the things that were Cesars;' and finally he left it with his
Apostles, to enjoin on all christian princes and rulers, that sufficient laws
be made, 'for the lawless and disobedient, for murderers, liars, whoremongers,
for them that defile themselves with mankind, and for -- men-stealers,' etc.
from which it is evident, that the ancient Jewish law against theft is here
expressly ratified by the Apostle, see 1 Timothy 1, 10. Exodus 21, 16. Once more, and

5. IN opposition to the above reasoning, it will undoubtedly be said, and well
it may, by men of sense and reflection, 'to what purpose is all this waste' of
time and pains in proof of that, which needs none at all. This is the
objection, and I honestly confess I am not able to answer it. Let him do it who
can; for is it possible to suppose, that a body of judicial laws, though made
in heaven, for a people who existed some thousand years ago, and so different
from us in their manners, connexions, pursuits, situation, soil, climate, and
an endless variety of other circumstances, can, or ever ought, in equity, and
in particular, to bind us, or any other nation on earth, at this day. Such laws
must exceed even the power of omnipotence itself, as much as any contradiction,
or act of injustice, that can be named. Many useful instructions indeed, to all
legislators, of every country on the globe, may and ought to be borrowed from
thence, as they came from a God infinitely wise: Yet, considered merely as
Jewish, they are, perhaps, no more to us, than those of any other wise nation.
Should it therefore still be urged, that because neither burglary, arson,
robbery, nor rape, were death by the Jewish law, they in fact, ought not to be
so by ours, I have equal right in my turn, to insist upon it, that the loss of
virginity before marriage, the striking of parents, and sabbath-breaking, shall
by our laws, also be punished with death. -- The exact truth after all is this;
the wisdom of God, has left the power of legislation, in the particular
circumstances of it, to the wisdom of moral agents, in every region under
heaven; and therefore, upon the virtue and good sense of this county, we must
and shall rely, in future; so far at least, as to presume, that not one among
all, will ever again open his mouth, to curse or revile the rulers of his own
choice, while in the honest, but painful execution of a law, a righteous law of
our own enacting; and in the open, hazardous defense of our own lives, peace,
and property.

A SKETCH of JOHN DIXSON's Life.
THE principal account, we can at present give of this unfortunate young man,
is that which was taken from his own mouth, while in prison: And as he was
utterly averse from such confessions as have been usually made under such
circumstances, his history will be short. -- He was born, as he constantly
affirmed, at East-Haddam, in Connecticut: His father died when he was young,
and under the care of his mother, he was early in life sent to school, where he
soon distinguished himself for mischievous behavior. When grown up, he entered
contrary to the inclination of his parent, on board a vessel bound to France:
His villainous conduct in this voyage, procured for him a severe chastisement
from his captain; which he returned upon his own head, the first opportunity he
found on shore. After this, he enlisted into the American army, and took a
bounty, but soon deserted, and again enlisted, and thus went on until the
number of his enlistments, with bounties, amounted to eighteen times: For which
he received proper punishments as often as detected; but to no effect. He made
several rambles through different parts of the country, in which he improved
every opportunity 'to fill up the measure of his iniquity.' He frequently broke
open houses and stores, and stole goods, provisions, money, clothing, and even
cattle, to a very considerable amount: All which, in a very short time, he
consumed upon his lusts, at taverns, in grog-shops, and over the gameing-table.
From a shoe-maker's shop he once stole a pair of shoes; and being immediately
discovered, he, to save his back from stripes, begged, and promised to labor
faithfully, until he had made full satisfaction: The owner finally consented;
and employed him to drive his team: But he ungratefully seized the very first
opportunity, and drove the oxen to a river, swam them over, then sold them,
took the money, and went off. For theft he was once committed to Worcester
gaol, and there loaded with irons, strongly fastened about his neck, which he
soon broke, as well as the prison, and fled. He also broke from Windham gaol,
in Connecticut, to which he had been confined for stealing again. 'His mouth
was full of cursing' and swearing, of oaths and blasphemies of the most
horrible sound, that his imagination could invent. He showed no regard to the
holy sabbath; rarely ever read the scriptures, or attended public worship, and
never gave any attention to the word preached when present. He was once accused
of committing a rape; and it is perhaps now beyond a doubt, that while in the
army, and for repeated desertions, enlistments, taking bounties, and changing
his name, this very man was there sentenced to death, and actually brought
under the gallows for execution; but for reasons unknown, he was pardoned, and
returned to his regiment, where he stole an horse, in a few hours after, from
an officer, and rode off. But the fatal crime, which ended at once his life and
licentious career, was burglary, committed at the house of Capt. James Dagget,
of Rehoboth. The evidence upon which he was apprehended, tried, and condemned,
was so full and convincing, as left in the mind scarcely a remaining doubt. The
barefaced impudence 'of his own iniquity found him out,' ' sin taking occasion
from' thence, ' deceived him and slew him.' Before he received the sentence of
death, he was in prison jovial, dissolute, and profane; but afterward he
appeared, at times, full of anxiety and remorse. -- His attention and
behavior, the last times he attended public worship, were very serious. In a
short speech made at the gallows, he warned others, by himself, against
drinking, gameing, and evil company: He then expressed his thanks to the
sheriff, and to all of whom he had received kindnesses, while in prison; and as
soon as the appointed moment of his execution arrived, he leaped into the cart,
assisted in adjusting the rope about his own neck, and even in turning himself
off, with an appearance of fortitude, which surprised every spectator; but
this, whether from principles of infidelity, stupefaction, or christianity, we
dare not pronounce.

Ill-fated youth! compute your gain,
Pain purchased pleasure, ends in pain:
The strangling noose, in death destroys,
The fabric of your guilty joys!
FINIS.

