CONSIDERATIONS ON THE BANK OF NORTH AMERICA.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by HALL and SELLERS. 1785.

CONSIDERATIONS, etc.
AN attack is made on the credit and institution of the Bank of North America.
Whether this attack is justified by the principles of law and sound policy, is
a natural subject of enquiry. The enquiry is as necessary and interesting, as
it is natural: For, though some people represent the Bank as injurious and
dangerous, while others consider it as salutary and beneficial, to the
community, all view it as an object of high importance; deserving and demanding
the public attention.

IN the investigation of this subject, it will be requisite to discuss some
great and leading questions concerning the constitution of the United States,
and the relation, which subsists between them and each particular State in the
union. Perhaps it is to be wished that this discussion had not been rendered
necessary; and that those questions had rested some time longer among the
arcana imperii: But they are now presented to the public; and the public should
view them with firmness, with impartiality, and with all the solicitude
befitting such a momentous occasion.

A GENTLEMAN, Vide the preface to the Statement of the accounts of the United
States.
who had the best opportunities of observing, and who possesses the best
talents for judging on the subject, informs his fellow-citizens officially,
that it may be not only asserted, but demonstrated, that, without the
establishment of the National Bank, the business of the department of finance
could not have been performed in the late war.

THE Millennium is not yet come. War, with all the horrors and miseries in his
train, may re-visit us. The finances may again be deranged: Public credit may,
again, be at an end: No means may be afforded adequate to the public expenses.
Is it wise or politic to deprive our country, in such a situation, of a
resource, which happy experience has shown to be of such essential importance?
Will the citizens of the United States be encouraged to embark their fortunes
on a similar bottom in a future war, by seeing the vessel, which carried us so
successfully through the last, thrown aside, like an useless hulk, upon the
return of peace?

IT will not be improper to recall to our remembrance the origin, the
establishment, and the proceedings of the Bank of North America.

IN May, 1781, the Superintendant of Finance laid before Congress a plan of a
Bank. On the 26th of that month Congress passed the following resolution
concerning it.

"RESOLVED, That Congress do approve of the plan for establishing a National
Bank in these United States, submitted to their consideration by Mr. Robert
Morris, the 17th May, 1781, and that they will promote and support the same by
such ways and means, from time to time, as may appear necessary for the
institution, and consistent with the public good.

"THAT the subscribers to the said Bank SHALL BE INCORPORATED, agreeably to the
principles and terms of the plan, under the name of the President, Directors
and Company of the Bank of North America, so soon as the subscription shall be
filled, the Directors and President chosen, and application made to CONGRESS
for that purpose, by the President and Directors elected.

"RESOLVED, That it be recommended to the several States, by proper laws for
that purpose, to provide that no other Bank or Bankers shall be established or
permitted within the said States respectively during the war.

"RESOLVED, That the notes hereafter to be issued by the said Bank, payable on
demand, shall be receivable in payment of all taxes, duties and debts, due or
that may become due or payable to the United States.

"RESOLVED, That Congress will recommend to the several legislatures to pass
laws, making it felony without benefit of clergy, for any person to counterfeit
Bank Notes, or to pass such notes, knowing them to be counterfeit; also making
it felony without benefit of clergy, for any President, Inspector, Director,
Officer or servant of the Bank, to convert any of the property, money or credit
of the said Bank to his own use, or in any other way to be guilty of fraud or
embezzlement, as officers or servants of the Bank."

UNDER these resolutions a subscription was opened for the National Bank: This
subscription was not confined to Pennsylvania: The citizens of other States
trusted their property to the public faith; and before the end of December,
1781, the subscription was filled, "from an expectation of a charter of
incorporation from Congress." Application was made to Congress by the President
and Directors, then chosen, for an act of incorporation. "The EXIGENCIES of the
United States rendered it indispensably necessary that such an act should be
immediately passed." See the act in the appendix.
Congress* at the same time that they PASSED the act of incorporation,
RECOMMENDED to the legislature of each State, to pass such laws as they might
judge necessary for giving its ordinance its full operation, agreeably to the
true intent and meaning thereof, and according to the recommendations contained
in the resolution of the 26th day of May preceding.

THE Bank immediately commenced its operations. Its seeds were small, but they
were vigorous. The sums paid in by individuals upon their subscriptions did not
amount, in the whole, to seventy thousand dollars. The sum invested by the
United States, in bank stock, amounted to something more than two hundred and
fifty thousand dollars: But this sum may be said to have been paid in with one
hand and borrowed with the other; and before the end of the first three months
farther sums were advanced to the United States, and an advance was made to
this State. See in the appendix the different sums advanced to this state.
Besides, numerous accommodations were afforded to individuals. Little was it
then imagined that the Bank would ever be represented as unfriendly to
circulation. It was viewed as the source and as the support of credit, both
private and public: As such, it was hated and dreaded by the enemies of the
United States: As such, it was loved and fostered by their friends.

PENNSYLVANIA, distinguished on numerous occasions by her faithful and
affectionate attachment to foederal principles, embraced, in the first session
of her legislature after the establishment of the Bank, the opportunity of
testifying her approbation of an act, which had been found to be indispensably
necessary. Harmonizing with the sentiments and recommendations of the United
States, the Assembly passed an act, 18 th March, 1782.
"for preventing and punishing the counterfeiting of the common seal, bank
bills and bank notes, of the President, Directors and Company of the Bank of
North America." In the preamble to this act, which, according to the
constitution of this state, expresses the reasons and motives for passing it,
the "NECESSITY" of taking "EFFECTUAL measures for preventing and punishing
frauds and cheats which may be put upon the President, Directors and Company of
the BANK of NORTH AMERICA," is explicitly DECLARED by the legislature.

THE sentiments and conduct of other states, respecting the establishment of
the National Bank by Congress, were similar to those of Pennsylvania. The
General Assembly of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations January Sessions,
1782.
made it felony, without benefit of Clergy, "to counterfeit any note or notes
issued, or to be issued, from the Bank of North America, as approved and
ESTABLISHED by the United States in Congress assembled." The state of
Connecticut enacted, 10 th January, 1782.
that a tax should be laid, payable in money, or "notes issued by the Directors
of the National Bank, ESTABLISHED by an ordinance of the United States in
Congress assembled." By a law of Massachusetts, the subscribers to the National
Bank, approved of by the United States, were "incorporated, on the behalf of
that commonwealth, by the name of the President, Directors and Company of the
Bank of North America, according to the terms of the ORDINANCE TO INCORPORATE
THE SAID SUBSCRIBERS, passed by the United States in Congress assembled on the
thirty-first day of December, 1781." The same law further enacts, "that all
notes or bills, which have been or shall be issued by, for, or in the name of
the said President, Directors and Company, and payable on demand, shall be
receivable in the payment of all taxes, debts and duties, due or that may
become due, or payable to, or for account of, the said United States." In the
preamble of this law, the legislature declares that "a National Bank is of
great service, as well to the public as to individuals."

THE President and Directors of the Bank had a delicate and a difficult part to
act. On one hand, they were obliged to guard against the malice and exertions
of their enemies: On the other, it was incumbent on them to sooth the timidity
of some of their friends. The credit of a Bank, as well as all other credit,
depends on opinion. Opinion, whether well or ill founded, produces, in each
case, the same effects upon conduct. Some thought that an act of incorporation
from the legislature of this state would be beneficial; none apprehended that
it could ever be hurtful to the National Bank. Prudence, therefore, and a
disposition, very natural in that season of doubt and diffidence, to gratify
the sentiments, and even the prejudices, of such as might become subscribers or
customers to the Bank, directed an application to the Assembly for "a charter,
similar to that granted by the United States in Congress assembled." But though
the Directors were willing to avail themselves of encouragement from every
quarter, they meant not to relinquish any of their rights, or to change the
foundation on which they rested. They made their application in their corporate
character. Their letter to the President of the Supreme Executive Council, on
this occasion, is in the appendix.
They expressly mentioned to the Assembly, that the United States in Congress
assembled had granted to the Bank a charter of incorporation, and that the
institution was to be carried on under THEIR IMMEDIATE AUSPICES. The
legislature thought that it was proper and reasonable to grant 1 st April, 1782.
the request of the President and Directors of the Bank of North America; and
assigned, as a reason for the act, "that the United States in Congress
assembled, from a conviction of the support which the finances of the UNITED
STATES would receive from the establishment of a NATIONAL BANK, passed an
ordinance to incorporate the subscribers for this purpose, by the name and
style of the President, Directors and Company of the Bank of North America."

THE first clause of the law enacts, that "those who are, and those who shall
become subscribers to the said Bank, be, and FOR EVER HEREAFTER SHALL BE, a
corporation and body politic, to all intents and purposes."

IT is further enacted, that "the said corporation be, and shall be for ever
hereafter, able and capable in law to do and execute all and singular matters
and things, that to them shall or may appertain to do."

To show, in the most striking light, the kind sentiments of the legislature
toward the institution, it is further enacted, that "this act shall be
construed and taken most favorably and beneficially for the said corporation."

ON these facts and proceedings, two questions of much national importance
present themselves to our view and examination.

I. IS THE Bank of North America legally and constitutionally instituted and
organized, by the charter of incorporation granted by the United States in
Congress assembled?

II. WOULD it be wise or politic in the legislature of Pennsylvania, to revoke
the charter which it has granted to the institution?

THE discussion of these two questions will naturally lead us to the proper
conclusions concerning the VALIDITY and the UTILITY of the Bank.

I. HAD the United States in Congress assembled a legal and constitutional
power to institute and organize the Bank of North America, by a charter of
incorporation?

THE objection, under this head, will be -- that the articles of confederation
express all the powers of Congress, that in those articles no power is
delegated to that body to grant charters of incorporation, and that, therefore,
Congress possess no such power.

IT is true, that, by the second article of the confederation, "each State
retains its sovereignty, freedom and independence, and every power,
jurisdiction and right, which is not, by the confederation, expressly delegated
to the United States in Congress assembled."

IF, then, any or each of the States possessed, previous to the confederation,
a power, jurisdiction or right, to institute and organize, by a charter of
incorporation, a Bank for North America; in other words -- commensurate to the
United States; such power, jurisdiction and right, unless expressly delegated to
Congress, cannot be legally or constitutionally exercised by that body.

BUT, we presume, it will not be contended, that any or each of the States
could exercise any power or act of sovereignty extending over all the other
States, or any of them; or, in other words, incorporate a Bank, commensurate to
the United States.

THE consequence is, that this is not an act of sovereignty, or a power,
jurisdiction or right, which, by the second article of the confederation, must
be expressly delegated to Congress, in order to be possessed by that body.

IF, however, any person shall contend that any or each of the States can
exercise such an extensive power or act of sovereignty as that above mentioned;
to such person we give this answer -- The State of Massachusetts has exercised
such power and act: It has incorporated the Bank of North America. But to
pursue my argument.

THOUGH the United States in Congress assembled derive from the particular
States no power, jurisdiction or right, which is not expressly delegated by the
confederation, it does not thence follow, that the United States in Congress
have no other powers, jurisdiction or rights, than those delegated by the
particular States.

THE United States have general rights, general powers, and general
obligations, not derived from any particular States, nor from all the
particular States, taken separately; but resulting from the union of the whole:
And, therefore, it is provided, in the fifth article of the confederation, that
for the more convenient management of the GENERAL INTERESTS OF THE UNITED
STATES, delegates shall be annually appointed to meet in Congress.

To many purposes, the United States are to be considered as one undivided,
independent nation; and as possessed of all the rights, and powers, and
properties, by the law of nations incident to such.

WHENEVER an object occurs, to the direction of which no particular state is
competent, the management of it must, of necessity, belong to the United States
in Congress assembled. There are many objects of this extended nature. The
purchase, the sale, the defense, and the government of lands and countries, not
WITHIN ANY State, are all included under this description. An institution for
circulating paper, and establishing its credit over the whole United States, is
naturally ranged in the same class.

THE act of independence was made before the articles of confederation. This
act declares, that "these UNITED Colonies," (not enumerating them separately)
"are free and independent States; and that, as free and independent States,
THEY have full power to do all acts and things which independent States may, of
right, do."

THE confederation was not intended to weaken or abridge the powers and rights,
to which the United States were previously entitled. It was not intended to
transfer any of those powers or rights to the particular States, or any of
them. If, therefore, the power now in question was vested in the United States
before the confederation; it continues vested in them still. The confederation
clothed the United States with many (though, perhaps, not with sufficient)
powers: But of none did it disrobe them.

IT is no new position, that rights may be vested in a political body, which
did not previously reside in any or in all the members of that body. They may
be derived solely from the UNION of those members.

2 Burlamaqui, p. 42.
"THE case," says the celebrated Burlamaqui, is here very near the same as in
that of several voices collected together, which, by their union, produce a
harmony, that was not to be found separately in each.

A NUMBER of unconnected inhabitants are settled on each side of a navigable
river; it belongs to none of them; it belongs not to them all, for they have
nothing in common: Let them unite; the river is the property of the united body.

THE arguments drawn from the political associations of individuals into a
state will apply, with equal force and propriety, to a number of states united
by a confederacy.

NEW states must be FORMED and established; their extent and boundaries must be
regulated and ascertained. How can this be done, unless by the United States in
Congress assembled?

STATES are corporations or bodies politic of the most important and dignified
kind.

LET us now concenter the foregoing observations, and apply them to the
incorporation of the Bank of North America by Congress.

BY the civil law, corporations seem to have been created by the mere and
voluntary association of their members, provided such convention was not
contrary to law. Blackstone, 472.


BY the common law, something more is necessary -- All the methods whereby
corporations exist are, for the most part, reducible to that of the king's
letters patents, or charter of incorporation. Blackstone, 472, 473.


FROM this it will appear that the creation of a corporation is, by the common
law, considered as the act of the executive rather than of the legislative
powers of government.

BEFORE the revolution charters of incorporation were granted by the
proprietaries of Pennsylvania, under a derivative authority from the crown, and
those charters have been recognized by the constitution and laws of the
commonwealth since the revolution.

FROM analogy, therefore, we may justly infer, that the United States in
Congress assembled, possessing the executive powers of the union, may, in
virtue of such powers, grant charters of incorparation for accomplishing
objects that comprehend the general interests of the United States.

BUT the United States in Congress assembled possess, in many instances, and to
many purposes, the legislative as well as the executive powers of the union;
and therefore, whether we consider the incorporation of the Bank as a law, or
as a charter, it will be equally within the powers of Congress: For the object
of this institution could not be reached without the exertion of the combined
sovereignty of the union.

I HAVE asked -- How can new states, which are bodies politic, be formed,
unless by the United States in Congress assembled? Fact, as well as argument,
justifies my sentiments on this subject. The conduct of Congress has been
similar on similar occasions. The same principles have directed the exercise of
the same powers.

IN the month of April, 1784, Congress resolved, that part of the western
territory "should be divided into distinct states."

THEY further resolved, that the settlers should, "either on their own
petition, or on the order of Congress, receive authority from THEM to meet
together, for the purpose of establishing a temporary government, to adopt the
constitution and laws of any one of the original states."

"WHEN any such state shall have acquired twenty thousand free inhabitants, on
giving due proof thereof to Congress, they shall receive from THEM authority to
call a Convention of representatives, to establish a permanent constitution and
government for themselves."

"THE preceding articles," among others, "shall be formed into a CHARTER of
compact, shall be duly executed by the President of the United States in
Congress assembled, under his hand and the seal of the United States; shall be
promulgated, and shall stand as fundamental Constitutions between the thirteen
original states, and each of the several states NOW NEWLY DESCRIBED,
unalienable from and after the sale of any part of the territory of such state,
but by the joint consent of the United States in Congress assembled, and of the
particular state within which such alteration is proposed to be made."

IT will be difficult, I believe, to urge against the power of Congress to
grant a charter to the Bank of North America, any argument, which may not, with
equal strength and fitness, be urged against the power of that body to form,
execute and promulgate a charter of compact for the New States.

THE sentiments of the representatives of the United States, as to their power
of incorporating the Bank, ought to have much weight with us. Their sentiments
are strongly marked by their conduct, in their first resolutions respecting the
Bank. These resolutions are made at the same time, and on the same subject: But
there is a striking difference in their manner. It was thought proper "that no
other Bank should be permitted within any of the states, during the war."
Congress "RECOMMENDED to the several states to make provision, for that
purpose, by proper laws." It was thought prudent that the Bank should be
protected, by penal laws, from fraud, embezzlement and forgery. Congress
RECOMMENDED it to the several Legislatures to pass such laws. It was deemed
expedient that bank notes should be received in payment of sums payable to the
United States: Congress RESOLVE, that the notes "SHALL BE RECEIVABLE" in such
payments. It was judged necessary that the Bank should have a charter of
incorporation: Congress RESOLVE, that the Bank "SHALL BE INCORPORATED," on
application made "TO CONGRESS" for that purpose. The line of distinction
between those things in which Congress could only recommend, and those in which
they could act, is drawn in the clearest manner. The incorporation of the
National Bank is ranked among those things, in which they could act.

THIS act of Congress has, either expressly, or by implication, received the
approbation of every state in the union. It was officially announced to every
state by the Superintendant of Finance. See his letter in the appendix.
Had any one state considered it as an exercise of usurped power, would not
that state have remonstrated against it? But there is no such remonstrance.

THIS act of Congress has been most explicitly recognized by the Legislature of
Pennsylvania. The law for preventing and punishing frauds and cheats upon the
Bank was passed on the 18th of March, 1782, and before the Bank had obtained a
charter from this state. By that law it is made felony without benefit of
clergy, to forge the common seal of the President, Directors and Company of the
Bank of North America. Who were the President, Directors and Company of the
Bank of North America? Those whom Congress had made "a corporation and body
politic, to all intents and purposes, BY THAT NAME AND STYLE." How came that
body by a "common seal?" The act of Congress ordained that that body "should
have full power and authority to make, have and use a COMMON SEAL." In the act
to incorporate the subscribers to the Bank of North America, the Legislature,
after reciting that the United States in Congress assembled had "passed an
ordinance to incorporate them," say, "the President and Directors of the said
Bank have applied to this House for a similar act of incorporation, which
request it is proper and reasonable to grant."

WHEN the foregoing facts and arguments are considered, compared and weighed,
they will, it is hoped, evince and establish, satisfactorily to all, and
conclusively on the legislature of Pennsylvania, the truth of this position --
That the Bank of North America was legally and constitutionally instituted and
organized, by the charter of incorporation granted by the United States in
Congress assembled.

II. WOULD it, then, be wise or politic in the legislature of Pennsylvania, to
revoke the charter which it has granted to this institution? It would not be
wise or politic --

1st. BECAUSE the proceeding would be nugatory. The recall of the charter of
Pennsylvania would not repeal that of the United States, by which we have
proved the Bank to be legally and constitutionally instituted and organized.

2d. BECAUSE, though the legislature may destroy the legislative operation, yet
it cannot undo the legislative acknowledgment of its own act. Though a statute
be repealed, yet it shows the sense and opinion of the legislature concerning
the subject of it, in the same manner as if it continued in force. Foster, 394.
The legislature declared, in the law, that it was proper and reasonable to
grant the request of the President and Directors of the Bank, for an act of
incorporation similar to the ordinance of Congress: No repeal of the law can
weaken the force of that declaration.

3d. BECAUSE such a proceeding would wound that confidence in the engagements
of government, which it is so much the interest and duty of every state to
encourage and reward. The act in question formed a charter of compact between
the Legislature of this state, and the President, Directors and Company of the
Bank of North America. The latter asked for nothing but what was proper and
reasonable: The former granted nothing but what was proper and reasonable: The
terms of the compact were, therefore, fair and honest: While these terms are
observed on one side, the compact cannot, consistently with the rules of good
faith, be departed from on the other.

IT may be asked -- Has not the state power over her own laws? -- May she not
alter, amend, extend, restrain and repeal them at her pleasure?

I AM far from opposing the legislative authority of the state: But it must be
observed, that, according to the practice of the legislature, public acts of
very different kinds are drawn and promulgated under the same form. A law to
vest or confirm an estate in an individual -- a law to incorporate a
congregation or other society -- a law respecting the rights and properties of
all the citizens of the state -- are all passed in the same manner; are all
clothed in the same dress of legislative formality; and are all equally acts of
the Representatives of the Freemen of the commonwealth. But surely it will not
be pretended, that, after laws of those different kinds are passed, the
legislature possesses over each the same discretionary power of repeal. In a
law respecting the rights and properties of all the citizens of the state, this
power may be safely exercised by the legislature. Why? Because, in this case,
the interest of those who make the law (the members of Assembly and their
constituents) and the interest of those who are to be affected by the law (the
members of Assembly and their constituents) is the same. It is a common cause,
and may, therefore, be safely trusted to the Representatives of the community.
None can hurt another, without, at the same time, hurting himself. Very
different is the case with regard to a law, by which the state grants
privileges to a congregation or other society. Here two parties are instituted,
and two distinct interests subsist. Rules of justice, of faith, and of honor,
must, therefore, be established between them: For, if interest alone is to be
viewed, the congregation or society must always lie at the mercy of the
community. Still more different is the case with regard to a law, by which an
estate is vested or confirmed in an individual: If, in this case, the
legislature may at discretion, and without any reason assigned, divest or
destroy his estate, then a person seized of an estate in fee-simple, under
legislative sanction, is, in truth, nothing more than a solemn tenant at will.

FOR these reasons, whenever the objects and makers of an instrument, passed
under the form of a law, are not the same, it is to be considered as a compact,
and to be interpreted according to the rules and maxims, by which compacts are
governed. A foreigner is naturalized by law: Is he a citizen only during
pleasure? He is no more, if, without any cause of forfeiture assigned and
established, the law, by which he is naturalized, may at pleasure be repealed.
To receive the legislative stamp of stability and permanency, acts of
incorporation are applied for from the legislature. If these acts may be
repealed without notice, without accusation, without hearing, without proof,
without forfeiture; where is the stamp of their stability? Their motto should
be, "LEVITY." If the act for incorporating the subscribers to the Bank of
North America shall be repealed in this manner, a precedent will be established
for repealing, in the same manner, every other legislative charter in
Pennsylvania. A pretense, as specious as any that can be alleged on this
occasion, will never be wanting on any future occasion. Those acts of the
state, which have hitherto been considered as the sure anchors of privilege and
of property, will become the sport of every varying gust of politics, and will
float wildly backwards and forwards on the irregular and impetuous tides of
party and faction.

4th. IT would not be wise or politic to repeal the charter granted by this
state to the Bank of North America, because such a measure would operate, as
far as it would have any operation, against the credit of the United States, on
which the interest of this commonwealth and her citizens so essentially
depends. This institution originated under the auspices of the United States:
The subscription to the National Bank was opened under the recommendations and
the engagements of Congress: Citizens of this state, and of the other states,
and foreigners, have become stock-holders, on the public faith: The United
States have pledged themselves to promote and support the institution by such
ways and means, from time to time, as may appear necessary for it, and
consistent with the public good 26 th May, 1781.
They have recommended to the legislature of each state, to pass such laws as
they might judge necessary for giving the ordinance incorporating the Bank its
full operation. Pennsylvania has entered fully into the views, the
recommendations, and the measures of Congress respecting the Bank. She has
declared in the strongest manner her sense of their propriety, their
reasonableness, and their necessity: She has passed laws for giving them their
full operation. Will it redound to the credit of the United States to adopt and
pursue a contrary system of conduct? The acts and recommendations of Congress
subsist still in all their original force: Will it not have a tendency to shake
all confidence in the councils and proceedings of the United States, if those
acts and recommendations are now disregarded, without any reason shown for
disregarding them? What influence will such a proceeding have upon the opinions
and sentiments of the citizens of the United States and of foreigners? In one
year they see measures respecting an object of confessed public importance
adopted and recommended with ardour by Congress; and the views and wishes of
that body zealously pursued by Pennsylvania: In another year they see those
very measures, without any apparent reason for the change, warmly reprobated by
that state: They must conclude one of two things: -- That Congress adopted and
recommended those measures hastily and without consideration; or that
Pennsylvania has reprobated them undutifully and disrespectfully. The former
conclusion will give rise to very unfavourable reflections concerning the
discernment both of the state and of the United States: The latter will suggest
very inauspicious sentiments concerning the foederal disposition and character
of this commonwealth. The result of the conclusion will be -- that the United
States does not deserve, or that they will not receive, support in their system
of finance. -- These deductions and inferences will have particular weight, as
they will be grounded on the conduct of Pennsylvania, hitherto one of the most
foederal, active and affectionate states in the union.

5th. IT would not be wise or politic in the legislature to repeal her charter
to the Bank; because the tendency of such a step would be to deprive this state
and the United States of all the advantages, public and private, which would
flow from the institution, in times of war, and in times of peace.

LET us turn our attention to some of the most material advantages resulting
from a Bank.

1st. IT increases circulation, and invigorates industry. "It is not, says Dr.
Smith, in his Treatise on the Wealth of Nations, Vol. 1, p. 383, 384.
by augmenting the capital of the country, but by rendering a greater part of
that capital active and productive than would otherwise be so, that the most
judicious operations of banking can increase the industry of the country. The
part of his capital which a dealer is obliged to keep by him unemployed, and in
ready money, for answering occasional demands, is so much dead stock, which, so
long as it remains in this situation, produces nothing either to him or to his
country. The judicious operations of banking enable him to convert this dead
stock into active and productive stock; into materials to work upon, into tools
to work with, and into provisions and subsistence to work for; into stock which
produces something both to himself and to his country. The gold and silver
money which circulates in any country, and by means of which the produce of its
land and labor is annually circulated and distributed to the proper consumers,
is, in the same manner as the ready money of the dealer, all dead stock. It is
a very valuable part of the capital of the country, which produces nothing to
the country. The judicious operations of banking, by substituting paper in the
room of a great part of this gold and silver, enables the country to convert a
great part of this dead stock into active and productive stock; into stock
which produces something to the country. The gold and silver money which
circulates in any country may very properly be compared to a highway, which,
while it circulates and carries to market all the grass and corn of the
country, produces, itself, not a single pile of either. The judicious
operations of banking, by providing, if I may be allowed so violent a metaphor,
a sort of waggon-way through the air, enable the country to convert, as it
were, a great part of its highways into good pasture and cornfieldsd, and
thereby to increase very considerably the annual produce of its land and
labor."

THE same sensible writer informs us, in another place, that "the Vol. 1, p.
434, 435.
substitution of paper in the room of gold and silver money, replaces a very
expensive instrument of commerce with one much less costly, and sometimes
equally convenient. Circulation comes to be carried on by a new wheel, which it
costs less both to erect and to maintain than the old one. -- There are several
sorts of paper money; but the circulating notes of banks and bankers is the
species which is best known, and which seems best adapted for this purpose." --
"These notes come to have the same currency as gold and silver money, FROM THE
CONFIDENCE THAT SUCH MONEY CAN AT ANY TIME BE HAD FOR THEM."

SIR James Stewart calls banking "the great engine, Vol. 2, p. 350.
by which domestic circulation is carried on."

TO HAVE a free, easy and equable instrument of circulation is of much
importance in all countries: It is of peculiar importance in young and
flourishing countries, in which the demands for credit, and the rewards of
industry, are greater than in any other. When we view the extent and situation
of the United States, we shall be satisfied that their inhabitants may, for a
long time to come, employ profitably, in the improvement of their lands, a
greater stock than they will be able easily to procure. In such a situation, it
will always be of great service to them to save as much as possible the expense
of so costly an instrument of commerce as gold and silver, to substitute in its
place one cheaper, and, for many purposes, not less convenient; and to convert
the value of the gold and silver into the labor and the materials necessary
for improving and extending their settlements and plantations.

"To the Banks of Scotland, says Sir James Stewart, Vol. 2, p. 356.
the improvement of that country is entirely owing; and until they are
generally established in other countries of Europe, where trade and industry
are little known, it will be very difficult to set those great engines to work."

2d. THE influence of a Bank on credit is no less salutary than its influence
on circulation. This position is, indeed, little more than a corollary from the
former. CREDIT IS CONFIDENCE; and, before we can place confidence in a payment,
we must be convinced that he who is to make it will be both able and willing to
do so at the time stipulated. However unexceptionable his character and fortune
may be, this conviction can never take place, unless in a country where solid
property can be, at any time, turned into a circulating medium.

3d. TRADE, as well as circulation and credit, derives great support and
assistance from a Bank. Credit and circulation produce punctuality; and
punctuality is the soul of commerce. Let us appeal to experience as well as
reason.

DR. SMITH says, Vol. 1, p. 442.
he has heard it asserted, that the trade of the city of Glasgow doubled in
about fifteen years after the first erection of the Banks there; and that the
trade of Scotland has more than quadrupled since the first erection of the two
public Banks at Edinburgh, of which one was established in 1695, and the other
in 1727. Whether the increase has been in so great a proportion, the author
pretends not to know. But that the trade of Scotland has increased very
considerably during this period, and that the Banks have contributed a good
deal to this increase, cannot, he says, be doubted.

THESE observations, and observations similar to these, have induced Sir James
Stewart to conclude. -- that "Banking, Vol. 2, p. 358.
in the age we live, is that branch of credit which best deserves the attention
of a statesman. Upon the right establishment of Banks depends the prosperity of
trade, and the equable course of circulation. By them, SOLID PROPERTY MAY BE
MELTED DOWN. By the means of Banks, money may be constantly kept at a due
proportion to alienation. If alienation increases, more property may be melted
down. If it diminishes, the quantity of money stagnating will be absorbed by
the Bank, and part of the property formerly melted down in the securities
granted to them will be, as it were, consolidated anew. These must pay, for the
country, the balance of their trade with foreign nations: These keep the mints
at work: And it is BY THESE MEANS, PRINCIPALLY, THAT PRIVATE, MERCANTILE, AND
PUBLIC CREDIT IS SUPPORTED."

I MAKE no apology for the number and length of the quotations here used. They
are from writers of great information, profound judgment, and unquestioned
candor. They appear strictly and strongly applicable to my subject: And being
so, should carry with them the greatest weight and influence: For the
sentiments, which they contain and inculcate, must be considered as resulting
from general principles and facts, and not as calculated for any partial
purpose in this commonwealth.

BUT, here, it will probably be asked -- Has your reasoning been verified by
experience in this country? What advantages have resulted from the Bank to
commerce, circulation and credit? Was our trade ever on such an undesirable
footing? Is not the country distressed by the want of a circulating medium? Is
not credit almost totally destroyed?

I ANSWER -- There is, unfortunately, too much truth in the representation: But
if events are properly distinguished, and traced to their causes, it will be
found -- that none of the inconveniences abovementioned have arisen from the
Bank -- that some of them have proceeded, at least in part, from the opposition
which has been given to it -- and that, as to others, its energy has not been
sufficient to counteract or control them.

THE disagreeable state of our commerce has been the effect of extravagant and
injudicious importation. During the war, our ports were in a great measure
blocked up. Imported articles were scarce and dear; and we felt the
disadvantages of a stagnation in business. Extremes frequently introduce one
another. When hostilities ceased, the floodgates of commerce were opened; and
an inundation of foreign manufactures overflowed the United States: We seemed
to have forgot, that to pay was as necessary in trade as to purchase; and we
observed no proportion between our imports, and our produce and other natural
means of remittance. What was the consequence? Those who made any payments made
them chiefly in specie; and in that way diminished our circulation. Others made
no remittances at all, and thereby injured our credit. This account of what
happened between the European merchants and our importers, corresponds exactly
with what happened between our importers and the retailers spread over the
different parts of the United States. The retailers, if they paid at all, paid
in specie. And thus every operation, foreign and domestic, had an injurious
effect on our credit, our circulation, and our commerce. But are any of these
disadvantages to be ascribed to the Bank? No. Is it to be accounted a fault or
defect in the Bank, that it did not prevent or remedy those disadvantages? By
no means. Because one is not able to stem a torrent, is he therefore to be
charged with augmenting its strength? The Bank has had many difficulties to
encounter. The experiment was a new one in this country: It was therefore
necessary that it should be conducted with caution. While the war continued,
the demands of the public were great; and the stock of the Bank was but
inconsiderable: It had its active enemies, and its timid friends. Soon after
the peace was concluded, its operations were restrained and embarrassed by an
attempt to establish a new Bank. A year had not elapsed after this, when the
measure, which has occasioned these Considerations, was introduced into the
legislature, and caused, for some time* a total stagnation in the business of
the institution. When all these circumstances are recollected and attended to,
it will be matter of surprise that the Bank has done so much, and not that it
has done no more. Let it be deemed, as it ought to be, the object of public
confidence, and not of public jealousy: Let it be encouraged, instead of being
opposed, by the counsels and proceedings of the state: Then will the genuine
effects of the institution appear; then will they spread their auspicious
influence over Agriculture, Manufactures and Commerce.

4th. ANOTHER advantage to be expected from the Bank of North America is, the
establishment of an undepreciating paper currency through the United States.
This is an object of great consequence, whether it be considered in a
political, or in a commercial view. It will be found to have a happy effect on
the collection, the distribution, and the management of the public revenue: It
will remove the inconveniences and fluctuation attending exchange and
remittances between the different states. "It is the interest of every trading
state to have a sufficient quantity of paper, well secured, to circulate
through it, so as to facilitate payments every where, and to cut off inland
exchanges, which are a great clog upon trade, and are attended with the risque
of receiving the paper of people, whose credit is but doubtful." -- Political
Economy, vol. 2, p. 415.

SUCH are the advantages which may be expected to flow from a National Bank, in
times of peace. In times of war, the institution may be considered as
essential. We have seen that, without it, the business of the Department of
Finance could not have been carried on in the late war. It will be of use to
recollect the situation of the United States with regard to this subject. The
two or three first years of the war were sufficient to convince the British
government, and the British armies, that they could not subdue the United
States by military force. Their hopes of success rested on the failure of our
finances. This was the source of our fears, as well as of the hopes of our
enemies. By this thread our fate was suspended. We watched it with anxiety: We
saw it stretched and weakened every hour: The deathful instrument was ready to
fall upon our heads: On our heads it must have fallen, had not public credit,
in the moment when it was about to break asunder, been entwined and supported
by the credit of the Bank. Congress, to speak without metaphors, had not money
or credit to hire an express, or purchase a cord of wood. General Washington,
on one occasion, and probably more than one, saw his army literally unable to
march. Our distress was such, that it would have been destruction to have
divulged it: But it ought to be known now; and when known, ought to have its
proper influence on the public mind and the public conduct.

THE expenses of a war must be defrayed, either -- 1st, by treasures previously
accumulated -- or 2dly, by supplies levied and collected within the year, as
they are called for -- or 3dly, by the anticipation of the public revenues. No
one will venture to refer us to the first mode. To the second the United
States, as well as every state in Europe, are rendered incompetent by the
modern system of war, which, in the military operations of one year, concenters
the revenue of many. While our enemies adhere to this system, we must adopt it.
The anticipation of revenue, then, is the only mode, by which the expenses of a
future war can be defrayed. How the revenues of the United States can be
anticipated without the operations of a National Bank, I leave to those who
attack the Bank of North America to show. They ought to be well prepared to
show it; for they must know, that to be incapable of supporting a war is but a
single step from being involved in one.

THE result of the whole, under this head, is, -- that in times of peace, the
National Bank will be highly advantageous; that in times of war, it will be
essentially necessary, -- to the United States.

I FLATTER myself, that I have evinced the validity and the utility of the
institution.

IT HAS been surmised, that the design of the legislature is not to destroy,
but to modify, the charter of the Bank; and that if the Directors would assent
to reasonable amendments, the charter, modified, might continue in force. If
this is the case, surely to repeal the law incorporating the Bank is not the
proper mode of doing the business. The Bank was established and organized under
the authority and auspices of Congress. The Directors have a trust and duty to
discharge to the United States, and to all the particular States, each of which
has an equal interest in the Bank. They could not have received, from this
state, a charter, unless it had been similar to that granted by Congress.
Without the approbation of Congress, where all the states are represented, the
Directors would not be justified in agreeing to any alteration of the
institution. If alterations are necessary; they should be made through the
channel of the United States in Congress assembled.

APPENDIX.
An ORDINANCE, to incorporate the SUBSCRIBERS to the BANK of NORTH AMERICA.
WHEREAS Congress, on the twenty-sixth day of May last, did, from a conviction
of the support which the finances of the United States would receive from the
establishment of a National Bank, approve a plan for such an institution,
submitted to their consideration by Robert Morris, Esquire and now lodged among the
archives of Congress, and did engage to promote the same by the most effectual
means: AND WHEREAS the subscription thereto is now filled, from an expectation
of a charter of incorporation from Congress, the Directors and President are
chosen, and application has been made to Congress, by the said President and
Directors, for an act of incorporation: AND WHEREAS the exigencies of the
United States render it indispensably necessary that such an act be immediately
passed:

Be it therefore ordained, and it is hereby ordained by the United States in
Congress assembled, That those who are, and those who shall become subscribers
to the said Bank, be, and for ever after shall be, a corporation and body
politic, to all intents and purposes, by the name and style of THE PRESIDENT,
DIRECTORS AND COMPANY OF THE BANK OF NORTH AMERICA.

And be it further ordained, That the said corporation are hereby declared and
made able, and capable in law to have, purchase, receive, possess, enjoy and
retain lands, rents, tenements, hereditaments, goods, chattels and effects, of
what kind, nature or quality soever, to the amount of ten millions of Spanish
silver milled dollars, and no more, and also to sell, grant, demise, alien or
dispose of the same lands, rents, tenements, hereditaments, goods, chattels and
effects.

And be it further ordained, That the said corporation be, and shall be for
ever hereafter able and capable in law to sue and be sued, plead and be
impleaded, answer and be answered unto, defend and be defended, in courts of
record, or any other place whatsoever, and to do and execute all and singular
other matters and things, that to them shall or may appertain to do.

And be it further ordained, That for the well governing of the said
corporation, and the ordering of their affairs, they shall have such officers
as they shall hereafter direct or appoint: Provided nevertheless, That twelve
Directors, one of whom shall be the President of the corporation, be of the
number of their officers.

And be it further ordained, That Thomas Willing be the present President; and
that the said Thomas Willing and Thomas Fitzsimons, John Maxwell Nesbitt, James
Wilson, Henry Hill, Samuel Osgood, Cadwalader Morris, Andrew Caldwell, Samuel
Ingles, Samuel Meredith, William Bingham, Timothy Matlack, be the present
Directors of the said corporation, and shall so continue until another
President and other Directors shall be chosen, according to the laws and
regulations of the said corporation.

And be it further ordained, That the President and Directors of the said
corporation shall be capable of exercising such power, for the well governing
and ordering of the affairs of the said corporation, and of holding such
occasional meetings for that purpose, as shall be described, fixed and
determined by the laws, regulations and ordinances of the said corporation.

And be it further ordained, That the said corporation may make, ordain,
establish and put in execution, such laws, ordinances and regulations, as shall
seem necessary and convenient to the government of the said corporation:
Provided always, That nothing herein before contained shall be construed to
authorize the said corporation to exercise any powers in any of the United
States, repugnant to the laws or constitution of such state. And be it further
ordained, That the said corporation shall have full power and authority to
make, have and use a common seal, with such device and inscription as they
shall think proper, and the same to break, alter and renew, at their pleasure.

And be it further ordained, That this ordinance shall be construed and taken
most favorably and beneficially for the said corporation.

DONE by the United States in Congress assembled, the thirty-first day of
December, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and eighty-one,
and in the sixth year of our Independence.

JOHN HANSON, President. Attest. CHARLES THOMSON, Secretary.


Office of Finance, January 8, 1782. SIR,
I HAVE the honor to transmit herewith an Ordinance, passed by the United
States in Congress assembled the 31st day of December, 1781, incorporating the
subscribers to the Bank of North America, together with sundry resolutions,
recommending to the several states to pass such laws as they may judge
necessary for giving the said Ordinance its full operation. The resolutions of
the 26th of May last speak so clearly to the points necessary to be established
by those laws, that I need not enlarge on them. Should any thing more be found
necessary upon experience, the President and Directors will no doubt make
suitable applications to Congress, or to the states respectively, as the case
may require. It affords me great satisfaction to inform your Excellency, that
this Bank commenced its operations yesterday; and I am confident, that with
proper management it will answer the most sanguine expectations of those who
befriend the institution. It will facilitate the management of the finances of
the United States: The several States may, when their respective necessities
require, and the abilities of the Bank will permit, derive occasional advantage
and accommodations from it: It will afford to the individuals of all the
states, a medium for their intercourse with each other, and for the payment of
taxes, more convenient than the precious metals, and equally safe: It will have
a tendency to increase both the internal and external commerce of
North America, and undoubtedly will be infinitely useful to all the traders of
every state in the union: Provided, as I have already said, it is conducted on
the principles of equity, justice, prudence and economy. The present Directors
bear characters that cannot fail to inspire confidence; and as the corporation
is amenable to the laws, power can neither sanctify any improper conduct, nor
protect the guilty. Under a full conviction of these things, I flatter myself
that I shall stand excused for recommending, in the strongest manner, this well
meant plan, to all the encouragement and protection which your state can give,
consistently with wisdom and justice. I have the honor to be, with great
respect,

Your Excellency's most obedient, and most humble servant, ROBERT MORRIS.

Circular To the Governors of each state.
An ACT for preventing and punishing the counterfeiting of the Common Seal,
Bank Bills and Bank Notes of the President, Directors and Company of the Bank
of North America, and for other purposes therein mentioned.
SECT. I. WHEREAS it is necessary to take effectual measures for preventing and
punishing frauds and cheats, which may be put upon the President, Directors and
Company of the Bank of North America, by altering, forging or counterfeiting
the Common Seal, and the Bank Bills and Bank Notes of the said President,
Directors and Company:

SECT. II. Be it therefore enacted, and it is hereby enacted by the
Representatives of the Freemen of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in General
Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same, That if any person or persons
shall forge, counterfeit or alter the Common Seal of the said President,
Directors and Company, or any Bank Bill or Bank Note, made or given out, or to
be made or given out, for the payment of any sum of money by or for the said
President, Directors and Company, or shall tender in payment, utter, vend,
exchange or barter any such forged, counterfeit or altered Bill or Note, or
shall demand to have the same exchanged for ready money by the said President,
Directors and Company, or any other person or persons (knowing such Bill or
Note so tendered, uttered, vended, exchanged or bartered, or demanded to be so
exchanged, to be forged, counterfeit or altered) with intent to defraud the
said President, Directors and Company, or any other person or persons, bodies
politic or corporate, then every such person or persons so offending, and being
thereof convicted in due form of law, shall be deemed guilty of felony, and
shall suffer death as a felon, without benefit of clergy.

SECT. III. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
President, Director, or any officer or servant of the said President, Directors
and Company, being entrusted with any such bill or note, or any bond, deed,
money or other effects, belonging to the said President, Directors and Company,
or having any such bill or note, or any bond, deed, money or other effects,
lodged or deposited with the said President, Directors and Company, or with
such officer or servant, as an officer or servant of the said President,
Directors and Company, shall secret, embezzle, or run away with any such bill,
note, bond, deed, money or other effects, or any part of them, every President,
Director, Officer or Servant, so offending, and being thereof convicted in due
form of law, shall be deemed guilty of felony, and shall suffer death as a
felon, without benefit of clergy.

Signed, by Order of the House, FREDERICK A. MUHLENBERG, Speaker
Enacted into a Law, at Philadelphia, on Monday, the eighteenth day of March,
in the year of our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred Eighty and Two. PETER Z.
LLOYD, Clerk of the General Assembly.

Philadelphia, February 9, 1782. SIR,
THE President, Directors and Company of the Bank of North America,
incorporated by the United States of America in Congress assembled, have
thought it proper to petition the General Assembly of Pennsylvania for a
similar charter, and such further support from the legislature of the state, as
may render the Bank capable of yielding those advantages to the general cause
of America, which are intended thereby: And this institution being encouraged
and supported by citizens of other states, as well as that in which it happens
to be established, the most respectful and proper mode of presenting the
petition to that Honorable House appearing to be through the Supreme Executive
Council of the state, we have enclosed the same to you, and request that you
will please to lay it before the General Assembly as soon as they shall meet. I
have the honor to be,

Your Excellency's most obedient servant, THOMAS WILLING, President.

His Excellency WILLIAM MOORE, Esquire President.
An ACT to incorporate the Subscribers to the Bank of North America.
SECT. I. WHEREAS the United States in Congress assembled, from a conviction of
the support which the finances of the United States would receive from the
establishment of a National Bank, passed an Ordinance to incorporate the
Subscribers for this purpose, by the Name and Style of "THE PRESIDENT,
DIRECTORS AND COMPANY OF THE BANK OF NORTH AMERICA."

AND WHEREAS the President and Directors of the said Bank have applied to this
House for a similar Act of incorporation, which request it is proper and
reasonable to grant:

SECT. II. Be it therefore enacted, and it is hereby enacted by the
Representatives of the Freemen of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in General
Assembly met, and by the Authority of the same, That those who are, and those
who shall become Subscribers to the said Bank, be and for ever hereafter shall
be a Corporation and Body politic, to all intents and purposes, by the Name and
Style of "THE PRESIDENT, DIRECTORS AND COMPANY OF THE BANK OF NORTH AMERICA."

SECT. III. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said
corporation are hereby declared and made able and capable in law, to have,
purchase, receive, possess, enjoy and retain lands, rents, tenements,
hereditaments, goods, chattels and effects, of what kind, nature or quality
soever, to the amount of Ten Millions of Spanish Silver milled Dollars, and no
more. And also to sell, grant, demise, alien, or dispose of the same lands,
rents, tenements, hereditaments, goods, chattels and effects.

SECT. IV. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said
corporation be, and shall be for ever hereafter, able and capable in law to sue
and be sued, plead and be impleaded, answer and be answered unto, defend and be
defended, in courts of record, or any other place whatsoever, and to do and
execute all and singular other matters and things, that to them shall or may
appertain to do.

SECT. V. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for the
well governing of the said corporation, and the ordering of their affairs, they
shall have such officers as they shall hereafter direct or appoint. Provided
nevertheless, That twelve Directors, one of whom shall be the President of the
corporation, be of the number of their officers.

SECT. VI. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That Thomas
Willing be the present President, and that the said Thomas Willing, and Thomas
Fitzsimons, John Maxwell Nesbitt, James Willson, Henry Hill, Samuel Osgood,
Cadwallader Morris, Samuel Engles, Samuel Meredith, William Bingham, Timothy
Matlack and Andrew Caldwell, be the present Directors of the said corporation,
and shall so continue until another President and other Directors shall be
chosen, according to the laws and regulations of the said corporation.

SECT. VII. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
President and Directors of the said corporation shall be capable of exercising
such powers, for the well governing and ordering of the affairs of the said
corporation, and of holding such occasional meetings for that purpose, as shall
be described, fixed and determined by the laws, regulations and ordinances of
the said corporation.

SECT. VIII. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the
said corporation may make, ordain, establish and put in execution such laws,
ordinances and regulations, as shall seem necessary and convenient for the
government of the said corporation.

SECT. IX. Provided always, That nothing herein before contained shall be
construed to authorize the said corporation to exercise any powers in this
state, repugnant to the laws or constitution thereof.

SECT. X. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said
corporation shall have full power and authority to make, have and use a common
Seal, with such devices and inscription as they shall think proper, and the
same to break, alter and renew, at their pleasure.

SECT. XI. And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That this Act
shall be construed and taken most favorably and beneficially for the said
corporation.

Signed, by Order of the House, FREDERICK A. MUHLENBERG, Speaker.
Enacted into a Law, at Philadelphia, on Monday, the first day of April, in the
year of our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred Eighty and Two. PETER Z. LLOYD,
Clerk of the General Assembly.

ON the 16th day of February, 1782, advanced to the United States, on behalf of
Pennsylvania, 80,000 dollars.

At different times in 1782, advanced to the Commissioners for defense of the
river and bay of Delaware, the sum of about 22,500 dollars.

On the 17th day of September, 1782, advanced to the State Treasurer, for
defense of the western frontiers, upon application of the House of Assembly,
13,333 dollars, in part of a larger sum agreed to be lent, as the necessity of
the state might require; but upon advice from the British commander in chief,
that the Indians were called off our frontiers, this requisition stopped, and
no further sum was taken out of the Bank.

On the 18th day of April, 1784, paid the Speaker's draft on the Treasurer,
accepted by him, in favor of James Mease, 16,000 dollars.

On the 6th of January, 1785, lent the Managers of the House of Employment,
4,000 dollars.

On the 26th of January, 1785, lent the City Wardens the sum of 2,400 dollars.

FINIS.

