DOCTOR WALES^^ ELECTION SERMON.

M,DCC,LXXXV.

The Dangers of our national Prosperity; and the Way to avoid them.

A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF CONNECTICUT, AT
HARTFORD, MAY 12th, 1785.

BY SAMUEL WALES, D. D. PROFESSOR of DIVINITY at YALE-COLLEGE.

Do ye thus requite the LORD, O foolish people and unwise? MOSES. Justice
stands afar off; for truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter.
And he that ^eporteth from evil, makes himself a prey: and the LORD saw it,
and it displeased him. ISAIAH. Justum et tenacem propositi virum,
Non civium ardor prava jubentium,
Non vultus instantis tyranni
Mente quatit solida; --
Si fractus illabitur orbis,
Impavidum ^erient ruinae.)
HOR. HARTFORD: PRINTED BY BARLOW and BABCOCK.

M,DCC,LXXXV.

At a general Assembly of the State of Connecticut, holden at Hartford, on the
2d Thursday of May Anno Dom. 1785.
ORDERED that the Honorable Roger Sherman, and Pierpont Edwards, Esquires,
return the thanks of this Assembly to the Reverend Doctor Samuel Wales, for his
Sermon delivered before the Assembly on the 12th inst. and desire a Copy
thereof that it may be printed.

A true Copy of Record, Examined by GEORGE WYLLYS, Sec'ry.

DEUTERONOMY VIII. 11, 12, 13, and 14. Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy
God, in not keeping his commandments and his judgments and his statutes which
I command thee this day: -- Lest when thou have eaten and art full, and have
built goodly houses, and dwelt therein; And when thy herds and thy flocks
multiply, and thy silver and thy gold is multiplied, and all that thou have is
multiplied; -- Then thine heart be lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God
which brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage.
THESE words contain a divine instruction to the people of Israel, respecting
their state of prosperity in the promised land. The instruction is not typical
or merely local, but of a moral and universal nature. It may therefore with
propriety, be applied to all people in every age, whenever they are in a
prosperous state. With singular propriety may it be applied to the people of
these United States, who, after the severe distresses of unnatural war and
civil discord, are now happy in the blessings of peace and plenty. Let me then
request the indulgence of this very respectable auditory, while, in order to
apply to ourselves the divine caution of our text, I endeavor,

I. To point out some of those evils which, as a people we have reason to fear
in our present national prosperity. -- And then,

II. To exhibit, in a very concise manner, that line of conduct which we ought
to pursue, in order to secure through the divine favor the continuance of
those blessings which we now enjoy.

A political discussion of these points, it is persumed will not be expected
nor desired. It is proposed to consider them especially in a moral and
religious view. Indeed never should it be forgotten that all the measures of
civil policy ought to be founded on the great principles of religion; or, at
the least, to be perfectly consistent with them: otherwise they will never be
esteemed, because they will be contrary to that moral sense of right and wrong
which God has implanted in the breast of every rational being. But to proceed,

1. Let us attend to some of those evils which, as a people, we have reason
especially to fear in our present national prosperity. That we have been and
still are greatly blessed with national prosperity, I conceive, will not be
doubted. We have been often delivered in a most signal manner, both from the
secret stratagems and the open assaults of our enemies. Great is the salvation
which heaven has wrought for us in the full restoration of the blessings of
peace. The Lord has done great things for us; whereof we are glad. He has
given us a very extensive country abounding with the richest gifts of nature.
With sufficient ease do we procure all the necessaries, together with most of
the conveniences and delicacies of life. Could we procure them with more ease
or in greater plenty, we should not be in so desirable a situation as we are
now. A proper view of all our various blessings will lead us to conclude that
we are indeed the most highly favored people under heaven. God has not dealt
so with any other nation.

But security in happiness is not the lot of humanity. This is equally true of
all mankind, whether we consider them as individuals or as united in society.
In the midst of all our present public happiness, dangers surround us and
evils hang over our heads.

The greatest evil by which we are endangerd, and which indeed is the source of
all others, is the want of true religion. It is true, the superior blessings
which we enjoy are well calculated to promote religion, to promote each of its
essential branches, piety and charity. And such affects would those blessings
naturally produce, did we improve them as we ought. But through the
perverseness of our nature there is much danger that we shall use them for very
different purposes. When we are favored with a profusion of earthly good, we
are exceedingly prone to set our hearts upon it with an immoderate affection,
neglecting our bountiful Creator from whom alone all good is derived. We bathe
and bury ourselves in the streams, forgetting the fountain whence they flow.
This is indeed a very disingenuous behavior toward the Father of mercies. It
certainly discovers a very sordid disposition, a depraved and contracted mind.
Such a disposition, however, is but too natural to man in his present
degenerate state.

We are much more inclined to murmur at God's justice in adversity than to
acknowledge his goodness in prosperity; more ready to view God as the author of
evil than as the author of good. In the distresses of the late war, though they
were most evidently brought upon us by the instrumentality of men, we were
nevertheless much more ready to impute them to the hand of God, than we now are
to acknowledge the same hand in the happiness of peace, and the other rich
blessings of his providence and grace. When our wants are very pressing, we are
willing, or pretend to be willing to apply to God for relief. But no sooner is
the relief given than we set our hearts upon the gift, and neglect the giver;
or rather make use of his own bounty in order to sight against him. The reason
is, because we are more inclined to love the creature than the Creator, to be
lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God. On this account, Moses with
peculiar emphasis warns the Israelites to stand on their guard against such
impiety in the days of their prosperity: Beware that thou forget not the Lord
thy God.

If we now attend to matters of fact we shall find no reason to think more
lightly of the dangers before us. The history of the Israelites shows us that
they greatly needed the caution which Moses gave them. Scarcely a prosperous
period in their history can be pointed out which was not followed by a decay of
piety, and a corruption of morals. This was the case soon after their happy
settlement in the land of Canaan. This was the case very frequently in the
times of their Judges and Kings. And this was eminently the case with respect
to their highest state of wealth and power under the reign of Solomon. The very
great prosperity of this happy reign produced very unhappy effects, even upon
that wise king, as well as upon his court, and his subjects. The profligacy of
his court may be seen in the history of his life: and that the moral state of
his subjects was also exceedingly corrupt, appears from their conduct
immediately after his death. Even in the good reign of the pious Hezekiah,
ingratitude and irreligion were the consequences of success and prosperity.
Hezekiah rendered not according to the benefit done unto him: for his heart was
lifted up; therefore there was wrath upon him, and npon Judah and Jerusalem. 2 Chronicles. xxxii. 25.
The character of Israel, as drawn in the spirit of prophesy by Moses may, with
the utmost propriety, be applied to them in every stage of their prosperity.
They have corrupted themselves, their spot is not the spot of his children:
they are a perverse and crooked generation. Do ye thus requite the Lord, O
foolish people and unwise? is he not thy father that has bought thee? has he
not made thee and established thee? But Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked, thou art
waxen fat, thou art grown thick, thou art covered with fatness; then he forsook
God which made him, and lightly esteemed the rock of his salvation. They
provoked him to jealousy with strange gods, with abominations provoked they him
to anger. Deuteronomy. xxxii. 5, 6, 15, 16.


Nor was this pernicious effect of abused prosperity peculiar to the people of
Israel. It has, in one degree or another, been common to all people in every
age of the world. It has been the case even with the Christian Church. The
consequences of outward prosperity have been often more fatal to the Christian
cause than those of adversity. Indeed the distresses and persecutions of the
Church have often produced a very happy effect in the advancement of true
Christianity. Hence that observation in primitive times: " The blood of the
Martyrs is the seed of the Church." But the like happy effect has seldom if
ever followed from a state of external peace and opulence. The first great
instance of signal prosperity granted to the Christians in the beginning of the
fourth Century under Constantine the great, was soon followed by a great loss
of fervent piety, and a sad corruption both of doctrines and morals. And the
same sad effect has followed from many instances of their prosperity in
succeeding ages; particularly from the flourishing state of many protestant
Churches since the grand emancipation from the Papal See. Indeed wealth and
power have been and still are the great supporters of that man of sin who
opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped.

Wealth, with its common attendants, idleness and pleasure, were the ruin of
Sodom and Gomorrah. Behold, this was the iniquity of Sodom, pride, fullness of
bread, and abundance of idleness was in her and in her daughters." Ezekiel. xvi.
49.
These same things were the ruin of mighty Babylon. " Thou that art given to
pleasures, said the prophet, that dwell carelessly, that say in thine
heart, I am, and none else besides me." Isaiah xlvii. 8.
In what a striking manner were these words verified in the day of her fall!
The same things brought destruction upon each of the four great monarchies, and
upon most of the other states and kingdoms which have fallen, one after another
in the successive ages of time. And the very same things have proved ruinous to
individuals without number. Surely we have no reason to call the proud, happy,
or to look with a covetous eye upon the glare of earthly greatness. Misery lies
hid beneath it, and destruction is its usual attendant.

Since then a prosperous state has been so often followed with such an effect
both on public communities, and on individuals, have we not reason to fear a
similar effect from our national prosperity at the present day? Is it not a sad
truth, that since the commencement of the late war, and especially since the
restoration of peace, the holy religion of Jesus, that brightest ornament of
our world, is, by many less regarded than it was before? and are not the sacred
institutions of the Gospel more neglected and despised? Are not the friends of
Christianity treated with more disregard? Are not infidelity and profligacy of
manners, viewed with less concern, and by many considered as matters of trivial
consequence? Still, we ought with the highest gratitude to acknowledge the
sovereign grace of Almighty God, which has, in some places, been manifested in
the support of his own cause. In several of our States he has been pleased to
excite in the minds of many individuals, here and there, an unusual attention
to divine and eternal things. He saw us unpurified by the furnace of
affliction: He saw us disregarding him while he spoke to us in the whirlwind,
the earthquake, and the fire. Yet has he been pleased to speak to us not only
by the still voice of peace after war, but also by the omnipotent voice of his
holy Spirit; inviting us to become the subjects of the Prince of peace, and
making numbers in one place and another, as we trust, the actual possessors of
that peace which the world can neither give nor take away. To his great name be
all the glory ascribed.

But notwithstanding some pleasing appearances of true religion, in several
places, we have too much reason to fear that " The unthinking many" are abusing
our present prosperity in such a manner as to produce a very different effect.
We have reason to fear that they are fast growing into that state of irreligion
which has been noticed already. The symptoms and effects of this evil are
already too manifest; and will probably continue and increase unto more
ungodliness, unless vigorous measures be taken to prevent them. Some few of
these evils which may be called symptoms and effects of irreligion I beg leave
particularly to mention.

In the first place, One of them which we have much reason to lament and fear,
is ingratitude, vile ingratitude both to God and to man. During the troubles of
the late war, how ardently did we wish for peace? While our lives and liberties
were endangered; while our very existence as a nation, was in doubt; while we
were threatened with all the horrors of a crushed rebellion and all the
vengeance of a very potent enemy peculiarly incensed against us; how eagerly
did we long after that independence, that established liberty and national
happiness which we now enjoy? We then saw and felt our need of help from God.
While the horrid contest was long doubtful, we acknowledged that the issue must
be determined by the sovereign disposer of events. At some periods victory and
success were so greatly in favor of our enemies, and our own affairs were, in
many respects, so exceedingly embarrassed, that the stoutest hearts were almost
ready to fail. At some seasons there seemed to be no way left but To stand
still and see the salvation of the Lord. This salvation we sought of him; nor
did we seek in vain. His own arm brought salvation. By a series of the most
visible interpositions of his providence, he has made wars to cease through the
land, and blessed us with all that our hearts desired.

But alas! what poor returns have we made to our great Deliverer! Witness our
cold hearts and our irreligious lives. How much less inclined are we to return
him sincere thanks for these favors now, than we were to ask them of him in
the times of our distress? How small are the emotions of gratitude in our
hearts, toward the God of all our salvations! And what little honor do we
bring to his name by our lives and conversation! With too much propriety may we
apply to ourselves these words of the Psalmist: When he slew them, they sought
him: and they returned and enquired early after God. And they remembered that
God was their rock, and the high God their Redeemer. Nevertheless they did
flatter him with their mouth and they lied unto him with their tongues. For
their heart was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his covenant.
Psalm: 8. 34 -- 37.


Nor have we been guilty of ingratitude toward God only; we have been guilty
of the same evil toward man. Although this be a less evil than the former, it
is nevertheless an evil which we ought to condemn and reform. We are certainly
under great obligations to those who have voluntarily taken an hazardous or an
expensive part, in effecting our late happy revolution. They have been, under
God, the Saviors of our country. They have been instrumental in effecting one
of the most happy and interesting events which have taken place in the present
age, or in any other. Their merit is certainly great. Yet after all, are they
not too much in the situation of the poor wise man, mentioned in sacred writ,
who by his wisdom delivered from impending danger, the city in which he dwelt,
but was nevertheless soon universally forgotton? Do we give them that praise,
that respect, that reward to which they have a just claim? That we have not yet
afforded that reward which they justly claim, cannot be denied. This thought
leads me to say,

2. That another particular evil into which we have fallen, and by which we are
much endangered, is injustice, injustice to the best and most deserving friends
of our country. Those are certainly to be esteemed some of the most deserving
friends of the country, who have willingly lent her either their lives or their
property in the late important struggle. To such persons we are under
obligations not only of gratitude but of justice. Their voluntary sacrifices
have, through the divine blessing, purchased for us our lives and fortunes, our
liberties, our independence, our peace, and in a great measure, all our
temporal happiness.

Whether all who thus served their country acted wholly from disinterested
views, is a question which we ought not to ask them, and which, with honor, we
cannot ask. That many of them acted from the most generous and patriotic
motives, cannot be doubted by a candid mind. The least that we can do for them,
according to strict justice, is to afford them a reward equal to the full
import of our promises. This, however, with regret be it spoken, has not been
done. But in lieu of this, many who have generously ^oane^ their property to
the country in the season of her most pressing want and danger, have for a long
time been unable to obtain a single farthing either of the principle or of the
interest, though both have been long justly due. Since the above was written,
the author is happy to find that provision has been lately made for the payment
of some part of the interest of our national debt, to which debt (...)
And whenever any payments of annuities have been attempted, they have been
generally, if not universally made in a depreciating medium which immediately
annihilated in their hands a very considerable part of its nominal value. In a
similar way have we effected most of the payments which have been made to our
armies. Indeed as to most of our public securities, there has uniformly been a
wide difference between their real and their nominal value. This is a
difference which never ought to have existed: a difference manifestly contrary
to the nature and claims of justice and truth. And after all, the faithful
Soldier who has in the face of the greatest discouragements and dangers
persevered in the service of his country to the close of the war, receives a
very considerable part of his pay in a paper medium which he is obliged to sell
or barter for one eighth part of its nominal value, one half quarter only of
the value for which he receives it.

Gladly would I draw a veil over this part of our national conduct, were it
possible, and could it be done with propriety. But it cannot be done, it ought
not to be attempted. The best and wisest thing which we can now do with regard
to this matter, is, to reprobate our own conduct and reform it for the future.
Let us not pretend any longer to excuse ourselves by promising and promising
that we will do justice to our creditors at some distant period of time. Such
promises are easily made and commonly of little worth. Nor do they by any means
answer the demands of justice provided they should be hereafter fulfilled. For
justice requires punctuality with respect to the time of payment as really as
with respect to the sum which is due. A failure in the former of these points,
is often more pernicious than in the latter. Let us no longer plead in ability
in our own vindication. I hope indeed this plea may be made in vindication of
some of our past deficiences, but I fear it can by no means justify them all.
It is, at best, but a very dishonorable plea because it is so often used
merely as a mask for injustice, and always can be used in one shape or another
by those who are unwilling to pay their debts. -- As a people, we are not poor,
but rich, and have large resources of public revenue. If we are but willing to
do justice, and do not needlessly embarrass the hands of government, we shall
be under no necessity of defrauding or injuring our creditors. If we cannot
immediately pay them the principle of our debt, we can, at least, pay the
interest, and thereby at once place our credit on a more respectable footing.

Britain, loaded with a bebt more than thirty times so large as ours, and
carrying an annual interest larger than our whole debt, nevertheless pays the
interest punctually, maintains her credit, and can borrow money from her
subjects at pleasure. At the same time her civil list and other annual expenses
are far greater than ours even in proportion to her wealth, and perhaps greater
almost in the same proportion with her national debt. debt. The national debt
of Britain is 280 millions sterling, carrying an interest of L9500000. The
national debt of the United States is not far from 9 millions in the same money.
Whatever difference there may be between her source of revenue and ours, or
what ever difference there may be between her and us in any other respect,
still with regard to public justice to her creditors, she affords us an example
which we ought not to behold without self-condemnation.

Our public injustice is attended with consequences most deplorable and
alarming. It exposes us to the high displeasure of that God who from
everlasting to everlasting, loves righteousness and hates iniquity. It tends
to render public faith contemptible and is highly injurious to our national
character. It gives too much countenance to the reproach of our enemies who
have stigmatized us with the character of a knavish, faithless people; covering
the most iniquitous designs under the garb of liberty and the cloak of
religion. It is hurtful to many literary and religious institutions; while the
moneys which were charitably given for their support are detained and perverted
to a very different purpose. It is attended with great cruelty toward widows
and orphans, toward the poor and needy, and many other individuals who have
suffered extremely for the want of those moneys which are their just due, and
to which they have an indisputable claim.

The cries of such persons enter into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath. Is not
this unjust detention of property, in a particular manner attended with cruelty
to the generous Soldier, who has nobly braved fatigues, and dangers, and
deaths, for our sake, who has faithfully adhered to our cause while thousands
deserted it, while thousands and ten thousands of his brethren perished around
him by the horrors of sickness and the sword, and the far greater horrors of
British prison-ships, and British jails? Who of us would be willing to endure
the like fatigues and be exposed to the like dangers for the contemptible
reward which we now afford the Soldier? Who would not think himself affronted
by the very proposal of so small a reward for so great a service.

This public injustice destroys some of the most important ends of civil
society; such as an equal administration of justice, and the security of
property. It involves us in some of the worst evils of tyranny and despotism,
while we are flattering ourselves with the pleasing names of liberty and
independence. It tends to destroy all confidence in the Public, and to create a
distrust of Government. For if such a flagrant violation of justice may be
practiced in one instance, how do we know but the like may be practiced in many
instances; or what one right have we which is properly secured? If the Public,
as a body, will allow themselves, in any one instance, to injure an individual,
every member of the Public is in constant danger. For who can tell where the
injury will fall next? If one part of our property may be detained from us for
a long time, contrary to the plainest promises, without our consent and without
any unavoidable necessity; how can we know but that another part may be soon as
unjustly wrested from us in the very first instance? In either case the
injustice is equally real and equally manifest: and which would be the greater
evil of the two, can be determined only by concurrent circumstances. If our
property must be taken or detained without our consent, what great choice is
there as to the mode, whether it be taken by fraud or by force, whether we be
robbed by an highwayman or cheated by a knave? In this latter case we have
often the long pain of repeated disappointments, which does not take place in
the former.

Further, is it certain that Government will never again want the voluntary aid
of individuals, aid which she cannot compel them to yield? Should she be again
in such a situation what encouragement would individuals have to afford the
needed aid? Will they not be ready to fear that all State Policy is founded
merely on Machiavelian principles, and that public bodies will practice fraud
in order to accomplish their own ends, whenever they can do it with impunity?
-- Honest minds hope that such fears are groundless, and that some public
Communities at least, as well as some individuals, mean to make justice a rule
of conduct. If this be the case, let us make it manifest by our own conduct; if
it be not the case, let the truth be known, that faithful citizens and honest
men may be no longer deceived and duped out of their property. Heu pietas, heu
publica fides!

But the most pernicious consequence of our public injustice is still to be
mentioned. It has a fatal influence upon the morals of the people at large. It
is like the sin of Jereboam the son of Nebat; it makes Israel to sin, and
thereby still further provokes the Lord God of Israel to anger. It is a trite
observation and a very just one, That example has more influence than precept.
And if our public conduct may be adduced by knaves and sharpers, as an example
and pretext of injustice, will it not have a greater tendency to promote this
evil than all our laws will have to prevent it? Too many are there of that
smooth-speaking class of people, who mean to get their living out of others;
who, whenever they can run into debt, consider it as so much clear gain;
because, forsooth, they can make ample payment by fair promises and soft words,
by complaints of the scarcity of money and the hardness of the times. Better
payment than this they do not wish to make: The words of their mouths are
smoother than butter, but war is in their heart: Their words are softer than
oil, yet are they drawn swords. To our reproach and our shame, we are already
too much inclined to dishonesty. It is already practiced by too much many to
the detriment of the Public, and to the ruin of their own true interest both
temporal and eternal. Too many motives are there already to this accursed evil,
too many are its friends and votaries. For Gods sake let it not have any more.
Many even of our religious societies have long conducted as if they thought it
no evil to violate the most explicit and solemn covenants with the ministers of
religion by withholding from them the stipulated support. If the religious
scarcely escape this evil, what may be expected from the ungodly and profane?
There is, however, a generation that are pure in their own eyes, and yet is not
washed from their filthiness. Let this wise maxim be remembered by us all, and
particularly by those very religious people who make high professions of
Christianity, and yet at the same time bid defiance to the plainest rules of
justice, and trample under foot the most sacred obligations of truth and
plighted faith.

3. Another particular evil by which we are endangered, is the want of true
patriotism. By true patriotism I mean a real concern for the welfare of our
whole country in general. This patriotism is a branch of that extensive
benevolence which is highly recommended by our holy religion, and is at the
same time most evidently consentaneous to the dictates of sound reason. Genuine
patriotism of the best kind, is peculiar to those only who are possessed of a
principle of true virtue. Some semblances and imitations of this patriotism are
nevertheless to be found in those who are not, on the whole, of a truly
virtuous character. Yet even these imitations of pure patriotism have often
proved very beneficial in civil society.

While the war lasted our patriotism was eminent and produced the most happy
effects. Common danger was a common bond of union, cementing us together. But
as this bond has now in some measure ceased, there is danger that our union
will not be so great as will be necessary for the general good. There is danger
not only that factions will arise in particular States, but that particular
States will attempt to pursue their own particular interests without a due
regard to the common good, and perhaps in direct opposition to it. But we
should remember that these States are, by voluntary and solemn agreement united
as one nation, one body, of which each particular State is a member. And the
eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee: nor again the head to the
feet, I have no need of you: but the members should have the same care one for
another. 1 Cor. 12. 21, and 25.
It will doubtless be necessary not only that individual persons, but also
particular States should often give up, in many cases, their own particular
interest for the common benefit. To do thus is generous, is wise, is necessary
for our existence as a free and independent people. Some generous examples of
this kind have been given, and it is to be hoped they will be universally
followed. If we are unwilling to act on this liberal scale we shall be in
perpetual danger of that evil which our Savior points out when he tells us, "
That every kingdom divided against itself cannot stand. but is brought to
desolation."

It was the want of this extensive patriotism that ruined the States of Greece.
A party spirit, a spirit of jealousy and discord prevailed among them, and
divisions and wars exposed them for a long time to the invasions of the Persian
Empire, and finally subjugated them all to the Macedonian yoke.

If the same spirit prevail among us we have no reason to suppose but it will
produce the most unhappy consequences. Human nature is the same in every age,
and similar causes will produce similar effects. In this view we may see how
much it concerns us to support our grand bond of union, or, in other words; to
maintain the rights of our honorable Congress, and even to enlarge their
powers, should this be proved necessary for the general good. --

That want of patriotism, of which we speak, produces very different effects in
persons who are in different situations of life. It is nearly the same thing
with selfishness. It often leads the ambitious and aspiring to seek their own
promotion by very improper means. It leads them into a mad pursuit of low
popularity, to the violation of honor and honesty and to the neglect of the
public good. For not these things, but popular applause and their own
advancement in office are the objects of their first concern. And they
sometimes have their reward: but a very contemptible one it is. True popularity
or the real esteem of the virtuous and the wise, procured by a steady course of
benevolent and virtuous conduct, is well worthy of pursuit and is indeed the
greatest earthly good that we can enjoy. This popularity is not procured by
time-serving, by flattery or any improper compliances. It is seldom if ever
gained without a manly opposition, in some cases at least, to popular prejudice
and vulgar error The man who can make it appear that he conscienciously acts
from a virtuous principle will command the veneration even of the most
unprincipled, and of those who oppose him. But the fame of the popular drudge,
that fame which is gained by low arts of deceiving the ignorant and abusing
their prejudices, to the public detriment, is not only unworthy of a Christian,
but beneath the character of an honest man.

This same selfish spirit, when it possesses the minds, of the common people,
has this bad consequence, among many others, that it subjects them to an undue
influence in the choice of civil rulers. Possessed of this spirit, they will
not regard the probity or abilities of the candidates for office; but will be
very ready to give their voice for those to whom they happen to be particularly
attached by any private and sinister motives; for those by whom they are most
humoured in their prejudices and follies; and especially for those who most
loudly exclaim against the payment of public debts and most vigorously oppose
taxation however just or necessary. All such operations of selfishness, whether
in popular demagogues or in the people at large, in whatever shape they appear,
tend ultimately to the public detriment and to the encouragement of deceit and
dishonesty.

4. A fourth evil by which we are threatened is a disregard of civil Authority.
Great is our privilege in choosing our own rulers, and, by them, of making and
executing our own laws. But this privilege we are in great danger of abusing,
for this strange reason, because it is the effect of our own voluntary act.
While the people at large are too ready to yield to this temptation, even
rulers themselves are in danger of relaxing too far the reigns of government,
through fear of displeasing the people by whom they are chosen to office. But
certain it is that no State can be long happy or even answer the most important
ends of civil society, unless government be revered and the law obeyed. Tyranny
and despotism are undoubtedly very great evils, but greater still are the
dangers of anarchy.

Those persons who have the most power in their own hands are in the greatest
danger of abusing it. No people on earth have so much power in their own hands
as those of the United States. All the powers of government are at their
disposal. We ought therefore to be much on our guard against the abuse of this
power. The abuse of this power may perhaps produce tyranny or aristocracy; but
the proper use of it will be the best way to prevent them both. Never let us
forget that the dignity of government and the energy of the law, are essential
to the continuance of our public happiness and prosperity. Reason and
experience teach us this lesson, while the more special voice of God enforces
the same, by commanding every soul to be subject to the higher powers. Romans 13.
1.


5. I will only add once more, in the fifth place, that we are in much danger
of the evils which arise from luxury and extravagance in our expenses. After
all that has been said in favor of foreign trade and foreign luxuries, it
still remains a demonstration in politics, that when our imports exceed our
exports, the course of trade is against us, and we are constantly growing poor.
This, it is to be feared, is our state at the present, especially on account of
those very extravagant importations which we have made since the peace. Our
very great consumption of foreign luxuries not only impoverishes the country to
an high degree, but at the same time, tends directly to enervate both our
bodies and our minds, to produce indolence and pride, and to open the door to
every temptation and every vice. In this case, as well as many others,
experience is a faithful teacher. And if we consult the experience of mankind
in every age, and in every part of the world, we shall not find a single
instance wherein luxury and extravagance have subserved the true interest of a
people. But instances in which they have proved hurtful and ruinous are to be
found in abundance. And to Republican governments they have proved more fatal
than to others. By cultivating industry, frugality, and a patriotic spirit,
Rome extended her conquests wherever she pleased, and was revered as the
Arbitress of kings and the Mistress of the world. But by adopting the luxuries
of Asia where her arms had proved victorious, she soon enfeebled her true
Republican spirit and prepared the way for her own ruin. Let not the same scene
be again acted over in America. America has by her noble exertions repelled the
force of Britain. But if America persists in her present rage after British
gewgaws and foreign luxuries, she must expect the fate of Rome, her ancient
predecessor; or at least, that very unhappy consequences will ensue. To prevent
these impending evils we need the exertions not only of the sons, but also of
the daughters of America. Very great are your influence and importance, my fair
hearers, in this respect, as well as in many others. Be assured that economy
and frugality with an elegance of dress, on the plan of that modest apparel
recommended by St. Peter, would add more grace to your charms and more dignity
to your characters than all the tinsel of British ornament, or the greatest
extravagance of foreign dress. --

II. It now remains that we exhibit, in a very concise manner that line of
conduct which we ought to pursue in order to secure, through the divine favor,
the continuence of those blessings which at the present we enjoy.

In the first place, it is, I conceive, sufficiently evident that we ought most
earnestly to endeavor after a reformation of those particular evils
aforementioned, and at the same time, to use the best means in order to prevent
them for the future. We must first cease to do evil or we shall never learn to
do well.

In the second place we must use our best endeavors to promote the practice of
virtue and true religion.

I will not indeed presume to assert, that God's conduct toward nations under
the gospel, is exactly parallel to his conduct toward the ancient Israelites.
They were under a dispensation of grace different from ours, and, for a long
time under that peculiar kind of civil government which has been called a
Theocracy. National blessings are not promised, and national judgments are not
threatened under the gospel in like manner as they were under the law. The
gospel being a more spiritual dispensation, its blessings and its curses are of
a more spiritual nature, and less obvious to the view of the world. They are
designed, in a special manner, to prepare persons for the more full
retributions of eternity. This we know is the case with regard to the blessings
conferred, and the chastisements inflicted on the children of God. And that
this is also the case with regard to the judgments inflicted on the man of sin
and his followers, we are expressly told: God shall send them strong delusion,
that they should believe a lie: that they all might be damned. 2 These. 2. 11,
12.
Still, this is certain, that by the constitution of nature which God has
established, vice tends to the misery, and virtue to the happiness not only of
individuals, but of public Communities. The practice of religion must therefore
be considered as absolutely essential to the best state of public prosperity,
it must be so unless we may expect happiness in direct opposition to the
constitution of nature and of nature's God. " Righteousness exalts a nation:
but sin is a reproach to any people." Prove.
This is the course of nature, this is the voice of heaven, this is he decree
of God.

In the third place, we ought especially in the use of all proper means, to
pray fervently for the effusions of the divine Spirit.

Without a divine and supernatural influence, true religion will never prevail.
This is a doctrine clearly taught in divine revelation and perfectly consonant
to the dictates of reason. It has been taught even by heathen Philosophers,
such as Socrates and Plato, Cicero and Seneca. It has been acknowledged, in one
shape or another, in every nation and in every age. Indeed it may be considered
as a doctrine of natural religion. Nor is there any thing enthusiastical or
unreasonable in this doctrine, any more than there is in that other great
doctrine of natural religion " That in God we live and move and have our
being." Divine influence is absolutely necessary both in the natural and in the
moral world. All creatures of every kind, from the most exalted Seraph before
the eternal throne, to the smallest animal which escapes our sight, are wholly
dependent on God. Our souls and all their powers are in his hand, and he can
form and incline them at his pleasure, in full consistency with our most
perfect freedom of action.

That divine influence which is necessary in order to a pious life we are
taught to expect from the operations of the third person in the holy Trinity.
We cannot therefore do a more faithful or important service for our country
than to pray fervently and perseveringly to the Father of mercies, that he
would by the energy of the Holy Ghost, form the hearts of this people to an
holy life, and thus " Purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good
works." Tit. ii. 14.


In the review of our subject, I think we may justly make this reflection: Let
us not flatter ourselves too much with an idea of the future prosperity and
glory of these United States.

While we thus flatter ourselves, we are in danger of expecting the end without
a proper attention to those means which are absolutely necessary in order to
obtain it. Young States are like young men; exceedingly apt, in imagination, to
anticipate and magnify future scenes of happiness and grandeur, which perhaps
they will never enjoy. It has lately become very fashionable to prophesy about
the future greatness of this country; its astonishing progress in science, in
wealth, in population and grandeur: to tell of Locks and Newtons, of poets,
philosophers and divines greater than have ever yet lived; of towering spires,
and spacious domes, of populous towns and cities rising thick throughout an
empire greater than the world has ever seen. Such representations may perhaps
be beautiful in poetry and declamation, but cannot with equal propriety be
admitted, in an unqualified sense, into serious and didactic prose. And true
indeed it is, Providence has here laid a foundation for a very flourishing and
mighty empire. But although the foundation is laid, the superstructure is not
yet finished, nor ever will be, unless we use the proper means. And whether we
shall use such means or not, is a matter of very great uncertainty. Foudations
for happiness have been often laid where happiness has never followed This is
no less true of States and Kingdoms than of individual persons. It is
remarkable that many places which were in ancient times, the seats of mighty
States and empires, and might perhaps have continued with increasing greatness
to the present time, had proper means been used, are nevertheless now covered
with ruin and desolation, or at best, in a very depressed and miserable
condition. What is become of Nineveh and Babylon, and those mighty Empires of
which they were the capital cities? What is become of Persepolis, of Antioch,
of Jerusalem, of Carthage, of Athens and Sparta? And how wide is the difference
between ancient and modern Rome? Had the inhabitants of such places, from age
to age, known the things of their peace and pursued them, their glory might
have remained to the present day.

If we abuse the signal favors which God has granted us, we have no right to
expect that he will favor us in the like manner for the future. Although it be
possible we may be a flourishing and happy people, it is equally possible we
may be far otherwise. When we have reached the pinnacle of our hopes, it is
often connected with evils far greater than the loss of that envied height
would have been. The fashion of this world passes away. The greatest worldly
good is often succeeded by the greatest evil; the greatest happiness by the
greatest misery. Who would have thought, after the happy establishment of peace
between France and Britain, twenty years ago, that the late war between Britain
and America, with all its attending horrors, could possibly have taken place so
soon?

When God gave Israel their request, but sent leanness into their souls, Psalm
cvi. 15.
these two things, taken in their connection, were the greatest curse that could
have befallen them. When Jephthah had ended a successful war against the
children of Ammon, and thereby become the savior of his country, he seemed to
have gained the whole desire of his heart, even all that happiness for which he
had most ardently wished. But this same event which made him so happy a man was
closely connected with two sore evils which came nearer to his heart and more
sensibly affected him, than all his former concerns respecting the Ammonites.
It was cannected with the mournful affair respecting his only child, and it was
the occasion of a very bloody civil war in which, beside others, forty and two
thousand Ephraimites were slain with the sword. And thus, as in ten thousand
similar instances, the occasion of his greatest happiness was turned into the
occasion of his greatest misery.

So, although we have gained that for which we most ardently wished, an happy
period to the late war, yet we can by no means be certain but that some far
greater evils are now before us. We may be overrun and ruined both for time
and eternity by a torrent of vice and licenciousness, with their never-failing
attendants, infidelity and atheism. We may be left to destroy ourselves by
intestine divisions and civil wars: or we may be visited with such sickness and
pestilence as would soon produce a far greater destruction than any war of what
kind soever. God has many ways, even in the present world, to punish the sins
both of individuals and of nations. He has ten thousand arrows in his quiver,
and can always direct any or all of them unerring, to the victims of his wrath.
No possible concurrence of circumstances can screen us from the notice of his
eye or the power of his hand. Never, never, can we be secure but in the
practice of true virtue and in the favor of God.

From long and general custom, it will, I conceive, be expected that I do not
close this discourse without some of those addresses which have been usual on
the present occasion.

It the first place, I beg leave, with great veneration to address myself to
his Excellency our Governor and Commander in Chief. --

May it please your EXCELLENCY, It is with great pleasure we behold you at the
helm of government in this sovereign and independent State. While we sympathize
with you under the burdens and difficulties of your very important station, we
cannot but congratulate you on a variety of circumstances which are peculiarly
satisfactory. Highly honorable, in many respects, is the office which your
Excellency fills with so much honor. Much dignity is derived to it from its
high importance and extensive utility. It has been rendered honorable by a
long succession of worthy and eminent characters, who have filled it from one
time to another, and particularly by that very illustrious and immortal
character, your immediate predecessor in office. Great is the honor of having
a place in such a succession as this, and much greater still the honor of
appearing in it, as your Excellencey does, with a venerable dignity.
Connecticut can boast of a number of her sons in the vigor of life, who are
equal to the first offices in government. Yet, by the suffrages of a free and
discerning people, your Excellency, though far advanced in life, has been
raised to the first chair of government. A greater mark of esteem could not
have been given; an equal one, probably never was given by this state or by any
other.

Very great is the public esteem for those abilities with which the Fountain of
wisdom has endowed you, and for that large store of knowledge which you have
acquired from a most extensive reading in the various branches both of civil
and sacred science. And yet all good men rejoice that you are thus highly
esteemed, not merely for your natural or acquired endowments, but more
especially for the moral virtues and your sacred regard for the religion of
Jesus. May your singular piety and wisdom, your extensive influence and most
excellent example, contribute much to prevent those public evils by which we
are endangered. This effect in some good measure they have already had, God
grant they may have, in a still greater degree, the same happy effect for the
future.

We cannot but view your Excellency as a Moses, a Joshua or a Samuel, giving
the most important instructions at the close of a most useful life. With
painful apprehension of our great loss, and yet with joy in the prospect of
your far more exceeding gain, we view you as an Elijah ready to mount the fiery
car and ascend to your native heaven, followed with the most eager exclamations
of your country. "my father, my father, the chariot of Israel and the horsemen
thereof." 2 Kings ii. 12
Whenever that time shall come, mournful to us but joyful to you, may a double
portion of your spirit descend and rest upon your successors in office and upon
all our civil rulers. May your Excellency have, both while with us and when
taken from us, all the peace and joy of that holy religion to which you have so
devoutly adhered. May the God of all consolation be your support through life
and your portion forever. Amen. --

May I now be permitted to turn my address, with great respect, to the other
branches of our honorable Legislature; to his Honor the Lieutenant Governor,
the honorable assistant Counselors, and the very respectable Representatives
of the people.

May it please your Honors and the Gentlemen of the other house of Assembly.

While prosperity is dangerous to a people in general, it is peculiarly so to
those who are elevated above the common walks of life. Honor, power and wealth
are attended with strong temptations, temptations which in most instances have
proved too powerful for man. Indeed they have been and always will be too
powerful for him, unless when he calls in foreign aid, even the aid of almighty
grace. They who are possessed of those worldly goods, those envied
distinctions, it is to be feared, often have their portion in this life only,
and are therefore of all men the most miserable. Hence that ancient objection
against the Savior when here on earth, "Have any of the rulers, or of the
Pharisees believed on him?" John vii 48.
Hence his own proverbial observation: "It is easier for a camel to go through
the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God."
Mat. xix. 24.
Hence his question to the Jews: "How can ye believe, which receive honor one
of another, and seek not the honor that comes from God only?" John v. 44.
Hence we read of those among the chief rulers who, in spite of conviction,
refused to confess Christ, because "They loved the praise of men more than the
praise of God." John xii. 43.
Hence the observation of St. Paul: "Not many wise men after the flesh, not
many mighty, not many noble are called." 1 Cor. I. 26.
But although we thus speak in order to stir up your pure minds by way of
remembrance, yet we hope better things of you, venerable Fathers, things which
accompany salvation, and things which have a favorable aspect, both on our
civil and on our religious concerns.

Singularly happy has Connecticut been, even from the beginning, in a
Legislature friendly not only to civil liberty but also to true religion. And
this most excellent character, we trust, may with propriety be applied to this
present honorable Assembly. May all your public measures and your whole
conduct, be a demonstrative proof that our hopes are well founded.

In a particular manner, may your vigourous exertions be directed against those
evils by which we are threatened in our present prosperous situation. More
especially, may such measures be adopted as shall be well calculated to restore
public faith, and to free this State, so far as possible, from the crying guilt
of public injustice, which will otherwise be our reproach and perhaps our ruin.
In the name of all honest men, let me presume to entreat you, Honored Fathers,
that such measures be not neglected. The God of Israel said, the Rock of Israel
spoke to me, He that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of God. a
Sam xxiii 3.
The measures necessary to the exercise of public justice will accord with the
judgment of all wise politicians as well as with the judgment of God and of
all good men. Such measures may possibly be burdensome, in some degree to the
people. But weak or wicked we must have been if we ever hoped to gain the
glorious prize of independence, without bearing burdens and particularly a very
considerable burden of expen^^. The prize which we have gained, well improved,
will infinitely more than counterbalance all the expenses we have borne or ever
need to bear. Every honest man will gladly bear his proportion of such burdens,
rather than to transgress the eternal law of righteousness and truth. Every man
who has the smallest pretensions to honor or spirit, will willingly bear his
proportion, rather than to be guilty of the meanness, the baseness of cruelly
defrauding the most faithful servants of the Public, in order to save an
inconsiderable expense to himself. Every man who is unwilling to forward those
measures which are necessary in order to the exercise of public justice, ought
to lie under the imputation of shameful ignorance or a more shameful
dishonesty. After all, such measures may perhaps through the weakness of human
nature, be unpopular with many and meet with opposition. But should they be
opposed by multitudes numerous as the army of Xerxes or the more numerous
future armies of Gog and Magog, still, while engaged in the cause of
righteousness, we may say as the prophet did when he and his servant were
surrounded by a mighty Syrian host: " Fear not; for they that be with us are
more than they that be with them." All the hosts of the Lord in heaven and on
earth will support us, while the Lord of hosts himself will be on our side. "
For the righteous Lord loves righteousness, his countenance does behold the
upright." He has given the strongest evidence in his word and in his works,
particularly in the great work of Redemption, given the strongest evidence of
his unalterable determination to support the cause of righteousness and truth.
Righteousness will finally prevail over iniquity, and truth over falsehood. --
Indeed were we designed only for the present world, even then the practice of
justice and the other moral virtues, would undoubtedly be the safest and the
happiest course not only for individuals but for States and Kingdoms,

In the executive department of Government, it is greatly to be wished not only
that impartial justice may be administered, but that it be done with dispatch
and with as little expense as may be consistent with the dignity of Government.
Unhappy indeed is the case when a legal process is attended with such expense,
delay and other embarrasments that one had better lose his just dues than to
recover them by a course of law. Not a few instances of this kind have taken
place. Can no measures be adopted which may serve to remedy so great an evil?

The University of this State, the education of youth and the advancement of
literature, are kindred objects of such (...) importance, that it is presumed
they will not pass unnoticed by this honorable Assembly. May you, Honored
Fathers, in your great wisdom and benevolence, adopt such measures with regard
to each of them as shall be worthy of yourselves and most conducive to the true
interest of the Public. And may all your measures be such as shall evince to
the world that you are not only our worthy and faithful civil fathers, but also
that you are, at the same time, acting in a far more amiable and honorable
character, even that of Nursing fathers to the church of Christ.

I now beg the patience of this auditory, while, with the most effectionate
esteem and reverence, I address myself to my fathers and brethren in the sacred
character.

Reverend and worthy Sirs, Although Christ's kingdom is not of this world, yet
is it perfectly friendly to civil government. It requires us to obey and honor
civil rulers, and to conduct ourselves as peaceable and useful subjects of the
State. By serving God and your generation in this way, much good may be done,
and much has been done by the members of your venerable order. Great was your
influence and great your merit in producing the late glorious revolution. And
although by the temporary losses which most of you have sustained during the
arduous conflict and even to the present day, you have doubtless borne more
than your equal proportion of the expenses of the war, yet will this burden be
considered as trifling when compared with the peace of a good conscience and
the salvation of your country.

Your virtuous exertions are now again greatly needed in preventing those evils
with which we are threatened in our present prosperous state. No order of men
have equal advantages with you, to warn the people against the encroachments of
power on the one hand, and the evils of anarchy on the other; and at the same
time to instruct them in all those various duties which they owe to civil
rulers and to their country.

Let us however, never forget that civil and secular affairs ought to be viewed
by us as matters of no more than a secondary consideration. The weightier
matters of the law and the gospel ought always to engage our chief attention,
our highest concern.

We are Ambassadors for God to a revolted world. In the guilt and wretchedness
of this revolt, we ourselves are personally involved. Jesus in extremest
agonies both of body and soul, has died for our salvation. He has gone into
heaven to prepare mansions of glory for his faithful followers. Hell from
beneath is moving to receive the despisers of his grace. Satan and the powers
of darkness, in conjunction with the world and the flesh, are plotting the
destruction of men. The people of our charge are daily passing the vale of
death and receiving the retributions of eternity. The eye of omniscience is
continually upon us. He who walks in the midst of the golden candlesticks and
holds the stars in his right hand, has said, " All the churches shall know
that I am he which searches the reins and hearts: and I will give unto every
one of you according to your works." We watch for souls as those who must give
an account: If unfaithful, an aggravated doom will be our portion: if faithful,
we are unto God a sweet savor of Christ in them that are saved and in them
that perish. And who is sufficient for these things? What manner of persons
then, ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness? With what fervor
and fidelity ought we to preach the pure doctrines of the gospel and the
unsearchable riches of Christ? -- Death will soon put an end to our labors.
Let us be animated by the promised presence of our great Lord and Master and by
his voice which now speaks to each one of us in particular, saying "Be thou
faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life." Amen.

Let me now conclude with one word to this whole numerous and respectable
Auditory.

Fellow Citizens and fellow Christians, Great are the benefits of good
government. But let us not imagine that these benefits are to be expected by
us, unless, as a people and as individuals, we are willing to perform those
duties which we owe to our civil rulers and to the Public in general.
Unspeakably great are the blessings of the gospel. But let us not imagine that
ministers or churches or any power whatever can force these blessings upon us
without our consent. They are not, they cannot be ours unless we live as the
gospel directs.

We are happy in being now met together in this large Assembly and on this
great occasion. But before the next return of this Aniversary, how ^any, who
are now here, will belong to the great congregation of the dead, and be fixed
unalterably in their eternal state! Who, where, now in this assembly are the
persons thus destined so soon to another world? Perhaps none more likely than
the person speaking, were we to* form our judgment from apparent symptoms. But
if this be the ca^^ with him, he is not alone. Others will also travel with him
the same dark road of death. And what one individual here present can say that
he is not one of this number? Are we all prepared for our eternal state? In
that state we shall all soon be found, while other busy mortals, like
ourselves, will take our places on this stage of life. And never, never shall
we all meet together again, till we meet with the assembled Universe before the
tribunal of our final Judge.

The God of all grace enable us so to live that we may, at that solemn period,
be found on the right hand of our Judge, and, by the sentence of his mouth,
have our portion assigned us with a far greater and more glorious assembly than
the present; even with the general assembly and church of the first born which
are written in heaven; with the spirits of just men made perfect, with an
innumerable company of angels, with Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant and
with God the Judge of all. -- Blessing and honor and glory and power be unto
him that sits on the throne and unto the Lamb, forever and ever.

-- Amen.

