A BILL for establishing RELIGIOUS FREEDOM, printed for the consideration of
the PEOPLE.
WELL aware that the opinions and belief of men depend not on their own will,
but follow involuntarily the evidence proposed to their minds, that Almighty
God has created the mind free, and manifested his Supreme will that free it
shall remain, by making it altogether insusceptible of restraint: That all
attempts to influence it by temporal punishment or burdens, or by civil
incapacitations, tend only to beget habits of hypocrisy and meanness, and are a
departure from the plan of the holy author of our religion, who being Lord both
of body and mind, yet chose not to propagate it by coercions on either, as was
in his Almighty power to do, but to extend it by its influence on reason alone:
That the impious presumption of legislators and rulers, civil as well as
ecclesiastical, who, being themselves but fallible and uninspired men, have
(...) dominion over the faith of others, setting up their own opinions and
modes of thinking, as the only true and infallible, and as such, endeavoring
to impose them on others, has established and maintained false religions over
the greatest part of the world, and through all time: That to compel a man to
furnish contributions of money for the propagation of opinions which he
disbelieves and abhors, is sinful and tyrannical: That even the forcing him to
support this or that teacher of his own religious persuasion, is depriving him
of the comfortable liberty of giving his contributions to the particular pastor
whose morals he would make his pattern, and whose powers he feels most
persuasive to righteousness, and is withdrawing from the M^^^^try those
temporal rewards which, proceeding from an approbation of their personal
conduct, are an additional incitement to earnest and unremitting labor for the
instruction of mankind: That our civil rights have no dependence on our
religious opinions, any more than on our opinions in physics or geometry:
(...) therefore the ^ors^ribing any citizen as unworthy the public confidence,
by laying upon him an in^apacity of being called to offices of trust and
emolument, unless he profess or renounce this or that religious opinion, is
depriving him injuriously of those privileges and advantages to which, in
common with his fellow citizens he ^^s a natural right: That it tends also to
corrupt the principles of that very religion it is meant to encourage, by
bribing with a monopoly of worldly honors and emoluments, those who will
externally profess and conform to it: That though indeed these are criminal who
do not withstand such temptation, yet neither are those innocent who lay the
bait in their way That the opinions of men are not the object of civil
government, nor under its jurisdiction: That to suffer the civil Magistrate to
intrude his powers into the field of opinion, and to restrain the profession or
propagation of principles on supposition of their ill tendency, is a dangerous
fallacy, which at once destroys all religious liberty; because he being of
course Judge of that tendency will make his own opinions the rule of judgment,
and approve or condemn the sentiments of others only as they shall square with,
or differ from his own: That it is time enough for the rightful purposes of
civil government for its officers to interfere when principles break out into
over^acts against peace and good order: And finally, that truth is great and
will prevail if left to herself; that she is the proper and sufficient
antagonist to error, and has nothing to fear from the conflict, unless by
human interposition, disarmed of her natural weapons, free argument and debate;
errors ceasing to be dangerous when it is permitted freely to contradict them

WE the General Assembly of Virginia do enact, that no man shall be compelled
to frequent or support any religous Worship place or Ministry whatsoever, nor
shall be enforced, restrained, molested, or burdened in his body or goods, nor
shall otherwise suffer on account of his religious opinions or belief, but that
all men shall be free to profess, and by argument to maintain their opinions in
matters of religion, and that the same shall in no wise diminish, enlarge, or
affect their civil capacities.

AND though we well know that this Assembly, elected by the people for the
ordinary purposes of legislation only, have no power to restrain the acts of
succeeding Assemblies, constituted with powers equal to our own, and that
therefore to declare this act irrevocable would be of no effect in law; yet we
are free to declare, and do declare, that the rights hereby asserted are of the
natural rights of mankind, and that if any act shall be hereafter passed to
repeal the present, or to narrow its operation, such act will be an
infringement of natural right.


