THE ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION; THE Declaration of Rights; THE Constitution of
this Commonwealth, AND THE ARTICLES of the DEFINITIVE TREATY BETWEEN
GREAT BRITAIN and the UNITED STATES of AMERICA.

Published by order of the GENERAL ASSEMBLY.

RICHMOND: PRINTED BY DIXON AND HOLT.

IN THE HOUSE OF DELEGATES,
The 27th of November, 1784,
RESOLVED that the Executive be requested to cause copies of the Articles of
Confederation, and Declaration of Rights, the Constitution of this
Commonwealth, and the Articles of the Definitive treaty between Great Britain
and the United States of America, to be printed and bound together, and to
distribute the (...), through the several counties in like manner and
proportion as the laws are directed to be distributed; and that the Executive
be moreover requested to send one copy to every Courts (...) C^^^k, to be by
(...) kept among the records o^ t^ the same, accessible to all who may think
proper to consult them.

Test. JOHN BECKLEY, C. H. D. WILL: DREW, C. ^. A Copy. JOHN BECKLEY, C. H. D.

December 8, 1784. Agreed ^o by the Senate.
ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION AND PERPETUAL UNION, BETWEEN The States of
New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island and Providence Plantations,
Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia,
North Carolina, South Carolina and Georgia.
ARTICLE I. THE style of this confederacy shall be "THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA."

ART. II Each state retains its sovereignty, freedom, and independence, and
every power, jurisdiction, and right, which is not by the confederation
expressly delegated to the United States, in Congress assembled.

ART III. The said states hereby severally enter into a firm league of
friendship with each other for their common defense, the security of their
liberties, and their mutual and general welfare, binding themselves to assist
each other against all force offered to or attacks made upon them, or any of
them, on account of religion, sovereignty, trade, or any other pretense
whatever.

ART. IV. The better to secure and perpetuate mutual friendship and intercourse
among the people of the different states in this union, the free inhabitants of
each of these states, (paupers, vagabonds, and fugitives from Justice,
excepted) shall be entitled to all privileges and immunities of free citizens
in the several states; and the people of each state shall have free ingress and
regress to and from any other state, and shall enjoy therein all the privileges
of trade and commerce, subject to the same duties, impositions, and
restrictions, as the inhabitants thereof respectively. Provided that such
restriction shall not extend so far to prevent the removal of property imported
into any state to any other state of which the owner i^ an inhabitant; provided
also, that no imposition, duties, or restriction, shall be laid by any state on
the property of the United States, or either of them.

I^ any person guilty of or charged with treason, felony or other high
misdemeanor, in any state, shall flee from justice, and be found in any of the
United States, he shall, upon demand of the Governor or Executive power of the
state from which ^e fled, be delivered up, and removed to the state having
jurisdiction of his offense.

Full faith and credit shall be given in each of these states to the record,
^cts and judical proceedings, of the courts and magistrate of every other state.

ART. V For the more convenient management of the general interests of the
United States, delegates shall be annually appointed, in such manner as the
Legislature of each state shall direct, ^o meet in Congress on the first Monday
in November in every year, with a power reserved to each state to recall its
delegates, or any of them, at any time within the year, and to send others in
their stead for the remainder of the year.

No state shall be represented in Congress by less than two, nor more than
seven members; and no person shall be capable of being a delegate for more than
three years, in any term of six years; nor shall any person, being a delegate,
be capable of holding any office under the United States, for which he, or any
other for his benefit, receives any ^^lary, sees, o^ emolument of any kind.

Each state shall maintain its own delegates in a meeting of the states, and
while they act as members of the committee of the states.

In determining questions in the United States, in Congress assembled, each
state shall have one vote.

Freedom of speech and debate in Congress shall not be impeached or questioned
in any court, or place, out of Congress; and the members of Congress shall be
protected in their persons from arrests and imprisonments during the time of
their going to and from, and attendance on Congress, except for treason,
felony, or breach of the peace.

ART. VI. No state, without the consent of the United States in Congress
assembled, shall send any embassy to or receive any embassy from, or enter into
any conference, agreement, alliance, or treaty with, any King, Prince, or
state; nor shall any person holding any office of profit or trust under the
United States, or any of them, accept of any present, emolument, office, or
title of any kind whatever, from any King, Prince, or foreign state; nor shall
the United States in Congress assembled, or any of them, grant any title of
nobility.

No two or more states shall enter into any treaty, confederation, or alliance
whatever, between them, without the consent of the United States in Congress
assembled, specifying accurately the purposes for which the same is to be
entered into, and how long it shall continue.

No state shall lay any imposts of duties which may interfere with any
stipulations in treaties entered into by the United States, in Congress
assembled, with any King, Prince, or state, in pursuance of any treaties
already proposed by Congress to the Courts of France and Spain.

No vessels of war shall be kept up in time of peace by any state, except such
number only as shall be deemed necessary by the United States, in Congress
assembled, for the defense of such state, or its trade; nor shall any body of
forces be kept up by any state in time of peace, except such number only, as,
in the judgment of the United States, in Congress assembled, shall be deemed
requisite to garrison the forts necessary for the defense of such state; but
every state shall always keep up a well regulated and disciplined militia,
sufficiently armed and accounted, and shall provide and constantly have ready
for use, in public stores, a due number of field pieces and tents, and a proper
quantity of arms, ammunition, and camp equipage.

No state shall engage in any war without the consent of the United States in
Congress assembled, unless such state be actually invaded by enemies, or shall
have received certain advice of a resolution being formed by some nation of
Indians to invade such state, and the danger is so eminent as not to admit of a
delay, till the United States, in Congress assembled, can be consulted. Nor
shall any state grant commissions to any ships or vessels of war, nor letters
of ma^que or reprisal, except it be after a declaration of war by the United
States in Congress assembled, and then only against the kingdom or state, and
the subjects thereof, against which war has been so declared, and under such
regulations as shall be established by the United States in Congress assembled,
unless such state be infested by pirates, in which case vessels of war may be
fitted out for that occasion, and kept so long as the danger shall continue, or
until the United States, in Congress assembled, shall determine otherwise.

ART. VII. When land forces are raised by any state for the common defense, all
officers, of or under the rank of Colonel, shall be appointed by the
Legislature of each state respectively by whom such forces shall be raised, or
in such manner as such state shall direct, and all vacancies shall be filled up
by the state which first made the appointment.

ART. VIII. All charges of war, and all other expenses that shall be incurred
for the common defense or general welfare, and allowed by the United States in
Congress assembled, shall be defrayed out of a common treasury, which shall be
supplied by the several states, in proportion to the value of all land within
each state, granted to or surveyed for any person, as such land and the
buildings and improvements thereon shall be estimated, according to such mode
as the United States in Congress assembled, shall from time to time direct and
appoint. The taxes of paying that proportion shall be laid and levied by the
authority and direction of the Legislatures of the several states within the
time agreed upon by the United States in Congress assembled.

ART. IX. The United States in Congress assembled, shall have the sole and
exclusive right and power of determining on peace and war, except in the cases
mentioned in the sixth article; of sending and receiving ambassadors; entering
into treaties and alliances, provided that no treaty of commerce shall be made,
whereby the Legislative power of the respective states shall be restrained from
imposing such imposts and duties on foreigners, as their own people are
subjected to, or from prohibiting be exportation or importation of any species
of goods or commodities whatsoever; of establishing (...) for d^ci^ing in all
cases, w^^t c^otures on land or water shall be legal, and in what manner (...)
taken by land or naval forces in the service of the United States shall be
divided o^ appropriated; of granting letters of marque and reprisal in times of
peace; appointing courts for the trial of piracies and felonies committed ^n
the high seas, and establishing c^u^ts for receiving and determining finally
appeals in all cases of captures, provided that no member of Congress shall be
appointed a judge of any of the said court.

The United States in Congress assembled shall also be the last resort on
appeal in all disputes and differences now subsisting, or that hereafter may
arise, between two or more states concerning boundary, jurisdiction, or any
other cause whatever, which authority shall always be exercised in the manner
following: Whenever the Legislative or Executive authority o^ lawful agent of
any state in controversy with another shall present a petition to Congress,
stating the matter in question, and p^a^ing for a ^e^^ing, notice thereof shall
be given by order of Congress to the Legislative or Executive authority of the
other state in controversy, and a day assigned for the appearance of the
parties by their lawful agents, who shall then be directed to appoint, by joint
consent, commissioners or judges to constitute a court for hearing and
determining the matter in question; but if they cannot agree, Congress shall
same three persons out of each of the United States, and from the l^st ^f such
persons each ^a^ty shall alternately strike out one, the petitioners beginning,
until the number shall be reduced to thirteen, ^^d from that number, not less
than seven, nor more than nine names, (...) Congress shall direct, shall in the
presence of Congress, be drawn out by lot, and the persons whose names shall be
so drawn, or any si^e of them, shall be commissioners, or judges, to hear and
finally determine the controversy, so always as a major part of the judges who
shall hear the cause shall agree in the determination. And if either party
shall neglect to attend at the day appointed, without showing reasons which
Congress shall judge sufficient, or being present shall refuse to strike, the
Congress shall proceed to nominate three persons out of each state, and the
secretary of Congress shall strike in behaif of such party absent or refusing;
and the judgment and sentence of the court to be appointed, in the manner
before prescribed, shall be final and conclusive. And if any of the parties
shall refuse to submit to the authority of such court, or to appear or defend
their claim or cause, the court shall nevertheless proceed to pronounce
sentence, or judgment, which shall in like manner be final and decisive, the
judgment or sentence and other proceedings being in either case transmitted to
Congress, and lodged among the acts of Congress, for the security of the
parties concerned. Provided, that every commissioner, before he sits in
judgment, shall take an oath, to be administered by one of the judges of the
supreme or superior court of the state where the cause shall be tried, "^ well
and truly to hear and determine the matter in question, according to the best
of his judgment, without favor, affection, or hope of reward." Provided also,
that no state shall be deprived of territory for the benefit of the United
States.

All controversies concerning the private right of soil claimed under different
grants of two or more states, whose jurisdictions, as they may respect such
lands, and the states which p^ssed such grants, are adjusted, the said grants,
or either of them, being at the same time claimed to have originated antecedent
to such settlement of jurisdiction, shall, on the petition of either party to
the Congress of the United States, be finally determined, as near as may be, in
the same manner as is before prescribed for deciding disputes respecting
territorial jurisdiction between different states.

The United States, in Congress assembled, shall also have the sole and
exclusive right and power of regulating the alloy and value of coin st^u^k by
^^^ir own authority, or by that of the respective states; fixing the standard
of weights and measures throughout the United States; regulating the trade and
managing all affairs with the Indians, not members of any of the states,
provided that the Legislative right of any state within its own limits be not
infringed or violated; establishing and regulating post offices from one state
to another, throughout all the United States, and exacting such postage on the
papers passing through the same as may be requisite to defray the expenses of
the said office; appointing all officers of the land forces in the service of
the United States, excepting regimental officers; appointing all the officers
of the naval forces, and commissioning all officers whatever in the service of
the United States* making rules the government and regulation of the said land
and naval forces, and directing their operations.

The United States, in Congress assembled, shall have authority to appoint a
committee to fit in the recess of Congress, to be denominated "A committee of
the states," and to consist of one delegate from each state, and to appoint
such other committees and civil officers as may be necessary for managing the
general affairs of the United States under their direction; to appoint one of
their number to preside, provided that 10 person be allowed to serve in the
office of president more than one year in any term of three years; to ascertain
the necessary sums of money to be ra^^ed for the service of the United States,
and to appropriate and apply the same to def^^^^ng the public expenses; to
borrow money o^ emit ^i^^s on the c^^dit of the United States, transmitting
every half year to the res^^^ctive states, an account of the sums of money so
borrowed or emitted; to build and equip a naval; to agree upon the number of
land forces, and to make requisition from each state for its qu^^^, in
proportion to the number of while inhabitants in such state, which requisition
shall be binding, and thereupon the Legislature of each state shall appoint the
regimental officers, raise the men, and cloth, arm, and equip them in a
soldier like manner, at the expense of the United States, and the officers and
men so clothed, armed, and equipped, shall march to the place appointed, and
within the time agreed on by the United States in Congress assembled; but if
the United States in Congress assembled shall, on consideration of
circumstances, judge proper that any state should not raise men, or should
raise a smaller number than its quota, and that any other state should raise a
greater number of men than the quota* thereof, such extra number shall be
raised, officered, clothed, armed, and equipped in the same manner as the
quota of such state, unless the Legislature of such state shall judge that such
extra number cannot be safely spared out of the same, in which case they shall
raise, officer, cloth, arm, and equip, as many of such extra number as they
judge can be safely spared, And the officers and men so clothed, armed, and
equipped, shall march to the place appointed, and within the time agreed on by
the United States in Congress assembled.

The United States in Congress assembled shall never engage in a war, nor grant
letters of marque and rep^isal, in time of peace, nor enter into any treaties
or alliances, nor coin money, nor regulate the value thereof, nor ascertain the
su^^s and expenses necessary for the defense and welfare of the United States,
or any of them, nor emit bills, nor borrow money on the credit of the United
States, nor appropriate money, nor agree upon the number of vessels of war, to
be built or purchased, o^ the number of land or sea forces to be raised, nor
appoint a commander in chief of the army or navy, unless nine states assent to
the same: Nor shall a question on any other point, except for adjourning from
day to day, be determined, unless by the votes of a majority of the United
States in Congress assembled.

The Congress of the United State shall have power to adjourn to any time
within the year, and to any place within the United States, so that no period
of adjournment be for a longer duration than the space of six months, and shall
publish the journal of their proceedings monthly, except such parts thereof
relating to treaties, alliances or military operations, as in their judgment
require secrecy; and the yeas and nays of the delegates of each state on any
question shall be entered on the journal, when it is desired by any delegate;
and the delegates of a state, or any of them, at his or their request, shall be
furnished with a transcript of the said journal, except such parts as are above
excepted, to lay before the Legislatures of the several states.

ART. X. The committee of the states, or any nine of them, shall be authorized
to execute, in the recess of Congress, such of the powers of Congress a^ the
United States in Congress assembled, by the consent of nine states, shall from
time to time think exp^dient to vest them with; provided that no power be
delegated to the said committee, for the exercise of which, by the articles of
confederation, the voice of nine states, in the Congress of the United States
assembled, is requisite.

ART. XI. Canada acceding to this confederation, and joining in the measures of
the United States shall be admitted in o^ and entitled to all the advantages of
this (...) but n^ ^ther colony shall be admitted into the same, unless such
admission be agreed to by nine states.

ART. XII. All bills of credit emitted, moneys borrowed and debts contracted
by, or under the authority of Congress before the assembling of the United
States, in pursuance of the present confederation, shall be deemed and
considered ^s ^ charge against the United States, for payment and satisfaction
whereof the said United States, and the public faith are hereby solemnly
pledged.

ART. XIII. Every state shall abide by the descriminations of the United
States, in Congress assembled, on all questions which by this confederation are
submitted to them. And the articles of this confederation shall be inviolably
observed by every state, and the union shall be perpetual; nor shall an
alteration at any time hereafter be made in any of them; unless such alteration
be agreed to in a Congress of the United States, and be afterward confirmed by
the Legislatures of every state.

AND WHEREAS it has pleased the great Governor of the world so incline the
hearts of the Legislatures we respectively represent in Congress, to approve
of, and to authorize us to r^tif^ the si^d articles of confederation and
perpetual union. KNOW YE, that we, the undersigned delegates, by virtue of the
power and authority to us given for that purpose, do, by these presents, in the
name and in behalf of our respective constituents, fully and entirely ratify
and confirm each and every of the said articles of confederation and perpetual
union, and all and singular the matters and things therein contained. And we do
further solemnly plight and engage the faith of our respective constituents,
that they shall abide by the determinations of the United States in Congress
assembled, on all questions which by the said confederation are submitted to
them; and that the articles thereof shall be inviolably observed by the states
we respectively represent; and that the union shall be perpetual. IN WITNESS
whereof, we have her unto set our hands in Congress.

Done at Philadelphia, in the state of Pennsylvania, the 9th day of July, in
the year of our Lord, 1778, and in the third year of the independence of
America. The aforesaid articles of confederation were finally ratified on the
first day of March 1781; the state of Maryland having* by their members in
Congress, on that day acceded thereto, and completed the same.

NEW HAMPSHIRE, Josiah Bartlett, John Wentworth, jun.
MASSACHUSETTS BAY, John Harcock, Samuel Adams, Elbridge G^^^y, Francis Da^a,
James Lovell, Samuel Hol^on.
RHODE ISLAND, etc. William E^lery, Henry Merchant, John Co^lins.
CONNECTICUT, Roger Sherman, Samuel Huntington* O^iver W^^cott, Titus Hosmer,
Andrew Adam^.
NEW YORK, James Duane, Francis Lewis, William D^er, Governeur Morris.
NEW JERSEY, John Witherspoon* Nathaniel Scudder.
PENNSYLVANIA, Robert Morris, Daniel Roberdea^, Jonathan Bavard Smith* William
Clingan, Joseph Reed.
DELAWARE, Thomas M'Kean, John Dickinson, Nicholas Vandyk^.
MARYLAND, John Hanson, Daniel Carroll.
VIRGINIA, Richard Henry Lee, John Bannister, Thomas Adams, John Harvey,
Francis Lightfoot Le^*
NORTH CAROLINA, John Penn, Cornelius Harnett, John Williams,
SOUTH CAROLINA, Henry Lauren^, William Henry Drayton, John Matthews, Richard
Hutson, Thomas Heyward, jun.
GEORGIA, J^hn Walton, ^dward ^^lf^ir, Edward Longworthy.



THE DECLARATION OF RIGHTS Made by the Representatives of the good people of
Virginia, assembled in full and free Convention; which rights do pertain to
them, and their posterity, as the basis and foundation of Government.
FIRST, THAT all men are by nature equally free and independent, and have
certain inherent rights, of which, when they enter into a state of society,
they cannot, by any c^m^^ct, deprive or divest their posterity; namely, the
enjoyment of life and liberty, with the means of acquiring and possessing
property, and pursuing and obtaining happiness and safety.

2d. That all power is vested in, and consequently derived from, the people;
that magistrates are their trustees and servants, and at all times amenable to
them.

3d. That government is, or ought to be instituted for the common benefit,
protection and security, of the people, nation, or community, of all the
various modes and forms of government that is best, which is capable of
producing the greatest degree of happiness and safety, and is most effectually
secured against the danger of mal-administration; and that wherever any
government shall be found inadequate or contrary to these purposes, a majority
of the community has an indubitable, unalienable, and indefe^sible right, to
perform, alter, or abolish it, in such manner as shall be judged most conducive
to the public weal.

4th. That no man, or set of men, are entitled to exclusive or separate
emoluments or privileges from the community, but in consideration of public
services; which, not being descendible, neither ought the offices of
magistrate, legislature, or judge, to be the hereditary.

5th. That the Legislative and Executive powers of the state should be separate
and distinct from the judicary; and that the members of the two first may be
restrained from oppression, by feeling and participating the burdens of the
people, they should at fixed periods, be reduced to a private station, return
into that body from which they were originally taken, and the vacancies be
supplied by frequent, certain, and regular elections, in which all, or any part
of the former members, to be again eligible, or ineligible, as the laws shall
direct.

6th. That elections of members to serve as representatives of the people, in
Assembly, ought to be free, and that all men, having sufficient evidence of
permanent common interest with, and attachment to, the community, have the
right of suffrage, and cannot be taxed or deprived of their property for public
uses without their own consent, or that of their representatives so elected,
nor bound by any law to which they have not, in like manner, assented for the
public good.

7th. That all power of suspending law, or the execution of laws, by any
authority without consent of the representatives of the people, is injurious to
their rights, and ought not to be exercised.

8th. That in all capital or criminal prosecutions, a man has a right to
demand the cause and nature of his accusation, to be confronted with the
accusers and witnesses, to call for evidence in his favor, and to a speedy
trial by an impartial jury of his vicinage, whithout whose unanimous consent he
cannot be found guilty, nor can he be compelled to give evidence against
himself; that no man be deprived of his liberty, except by the law of the land,
or the judgment of his peers.

9th. That excessive bail ought not to be required, nor excessive fines
imposed, nor cruel unusual punishments inflicted.

10th. The general warrants, whereby any officer or messenger may be commanded
to search suspected places without evidence of a fact committed, or to seize
any person or persons not named, or whose offense is not particularly described
and supported by evidence, are grievous and oppressive, and ought not to be
granted.

11th. That in controversies respecting property, and in suits between man and
man, the ancient trial by jury is preferable to any other, and ought to be held
sacred.

12th. That the freedom of the press is one of the great bulwarks of liberty,
and can never be restrained but by dispotic governments.

13th. That a well regulated militia, composed of the body of the people
trained to arms, is the proper, natural, and safe defense of a free state; that
standing armies, in time of peace, should be avoided, as dangerous to liberty;
and that, in all cases, the m^^^^^ry should be under strict subordination to,
and governed by, the civil power.

14th. That the people have a right to uniform government; and therefore, that
no government separate from, or independent of the government of Virginia,
ought to be erected or established within the limits thereof.

15th. That no free government, or the blessing of liberty, can be preserved to
any people but by a fi^n^ adherence to justice, moderation, temperance,
frugality, and virtue, and by frequent recurrence to fundimental principles.

16th. That religion, or the duty which we owe to our CREATOR, and the manner
of discharging it, can be directed only by reason and conviction, not by force
or violence, and therefore all men are equally entitled to the free exercise of
religion, according to the dictates of conscience; and that it is the mutual
duty of all to practice Christian forbearance, love, and charity, toward each
other.

THE CONSTITUTION OR FORM OF GOVERNMENT Agreed to and resolved upon at a
general Convention o^ the Delegates and Representatives of the several Counties
and Corporations of Virginia, held at the Capital in the City of Williamsburg,
on Monday the sixth day of May, in the year 1776.
WHEREAS George III. King of Great Britain and Ireland, and elector of Hanover,
heretofore entrusted with the exercise of the kingly office in this government,
has endeavored to pervert the same into a detestable and insupportable
tyranny, by p^^ting his negative on laws the most wholesome and necessary for
the public good:

By denying his Governors permission to pass laws of immediate and pressing
importance, unless suspended in their operation for his assent, and, when so
suspended, neglecting to attend to them for many years.

By refusing to pass certain other laws, unless the person to be benefited by
them would relinquish the inestimable right of representation in the
legislature:

By dissolving legislative Assemblies repeatedly and continually, for opposing
with manly firmness, his invasions of the rights of the people:

When dissolved, by refusing to call others for a long space of time, thereby
leaving the political system without any legislative head:

By endeavoring to prevent the population of our country, and, for that
purpose, obstructing the laws for the naturalization of foreigners:

By keeping among us, in times of peace, standing armies and ships of war:

By ^ffecting to render the military independent of, and superior to, the civil
power:

By combining with others to subject us to a foreign jurisdiction giving his
assent to their pretended acts of legislation:

For quartering large bodies of armed troops among us:

For cutting off our trade with all parts of the world:

For imposing taxes on us without our consent:

For depriving us of the benefits of trial by jury:

For transporting us beyond seas, to be tried for pretended offenses:

For suspending our own legislatures, and declaring themselves invested with
power to legislate for us in all cases whatsoever:

By plundering our sons, ravaging our coasts, burning our towns, and destroying
the lives of our people:

By inciting insurrection of our fellow subjects, with the allurements of
forfeiture and confiscation:

By prompting our negroes to ^ife in arms among us, those very negroes whom, by
an inhuman use of his negative, he has refused us permission to exclude by law:

By endeavoring to bring on the inhabitants of our frontiers the merciless
Indian savages, whose known rule of warfare as an undistinguished destinction
of all ages, sexes, and conditions of existence:

By transporting, at this time, a large army of foreign mercenaries, to
complete the works of death, desolation, and tyranny, already begun with
circumstances of cruelty and perfidy unworthy the head of a civilized nation:

By answering our repeated petitions for redress with a repetition of injuries:

And finally, by abandoning the helm of government, and declaring us out of his
allegiance and protection.

By which several acts of misrule, the government of this country, as formerly
exercised under the crown of Great Britain, is TOTALLY DISSOLVED.

We therefore, the Delegates and Representatives of the good people of
Virginia, having maturely considered the premises, and viewing with great
concern the deplorable condition to which this once happy country must be
reduced, unless some regular adequate mode of civil policy is speedily adopted,
and in compliance with a recommendation of the General Congress, do ordain and
declare the future form of government of Virginia to be as follows:

The legislative, executive, and judiciary departments, shall be separate and
distinct, so that neither exercise the powers properly belonging to the other;
nor shall any person exercise the powers of more than one of them at the same
time, except that the justices of the county courts shall be eligible to either
House of Assembly.

The legislative shall be formed of two distinct branches, who, together, shall
be a complete legislature. They shall meet once or oftener, every year, and
shall be called the GENERAL ASSEMBLY of VIRGINIA.

One of these shall be called the HOUSE of DELEGATES, and consist of two
representatives to be chosen for each county, and for the district of West
Augusta, annual, of such men as actually resid^ in and are freeholders, or
duly qualified according to law, and also one Delegate or Representative to be
chosen annually for the city of Williamsburg, and one for the borough of
Norfolk, and a Representative for each of such other cities and boroughs as may
hereafter be allowed particular representation by the legislature; but when any
city or borough shall so decrease as that the number of persons having right of
suffrage therein shall have been for the space of seven years successively,
less than half the number of voters in some one county in Virginia, such city
or borough thenceforward shall ceas^ to send a Delegate or Representative to
the Assembly.

The other shall be called the SENATE, and consist of twenty four members, of
whom thirteen shall constitute a House to proceed on business, for whose
elections the different counties shall be divided into twenty-four districts,
and each county of the respective district, at the time of the election of its
Delegates, shall vote for one Senator, who is actually a resident and
freeholder within the district, or duly qualified according to law, and is
upwards of twenty-five years of age; and the sheriff^ of each county, within
five days at farthest after the last county election in the district, shall
meet at some convenient place, and from the place so taken in their respective
counties return a Senator the man who shall have the greatest number of votes
in the ^hole district. To keep up this Assembly by rotation, the districts
shall be equally divided into four classes, and numbered by lot. At the end of
one year after the general election, the six members elected by the first
division shall be displaced, and the vacancies thereby occasioned supplied from
such class or division, by new election, in the manner aforesaid. This rotation
shall be applied to each division, according to its number, and continued in
due order annually.

The right of suffrage in the election of members of both Houses shall remain
as exercised a^ present, and each House shall choose its own Speaker, appoint
its own officers, settle its own rules of proceeding, and direct writs of
election for supplying intermediate vacancies.

All laws shall originate in the House of Delegates, to be approved or rejected
in the Senate, or to be amended with the consent of the House of Delegates;
except money bills, which in no instance shall be altered by the Senate, but
wholly approved or rejected.

A Governor or Chief Magistrate, shall be chosen annually, by joint ballot of
both Houses, to be taken in each House respectively, deposited in the
conference room, the boxes examined jointly by a committee of each House, and
the numbers severally reported to them, that the appointments may be entered
(which shall be the mode of taxing the joint ballot of both Houses in all
cases) who shall not continue in that office longer than three years
successively, no^ be eligible until the expiration of four years after he shall
have been out of that office. An adequate but moderate salary, shall be settled
on him during his continuance in office; and he shall, with the advice of the
Council of State, exercise the executive powers of government according to the
laws of this commonwealth; and shall not, under any pretense, exercise any
power or prerogative by virtue of any law, statute, or custom of England: But
he shall, with the advice of the Council of State, have the power of granting
reprieves or pardons, except where the prosecution shall have been carried on
by the House of Delegates, or the law shall otherwise particularly direct; in
which cases, no reprieve or pardon shall be granted, but by resolve of the
House of Delegates.

Either House of the General Assembly may adjourn themselves respectively. The
Governor shall not prorogue or adjourn the Assembly during their sitting, nor
dissolve them at any time; but he shall, if necessary, either by advice of the
Council of State, or on application of a majority of the House of Delegates,
call them before the time to which they shall stand prorogued or adjourned.

A Privy Council, or Council of State, consisting of eight members, shall be
chosen by joint ballot of both Houses of Assembly, either from their own
members or the people at large, to assist in the administration of government.
They shall annually choose out of their own members, a President, who, in case
of the death, inability, or necessary absence of the Governor from the
government, shall act as Lieutenant Governor. Four members shall be sufficient
to act, and their advice and proceedings shall be entered of record, and signed
by the members present (to any part whereof any member may enter his dissent)
to be laid before the General Assembly, when called for by them. This Council
may appoint their own clerk, who shall have a salary settled by law, and take
an oath of secrecy in such matters as he shall be directed by the Board to
conceal. A sum of money appropriated to that purpose shall be divided annually
among the members in proportion to their attendance; and they shall be
incapable, during their continuance in office, of sitting in either House of
Assembly. Two members shall be removed by joint ballot of both Houses of
Assembly at the end of every three years, and be ineligible for the three next
years. These vacancies, as well as those occasioned by death or incapacity,
shall be supplied by new elections, in the same manner.

The Delegates for Virginia to the Continental Congress shall be chosen
annually, or superseded in the mean time by joint ballot of both Houses of
Assembly.

The present militia officers shall be continued, and vacancies supplied by
appointment of the Governor, with the advice of the Privy Council, or
recommendations from the respective county courts; but the Governor and Council
shall have a power of suspending any officer and ordering a court martial on
complaint of misbehavior or inability, or to supply vacancies of officers
happening in actual service.

The Governor may embody the militia, with the advice of the Privy Council;
and, when embodied, shall alone have the direction of the militia under the
laws of the country.

The two Houses of Assembly shall, by joint ballot, appoint Judges of the
Supreme Court of Appeals, and General Court, Judges in Chancery, Judges of
Admiralty, Secretary, and the Attorney General, to be commissioned by the
Governor, and continue in office during good behavior, In case of death,
incapacity, or resignation, the Governor, with the advice of the Privy Council,
shall appoint persons to succeed in office, to be approved or displaced by both
Houses. These officers shall have fixed and adequate salaries, and, together
with all others holding lucrative offices, and all ministers of the Gospel of
every denomination, be incapable of being elected members of either House of
Assembly, or the Privy Council.

The Governor, with the advice of the Privy Council, shall appoint justices of
the peace for the counties; and in case of vacancies, or a necessity of
increasing the number hereafter, such appointments to be made upon the
recommendation of the respective county courts. The present acting secretary in
Virginia, and clerks of all the county courts, shall continue in office. In
case of vacancies, either by death, incapacity, or resignation, a secretary
shall be appointed, as before directed, and the clerks by the respective
courts. The present and future clerks shall hold their offices during good
behavior, to be judged of and determined in the General Court. The sheriffs and
coroners shall be nominated by the respective courts, approved by the Governor
with the advice of the Privy Council, and commissioned by the Governor. The
Justices shall appoint constables; and all fees of the aforesaid officers be
regulated by law.

The Governor, when he is out of office, and others offending against the
state, either by male administration, corruption, or other means, by which the
safety of the state may be endangered, shall be impeachable by the House of
Delegates Such impeachment shall be prosecuted by the Attorney General, or such
other person or persons as the House may appoint, in the General Court,
according to the laws of the land. If found guilty, he (...) they shall be
either forever be disabled to hold any office under government, or removed from
such office pro tempore, or subjected to such pains or penalties as the law
shall direct

If al^, or any of the Judges of the General Court, shall, on good grounds (to
be judged of by the House of Delegates) (...) accused of any of the crimes or
offenses beforementioned, (...) House of Delegates may, in like manner,
impeach the Judge or Judges so accused to be prosecuted in the Court of
Appeals; and he or they, if found guilty, shall be punished in the same manner
as is prescribed in the preceding clause.

Commissions and grants shall run, In the name of the COMMONWEALTH of VIRGINIA,
and bear test by the Governor with the seal of the Commonwealth annexed. Writs
shall run in the same manner, and bear test by the clerks of the several
courts. Indictments shall conclude, Against the peace and dignity of the
Commonwealth.

A Treasurer shall be appointed annually, by joint ballot of both Houses.

All escheats, penalties, and forfeitures, heretofore going to the King, shall
go to the commonwealth, save only such as the Legislature may abolish, or
otherwise provide for.

The territories contained within the charters erecting the colonies of
Maryland, Pennsylvania, North and South Carolina, are hereby ceeded, released
and forever confirmed to the people of those colonies respectively, with all
the rights of property, jurisdiction, and government, and all other rights
whatsoever which might at any time heretofore have been claimed by Virginia,
except the free navigation and use the rivers Potowmack and Pocomoke, with the
property of the Virginia shores or strands bordering on either of the said
rivers, and all improvements which have been or shall be made thereon. The
western and northern extent of Virginia shall, in all other respects, stand as
fixed by the charter of King James I in the year one thousand six hundred and
nine, and by the public treaty of peace between the Courts of Great Britain and
France, in the year one thousand seven hundred and sixty three, unless, by act
of Legislature, one or more territories shall hereafter be said off, and
governments established westward of the Allegany mountains. And no purchase of
lands shall be made of the Indian natives but on behalf of the public, by
authority of the General Assembly.

In order to introduce this government, the Representatives of the people met
in Convention shall choose a Governor and Privy Council, also such other
officers directed to be chosen by both Houses as may be judged necessary to be
immediately appointed. The Senate to be first chosen by the people, to continue
until the last day of March next, and the other until the end of the succeedng
session of Assembly In case of vacancies, the Speaker of either House shall
issue writs for new elections.

THE ARTICLES OF THE DEFINITIVE TREATY. In the Name of the Most Holy and
Undivided TRINITY.
IT having pleased the Divine Providence to dispose the hearts of the most
serene and most potent Prince George the third, by the Grace of God, King of
Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, Duke of Brunswick and
Lunenburg, Arch-Treasurer and Prince Elector of the Holy Roman Empire, etc and
of the United States of America, to forget all past misunderstandings and
differences, that have unhappily interrupted the good correspondence and
friendship which they mutually wish to restore; and to establish such a
beneficial and satisfactory intercourse between the two countries, upon the
ground of reciprocal advantages and mutual convenience, as may promote and
secure to both perpetual peace and harmony: And having for this desirable end,
already la^d ^he foundation of peace and reconciliation, by the provisional
articles, signed at Paris, on the 30th of November, 1782, by the commissioners
empowered on each part, which articles were agreed to be inserted in, and to
constitute the treaty of peace proposed to be concluded between the crown of
Great Britain and the said United States, but which treaty was not to be
concluded until terms of peace should be agreed upon between Great Britain and
France, and his Britannic Majesty should be ready to conclude such treaty
accordingly; and the treaty between Great Britain and France, having been since
concluded, his Britannic Majesty and the United States of America, in order to
carry into full effect the provisional articles abovementioned, according to
the tenor thereof, have constituted and appointed, that is to say, His
Britannic Majesty on his part, David Hartley, Esquire, member of the Parliament
of Great Britain, and the said United States on their part, John Adams,
Esquire, late a commissioner of the United States of America at the court of
Versailles, late Delegate in Congress from the state of Massachusetts, and
Chief Justice of the said state, and Minister Plenipotentiary of the said
United States, to their High Mightinesse^ the States General of the United
Netherlands; Benjamin Franklin, Esquire, late Delegate in Congress from the
^^me of Pennsylvania, President of the Convention of the said state, and
Minister Plenipotentiary from the United States of America at the Court of
Versailles; John Jay, Esquire, late President of Congress, and Chief Justice of
the state of New York, and Minister Plenipotentiary from the said United States
at the Court of Madrid, to be the Plenipotentiaries for the concluding and
signing the present definitive treaty; who after having reciprocally
communicated (...) respective full powers, have agreed upon and confirmed the
following articles.

ARTICLE I. His Britannic Majesty acknowledges the said United States, viz.
New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island and Providence Plantations,
Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia,
North Carolina, South Carolina and Georgia, to be free, sovereign and
independent states; that be treats with them as such, and for himself, his
heirs and successors, relinquishes all claims to the government, propriety and
territorial rights of the same, and every part thereof.

ART. II. And that all disputes which might arise in future on the subject of
the boundaries of the said United States may be prevented, it is hereby agreed
and declared, that the following are and shall be their boundaries, viz.

From the north west angle of Nova Scotia, viz. that angle which is formed by a
line drawn due north from the source of Saint Croix ^ver to the Highlands;
along the said Highlands which divide th^se rivers that empty themselves into
the river Saint Lawrence from those which fall into the Atlantic Ocean, to the
north western most hand of Connecticut river, thence down along the middle of
that river to the forty fifth degree of north latitude; from thence by a line
due west on said latitude, until it strikes the river Iroquois or Cataraquy;
thence along the middle of said river into lake Ontario, through the middle of
said lake until it strikes the communication by water between that lake and
lake Erie; thence along the middle of the said communication into lake Erie,
through the middle of said lake until it arrives at the water communication
between that lake and lake Huron; thence along the middle of said water
communication into the lake Huron; thence through the middle of said lake to be
water communication between that lake and lake Superior; thence through lake
Superior northward of the isles, Ro^al and Philapeaus to the long lake; thence
through the middle of said long lake and the water communication between it and
the lake of the Woods, to the said lake of the Woods; thence through the said
lake to the m^st north western point thereof, and from thence on a due west
course to the river Missisippi; thence by a line to be drawn along the middle
of the said river Missisippi, (...) (...) intersect the northernmost part of
the thirty-first degree of north latitude. South by a line to be drawn due east
from the determination of the line last mentioned, in the latitude of
thirty-one degrees north of the equator, to the middle of the river
Apalachicola or Catahouche; thence along the middle thereof to its junction
with the Flint river; thence strait to the head of Saint Mary's river; and
thence down along the middle of Saint Mary's river to the Atlantic Ocean. East
by a line to be drawn along the middle of the river Saint Croix, from its mouth
in the bay of Fundy to its source, and from its source directly north to the
aforesaid Highlands which divide the rivers that fall into the Atlantic Ocean
from those which fall into the river Saint Lawrence; comprehending all islands
within twenty leagues of any part of the shores of the United States, and lying
between lines to be drawn due east from the points where the aforesaid
boundaries between Nova Scotia on the one part, and East-Florida on the other,
shall respectively touch the bay of Fundy, and the Atlantic Ocean; excepting
such islands as now are or heretofore have been within the limits of the said
province of Nova Scotia.

ART. III. It is agreed that the people of the United States shall continue to
enjoy, unmolested, the right to take fish of every kind on the Grand Bank, and
on all the other banks of Newfoundland; also in the gulf of Saint Lawrence,
and at all other place^ in the sea, where the inhabitants of both countries
used at any time heretofore to fish; and also that the inhabitants of the
United States shall have liberty to take fish of every kind on such part of the
coast of Newfoundland as British fishermen shall use, (but not to dry or cure
the fame on that island) and also on the coasts, bays and creeks of all other
of his Britannic Majesty's dominions in America; and that the American
fishermen shall have liberty to dry and cure fish in any of the unsettled bays,
harbors and creeks of Nova Scotia, Magdalen islands, and Labradore, so long as
the same shall remain unsettled, but so soon as the same or either of them
shall be settled, it shall not be lawful for the said fishermen to dry or cure
fish at such settlement, without a previous agreement for that purpose with the
inhabitants, proprietors or possessors of the ground.

ART. IV. It is agreed that creditors on either side, shall meet with no lawful
impediment to the recovery of the full value in sterling money, of all bona
fide debts heretofore contracted.

ART. V. It is agreed that the Congress shall earnestly recommend it to the
legislatures of the respective states, to provide for the restitution of all
estates, rights and properties, which have been confiscated, belonging to real
British subjects, and also o^ the estates, rights and properties of persons
resident in districts in the possession of his Majesty's arms, and who have not
borne arms against the said United States. And that persons of any other
description shall have free liberty to go to any part or parts of any of the
Thirteen United States, and therein to remain twelve months unmolested in their
endeavors to obtain the restitution of (...) their estates, rights and
properties, as may have been confiscated; and that Congress shall also
earnestly recommend to the several states a reconsideration and revision of all
acts or laws regarding the premises, so as to render the said laws or acts
perfectly consistent, not only with justice and equity, but with that spirit of
conciliation which on the return of the blessings of peace should universally
prevail. And that Congress shall also earnestly recommend to the several
states, that the estates, rights and properties, of such last mentioned persons
shall be restored to them; they refunding to any persons who may be now in
possession the bona fide price (where any has been given) which such persons
may have paid on purchasing any of the said lands, rights or properties since
the confiscation. And it is agreed that all persons who have any interest in
confiscated lands, either by debts, marriage settlements, or otherwise, shall
meet with no lawful impediment in the prosecution of their just rights.

ART. VI. That there shall be no future confiscations made, nor any
prosecutions commenced against any person or persons for or by reason of the
part which he or they may have taken in the present war; and that no person
shall on that account, suffer any future loss or damage, either in his person,
liberty or property, and that those who may be in confinement on such charges,
at the time of the ratification of the treaty in America; shall be immediately
set at liberty, and the prosecutions so commenced be discontinued.

ART. VII. There shall be a firm and perpetual peace between his Britannic
Majesty and the said States, and between the subjects of the one, and the
citizens of the other, wherefore all hostilities both by sea and land shall
from henceforth cease; all prisoners on both sides shall be set at liberty, and
his Britannic Majesty shall with all convenient speed, and without causing any
destruction, or carrying away any negroes or other property of the American
inhabitants, withdraw all his armies, garrisons and fleets from the said United
States, and from every post, place and harbor within the same; leaving in all
fortifications the American artillery that may be therein, and shall also order
and cause all archives, records, deeds and papers, belonging to any of the
states, or their citizens, which in the course of the war may have fallen into
the hands of his officers, shall be forthwith restored and delivered to the
proper states and persons to whom they belong.

ART. VIII. The navigation of the river Missisippi, from its source to the
Ocean, shall forever remain free and open to the subjects of Great Britain and
the citizens of the United States

ART. IX. In case it should so happen that any place or territory belonging to
Great Britain or to the United States, should have been conquered by the arms
of either from the other, before the arrival of the said provisional articles
in America, it is agreed, that the same shall be restored without difficulty,
and without requiring any compensation.

ART X. The solemn ratifications of the present treaty, expedite (...) good and
due form, shall be exchanged between the contracting parties, in the space of
six months, or sooner if possible, to be computed from the day of the signature
of the present treaty. In witness whereof, we the undersigned, their Ministers
Plenipotenti^r^, have in their name and in virtue of our full powers, (...) our
hands the present definitive treaty, and caused the sca^s of our arms to be
affixed thereto.

DONE at PARIS, this third day of September, in the year of our Lord one
thousand seven hundred and eighty-three. (L. S.) D. HARTLEY, (L. S.) JOHN
ADAMS, (L. S.) B. FRANKLIN, (L. S.) JOHN JAY.


FINIS.

