NEW SENTIMENTS, DIFFERENT FROM ANY YET PUBLISHED, UPON THE DOCTRINE OF
UNIVERSAL SALVATION, AS CONNECTED WITH DOCTRINES GENERALLY APPROVED. The Force
of Divine Revelation. A VIEW OF Ancient Christianity compared with modern. A
SKETCH OF Church History and Religion of Nations. By ADELOS.

THOU BRING CERTAIN STRANGE THINGS TO (...) EARS.

MEN OF ATHENS PROVIDENCE: PRINTED BY BENNETT WHEELER.

PREFACE.
TRUTH is a Pearl of intrinsic Value. Every Breast admitting it becomes its
welcome Habitation. It refuses not to dwell with Beggars, Kings, or any Class
of Men, who receive it; and may accompany a Malefactor, a joyful Companion to
the Gallows; and from surrounding Spectators of his Infamy and Death, raise him
to meet the Plaudit of the general Assembly, and a welcome Life eternal. It may
be compared to a chaste Virgin, of heavenly Birth, and immortal Charms, upon
whose Forehead is deep engraved, The Wrath of God is revealed against all
unrighteousness of Men, yet still wears an inviting Aspect to all Sorts of Men,
while pointing out how that Wrath has been satisfied for Men of every
Character. She patiently bears Insults and Reproaches, but still is jealous of
her own Honor, and that of her Family, and cannot admit the intruding Hands of
Ruffians. Her just Resentment rises against it, denouncing the Vengeance of
Heaven. She scorns all cringing and fawning. In sincere Friendship, she levels
sharp-pointed Arrows at the Conscience, to wound deeply, but not without the
kind Purpose of conveying a salutary Balsam.

Whether the Lineaments of her Features, attempted in the following Pages, be
copied after those already drawn by the Finger of God in the sacred Pages, is
not left to the Decision of unconcerned Spectators, who do not find themselves
deeply interested, nor those who suppose Gain is Godliness -- nor those who
contend for Victory, but is submitted to the Judgment of those to whose
Conscience the Truth commends itself in the Sight of God. And if any Thing be
found not conformable to the Faith once delivered to the Saints, let it be
rejected, and meet with deserved Contempt.

CONTENTS.
CAP. I. A concise View of the Doctrine -- Men generally uncertain where to
look for Truth -- false Direction given the Mind by its Wish -- by Parents --
Teachers -- the Public -- the Great -- ancient Fathers, etc. An infallible
Standard of Truth -- Unity and Force of Scripture -- its Effects -- its open
Way of Speaking, and what Use made of it. CAP. II. Two Facts noticed --
Appearance of Jewish Church -- and Christian -- its Form and Discipline --
sovereign Mercy -- how glad Tidings declared by Jesus -- who given him -- his
Intercession -- near Union -- of Faith -- brazen Serpent -- of Repentance, etc.
CAP. III. Apostles conduct when sent to preach -- Monuments erected -- of
Leviathan -- Return of Jesus -- unseen World opened -- plain Answer to plain
Question -- how all Men -- every Man -- the whole World, etc. understood at the
first -- Day of Judgment considered -- Crimes, or Devils, signified by those
on left Hand noticed -- Words fully displaying this Doctrine noticed. CAP. IV.
The native Influence of the Gospel contrasted -- Jesus sole Teacher --
Attention called from Man -- View of false Teachers -- bias in all Men to Hope
-- Satan's first Reasoning -- of dying intrepid -- Complainers against this
Doctrine its Founders -- Damnation, a Bugbear, the common Taste -- concise
Church History in all Ages -- Luther and Calvin -- present Posture of Religion
-- general Thought of the Bible -- national Christianity -- present Situation
of the World, etc.
NEW SENTIMENTS, etc.
CAP. I.
A concise View of the Doctrine -- Men generally uncertain where to look for
Truth -- false Direction given the Mind by its Wish -- by Parents -- Teachers
-- the Public -- the Great -- ancient Fathers, etc. -- An infallible Standard
of Truth -- Unity and Force of Scripture -- its Effects -- its open Way of
Speaking, and what Use made of it.

UNIVERSAL Salvation is a doctrine which would make every heart leap for joy
that could fully believe it; and there is no man living without a natural
relish for that perfect security about the next world, which a belief of it
would inspire. If it were possible to manufacture truth and evidence, would not
every person be employed in making a doctrine true, which to all intents
involves his own personal happiness beyond the grave? This doctrine is held to
be closely connected with that grand article of the christian faith, the
imputed righteousness. It gives trouble to many to find all their claims upon
their Maker, in preference to other men, boldly set at naught by the advocates
of this doctrine; and to see themselves placed in the same point of light with
dying criminals, and to find that no righteousness is made account of but that
of one person only, Jesus Christ. And all the striking things they say, about
the grandeur of his character, lose their luster with them, because they think
them said to supersede their own worth.

Far be it from us to object to the complete and entire sufficiency of that
righteousness, for all those whom it respected; and may they be covered with
shame who object to it! And if such was the high will of Him who can do what he
will with his own that this righteousness should respect every one of the human
race, then let no man move his tongue against this doctrine. However, when this
is roundly asserted, and consequently that all will be saved, however desirable
it would be to join, the mind recoils, as from a dangerous leap, and whispers
that this is extending beyond the limits which God has set, and doing violence
to the divine testimony. And it is difficult to conceive, that the advocates
for this doctrine are at all times free from a faultering mind. Whether this
shrinking from what the mind would fain grasp should be attributed to deceit
may soon appear.

It is well known that many men are in such doubtfulness and confusion about
what is truth, that they know not where to look for an infallible conductor, to
guide them in determining about any point of doctrine advanced. It is not aside
from the present design to point out both false guides, which often mislead,
and an infallible standard of truth also, which may be firmly relied on in
man's last extremity. -- A man's faith often rises not from real evidence but
deceitful influence, both in things of this life, and another. A belief of his
future prosperity in this world, and of a long life, frequently turns out in
fact to be a false belief. Something foreign from genuine evidence influenced
to it. The wish of his heart was chiefly concerned. The same leads many to
believe and proclaim their own integrity, when their neighbors cannot believe
it. It leads opposite contending parties to believe they are right in many
cases, whereas a by-stander may see that self-interest sways their belief. So
the wish and inclination may be deeply concerned in leading a man to believe
those doctrines of religion, which will make his situation easy in society
here, and flatter him with a certain prospect of happiness hereafter. A belief
rising from the wish can make nothing true; and as it often proves false in
this world, so it may in the next, into which we cannot at present look.

As a man receives a turn to error from his own heart, so he often does from
his connexions in society.

The tie between parents and children is great; and the little ones early look
to them as guides almost infallible in all matters; and their belief and
practice is shaped after them. They grow up with their parents manners, and
with their parents religion. The innumerable contradicting sects of this
present generation had their birth from the same sects of the last, who formed
their children in a belief of what they themselves believed; and the children
drew in their sentiments as they drew milk from the breast, without a stronger
argument than this, it is true, because their parents say so. This argument has
almost equal sway among Pagans, Mahometans, Papists, and Protestants; and its
influence has run through all ages. The Christians deliverance from it is
pointed out 1 Pet. i. 18, 19. 'Ye were not redeemed with corruptible things,
silver and gold -- from your vain conversation, received by tradition from your
fathers.'

Public teachers often mislead men in their belief. This will readily be
admitted as to Pagan and Popish priests; but when one looks nearer home, the
eye is beclouded. These teachers grow out of every sect as their proper soil,
and probably no sect will be destitute as long as they hold up sufficient
rewards. Those who have money to hire seldom want for laborers. Such
veneration for them as men of God, is often so impressed in childhood, as never
to be shaken off by many even in the latest period of life. How well placed the
trust every where put in them is, might be strikingly manifested by a history
of them in all parts of the globe, not only among Pagans, but even those called
Christians. Nay, one need not look far to see how many opposite winds of
doctrine issue from their mouths; and in how many opposite paths they severally
conduct their admirers.

The opinion of the public where one happens to live, often misleads men. They
naturally fall in with that which is connected with the esteem of their
neighbors; and besides, the opinion of many seems to give a sanction to one's
own opinion, and make it appear somehow sacred. This brings to mind the
proverb. Vox populi, vox Dei. The voice of the people is the voice of God If
this proverb be true, the God of whom it is spoken changes as much as the
Camelion, and assumes as many shapes as Proteus.
. A man feels strong when multitudes are of his side in opinion, and if he
departs from them he is apt to feel weak, and to be dashed out of countenance.
It is no hard thing to prove the multitude generally upon the side of falsehood.
A man traveling round the globe, will find public opinion changing, more than
the climates he passes through. The inspired language is, 'Thou shall not
follow a multitude to do evil. -- Though hand join hand, the wicked shall not
go unpunished.'

Some confide in ancient fathers, who lived near the apostles, and are misled
that way. The corruption of the gospel began even in their days, and grew
continually after, till that man of sin was revealed, the son of perdition,
whose coming was after the working of satan: 2 Thessalonians. ii. 3 -- 13. This
prophecy has been verified by the event. These fathers were more and more
employed in modelling the gospel, to shape with the religion of the nations;
adding Pagan maxims, traditions, etc. In short, they carried their point, and
got Christianity grafted upon Paganism, and it partook of its root and sap, and
bore its fruit; as it has ever since remained, even unto this day. These
fathers were opposed to each other, and each one was orthodox to himself and
heterodox to his opposer. Who shall tell us which of them was right? parents,
teachers, or the public, or who? As to getting any assurance from them of what
is indeed truth, we may as well let their volumes lie piled together in dust,
as expect to find it by earnestly turning them over in perusal.

Some lay stress upon, and are misled by great men. But should princes,
statesmen, generals, philosophers, and divines, so called, be consulted about
truth, there is no more agreement among them than among the unlearned and
ignorant; a proof beyond contradiction, that though they may be skilful guides
in matters of this life, there is not the least dependence upon them in the
concerns of another. And thus it is written, 'I will destroy the wisdom of the
wise, and bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent.' 1 Cor. i. 19.

By such fallacious guides are men led in all parts of the world; and a person
looking beyond his own sect pronounces all the rest infatuated. But when he
views his own sect concerned, the argument returns with its whole force; and if
stripped of the opinion of his own parent, teacher, party, etc. he feels as if
robbed of every dependence in religion; which shows him to be of the same
stamp, and equally infatuated with all the rest. It may then be said, these
dependancies are deceitful, and they may be all dismissed together, proclaiming
their own fallacy in the ear of conscience. It may be added, that some men,
sensible of the general infatuation, have dissented from their neighbors, and
raised a cry for human reason; but as they differ, and are opposed in
sentiment, it may be concluded that they are no less conducted by deceit than
the rest. And as it is written, 'lean not to thine own understanding -- he that
trusts to his own heart is a fool,' our ears may well be shut to the cry.

Is man then left without any resort? Is there no safe conductor to take him by
the hand, and direct him safely in that which is of the highest consequence? Do
any wish to hold conference with their departed relatives; or to consult with
Jesus Christ, and his Apostles, upon doubtful matters? Or to hear the voice of
God from heaven? They may imagine this would give a quick decision to every
doubtful point When such intercourse was held, men had doubts, and it was
painful, as both the history of Israel and the history of Jesus on the earth
show.
. But we are not destitute of them. Their sound has gone into all the earth,
and their words to the end of the world, and have come nigh to us in their
journey; so that one may consult Jesus, and his Apostles, with freedom; and
enquire of the supreme God, speaking by them, and by the prophets. Let it not
be vainly imagined, that there is a deficiency in the oracles of God. Their
compleatness is thus expressed, 2 Timothy iii. 16, 17. 'All scripture is given by
inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, etc. that the man of God
may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works.' Could full credit be
given to these words, one would not need further attestation to prove them
complete. They were intended as a complete expression of God's mind to man. He
framed the understandings of men in all their variety, and well knows in what
words his meaning will be best understood, and what manner of address is best
suited to answer his purpose. To say they are not a complete address to the
conscience of all sorts of men must be a high reflection upon their author.
With what darkness, and inconsistency, do little emmets of a day, venture to
charge the words of the living God. In attempting to explain his words, they
accommodate them to their own lusts, or some pre-conceived opinion; they put
their confused, inconsistent ideas as part of divine truth; and then charge all
their own darkness to the scriptures, wiping themselves clean. They speak not
without a significant meaning, nor so abstrusely as to be understood by the
learned only; for wayfaring men, though fools, may understand them, without the
aid of Jewish or Christian doctors. This was fact at first, that fishermen came
at the simple meaning, which haughty doctors overlooked and despised, and it
may be fact still. God speaks not here words of uncertain signification, which
may mean a thing or its opposite, as is reported of Pagan oracles, and is true
of many religious doctors. It is said, 1 Cor. xiv. 7, 8. -- 'Even things
without life giving sound, except they give a distinction in the sounds, how
shall it be known what is piped or harped? For if the trumpet give an uncertain
sound, who shall prepare himself to the battle. If scripture be compared to a
pipe or harp, are its founds not distinguished? or if to a trumpet does it give
an uncertain sound?
The Apostle in this chapter prefers five words spoken plain to the
understanding before ten thousand otherwise. This necessarily implies, that
scripture itself speaks plain to the understanding. To suppose one part of the
scriptures is destroyed or weakened by what is said in another, implies a high
charge against their author. Instead of this one part supports and strengthens
another, forming an harmonious consistency. And if any credit be given to their
testimony about themselves, they are able without human aid to make wise to
salvation, 2 Timothy iii. 15. This is the utmost that can be craved. Some
apprehend danger of perishing for lack of vision, if they have no clergyman to
preach among them. To such the preaching of the Apostles recorded in the Bible
is an insipid tale. But by this, foolish as it may seem, God saves them that
believe.
'They are able to build up and give an inheritance among the sanctified.' Acts
xx. 32. 'They, like the rain sent down which waters the earth and causes it to
bring forth for man's sustenance, return not void, but accomplish all that God
pleases.' Isa. lv. 10, 11.

Many think they should be happy could they see the Lord, and enquire at his
mouth. But when men had this opportunity, their complaint was the same that it
is now about the scriptures; 'How long do thou make us to doubt; tell us
plainly.' John x. 24. And if Jesus was now to be spoken with, what would asking
further information imply, but that there was a fault in those instructions
which he had already determined to be fully complete? And would it not have the
appearance of presumption? Should a nobleman express his thoughts to his
servants, knowing them sufficiently plain for their understandings, and leave
them in writing for their perusal, what would running to him for further
instructions imply, but that those already given were insufficient, and he who
gave them to blame.

That there is a perfect agreement of the scripture testimony in all its parts,
is strikingly manifest, by the genuine effect of it, upon the real believers of
it at first, which corresponded like the impression to the seal. See Acts iv.
32. 'And the multitude of them who believed were of one heart, and of one
soul.' Acts ii. 1. 'They were all with one accord in one place.' 46. v. 'And
they continuing daily with one accord in the temple.' v. 12. 'And they were all
with one accord in Solomon's porch.' We are led to think of a musical
instrument, whose strings are in perfect concord.
1 Cor. i. 10. 'Now I beseech you brethren, that ye be perfectly joined
together, in the same mind and the same judgment.' Romans xv. 6. 'That ye may
with one mind and one mouth glorify God, etc.' The meaning of heresy was then a
breach of this oneness of sentiment, but now it is what men please to call it.
Any thing that rose opposite to this was crushed in the birth. A church is
compared to the human body, which made up of several members is yet one, and
each member has a fellow feeling with the rest. See 1 Cor. xii. Of this union
most who are called churches now have not a distant idea. And students in
divinity may be ever learning and never be able to come to the knowledge of
this truth. But leaving them at their studies, it may be boldly affirmed, that
the union of the first churches in the truth, and love for its sake, was such,
that the force of men and devils combined could not break it; and many loved
not their lives to the death. The certain cause of this unity of belief was the
unity of the words of Jesus and his Apostles, which produced this unity among
believers as its corresponding effect. The same words are now recorded in the
scriptures, a certain proof this, that there is a perfect unity of sentiment,
in those scriptures which men rashly charge with inconsistency and
contradiction.

The testimony of scripture appeared forcible also by its effect. The gospel
came to them not in word only, but in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much
assurance; causing joy in much affliction, and turned men from idols to serve
the living God, and to wait for his Son from heaven, 1 Thessalonians. i. See also 2
Cor. x. 4, 5. 'The weapons of our warfare are mighty, through God, to the
pulling down of strong holds, casting down imaginations, and every high thing,
that exalts itself against the knowledge of God; and bringing into captivity
every thought to the obedience of Christ.' Here we naturally think of artillery
raised against a strong fortress, levelling it all to the ground, effecting a
most complete conquest. Again read Heb. iv. 12. 'The word of God is quick and
powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing to the dividing
asunder of soul, and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, etc.' What words can
more pungently express its sharp penetrating force. The effect upon Paul, the
murderers of Jesus, the Ephesians, and indeed all, appeared fully to answer
these descriptions of its force. Jesus says, John v. 25. 'The hour is coming
and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that
hear shall live.' Its force upon living men is here represented the same that
it will be hereafter upon the sleeping dust. However feeble the scriptures now
appear, as their Lord once did, yet hereafter they will be known to be the same
powerful voice which said at first, Let there be light, and at last will
command life into those in their graves; and that their effect upon every
believer of them discovered the same power, Ephesians. i. 19, 20, and ii. 5. These
scriptures are represented as judging men at the last day. John xii. 48, 'Then
those who have hurt the two witnesses, the old and new testament, must be
killed after this manner, by fire issuing out of their mouth.' At their close
we have the judgment of those that add to, or take from their testimony. Rev.
xxii. 18, 19. Where is the complaint now that there is no where to look for
truth?

A grand freedom of speech is used in them (not unsuitable to their dignity)
free from that restraint, which men are often under in guarding their words,
lest the captious should take an advantage of them. A short specimen may be
exhibited in the following instances.

A fool is one ignorant of or opposed to the truth, Psalm. xiv. 1. xciv. 8. and
Luke xi. 40. An instance of each we have, see 2 Kings, xviii. 36. 'The people
held their peace; for the king's commandment was answer him not.' See for the
other 1 Kings xviii. 27. 'Elijah mocked them, and said, cry aloud, for he is a
god; either he is talking, etc. or peradventure he sleeps.' These examples
show the two passages not opposed but united, and of the same spirit.
Prove. xxvi. 5. 'Answer not a fool according to his folly; lest thou also be
like him.'

A fool is one ignorant of or opposed to the truth, Psalm. xiv. 1. xciv. 8. and
Luke xi. 40. An instance of each we have, see 2 kings, xviii. 36. 'The people
held their peace; for the king's commandment was answer him not.' See for the
other 1 Kings xviii. 27. 'Elijah mocked them, and said, cry aloud, for he is a
god; either he is talking, etc. or peradventure he sleeps.' These examples
show the two passages not opposed but united, and of the same spirit.
Prove. xxvi. 6. 'Answer a fool according to his folly; lest he be wise in his
own conceit.'

The drift of Paul is to show how any man can be accounted righteous, since the
whole world is guilty. This he plainly manifests to be by the righteousness of
the Son of God, which is by faith unto those who believe. If by believing it
wrought, a man becomes possessed of it, the conclusion of the Apostle is
strong, that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the law.

The drift of James is to show the vanity of boasting, that one has faith if he
has not works, which alone manifest faith to be genuine. And he says, that from
Abraham's works this scripture was fulfilled, viz. Abraham believed God, and it
was imputed to him for righteousness. So that his foundation is the same with
Paul's, and he is carrying his doctrine out fully; and there is a perfect
agreement between them, though many are fond of thinking there is a
disagreement.


Romans iii. 28. -- 'Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by faith,
without the deeds of the law.'

The drift of Paul is to show how any man can be accounted righteous, since the
whole world is guilty. This he plainly manifests to be by the righteousness of
the Son of God, which is by faith unto those who believe. If by believing it
wrought, a man becomes possessed of it, the conclusion of the Apostle is
strong, that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the law.

The drift of James is to show the vanity of boasting, that one has faith if he
has not works, which alone manifest faith to be genuine. And he says, that from
Abraham's works this scripture was fulfilled, viz. Abraham believed God, and it
was imputed to him for righteousness. So that his foundation is the same with
Paul's, and he is carrying his doctrine out fully; and there is a perfect
agreement between them, though many are fond of thinking there is a
disagreement.


Jam. ii. 14. 'Ye see then how that by works a man is justified, and not by
faith only.

The final Judge here relates a plain fact which will close the day of
judgment. His professed design in the context was to lay open all the
transactions of that day, and the issue of it. And no doubt but he could tell a
future story, to use such an expression, as easily as a past one, and there is
no reason to question his veracity more than if he told what had already past.
And as this is asserted of those on the left hand, and were a part of the
nations gathered at that time, he points out that part of the nations will be
punished hereafter.

On the other hand, the Apostle is calling christians to pray for men in
general. He had showed how exceeding abundant the mercy of God was, and its
kind aspect upon all sorts of sinners, and mentioned himself as the foremost of
all; and showing that though two persons were cut off from the church, yet it
was with a merciful design, that they might learn not to blaspheme, and then
goes on to mention persons seemingly at the greatest distance from the truth,
kings, and men in eminence, and calls the disciples to pray for them, as well
as others, declaring it acceptable to him who will have all men saved and come
to the knowledge of the truth. That it means only all sorts is confirmed by
this, that his will is as much that they should come to the knowledge of the
truth as it is that they should be saved, and it is plain he does not will
every individual should come to the knowledge of the truth, fact shows the
contrary. But fact unites in showing that he wills all sorts of men to come to
the knowledge of the truth. Those who greedily catch hold of the word all here
to gratify their inclination may catch hold of the word all elsewhere, and see
what use they can make of it. Acts iv. 21. 'All men glorified God, for that
which was done.' A like readiness to catch the word all here might lead some to
deny the truth of God's word altogether, and with as good ground as others deny
the truth of the threatenings.


Mat. xxv. 46. 'These shall go away into everlasting punishment.'

The final Judge here relates a plain fact which will close the day of
judgment. His professed design in the context was to lay open all the
transactions of that day, and the issue of it. And no doubt but he could tell a
future story, to use such an expression, as easily as a past one, and there is
no reason to question his veracity more than if he told what had already past.
And as this is asserted of those on the left hand, and were a part of the
nations gathered at that time, he points out that part of the nations will be
punished hereafter.

On the other hand, the Apostle is calling christians to pray for men in
general. He had showed how exceeding abundant the mercy of God was, and its
kind aspect upon all sorts of sinners, and mentioned himself as the foremost of
all; and showing that though two persons were cut off from the church, yet it
was with a merciful design, that they might learn not to blaspheme, and then
goes on to mention persons seemingly at the greatest distance from the truth,
kings, and men in eminence, and calls the disciples to pray for them, as well
as others, declaring it acceptable to him who will have all men saved and come
to the knowledge of the truth. That it means only all sorts is confirmed by
this, that his will is as much that they should come to the knowledge of the
truth as it is that they should be saved, and it is plain he does not will
every individual should come to the knowledge of the truth, fact shows the
contrary. But fact unites in showing that he wills all sorts of men to come to
the knowledge of the truth. Those who greedily catch hold of the word all here
to gratify their inclination may catch hold of the word all elsewhere, and see
what use they can make of it. Acts iv. 21. 'All men glorified God, for that
which was done.' A like readiness to catch the word all here might lead some to
deny the truth of God's word altogether, and with as good ground as others deny
the truth of the threatenings.


1 Timothy ii. 4. 'Who will have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of
the truth.'

Men are left to make what use they please of such open expressions. God is not
concerned whether they charge the scriptures with inconsistency. Some will say
these texts are flat contradictions, others will hold those on one side in such
a way as to weaken those on the other. It is not uncommon to draw an argument,
that the scriptures are uncertain in their meaning, which opens the way to any
false doctrine. To mention the last instance, some say the scripture is
self-contradictory; others, that God's will can be frustrated as to the
salvation of men; others, that every man will be saved, to the making of no
effect all that is said to the contrary. Men destitute of the truth readily
avail themselves of such freedom of expression, and pretend they find texts
giving countenance to any scheme of doctrine or practice which suits their own
lusts, whether received by tradition, or bred in their own minds. The scripture
is dragged into their service, and we are confidently told, that it is a
doctrine of scripture. While they are doing these things God keeps silence, and
they think him like themselves, but a day is coming! It were vain to expect
that men wedded to their darling ways of religion, with which their interest is
fast entwisted, will quit their hold, even in the last stage of life, how much
soever God's word be trodden under foot, yet we may be sure he is able to
vindicate it.

The doctrine of Universal Salvation stands foremost among the pleasing
doctrines men have framed, and attributed to the scripture; but so full faced
does it appear against the general drift of scripture, that many who have gone
far in listening to pleasing doctrines, shrink from this, though they could
wish it might be true with all their hearts. They see the alternative too
clearly, that some men will be damned, or the scripture must be given up.

CAP. II.
Two Facts noticed -- Appearance of Jewish Church -- and Christian -- its Form
and Discipline -- sovereign Mercy -- how glad Tidings declared by Jesus -- who
given him -- his Intercession -- near Union -- of Faith brazen Serpent -- of
Repentance, etc.

BEFORE we proceed to the decisive testimony of scripture in this matter, a
fact or two may be mentioned, which appears in opposition to this doctrine.
That the contrary doctrine is generally professed at this day is fact as their
formulas show; and history shows it to have been so from early ages. This being
granted, it may be observed, that had the Apostles indeed held the doctrine of
Universal Salvation, it appears impossible that the contrary doctrine should
have such a spread in the world; because this doctrine is so agreeable to the
taste of all men, that no period can be found between the Apostles days and the
present, when they would have parted with it. Had any person attempted to lead
them to it, all professors would have risen up against him, as attempting to
rob them of the richest jewel in their cabinet, their highest security for
another world. Let it also be observed, that Christianity was early made a tool
of state by Constantine, which manifests that professors then held to a future
punishment; for rulers judge it necessary to hold up terrors of religion beyond
this life, to enforce obedience from their subjects.

But not to enlarge here, the proper appeal is to the holy scriptures, the
living oracles of God; and it must appear to every person not under the entire
influence of the first reasoner against, and softner of the rigor of the
divine threatening, who early said, 'Ye shall not surely die;' that the
scriptures do settle this point, that some men will suffer punishment beyond
the grave, as fully as words can express. This is strongly implied and
expressed various ways.

The appellations given to all that shall be saved collectively show that they
are only a part of mankind. The word (EKKLESIA) Church, signifies a body of men
called out from amongst others; the word (EKLEKTOI) Elect, signifies men chosen
out from among others. And the whole scripture account shows them to be persons
called, and chosen out of the world, as these names import. Noah's family in
the old world, and Lot's in Sodom, were types of them. The Patriarchs, the
Jews, and the Christians, were kept distinct as being called out of the world.
The distinction of the Jews from the rest of mankind is pointed out, Lev. xx.
26. 'Ye shall be holy unto me, for I the Lord am holy, and have severed you
from other people, that ye should be mine.' Deuteronomy. vii. 6. 'The Lord thy God
has chosen thee, to be a special people unto himself, above all people upon
the face of the earth.' They were allowed no connection in religion with other
nations. If they mingled with them, learned their works, intermarried, went
after their gods, or trusted in their princes, they were viewed as deeply
guilty. The leaders informed Ezra, that the Levites had not separated
themselves from the nations, but the holy seed had mingled themselves with
other people in marriage: Upon which he rent his garment, plucked off his hair,
and sat down astonished; and then fell upon his knees, making deep confession
of guilt: Could we suppose one Jewish Universalist present, what would he think
of such conduct.
See 9th chapter. Nehemiah also saw Jews which had married wives of other
nations, and he contended with them, and cursed them, and plucked off their
hair, etc. Neh. xiii. 23 -- 25. and it is called a great evil, 27 v. Their
trusting in other nations instead of God their protector is severely reproved.
Their going to Egypt to strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and
trusting in the shadow of Egypt, is declared to be to their shame and
confusion, Isa. xxx. 3. Their affinity both with Egypt and Assyria is
mentioned, Jer. ii. 18. and the plain language of it declared to be this, viz.
'I have loved strangers, and after them will I go.' 25 v. The same is exposed
as abominable whoredom, Ezekiel. xvi. So that to be otherwise than entirely
distinct from all other nations was highly provoking to God.

The Jews to this day retain traces of the ancient distinction which God
established between them and the nations, and in them now we see a faint
picture of what took place when that nation was the church of God.

This distinction did not teach them the doctrine of Universal Salvation, but
bespoke the opposite. They were ever taught what is expressed, Ephesians. ii. 12.
'That the nations were aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, strangers from
the covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world.' The
nations were viewed by them as objects of God's vengeance, Psalm. lxxix. 6.
'Pour out thy fury on (GOIM) the nations The word heathen is commonly supposed
to mean something different from nations; but they are the same in the original
language. The same might be observed of the word Gentiles. It is well known how
polished nations glory over savages, calling them heathen.
that have not known thee,' compared with Jer. x. 25. See also Psalm. lix. 8.
and cxlix. 7. Mic. v. 15, etc.

When the gospel church succeeded in place of the Jewish, it pleased God to
collect his people out from the rest of that abandoned nation, to break down
the partition, which till that time stood between Jews and the nations, Ephesians.
ii. 14. and to take out of the nations a people for his name. But they are no
sooner gathered both from the Jews and Gentiles, than a line of distinction
arises between them and all the rest of mankind, fully as great as that which
had been before between Jews and the rest of mankind. And they are called
collectively a nation, Mat. xxi. 43. 'The kingdom of God shall be taken from
you and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof.' So Peter says to
strangers of various countries collectively, 'Ye are a holy nation.' 1 Pet. i.
1. and ii. 9. God was the King of this nation, and however dispersed, they were
united under his jurisdiction. As to the rest in a lump, they were subject to
Satan, the prince of the power of the air, the god of this world. Ephesians. ii. 2.
and 2 Cor. iv. 4. Their entire distinction appears in their firm union
together, and suffering for the truth unto the death, being undivided in their
belief, or love for the truth's sake; while they kept at the greatest distance
from communion with others, and checked every thing which looked that way. They
stood fast in one spirit, striving together for the faith of the gospel, in
nothing terrified by adversaries which was an evident token of perdition to
others, and of salvation to themselves, Phil. i. 27, 28. On the other side
stood men of all nations, hating them mortally, both for the truth they held
and that mutual love it raised in them. Hence followed severe sufferings unto
death among the disciples. A few passages may be thrown together for further
illustration, Acts ii. 40. 'Save yourselves from this untoward generation.'
Acts xix. 9. 'He departed separating the disciples.' 2 Cor. vi. 17, 18.
'Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, and touch not the
unclean things, and I will receive you and be a father, etc.' 1 Cor. x. 20.
'The things which (ETHNEE) the nations sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils not
to God; and I would not that ye should have fellowship with devils.' 2 Timothy
iii. 5. 'From such turn away.' Rev. xviii. 4. 'Come out of her my people, that
ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues.' Such
commands were exemplified by striking fact in those days, which showed them
(though dispersed) to be one body fully as distinct from the world as the Jews
had been. So that in the one Christian nation as well as the Jewish those words
were verified, Numb. xxiii. 9. 'Lo the people shall dwell alone, and shall not
be reckoned among the nations.' This distinction has been long since thrown
down, which opened the floodgates to all manner of error about the Christian
doctrine and practice, as might be easily shown.
Now why does God enjoin such a distinction and separation, if all are objects
of mercy? If all men are brethren in Jesus, why is this breach among brethren
in the family of God, upon whom unity and love are so strongly enjoined? This
separation bespeaks some men distinguished from others as to forgiveness, as
they are distinguished from the first sinners, the devils. Agreeable to this
distinction the disciples only are addressed as partakers of salvation: See
Gal. i. 4. 'Who gave himself for our sins.' 1 Pet. ii. 24. 'Who bare our sins
in his own body.' 1 Thessalonians. v. 9. 'For God has not appointed us to wrath, but
to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ.' Many religious doctors, either
from ignorance or design, burying out of sight the above distinction, without
fear apply such expressions to whole parishes, and thereby draw much respect,
and unite large congregations, in esteem for them as godly men, for all love to
be complimented about having a share in good things beyond the grave, and
return the compliment in esteem. Both the Jews and Christians were exceedingly
hated for it. Yea, and all that will maintain it shall fall under the same
hatred, agreeable to 2 Timothy iii. 12.
Such language is confined only to the saints in separation from the world, as
any one doubtful may see by looking to the beginning of the epistles and
elsewhere. The practice of Universalists may speak whether they leave out this
distinction, and together with it the observance of all things whatsoever Jesus
Christ commanded, or not.

But to proceed. The above separation is brought to a closer point of view in
the commanded discipline of a church; see Mat. xviii. 15 -- 19. Here in case of
trespass, the offended is ordered to speak to the offender alone; if repentance
does not appear to take one or two more, and if still unsuccessful to tell it
to the church; and if he neglect to hear the church let him be unto thee as an
heathen man and a publican -- 'Verily, what ye bind on earth shall be bound in
heaven, etc.' In case of an established character in wickedness it is thus
ordered 1 Cor. v. 11. 'Not to keep company if any man, called a brother, be a
fornicator, or covetous, etc. with such a one no not to eat.' And 13 v. It is
ordered to put away from their body a wicked person, whom he before declared
should be delivered to Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit
might be saved, etc. Here the line of distinction comes near, and severs
members from their body, These commands are firmly believed by most now called
Christians of no great force, as their practice shows. But how sacred are all
the inspired words? If we lessen their force, why (...) we not as good lay
aside the Bible entirely, and take up Plato, Socrates, or some book that may be
trifled with, with more impunity.
who might have come in unawares. And in this solemn act of a church, gathered
in the name of the Lord Jesus, for the purpose, an idea of the future judgment
of God is strongly impressed, unless the end be reached, viz. the destruction
of fleshly lusts, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.
Had the doctrine of Universal Salvation been held at that time there was
nothing fearful held up to the offender's conscience beyond the grave; and no
force in the whole transaction as done on earth, or ratified in heaven; and it
tended not to the spirits being saved, for by this doctrine the man would be
saved, whether it had any effect or not; and it was a ridiculous farce in
religion. Should a company of Universalists attend to these indispensible
commands, what consistency would their appear in their doctrine and practice?
And might not each of them say, when he had finished the solemn act, as in
Prove. xxvi. 19. 'Am not I in sport?' spoken of him who deceives his neighbor.
There was something striking about the church of God, both in the Jewish and
Christian form, which, like the cloud between the Israelites and Egyptians,
afforded cheering light to some, but darkness and horror to others. The church
is the light of the world, and some were drawn by its reviving light, but
others were dismayed, it appearing to them like a dark cloud of threatening
aspect. See Ps. xlviii. 1 -- 7. After a description of her glory, having God in
the midst of her, it is added. 'For lo the kings assembled, they passed by
together! They saw it and so they marvelled, they were troubled and hasted
away; fear took hold upon them, and pain as of a woman in travail.' Song vi.
10. She is said to 'look forth as the morning, and yet to be terrible as an
army with banners; she had nothing sightly as to worldly appearance, like her
Lord!' Yet as they were dismayed even when they went to take him, John xviii.
6: So there was something of the same dismay among the persecutors of the
disciples. The persecutors of Stephen saw something about him that struck them
with awe, Acts vi. 15. Felix, though a governor, who had Paul's life at his
disposal, could not forbear trembling before his prisoner. Had he not collected
from Paul's reasoning and appearance a strong idea of a grand distinction among
men in the next world, it may be presumed he had not been forced thus to
tremble, out of character as it might seem. To mention no more, when they were
all with one accord in Solomon's porch, it is said, and of the rest durst no
man join himself to them. Thus striking was the appearance of the church of
God, and from beholding her countenance fears of future wrath seized her
enemies.

Again, the enmity established between God's people and the world confirms the
above mentioned distinction, and stands opposed to the doctrine of Universal
Salvation. Genesis iii. 15. 'I will put enmity between thee, and the woman, and
between thy seed and her seed.' This was soon manifest in the family of Adam,
and afterward in the families of the Patriarchs. It may be seen in the
Egyptian's hot pursuit of Israel, and in the song of triumph on account of
their destruction, Exodus xv cap. It appeared in Amelek opposing the travels of
Israel, Exodus xvii c. which occasioned these words, 'The Lord has sworn that
the Lord will have war with Amelek from generation to generation.' King Saul
was charged to cut them off without mercy; and for sparing Agag, etc. the
kingdom was rent from him. Amalek is a standing type of all the enemies of
God's people. We read Jer. xii. 9. 'Mine heritage is unto me as a speckled
bird, the birds round about are against her.' The Apostle gives a summary view,
Gal. iv. 28. 'Now we brethern as Isaac was, are the children of promise; but as
then he that was born after the flesh persecuted him after the spirit, even so
it is now;' and adds, 'the son of the bond woman shall not be heir with the son
of the free.' This enmity has been drawn out in real life wherever a church of
God has appeared, and was strikingly seen among the first disciples. The Lord
says, he is come to set fire on earth, to send a sword and division, and to set
a man at variance with his father, etc. One of the seven abominations, Prove.
vi. 16 -- 20, is he that sows discord among brethren. If all men are
brethren, what will follow but that the Lord sowed discord among brethren. But
far be it to suppose this.
pointing to the division his doctrine would make among men, and informs the
disciples, that they shall be hated of all men for his sake. We find such
expressions as these, 'Marvel not if the world hate you -- whosoever will be a
friend of the world is the enemy of God.' The Jews by their unsociableness in
religion got the character of Genus hominum invisum diis. A kind of men hateful
to the gods. The Christians after them had much the same. Tacitus speaking of
the burning of Rome, and the consequent sufferings of Christians, though he
thinks them clear in that matter yet says, they were convicted of hate to all
mankind. Had the boasted modern charity been in those days, with her
flexibility, we may presume she would have escaped such censure.
The Apocalypse show that this enmity will not cease till the end. We may in
that history of the future see a pretended spouse of Jesus, adorned with
tinsels of this world, and drunk with the blood of saints on one side; and upon
the other the Lamb's spouse wading through tribulation after her Lord, while
the souls under the altar cry, how long Lord do thou not avenge our blood?

Now does this enmity ever maintained from the beginning of Genesis to the last
of Revelations betoken Universal Salvation, or agree with modern universal
charity plead for by the Universalists and most others? Is there a feature in
the whole complexion that bears resemblance? Charity and love in scripture are
the same it is granted; but that charity rejoiced not in iniquity but with the
truth, 1 Cor. xiii. 6. Iniquity and falsehood are vipers which she cannot foster
in her bosom. The purer her flame the more vehement her opposition, to that
which opposes the truth her heart's delight. The enmity above was agreeable to
her nature, and loudly proclaims, that all men are not brethren in Christ Jesus.

The distinction of heaven's favorites from the world is confirmed in the ixth
of Romans compared with the xith cap. The Apostle mentions his heaviness for
his countrymen the Jews, who were broken off from the olive tree, and under
wrath. And lest any should think the ancient promises to Abraham and his seed
were failing by the rejection of his fleshly seed, he shows the thought to be
groundless, because they are not all Israel that are of Israel; i. e. the true
Israel are not strictly confined to those born after the flesh. For
illustration he goes to the root, showing Isaac was selected to partake of the
promise while Ishmael was left; and not only so, but in Isaac's family too,
even before the twins were born, the divine love made a distinction, having
respect to one but not to the other. For the children being not yet born
neither having done no good or evil, that stand, etc. -- It was said, the elder
shall serve the younger, as it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I
hated. The Apostle is aware that men will think that God is unrighteous, and so
he states their objection 14th verse, which he repels with ME GEENOITO (far be
it) and gives an answer sufficient for all those who contend with their maker
to hear, viz. He says to Moses, 'I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy,
and I will have compassion on whom I will, etc.' Then he introduces Pharaoh as
raised up to declare God's power and name abroad, and adds 18th verse.
'Therefore has he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he
hardens.' He supposes another objection formed 19th verse, 'Thou wilt then
say unto me, why does he yet find fault, for who has resisted his will?' The
presumption of the objector he thus repels 20 -- 25 ver. 'Nay but O man, who
art thou that reply against God? Shall the thing formed say unto him who
formed it, why have thou made me thus? Has not the potter power over the clay,
of the same lump to make one vessel to honor and another to dishonor? What if
God willing to show his wrath and make his power known, endured with much long
suffering, the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction. And that he might make
known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, even us, whom he has
called not only EKS IOUDAIOON (out of) the Jews, but also EKS ETHNOON (out of)
the Gentiles. The distinction then which is begun in this world is by the
Apostle carried out into the next, and appears there in vessels of wrath fitted
to destruction, upon whom God there shows his wrath and power united; and on
the other side vessels of mercy prepared unto glory, in whom the riches of his
glory will be made known. And who the last are we are particularly informed, Us
whom he has called out of the Jews, and out of the Gentiles, and so cannot be
all the Jews and all the Gentiles. This passage stands firm against all who
object against God's distinguishing his favorites at his pleasure. They may see
their own objections stated and answered by the Apostle, which confirm his
meaning beyond contradiction, to the confusion of all who would break his
thread of reasoning here. Agreeable to this, see Romans xi. 7. 'Israel has not
obtained that which he seeks for, but the election has obtained it, and the
rest were blinded.' 2 These. ii. 11 -- 13. 'God shall send them strong delusions
that they should believe a lie, that they all might be damned who believe not
the truth -- but we are bound to give thanks for you brethren -- because God
has from the beginning chosen Some charge the God whose character is drawn by
the Apostle with being a respecter of persons. The intended reproach he can
wipe off. He declares he is no respecter of persons, and explains what he means
by it, viz. That in every nation men are accepted (without distinction of Jews
from Gentiles) who by the word declaring peace by Jesus, are led to fear him,
and work righteousness, Acts x. 34 -- 37; and that there is no rank or sort of
men having preference above another. Col. iii. 22, 25, compared with xi. At the
same time he declares he has mercy on whom he will, and hardens whom he will.
And this Jesus thanks his Father for, Mat. xi. 25. If man finds fault he is
poorly able to carry the contest through.
you to salvation, etc.'

What the Apostle testifies of God's favors being bestowed according to his
pleasure agrees with what the Lord declared when entering upon his public
ministry; he as it were opened his commission from the prophet Esaias, applying
these words to himself: 'The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has
anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor -- deliverance to the captives --
and the acceptable year of the Lord.' Luke iv. 17 -- 20. The whole assembly
were delighted, and all eyes were fastened upon him, and they thought of some
claim to the benefit. But he reminds of one widow only that received it in a
great drought, and one leper only in the days of Elijah and Elisha, and these
persons not of Israel, while many widows and lepers were neglected in Israel.
The Jews well understood him, pointing out a distinction made among men as to
the favors of heaven, as appears in the sequel, Wrath took the place of their
delight, they thrust him out of the city to cast him down a precipice headlong.
A parallel to this we have John vi. 25, to the end, where many who were at
first well pleased upon making known that the mercies of heaven were of God's
good pleasure without any claim, they fled from him till he turns to the
twelve, 'Will ye also go away.' These passages conspire to throw their joint
light together as it were into a focal point, manifesting with radiancy, that
God's high pleasure distinguishes some men from others as to salvation.

The same distinction is held up in a different view, Rev. xiii. 8. 'All shall
worship him whose names are not written in the slain Lamb's book of life.'
Chap. xx. 15. 'Whosoever was not written in the book of life was cast into a
lake of fire.' Chap. xxi. 27. And there shall in no wise enter into it any
thing that defiles, but they who are written in the Lamb's book of life.' No
proof is here needed that some men's names are written in that book and others
are not, and the former shall enter heaven and the latter be cast into a lake
of fire. This is according to the mere pleasure of God, and was done from the
foundation of the world.

The scripture presents it also in another view, and that is, that God gave
Jesus some of mankind and not others. John xvii. 2. 'As thou have given him
power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou have
given him.' Verse 6. "I have manifested thy name to the men which thou gave
me out of the world.' They are distinguished from the world, who are said 14th
verse, to hate them. Verse 9. 'I pray for them, I pray not for the world.' See
also 8, 12, 19, 24, verses. In Chap. v. 37. it is said, 'All that the father
gives me shall come to me.' Verse 40th, 'And ye will not come to me that ye
might have life.' John x. 15. 'I will lay down my life for the sheep.' Verse
26th, 'But ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep.' If these do not
force men to see a distinction, what will do it? But it is objected, that the
Lord says, 'Other sheep I have, which are not of this fold.' John x. 16. It Is
true, and adds, 'They shall hear my voice,' whereby they are distinguished from
those who do not hear his voice.

Those words, John xvii. 9, may draw particular notice, 'I pray not for the
world, but for them which thou have given me.' There is not a petition in this
prayer that looks as if he prayed for all mankind, but it is confined to a
number, taken out of the world, and hated by them. But what is more, his
express declaration, 'I pray not for the world,' decides the matter. They who
can evade the force of it now, could do it if it had been repeated ever so many
times. In this solemn prayer and the discourse that went before it, the Lord
expresses bowels of tenderness to the disciples, and his language is the very
image and picture of that heart which was going freely to bleed for them; and
if it was to bleed for all mankind, is it possible he should say, I pray not
for the world, but for those whom thou have given me? This prayer preceding his
agony, is doubtless of the same spirit with the intercession he now makes at
the Father's right hand. We cannot suppose that he now takes in that petition
which he before rejected, so as say now I pray for the world. Aaron was a type,
and when he entered into the holy place, upon his breast plate, and upon his
heart, were written the names of those for whom he appeared there. And what
names were they? Names of the Egyptians and Amalekites, etc. No. Exodus xxviii.
29, 'Aaron shall bear the names of the children of Israel in the breast plate
of judgment upon his heart when he goes into the holy place, for a memorial
before the Lord continually.' It cannot be supposed, without violence, that the
Egyptians, Amalekites, etc. had any interest in what he transacted. So Jesus
the antitype bears only the names of the true Israel, whom the Father had
given him out of the world. And we cannot, without like violence, suppose that
the world at large have any interest in what he transacts for his people in
heaven. So that all the expressions which point out his near connection with his
people, and the blessings arising from it, respect only those whom the Father
gave him out of the world. These make the church purchased with his own blood,
and are the body of which he is head, are members of his body, of his flesh,
and his bones, are the temple of the living God, in which he dwells, are the
branches united to him the vine, are married to him. These similitudes point
out not a connection between him and all mankind, but respect only those the
Father gave him. God said not to Babylon as he said to Israel, I am married to
you, The Apostle speaks of the saints at Rome being married to Jesus Christ, he
does not say, all Rome, or all the world, was married to him. The church of the
Thessalonians are said to be in God the Father and in the Lord Jesus Christ,
but their persecuting countrymen mentioned, 1 Epist. ii. 14. are not said to be
in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. Nor were any of the Thessalonians,
except the church, or that small company called out from among them, to whom
the gospel came not in word only but in power, 1 Epist. i.

The same idea of destinction among men is suggested by the direction given by
the spirit, calling them to preach the gospel in one place, and forbiding to go
to another. They were forbid to go into Bithynia, Acts xvi. 7, and are called
to go into Macedonia, 9, 10, verses, and commanded to speak with boldness in
another for this reason, 'I have much people in this city,' Acts xviii. 9, 10.
And we find in all ages, and at this day, the preaching of Jesus and the
Apostles is by the providence of God carried to one place and not to another.
Grand kingdoms at this present time are destitute of the words of eternal life,
and we must conclude, that God has not a people among them.

We find moreover, that where the gospel is preached a select number only are
taken out as the favorites of heaven, as the fact every where shows in the new
testament. When the Apostle turned from the Jews to preach to the Gentiles,
Acts xiii. 48, it is said, 'As many as were ordained to eternal life believed.'
It is a plain violation of text, and it makes a distinction to say, all these
Gentiles were ordained to eternal life, or that all believed.

The gospel was not only published where God had a people, but it was believed
by them, and this distinguished them from the rest as being the only heirs of
salvation. The gospel ever went forth with these legible characters upon its
front, 'He that believes shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be
damned.' Faith and salvation are connected in scripture, as faith and being
healed were in the days of Jesus. The passages that connect faith and salvation
are too numerous to repeat, and are obvious to those who look into the Bible.
It may be asked, what occasion for connecting faith at all if all men are
saved? It is lost labor, and the words are but wind, if unbelievers are saved.
If we should invert the expressions in many instances they would speak
agreeable to the doctrine of Universal Salvation. Mark xvi. 16, must be read
thus, he that believes not shall be saved. And we must understand a great part
of scripture to mean the opposite to what it expresses. Indeed one is led to
think of necessity for a new edition of the Bible, to make its language plain
to common understanding, and turning its negatives into affirmatives; and its
affirmatives into negatives.

A few passages only may be mentioned which connect faith with justification
and salvation. The Apostle of set purpose undertakes to show how men are
brought into favor with God. He shows there is not one righteous, that all the
world are guilty, and every mouth must be stopped, and draws this firm
conclusion, Chap. iii. 20. 'Therefore, by the deeds of the law there shall no
flesh be justified in his sight.' Man being thus effectually shut out from the
divine favor by guilt, and ruined forever as to any thing he can do himself; a
supernatural way of access is laid open by the Apostle. And it deserves
attention how far, and for whom it is opened 21, 22, verses, 'But now the
righteousness of God without the law is manifested, being witnessed by the law
and the prophets, even the righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus
Christ unto all, and upon all them that believe.' Here the grand door of hope
is thrown open for the guilty, and the conveyance of an all-sufficient
righteousness to them who are destitute, is declared; but it is as certainly
declared to be by faith unto them who believe, as it is declared that such a
righteousness is revealed at all. To say that the righteousness of God is
manifested which is not by faith, but is unto all who do not believe as well as
those who do is a perversion of the scripture in a capital point. This is a
door of man's opening and not God's. The Apostle confirms what he has been
saying here in the 4th chapter 5th verse, 'To him who works not but believes
in him who justifies the ungodly his faith is counted for righteousness.' Here
again, while works are discarded salvation comes to the believer, and is
confined to him, yea his faith is counted for righteousness as Abraham's faith
was verse 22. If this be God's way of counting, then he that has faith has
righteousness, and he that has not faith has no righteousness, and without
righteousness personal or imputed no person can be justified, for heaven and
earth shall sooner pass away, than one jot or tittle of the law shall fail Some
say that those who do not believe before death will believe afterward, and be
saved. They allege, that the gospel was preached to the spirits in prison, and
to the dead, 1 Pet. iii. 19. and ^4.6 This is really devilish, to set these
texts to face down the whole of divine revelation, which closes and fixes a
seal upon all matters at death, and the judgment, and declares he that is
filthy let him be filthy still -- and points out that an impassable gulf is
fixed -- that damnation is their portion, without a syllable of new
dispensation. -- Whereas it is plain the gospel has been and is preached to the
dead. -- It has been preached to those who are now in torment. -- It is
preached to the dead now; who may when they leave this world find the things of
their peace hid from their eyes.
, Mat. v. 18. When the brazen serpent was lifted up in the wilderness it was
the appointment of heaven, that those who saw it should be healed of the wound
given by the fiery serpents, and as the Son of man is lifted up in like manner,
so it is as much the appointment of heaven, that those who believe in Him
should be healed of the wound given by that old serpent the devil. As it is
presumed, that no person was cured in the wilderness but what saw the brazen
serpent, so none can be saved but those that believe. It is said, 'He is lifted
up, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have eternal life.'
Believing and not believing are in three passages set in opposition to each
other, and salvation is connected with the former, and damnation with the
latter, Mark xvi. 16. John iii. 18, and 36. In the last it is expressed
strongly, 'He that believes not the son shall not see life, but the wrath of
God abides on him.' Men can if they please, because sentence against them is
not executed speedily, have their hearts fully set to bring all the words of
their Maker to naught, and make them of less force than the words of children,
madmen or knaves.

The scriptures connect repentance with salvation, and impenitence with
damnation. Repentance and remission of sins were first published in his name,
Luke xxiv. 27. Acts ii. 38. Acts xi. 18. When Jesus told the Jews, who supposed
that they whose blood Pilate mingled with their sacrifices, and they upon whom
the tower fell, were greater sinners because they suffered these things, that
they were not greater, and that they should perish likewise except they
repented. He does not mean that they should have a tower fall upon them too, or
suffer a violent death, for he rejects the idea of being greater sinners on
account of suffering such things. He must mean perishing under the wrath of God
beyond the grave. If there be no punishment for men hereafter what can be meant
by the second death, Rev. ii. 11. Leaving those who choose to look up a meaning
in their own imaginations; every sober man will attend to the meaning in
scripture, Rev. xxi. 8. 'The fearful and unbelieving, etc. shall have their
part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone,' which is the second
death.

CAP. III.
Apostles Conduct when sent to Preach. -- Monuments erected of Leviathan --
Return of Jesus -- unseen World opened -- plain Answer to plain Question -- how
all Men -- every Man -- the whole World, etc. understood at the First -- Day of
Judgment considered -- Crimes, or Devils, signified by those on left Hand
noticed -- Words fully displaying, the Doctrine noticed.

WHEN Jesus sent his Apostles forth to publish the good news, he tells them to
shake off the dust of their feet against those that did not hear their words;
and declares with a verily, 'That it shall be more tolerable for Sodom in the
day of judgment than for them, Mat. x. 15. Are they then equally heirs of
salvation with those who believe their words? How will it be more tolerable, if
neither of them will suffer any thing? This agrees with the woes denounced upon
Chorazin, Bethsaida and Capernaum, xi. Chap. 21 -- 24. When the Jews
blasphemed, Paul testifying, that Jesus was Christ, he shook his raiment, and
said, 'Your blood be upon your heads.' Does he mean by this, that they should
come to a violent death, as Christians did at that time more than any other
men? No. It points to the second death, the same which Moses refers to when
prophesying of the great prophet Jesus being raised up, he says, 'He that will
not hearken to him shall be destroyed.' Deuteronomy. xviii. 15. compared with Acts
iii. 22, 23. When the Apostle spoke weeping, of many professors who were taking
their good things in this life, Phil. iii. 18, 19. for their God was their
belly, and they minded earthly things, he declared their end was destruction.
The mind of every sober man is forcibly constrained to think of a destruction
beyond this life. The Apostle, 2 Cor. v. 11. having mentioned, that every one
must appear before the judgment seat of Christ, to receive according to his
deeds, adds, 'Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord we persuade men.' They
did not strike terrors out of the face of their gospel, which their whole
testimony shows. While ground of strong confidence was suggested, through the
propitiation, strong fears also of the coming wrath were inculcated, and they
fled for refuge, to lay hold of the hope set before them. Striking monuments of
apostasy are enfored upon their consciences -- Lot's wife -- the angels now
reserved in (...) -- Israel in the the wilderness -- the breaking off that
nation from the olive tree through unbelief, and the call not to be high minded
but fear, left God also spare not them, united with such expressions as these,
'How shall we escape The Apostle knew of no way to escape in that case. Modern
inventions were not then found out.
if we neglect the great salvation.' Heb. ii. 3. 'If they escaped not who
refused, etc. much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him who
speaks from heaven, xii. Chap. 25. 'If we sin wilfully after that we have
received the knowledge of the truth there remains no more sacrifice for sins,
but a certain fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation which
shall devour the adversaries:' He that despised Moses law died without mercy --
of how much sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under
foot the Son of God -- For we know him that has said, vengeance belongs to
me, I will recompenses says the Lord. -- It is a fearful thing to fall into
the hands of the living God. These with the addresses to the seven churches of
Asia, enforcing upon all the churches, that God searches the hearts and reins,
and will give every man according to their works, pervaded the center of their
souls; they feared and trembled, and were led to diligence in the work of
faith, and labor of love, and to work One says, oh here is works to be done.
Avaunt thou, and let us hear God speaking, 1 Phil. ii. 12. 'Wherefore my
beloved, as ye have always obeyed -- work out your salvation with fear and
trembling.'
out their salvation with fear, and to give all diligence to make their calling
and election sure. 2 Pet. i: 10, and show diligence to the full assurance of
hope unto the end. Heb. vi. 11. This suggests an idea far different from men's
sitting down to tell over experiences at leisure, to show their confidence of
salvation, and draw the attention of others to their worth and distinction from
other men. The highest pride and self-conceit is thus gratified by those who
are more the children of hell than before. Their religion will not bear the
touch stone of self-denied obedience after all their boasting. Their religion
may be compared to baser metals washed over, to resemble gold or silver, which
lose their wash soon, and appear baser than ever. Such have been what they call
revivals of religion, from time to time in the eyes of most men.
These formerly pulled down strong holds, cast down imaginations, and
captivated every thought, to the obedience of Christ; but by Leviathan darts
are counted as stubble, he laugheth at the shaking of the spear, the sword of
him that lays at him cannot hold, the spear, the dart, nor the habergeon. Job
xli. 26 -- 29. And no wonder, for his scales are his pride, shut up together as
with a close seal; his heart is as firm as a stone, yea, as bard as a piece of
the nether millstone, v. 21 and 15. In the great antichristian body, which
before were proof against the terrors of the Apostles, and are now crowned with
this doctrine, one may see Leviathan complete.

The Lord argues from his own sufferings, the sufferings of his final enemies,
Luke xxiii. 31. 'If they do these things in the green tree, what shall be done
in the dry? The same is argued from the sufferings of his body, the church, 1
Pet. iv. 17. 'For the time is come that judgment must begin at the house of
God, and if first at us, what shall be the end of them who obey not the gospel
of God.' See also, 2 Thessalonians. i. 5.

The second coming of Jesus is spoken of as the joy of his people and the
terror of his final enemies. While he comes to give rest to the former he
appears in flaming fire, taking vengeance upon the latter, who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction, see at large, 2 Thessalonians. i. 7 -- 11.
Sudden destruction will come upon them when crying peace and safety, Chap. v.
3. 'And thus they will be taken as fishes in a net, or birds in a snare,'
Eccle. ix. 12. 'And it will be as in the days of Noah and Lot, when destruction
If one says there will no destruction of any men, when he comes, he gives his
Maker the lie, who says it shall be as it was then when the flood came and
destroyed them all.
overtook them in the midst of their pleasures.' Luke xvii. 26 -- 30. Thus
temporal destructions were types of future destruction, as much as temporal
salvations were types.

The Lord fairly delineates (and he well knew) the unseen world in a parable,
Luke xvi. 19 -- ult. where the beggar from distress was transported to
happiness; but he who had received his good things in his life time, dyed and
was buried. And what follows after his death? 'And in hell he lift up his eyes
being in torments, and cries for a drop of water to cool his tongue,' which is
denied; and he informed he has already received all his comforts, and of an
impassable gulf fixed between him and the blessed. Now if all men are saved,
this is not so much as a parable or representation, but is a mere farce and
fiction.

The apostolic weapons, which produced mighty conquests in those days, are said
to have in readiness to revenge all disobedience when the obedience of saints
is fulfilled, 2 Cor. x. 6. Let it not be wondered, that this is ascribed to
their weapons since Jesus says, John xii. 48. 'The word that I have spoken
shall judge him at the last day.' See also, Rev. xi. 5. Where the two
witnesses, the old and new testament, are represented as destroying their
enemies by fire, bursting from their mouth. These have in readiness to revenge
all disobedience, but are waiting for for the completion of the obedience of
the saints. This agrees with the reply to the souls under the altar, crying,
how long do thou not avenge our blood? viz. that they should rest yet for a
little season until their fellow servants also, that should be killed as they
were should be fulfilled. When what is behind of the sufferings of Christ is
accomplished, and they have had their course through every part of his body,
the church, then the arrows will fly suddenly from the string, and wrath blaze
upon them that know not God, and obey not the gospel.

In Luke xiii. 23. one puts this question to Jesus, 'Lord, are there few that
be saved?' Does not this imply the question, that has been attended to? May we
not expect a decisive answer? Can we suppose the answer of any man living can
be more relied on? Shall we dare to ask whether he knew, or if he did, whether
he was willing to deceive about it? The enquirer took it for granted, that some
would not be saved, which sentiment Jesus does not repel, nor charge him with
having contracted thoughts; but immediately inforces upon his mind, that many
will perish, 24 -- 28. 'Strive to enter in at the strait gate; for many shall
seek to enter in, and shall not be able.' 'When once the master of the house
has risen up and shut the door, and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at
the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us; and he shall answer and say unto you,
I know you not whence you are; depart from me all ye workers of iniquity, there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, etc.' See agreeing with this, Mat. vii.
22, 23. The parable of the virgins, Mat. xxv. 10 -- 12. The parable of the
tares, and of the net, Mat. xiii. 42, 50. But what need of turning to many
passages? Jesus speaks in direct reply to the question, and if all men but one
upon earth should say contrary, he would have ground sufficient to tell them
they were all liars, and he has the word of one of more weight than them all.
One might go on to fill whole pages with mere quotations without any remarks,
it would rather be tiresome. The scriptures already quoted in sundry ways and
diverse manners, in doctrines, in discipline, in practice, and express
declarations, plainly show it will be the unhappy lot of some men to be damned.
And though the thought be painful, and each one may fear how it will be with
himself; yet it must be said, that they stand together as a strong bulwark not
to be overthrown. If giddy mortals avail themselves of that freedom of
expression, which is not unbecoming the God of heaven to use, and catch up
scattered texts, where the word all is used, and determine greedily, that every
individual of mankind will be saved. They are unlearned and unstable, and wrest
the scriptures to their own destruction. It might as well be concluded that
God's spirit was poured out upon every individual of mankind, upon the day of
Pentecost, because Peter says, this is that which was spoken by the prophet
Joel, viz. 'I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh;' or that every individual
is included in what is said. Acts iv. 21. 'All men glorified God for that which
was done;' though the same passage informs, that the rulers threatened, and
sought to punish them. The most remarkable passages which are pressed by
violence, and made to face down the whole current of divine revelation, may be
here produced, The word here rendered Savior might as well be rendered
preserver in this passage, and it gives the proper sense. The translators
render the word ^OSHEAUNG, which answers to the Greek here, preservest. Psalm
xxxvi. 6. 'Thou preservest man and beast.' If they had rendered that word
savest, no one would have thought it respected salvation beyond this life.
God's preserving his people in a special manner, so that they shall never be
left or forsaken by him, and not a hair of their head shall perish, is a motive
to trust in him, to labor and suffer reproach for his name. But if he be the
savior of all men hereafter, no force can be seen in the reason here given,
why the Apostle labored and suffered reproach.
1 Timothy iv. 10. 'For therefore we both labor and suffer reproach; because we
trust in the living God, who is the savior, or preserver of all men,
especially of those that believe.

It has been shown page 15, that the Apostle had been speaking of various sorts
of men, and that his will is as extensive, that they should come to the
knowledge of the truth. Fact shows, that all individuals do not come to the
knowledge of the truth, though it shows that all sorts of men do. So it means
only all sorts of men.
1 Timothy ii. 4. 'Who will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the
knowledge of the truth.'

The every man, or all, here are the many sons he brings to glory, 10th verse.
The sanctified, and his brethren, 11th verse. The church, 12th verse. The
children God gave him, 13th verse, and the seed of Abraham, 16th verse. It has
been observed, that the church is a body called out from the world, that those
God gave him are only a certain number of mankind; and as to the seed of
Abraham, 16th verse, of which (EPILAMBAINETAI) he takes hold, they are
believers only, Gal. iii. 7. To suppose he tasted death for those who neglect
the great salvation to the end, makes void 2d chapter 3d verse, and xiith, 25th
and xth, 26th, 27th, etc.
Heb. ii. 9. 'That he, by the grace of God, should taste death for every man.'

All men to whom the free gift comes are distinguished that, 17th verse, 'They
who receive abundance of grace and the gift of righteousness;' and in the 1st.
verse, which gives rise to what is said in this (...) and the parallel between
the imputation of guilt through Adam, and righteousness through Christ, they
are said to be persons justified by faith. And any one may easily see the
Apostles drift in this epistle, is to make out justication by faith only.
Therefore it comes not to unbelievers but is to all men who believe, Jews and
Gentiles, of every class; see observations in the 32d page, upon what the
Apostle says, iii. chapter ^1st, 22d verses, showing to whom the door of
salvation is opened.
Romans v. 18 'Therefore, as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all men to
condemnation, even so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all
men, unto justification of life.

The all made alive, are explained in the next verse to be Christ's, i. e.
those the Father gave him. They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh,
etc. Gal. v. 24. 'If any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his.'
2 Cor xiii. 5. 'Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates.' In the 2d verse of
the xvth chapter, he says, 'Ye are saved, if ye keep in memory what I preached,
unless ye have believe in vain,' and says, they are lost from whom the gospel
is hid, 2 Cor. iv. 5. like all made alive then are not reprobates as well as
others.
1 Cor. xv. 22. 'For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made
alive.

This epistle (...) a line between the company of the disciples and all others,
2d chapter 19th verse. 'They went out from us, but they were not of us -- they
were not all of us, etc.' iii. 10. 'The children of God, and the children of
the devil.' iv. 6. 'He that is of God -- he that is not of God.' v. ^^. 'He
that has the Son has life, he that has not the Son has not life.' It is
presumption to say, the world here includes the children of the devil -- those
who had not life, and those for whom he would not pray, xvii. John. It may with
boldness be (...) to mean only the 144,000 sealed, Rev. vii. 1 -- 10, together
with that (...) as multitude, 9th verse (EXS PANTOS ETHNOUS) out of all
nations, and kindreds and people, and tongues, etc. And so are part of all
nations only, and yet are God's whole world of the (...) distinguished from
satan's world; for which Jesus (...) then prayed, nor (...). These are
intended. John xvii. 20. 'Neither pray I for these, but for them who shall
believe on me through their word.'
1 John ii. 2. 'And he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only,
but for the sins of the whole world.'

These are the chief texts pressed into their service, to maintain the doctrine
of Universal Salvation against the powerful current of divine testimony. But
instead of opposing they fall in with the general stream. The disciples to whom
they were (...) when they at first received the truth were impressed strongly
with an idea, that could never be obliterated while holding the truth, and must
have a leading influence in all the views that were received after, viz. that
repentance and remission of sins were inseparably connected; and that he who
believed not should be damned. So the Apostles preached, and so they believed.
This was not only impressed in the first instant, but strongly enforced ever
after. They must infallibly consider this present evil world resembling Sodom,
and God's chosen or church fleeing from approaching destruction, as Lot's
family from Sodom, see Heb. vi. 18. 'We -- who have fled for refuge to lay hold
upon the hope set before us.' Could they have a distant idea, that the word all
respected the world at (...), of which Sodom was a type, and its destruction a
type of theirs? Could they demolish their first impression that good hope rises
only in believing, and with it the whole testimony that wrath awaited
unbelievers? It cannot be. The universal expressions must infallibly be
understood to mean the whole redeemed body made up of Jews and Gentiles,
Greeks, Barbarians, bond and free, etc. in every age, and them only. To
understand it further would be contrary to their first impressions, and all the
doctrines they heard, and all the discipline and practice they saw, and every
thing about the profession. This grand collection of all sorts makes a world,
though chosen out of the world, and a general view of them is given Rev. v. 9.
and Rev. vii. 1 -- 10. 'Though collected out of nations are a nation.' 1 Pet.
ii. 9. 'And are the glory and honor of the nations.' Rev. xxi. 26.

Why do not men eager to catch hold of the word all in this case, and extend it
to every individual, do the same with such passages as these! Mark i. 37. 'All
men seek for thee.' John iii. 26. 'The fame baptizeth and all men come to him.'
John xii. 19. 'The world is gone after him;' To do it in this case does not so
much oppose the united force of truth as in the present case. The reason is,
they have not so strong a temptation from the wish of the heart.

It is easy to see that men who know not the authority of God speaking in the
scriptures, nor the same authority in the first churches, the living epistles,
wherein that word was drawn out in real life; nor their reigning sentiments and
awful discipline in separation from the world, who form the loosest ideas both
of that word and of churches, will have darkness in their paths, and stumble at
such expressions. But could they for once realize the appearance of the
churches in Judea, with thoughts and hearts in unison, striking terror into the
hearts of their enemies, it would dash in a moment their readiness to apply the
word all to those who know not God, and (...) not the gospel.

The church of the living God is a medium through which truth is seen. 'It is
the light of the world.' Mat. v. 14. It is called the pillar and ground of the
truth. We may then view it as a beacon, a monument, and the establishment of
truth upon earth. Her light is derived from the Sun of Righteousness, and like
the moon she reflects it upon the world. And as an epistle of Christ the mind
of Christ was read in her conduct, as well as in what was written in the Bible.
Those formerly who looked through this medium received very different
impressions, from those who look through the medium of what are now called
churches, which bear no resemblance; and fail in the first instance of being a
body gathered in the name of Jesus Christ, separated from the world, and
exercising the appointed discipline. As the first churches might be called a
living comment upon the scriptures, and impressions of truth were taken from
them, in connection with the written word; so men at this day are led in their
understanding about the meaning of scripture, by the deceitful comment in what
are called churches; and as these are broken, divided, and opposed; no wonder
it is all confussion among them as among the Babel builders formerly.

A text or two may be added to those mentioned before, showing the certainty of
future punishment; one is Mark ix. 43 -- 49. The Lord here directs to part with
a hand, foot or an eye, that offends, because it is better to enter life
without them than to go into hell with them. And he repeats five times that the
fire is not quenched, and three times that the worm dies not. If any one will
turn to the passage and read it deliberately he may be asked these questions
when he has done. Does the Lord call to the loss of any earthly enjoyment in
order to enter life? Does he labor a point? What point does he labor? Is it
Universal Salvation? Or is it the doctrine of damnation? Or is he full of words
without any thing to the purpose, and making much ado about nothing? Who dare
say he is holding up a bugbear to terrify his friends to part with their
nearest enjoyments in life, and that they like fools took him to be in earnest,
so as lose even life it self afterward.

One text more may he considered. In the 25th chapter of Matthew, the final
judge (though then in abasement) lays open the transactions of the last day to
his friends; and informs that when seated upon his throne all nations shall be
gathered, and he shall separate them from one another, placing some on his
right hand and others upon his left; and shall address himself to the one, Come
ye blessed, etc. and then to the other, Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire,
etc. and in 46th verse, it is said, These shall go away into everlasting
punishment, but the righteous into life eternal. See the same issue of that day
Rev. xx. 15. The meaning that first presents itself is, that some men are
appointed to happiness at that time, and others to misery.

It has been said, that the separation here means only a separation of crimes
from persons. Answer; nations are gathered and he separates them one another,
and as they are a collection of persons it must be, that he separates persons
from one another. And the sufferers of this punishment are said to wail and
gnash their teeth, verse 30th of this chapter, and Mat. xiii. 42, 50, which
cannot be applicable to crimes, they being not the subjects of pain or action.
Such trifling evasions are not used where men's worldly interest is at stake.
Men do not take such liberty in construing the words of a law book. A man would
make himself ridiculous that should do it. For instance, the laws declare, that
any person guilty of murder shall be put to death. A man is brought upon trial,
full evidence appears against him, and he is brought in guilty, by the verdict
of a jury. Upon this the judge rises up to pronounce sentence, that he shall be
hanged, till he is dead; but the prisoner's attorney gets up and informs his
honor of a mistake which he labors under, and says, it is not the meaning of
the law to hurt men, or that they should suffer in person but simply to purge
their crimes, and therefore that the meaning of the law cannot reach farther
than that his client should be hung in effigy, and he prays that the person
himself might be set at liberty. Should a plea like this be made at the grand
court hereafter, one (...) of how much avail it will be to a discharge.

Others have said, that those upon the left hand are devils. Answer, if so then
devils are part of the nations gathered at that time, and are the part which is
separated. And a reason of their sentence is that they fed not the least of the
brethren of the judge, when hungry, did not cloathe, etc. It is difficult to
conceive how the devil can do this. Can any man think this to be the great
article of charge against the devil? Does this appear from scripture to be the
leading feature of his guilt. If it should be admitted, might it not be
supposed, that some of them will do it to escape the sentence, for they do not
love pain. The truth is men fly to any (...) in a pinch. It may be questioned
whether greater evasions were ever made in all the controver^^ that ever were
upon religion.

It may be enquired now, what (...) wanting to give the most full and complete
proof that all men will not be saved. Does one wish to see many doctrines in a
connected chain throwing their joint light into one point, or to see the whole
appearance, discipline, and practice entirely concurring and enforcing the
evidence, or to have peremptory declarations of the punishment of some men, and
to have them repeated over and over. Does he wish for a representation of what
passes in the unseen world from one well acquainted there, -- or what passes at
the general judgment, and what is the issue of the day, -- or to have the
question plainly put to Jesus and plainly answered, -- or to find the scripture
speaking of it throughout, he has them all conspiring together and affording as
bright evidence as they give upon any point, and indeed as great as words can
give. But if men wish to have the natural meaning of words destroyed, that they
may embrace a darling opinion; or to have the rock removed out of its place for
them, this is unreasonable, and has been often wished in vain. The divine law
and all the divine words must remain, fixed upon a firm basis, and heaven and
earth will sooner pass away than one jot or tittle of them fail.

It is true there are a few words recorded in scripture, which as we commonly
take up language, speak full according to the spirit of this doctrine, as Genesis
iii. 4. 'Ye shall not surely die.' Mich. iii. 11. 'No evil can come to us.'
Deuteronomy. xxix. 19. 'I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of my
heart. Rev. xviii. 7. 'I sit a queen, and am no widow, and shall see no
sorrow.' Information is given at the same time who they are spoken by, viz. the
serpent, the false prophets, and the whore of Babylon. And though they have
been held as sweet by many for ages, yet they have held them so with more of a
trembling hand, than they do now. A person is now emboldened, and with seeming
security may behold God rising in vehement wrath against them when they are
mentioned, as in the following verse, Deuteronomy. xxix. 20. and perfect will of God
-- becomes more acquainted with the grand relief; has his confidence confirmed,
and enjoys those consolations which are by Christ Jesus, and will be crowned
with eternal glory. His faith issues not in mere empty talk, but the lineaments
of it are drawn out visibly in his practice; particularly in his observance of
that new commandment of love, left by the dying Lord to his dear disciples, by
which he signifies they shall be known to be his, in distinction from the rest
of mankind, John xiii. 34, 35. This necessarily supposes them united in
separation from the world, -- striving together for the faith of the gospel --
continuing steadfastly in the apostles doctrine -- fellowship -- breaking of
bread and prayers -- assembling every Lord's day for that purpose -- loving
each other with a cordial affection for holding that truth which makes them
hateful to the world -- ministering to their wants, thus laying up treasure in
heaven -- rebuking in case of offense, and observing the discipline -- jointly
attending to every thing commanded, without making any void -- patiently
suffering as companions together for the truth's sake. And so every branch of
the ancient practice, and the apostolic contention, is revived in one body, of
which Jesus is the head, and they members of him, and one another, which shows
their faith working by love, and made perfect by works, agreeable to James ii.
chapter. As a plant rises from a seed, so practice rises from the faith, and
manifests them to be heirs of salvation, see 1 Thessalonians. i. 4 -- ult. and ii.
chap. 13, 14.

Far different is the faith, that all men will be saved. It is a belief of that
which the whole current of scripture testimony stands opposed to. -- Is a
breach of the one faith of the Apostles; and gives a trifling view of the
authority of the scriptures, as dissembling and holding up terrors in which
there will appear no reality when the mask is thrown off. It is far from its
nature to bring forth the fruits mentioned above, 'The Lord will not spare him,
but the anger of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke, and all the curses
shall lie upon him:' and Rev. xviii. 8. 'Therefore shall her plagues come in
one day, death, etc. -- and she shall be utterly burnt with fire; for strong is
the Lord God who judges her.'

CAP. IV.
The native Influence of the Gospel contrasted -- Jesus sole Teacher (...)
^ttention called from Man -- View of false Teachers -- bias in all Men to Hope
-- Satan's first Reasoning -- of dying intrepid -- Complainers against this
Doctrine its Founders -- Damnation a Bugbear, the common Taste -- concise
Church History in all Ages -- Luther and Calvin -- present Posture of Religion
-- general Thought of the Bible -- national Christianity -- present ^^^uation
of this World, etc.

THE gospel brings glad tidings of great joy for all sorts of sinners, even the
chief. While it gives a deadly stab to the heart, it conveys a life-giving
balsam. It presents a broad foundation of hope to one in the broadest view of
his guilt, and quiets the conscience of man, when fearfully looking for
judgment, and fiery indignation. Hence joy comes to prisoners that were
appointed to death by the sentence of the law. Great satisfaction arises from
hearing the merciful declarations, he that believes shall be saved -- if any
man thirst, let him come to me and drink -- him that comes to me, I will in no
wise cast out, etc. A person is then constrained practically to regard those
words, Mat. xvi. 24. 'If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and
take up his cross, and follow me:' and to cleave to the Lord with purpose of
heart, in observing all things commanded, which is a trial of the reality of
his faith. In this way he proves what is that good, acceptable, to lead to the
ancient separation, discipline, and self-denied observance of all things,
commanded to inspire with fear and trembling, and carry through sufferings unto
death. This practice instead of rising out of that belief, is a contradiction
to it; and it might as well be expected to see a bramble bush bearing grapes,
as to see this practice growing out of that faith. The very mention of such
fruits may possibly occasion the disdainful smile; but it may be boldly
affirmed, that gospel faith and such practice are as closely connected as body
and spirit: and if men trifle with the doctrines or commands of God, whose
voice will judge the world, it is done at no small risque.

What the Lord says with regard to false prophets, 'Ye know The devil (...) led
men that length, to believe there is no determining with certainty about their
being false, and his agents confidently like himself, say it is written, 'Judge
not, etc.' making Mat. vii. 1. serve their wicked purpose.
them by their fruits', may hold true also with respect to doctrines. Certainly
if they are opposed to fruits they are false. Fruits are not what any man, or
body of men take it into their heads to call so, but what God himself calls so.
The scripture must decide that point. And if the branches of love before
mentioned connected with a contention for the faith once delivered to the
saints be fruits, not only this doctrine, but the whole doctrine of the
Christian world must tumble in ruins. Not but that they may seem to hold some
things which look like truth, but a little leaven leavens the whole mass, and a
little poison makes a wholesome draught fatal.

The scripture says, beware of men, and its meaning is emphatical, as the
attention is called up to one teacher alone, even Christ. Though he be not
bodily present, he as certainly speaks in the scripture as if he were. There is
no where else to go then but to the scriptures, which contain the words of
eternal life. As to men, their deceit is cloaked under the most plausible and
kind appearances, and one had need beware of them, as of the devil himself. It
is said, 2 Pet. ii. 1 -- 4. 'There were false prophets among the people (i. e.
the Jews) as there shall be false teachers among you;' pointing to the whole
succession of them in all ages. He says also they shall bring upon themselves
swift destruction, They get good bread here, therefore this destruction is
beyond the grave.
and their damnation slumbereth not. Though it be delayed it is wide awake.
Turning to the Old Testament one sees their plausible character. They were
gathered round the two kings, 2 Chronicles. xviii. speaking smoothly, but Ahab tells
Jehoshaphat, 'As to Micaiah, did I not tell thee he would not prophecy good,
but evil; and he has a prison and bread of affliction appointed him. Of these
teachers we read, Ezekiel. xiii. 10. 'They have seduced the people, saying, there
is peace, and there was no peace.' 16th verse, see visions of peace when there
is no peace. 18th verse, sew pillows to all arm holes. 22d verse strengthened
the hands of the wicked by promising him life. In the xxiii. chapter of
Jeremiah, their character is largely described, their language is, 'The Lord
has said, ye shall have peace, and no evil shall come upon you, etc.' see at
large. As plausibility marked their character under the law, so it did under
the gospel, Romans xvi. 18. 'By good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts
of the simple,' i. e. those not taught of God. Paul in the same spirit with the
true prophets says, in opposition to them all, Gal. i. 10. 'For if I yet
pleased man, I should not be the servant of Christ.'

One would have thought satan had conducted his ministers near their utmost
limits as to speaking peace in their various departments throughout
Christendom, so called, before the appearance of this doctrine, which declares
there is no evil for any man to fear beyond the grave. This doctrine is the
finishing off of what begun long before, and all parties were engaged to
promote and bring forth the topstone with much applause.

It is natural for men to fancy it will be well with them when this short life
ends. This is manifest from the savage who has victuals, clothes and
ammunition, buried with him, that he may be well furnished in a visionary
hunting world of happiness; to the raptured philosopher who fancies, that his
spirit will be wasted on wings divine into unknown delightful regions, and like
the be he shall sip delicious draughts from ^^known flowers. The fancy of
ancient and modern philosophers, both Pagan and Christian, has had a large
range. They think of feasting upon nectar and ambrosia, and of being
transported from star to star through the wide universe.
This bias to fancied happiness appears as strong in those who profess to
believe the Bible, and yet in works deny it as any men whatever. So they cast
off from themselves the terrible threatenings, which still they reckon will
fall on some others. How flow men are to admit a truth which is against them,
often appears in one in a consumption.


It would be endless to point out the various gradations of their hope, and the
several foundations they build it upon. Men are more engaged to get a hope that
is strong, than to see whether it is fixed upon a rock or the sand. That a
slight foundation serves, appears in two armies engaged in battle, where on
both sides multitudes think that their fall in battle is meritorious, and will
give some claim to salvation. This is not confined to savage ignorance, but is
the case in polished nations. Not merely among men of low understanding, but
those of rank. Not merely among Papists, but Protestants too. Nor can it be
supposed that Britain, France, or America could boast over others in this
respect.

To some this foundation appears weak, therefore they may have recourse to
something that is more plausible. It may be a general belief of scripture
whether they understand what it contains or not. Morality in society --
attendance upon the religion of their country -- or parish -- esteem of their
minister and paying his tax to him -- veneration for dead saints, or it may be
experience of a change of hearts to a better conceit of themselves, or some
good action -- or good wish, or some thing else. Hope founded some how is a
staff that most men walk with. This bias to get a hope has at last led men the
fatal length to believe, that all men will be saved in the face of all God's
threatenings.

Men have had ample employ in cutting out various schemes of religion to fit
the policy of kingdoms or the taste of the public where they happen to live.
Barely to enumerate the sects called Christian, would be tedious, much more so
to lay open their several opinions. It may be presumed none have risen since
the first departure from the faith, that have more texts standing full faced
against them than the Universalists; or that are put to a greater shift to keep
up any plausibility. The shift made, that those on the left hand are crimes, or
devils, and not men is the master piece of all evasions. And if the credit of
wit be allowed them here, or a deep insight into human nature, as to what
scheme of religion might take with the human mind, yet it must be said it will
turn against themselves in the end, even as it is with the fallen angels, who
are not accused of wanting understanding.

Satan was the first reasoner upon the words of God, and the step he took was
to lead Eve to question the truth and force of them; then finding by her
answer, that she was deviating from the form of words delivered her, and
wavering about them, he pursues his advantage, and asserts 'Ye shall not surely
die.' And since that day, he goes about seeking whom he may devour, leading men
to question, whether God has said this and the other thing (taking off the
force of his words) and to hold loose the form of sound words delivered them;
and to doubt whether the curses will fall on them, though they walk in the
imagination of their hearts. It was not uncommon to fancy an escape before, but
now the conclusion is drawn fully as bold as at first, that no man shall surely
die.

The intrepidity with which some who hold this doctrine may leave this world,
is no certain argument that it is true. Deists, Pagans, Papists, and every
sect, have thought they had got evidence of the truth of their respective
schemes from the boldness with which some of their followers have died. But a
madman's firm belief that he is a king, does not make it evident that he really
is so. A man going to the gallows may firmly believe there is an escape for
him, but this alters not his real situation. It is said Psalm Lxxiii. 4. 'There
are no bands in their death,' who yet are said 19th verse, to be brought into
desolation in a moment.

Many persons think this doctrine false, and wonder how it could ever gain
ground in opposition to such a multitude of plain texts, who yet have had a
hand in its production. It is a child of their begetting, though they are sorry
for its birth, and neither parent, nor child, are fond of owning each other.
This may: seem a strange insinuation. But it is certain they bury out of sight
the ancient distinction of the church from the rest of mankind, and its
discipline, and with them the established enmity, and the sire Jesus came to
send on earth, while they hold up both in doctrine and practice, that the work
of Jesus had respect to all men. Some who dare not assert it in word, still
proclaim it loud in practice, by forming a near connection in religion with the
community at large where they live, so that the very existence of their Can it
want proof that the hierarchy of France and Britain rests only on government,
and wealthy patrons who are chiefly Deists laughing in their sleeves; and that
this is the firm foundation that supports them.

Or that if civil government and wealthy men in America should withdraw their
aid, that their churches totter to the ground, and the cry of teachers love of
souls would cease.


churches depends upon it; and if this connection was broke their churches
crumble to dust. There cannot be the appearance of consistency in this, unless
Jesus be supposed to die for all, and all will be saved. And it is thought to
be the height of religion to have what is called universal charity, which is
indeed paving a broad street for most, or all to walk to heaven in. Not only
this, but the force of scripture is beaten down, and it is made to give place
to traditions, platforms, creeds, etc. that the Bible is not thought sufficient
to support any doctrine without the helping shoulder of some great divine, or
number of divines so called. Nay it is become a common jest book to collect
expressions from, to give a high seasoning to wit and mirth. What more could
any wish for, to nullify all its threatenings? What more to lead to the thought
that Jesus died for all, and that all will be saved.

Damnation has been considered as a mere bugbear to frighten children, before
publishing this doctrine, not only by those who tossed it from their tongues in
profane oaths, but those who preached its terrors to get money. Those who have
wrote against this doctrine, have not dared to lay open the root of the
scripture doctrine, as standing against it, because it would be against their
own religion. Parishes must be held at any rate. Though some things may be well
spoken, yet we see nothing in (...) resembling the conduct of Noah, who moved
with fear of things not as yet seen, prepared an ark to the saving of his
house: Nothing like turning their backs upon this world, and following Jesus
without the camp, bearing his reproach. But instead of this, holding strong
connection with the world, and quietly going down stream, that they may be
clothed in purple and fine linen, and fare sumptuously every day.

We may now take a brief view of revolutions in the Christian profession. In
the Apostles days, the churches, which were in God the Father, and in the Lord
Jesus Christ, looked forth as the morning, clear as the sun, fair as the moon,
and terrible as an army with banners. The evidence of the sufferings of Jesus
with the glory following, burst into their minds and captivated their hearts.
They joyfully quitted their hold of this world, and partook of his sufferings,
looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of him who gave
himself to redeem them from all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar
people, zealous of good works. These works they considered as an evidence that
their faith was unfeigned, and so should be crowned with salvation. Their faith
and works both were hateful to the world, and drew upon them heavy sufferings;
but the hope of future glory raised their spirits, and strong consolations from
heaven supported them. The human mind without divine support shrinks from such
sufferings. Thus many at that day varied a little (as it might seem) to escape
distress, see Gal. vi. 12. This deviation continually increased afterward,
agreeable to 2 Thessalonians. ii. 7 -- 12. Herein were fulfilled 2 Timothy iii. 1. and 1 Timothy iv. 1. When it was considerably advanced, professors cast a favorable eye
toward the morality and maxims of nations, adding tradition, philosophy, etc.
to their profession; so that the distance between the church and world was very
sensibly lessened. The world failed not to return the compliment, and soon got
so favorable an idea of Christianity, that it was noticed by the great, and
the Emperor of the world introduced it as the reigning religion of the Roman
empire. Constantine loaded the Elders, or Bishops with wealth and honor; and
history informs, that a general corruption followed among them. Though this was
manifest to all men, yet the world continued to lavish its favors and increase
their grandeur, till upon the fall of the western empire, and its being divided
among ten kings they all yielded submission to the first Bishop, and in this
the prophecy, Rev. xvii. 12, 13. was fulfilled. This was within five hundred
years from the Apostles days. This haughty pontiff had sway for ages, over
princes and subjects, requiring an implicit faith in what he declared to be the
mind of God, while the scriptures were locked up out of sight; and at the same
time the greatest barbarities were exercised upon those who could not swallow
his dictates, and this under pretense of zeal for God. Mean while the grossest
vices ran through the whole body of the clergy, and the grossest opinions were
preached by them, and believed by the people.

A sensible check was given to his career in the 16th century, by Luther,
Calvin, and others, who boldly exclaimed against the corruptions of the church
of Rome, caused the scriptures to be published, and seemed to revive the
contention for the faith once delivered to the saints. But these contenders
instead of disappearing in this world, and becoming united with a poor and
afflicted people trusting in the name of the Lord; willingly admitted princes
to take up their cause and support it by their power. Thus it became a cause of
the kingdoms of this world, instead of a contention of the church of Christ in
separation from the world as at the beginning. So that Christianity was brought
into a state resembling what it was in the days of Constantine. The followers
of these reformers have been relaxing more and more from any thing about them,
which had any appearance of the Apostolic doctrine; and have been much divided,
and no small quarrellings raised among them. But at last tired with quarrels
and persecutions, and each party being gravelled with what another could lay
before his conscience from the scripture, they have in general been taking a
new turn about religion. While multitudes turn Deists, most others think best
not to be strenuous as to any point, and to maintain no contention, for (...)
they would call the faith once delivered to the saints. This they suppose is
amply compensated by the good opinion they can admit of every sect and
denomination. It has become an approved proverb, that men do not think alike,
and do not look alike, supposing that there is no more evil in having a
different belief According to Paul, belief is counted for righteousness, Romans
iv. 5.
than a different face: or in believing that which makes God's word of no
effect, or makes him a liar. So it is commonly thought, if a person be what
society calls a good member of it, he will be saved let his belief be what it
will. This emboldens men in any sentiments, even in the denial of revelation.

While men are thus showing mutual complaisance to each other, we may besure
they will take liberties with the word of God. Its divine origin is accordly
doubted by men who yet make a decent obeisance to the public religion. Some not
so prudent boldly reject some parts of it as fancy dictates. And to the bulk of
people, the most of it is of so doubtful signification, as to lose all force.
The paper, print, and cover may have a shadow of respect, but as to the
contents, this is too deep to be understood, that is figurative -- that is
doubtful -- that is indifferent, and the other is contradictory; so that taking
it all together it is the most unmeaning, insignificant book that was ever
written. -- And besides this they have erected a tribunal, upon which human
reason is seated as judge, before whom the words of God must be arraigned and
tried, and those only will be allowed to pass which she allows can be
comprehended, and do not clash too much with interest and ease. No wonder then
there be gods many and lords many. There are also sentiments many, which could
they be collected and fairly exposed would indeed excite the idea of Babel or
Bedlam.

Thus we have contrasted with the reception of truth at first, the reception it
has met with from the nations, when they have meddled with it: While they fail
not of loading its betrayers and murderers with honor, one while it is itself
locked up in prison fast, another time it is let out to be bandied about like a
foot ball, or to use another similitude, to be cut up into shreds, and have its
force demolished.

Among the first believers the divine testimony tore down reasonings, took the
heart by storm, and captivated every thought to the obedience of Christ. But on
the contrary now, the scriptures receive the assault, are stormed by men, and
captivated to support their evil reasonings, and countenance their wicked
affections and lusts.

Christian nations, so called, boast of superiority over other nations (whom
they call heathen) as Mohammedan nations glory over them, and the Chinese boast,
looking with contempt upon both. After all the boasting of Christian nations
they are much the same they were before they adopted Christianity, only they
have new names about religion, and the gods. It is said that the Roman senate
talked of enrolling Jesus among the gods. However that be, the name of Jesus is
only enrolled among the nations. Not to enlarge upon the battles that have been
fought in his name while the earth was made slippery with blood. The Spaniards
carried his name into South-America, and under it, not only dispossessed the
trembling natives but cut them in pieces and covered the earth with millions of
their carcases. Under the name of Jesus, millions of the (...) Negroes have
been torn from all that was dear to them, and reduced to wear out their lives
in slavery and distress. Under his name our high mettled Christians haughtily
tread upon the poor, grind their faces, and extort from wretchedness its last
comforts to support a high caparisoned gospel. And it is not uncommon to invoke
his name to give a sanction to earnest pursuits after this world, and hoarding
up treasures by extortion.

As to nations they may be compared to vast collections of water moving in a
steady course down their channel, that cannot be diverted or turned back. The
introducing Christianity, never turned their stream the contrary way, but
instead of this being perverted and mingling it is carried down stream. It was
not the intent of Jesus to do more than to collect out of the nations a people
for his name. Notwithstanding the high boasts of Christian nations, there is
the strongest ground to believe, that the outlines of the character of both
clergy and laity have a strong resemblance round the whole globe; and that
there is not more difference in their religion than in their looks or dress.

Two things may be mentioned, wherein all the nations agree.

I. They all imagine that human worth is of some avail toward making peace
with their Maker. The church motto in distinction is, He is our peace -- The
Lord our righteousness.

II. Worldly interest is a main point with all the nations. Mat. vi. 32. 'For
after all these things do (ETHNEE) the nations seek.'

In opposition, the reigning sentiment of the true followers of Jesus is thus
enforced, Luke xii. 33. 'Sell that ye have, and give alms; provide yourselves
bags that wax not old, a treasure in the heavens, etc.' Though Christian
nations are well agreed in the two principal points mentioned, yet in some
others which are called circumstantials they differ. Thus religion may assume a
different garb in different ages or places. Sometimes she appears in a more
strait and forbidding dress, sometimes more loose and inviting. To cut short,
universal benevolence, or charity, so called, is agreeable to the present taste
of all parties. She casts a pleasant eye (however disaffected) upon all sects
of religion, insomuch that a rejecter of revelation, if he declares he cannot
see evidence of its truth, will not meet a severe frown. However she cannot
quite conceal her disgust at a strenuous maintenance of the simple truth. But
still she cries, wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leads to the
Elysian fields, and many there be that go thither. This dame with her sister
Universal Redemption have at last found a companion in this doctrine, by whom
they are made perfect and complete, and receive their last polishing, so that
unmolested they may pride themselves in their charms, revel in enjoyment of
their wishes, and bid defiance to God's sovereignty, election, justification by
faith, self-denial, and fears of damnation, which before occasionally gave them
disquiet.

Finally, the doctrine of Universal Salvation, leads to the most undisturbed
enjoyment of a dream, which men indulged before; though they (...) with many
interruptions in it. It calls to dream without disturbance, and who will say it
is not pleasant. Many will dream (no doubt) till the silver cord is broken, and
they awake in a world of reality. It is probable, this doctrine will prevail,
and contribute much to that quiet men will be in when Jesus returns from
heaven, 1 Thessalonians. v. 3. 'When they shall say peace and safety, then sudden
destruction comes upon them, as travail, etc.'

A couple of texts may be here quoted that speak both of those who cry peace to
themselves, and those who cry peace to their hearers, Deuteronomy. xxix. 19, 20. 'And
it come to pass when he hears the words of this curse, that he bless himself
in his heart, saying, I shall have peace though I walk in the imagination of
mine heart; to and drunkenness to thirst.' The Lord will not spare him, but
then the anger of the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and
all the curses written in this book, shall lie up, on him, etc.' Of false
prophets we read, Jere. xxiii. 17, 19, 20. 'They say still to them who despise
me, the Lord has said, ye shall have peace; and they say to every one that
walks after the imagination of his own heart: no evil shall come upon you.
Behold a whirlwind of the Lord is gone forth in fury, etc. -- The anger of the
Lord shall not return until he has executed and till he has performed the
thoughts of his heart: In the latter days ye shall consider it perfectly. When
men in hell lift up their eyes in torments, it is ^anifestly (...), and it is
forced upon them to consider it perfectly (...).
The Apostle says, 'How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation.' Heb.
ii. 3.

The present state of the world is described, Rev. viii. 13. 'Wo, woe, woe, to
the inhabitants of the earth, by reason of the other voices of the trumpet of
the three angels which are yet to sound.' The four first have undoubtedly
sounded long ago; and the inhabitants of the earth must now undoubtedly be
under these woes. See also, xii. chapter 12th verse, 'Wo to the inhabiters of
the earth -- for the devil is come down to you, having great wrath, because he
knows that he has but a short time.' The shortness of his time wakes his
greatest exertions, and wrath. And if we judge from the false prophets, the
effect of these is great smoothness, and complaisance among men; so that the
effects of it are before our eyes. God's elect will be resolutely deaf to such
cries, 'Of peace and safety,' as are every where sounded, and flee from the
trifling combinations of men, calling themselves churches. Jere. LI. 6. 'Flee
out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver every man his soul: be not cut off in
her iniquities.' Rev. xviii. 4. 'Come out of her my people, that ye be not
partakers of her sins, and that ye (...) not of her plagues.'

APPENDIX.
TO invalidate that contested text, For there are Three that (...) record in
heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these Three are One, (1
John ^. 7.) the Arians and Socinians are very solicitous. Mr. Emlyn, among the
former, for his learning and ingenuity, holds a high rank. Against the original
authority of this text, he, in a concise manner, sums up the negative evidence,
from the concessions of Dr. Mill. See Emlyn's Inquiry into the original
authority of 1 John v. 7.
"This text is wanting," says Mr. Emlyn, "in our famous, Alexandria^ copy,
which the Dr. calls ingens thesaurus orientalis. It is wanting in the famous
Vatican copy, by which, according to pope Lee's order, the complutensian
edition was to be made. It is enough," says Mr. Emlyn, "to shake the credit of
this text, with all impartial men, that it is wanting in these two, the most
valuable manuscripts, we know of, in the world. Besides this, the Dr. gives a
long roll of other ancient manuscript Greek copies, in the most famous
libraries of the learned which want this text. The fifteen copies of Robert
Stephens have not this text. And it is wanting in the ancient versions of the
new testament. The most ancient of these versions were the Syriac, Coptic,
Ethiopic, Arabic, and Latin, all which, with the Ruffian, have not this text.
And Dr. Mill says that not one Greek writer, from the beginning of christianity
to St. Jero^^'s time (about 400 years) has ever cited this verse. And adds, it
is certain it has been wanting in the Greek copies very near from the apostle's
writing this epistle. And the Latin primitive fathers never quoted these words.
Mr. Travis, who has access to the most faithful, and the most credible,
documents, has proved, beyond all reasonable dispute, that Mr. Emlyn, in his
inferences from the complutensian manuscript, the Vatican copy, Robert
Stephens's fifteen manuscripts, (...) has greatly mistaken. He gives the most
enlightened answers to the objections of those writers that have distinguished
themselves most against this co^^ested text. "Of these Sanatus, M. Simon, and
Mr. Emlyn, among the more early opponents; and Dr. Benson, Sir Isaac Newton, M.
Griesboth, and Mr. Bowyer, among (...) more modern adversaries, seem to have
been the most diffuse, in the variety of their remarks, and the most determined
in their opposition." (Letter iii. p. 60, 61.)
The reader must note, that all these ancient writers are here produced, not
merely for not mentioning these words, but because they treated professedly of
such subjects as required the assistance of this text, and many of them of the
context, and next verse. And they could never have omitted it on any other
reason, but this, that they had it not in their Bibles, for above 700 years.

"It may reasonably be inquired, if there be any more evidence for this text
since the reformation? Luther and Bullinger would not put this text in any
editions of the Bible. Our old Bibles in Henry VIII's and Edward VI's time had
had these words in small letters, and sometimes in a parenthesis. In Queen
Elizabeth's Bible I find the same."

"Now, methinks, here is pretty large stock of evidence, and as much as one can
well require, for a negative, to show, that this verse was not originally any
part of the New Testament, and one need have very direct and peremptory
testimonies to the contrary, to make him so much as hesitate in the matter."

Negative evidence has, in determining the judgment of a candid mind, we beg
leave to say, but little weight. One positive fact, well supported, is of more
importance than ten thousand negations. And we are very happy it is in our
power to produce "very direct and peremptory testimonies" to establish the
originality and authenticity of this disputed text. For these testim^^^^^ are
indebted to the judicious and learned works of the (...). GEORGE TRAVIS, A. M.
Prebendary of Che^^er, and Vicar of Eastham, who, in his Letters to EDWARD
GIBBON, Esquire. has rescued this text from the hands of its adversaries, and
confered on the CHURCH an obligation of the liveliest gratitude and love.

EXTRACTS from Mr. TRAVIS.
"First -- From the writings of individuals.

1. Laurentius Valla, an Italian nobleman, of great crudition, was the first
person (as M. Simon confesses) who set himself to correct the Greek M.S.S. of
the New Testament. He lived nearly a century before Erasmas. Erasmus lived in
the fifteenth century.
By affiduous, and long continued, enquiries he got into his hands seven Greek
M.S.S. -- This passage of St. John was found in all these M.S.S. and is
commented upon by Valla, in his Notes upon this Epistle.

2. In the Commentary upon the scriptures, written by Nicholas de Lyra, this
verse of St. John is found, in the place which it now possesses, accompanied by
the learned author's Annotations, without the smallest, expressed, suspicion of
its authenticity. He held the professorship of Divinity, at Paris, with great
reputation, in the fourteenth century.

3. About a century before this last mentioned time, appeared the Commentary of
St. Thomas -- on this epistle, in which this Verse is not only admitted, but
commented upon, without any insinuations of interpolation. --

4. This Verse is found in the Rationale of Divine Offices, composed by the
celebrated Durandus Bishop of Mende, in Languedoc, in the thirteenth century.

5. Lombard, who was Bishop of Paris, in the twelfth century, expressly cites
this Verse in the first book of his Sentences. --

6. This Verse is quoted, in the same century, by Rupert, Abbot of Duyts, in
Germany in his Treatise on the " Glorification of the Trinity."

7. In the eleventh century lived St. Bernard, whose sermons are yet extant.
This Verse is insisted upon, by him, in several of his discourses. --

8. In, or about this age, Radulphus Ardens, Hugo Victorinus, and Scotus, with
other authors, whose works have survived to the present times, referred to the
Verse in question. --

9. The Glossa Ordinaria, the work of Walafrid Strabo, was composed in the
ninth century. Even M. Simon confesses, that " no comment on the Scriptures is
of equal authority with this exposition." In this work, the text, in question,
is not only found in the Epistle of St. John, but is commented upon, in the
Notes, with admirable force, and perspicuity. -- The Greek M.S.S. which
directed him to insert this Verse in his Text, and Commentary, must, in all
probability, have been more ancient than any known to exist. -- Some, at least,
of the Greek M.S.S. which were used by him, cannot well be supposed to have
been less than 300, or 400, years old; the latter of which dates carries them
up to A.D. 440. But the MOST ANCIENT Greek M.S. which is now known to exist, is
the Alexandrian; for which, however, Westein, who seems to have considered the
question with great attention, claims no higher an antiquity than the close of
the fifth century, or about A.D. 490. If this mode of reasoning, then, be not
(and it seems that it is not) fallacious, the text, and commentary, of Walafrid
Strabo stand upon the foundation of Greek M.S.S. which are more ancient, in
point of time, and therefore, which ought to be more respected, in point of
testimony than any possessed by the present age.

10. In the middle of the eighth century Ambrose Ansbert, Abbot of St.
Vincents, in Italy, wrote a comment upon the Apolcalypse; wherein this verse of
St. John is applied, in explanation of the fifth Verse of the first Chapter of
the Revelations.

11. In the same century lived Elipandus, Archbishop of Toledo, in Spain, who
maintained that Jesus Christ had no existence, antecedent to his coming into
the world, and that he was the Son of God by adoption, only, and not by any
co-essentiality in nature. These opinions of Elipandus were strenuously opposed
by Etherius, Bishop of Uxame, a suffrigan to Elipandus, and by Beatus, a Priest
in the Austrias. -- They quoted several passages of this Epistle of St. John;
and this verse in particular. --

12. Cassiodorius lived in Italy, in the middle of the sixth century. -- He
wrote a Commentary on the Epistles, etc. of the New Testament. -- In his
Annotations on this chapter Cassiodorius uses these words: -- in Heaven, the
Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit, and these three are one God.

13. In the beginning of the sixth century flourished Fulgentius, Bishop of
Ruspe, in Africa. In that age the tenets of Arius were espoused by, at least,
two African kings, Thrasimond, and Huneric. Fulgentius opposed the Arians
(although supported at that time by the former of these kings) with zeal and
fortitude. And in his works we find this verse -- expressly cited, and insisted
upon, as being conclusive against the tenets of Arius. --

15. A few years before Fulgentius, lived Vigilius, who was Bishop of Tapsum,
situated in the same province, and kingdom with Ruspe. He -- urges the
testimony of this Verse, in opposition to the errors of Arius. --

17. When the pious Jerome (who died A.D. 420) had completed that great work,
of correcting the Latin version of the old, and settling the text of the New,
Testament, which he undertook at the request of Pope Damasus, he closed the
arduous task with a solemn protestation, that, in revising the New Testament,
he had adhered entirely to the Greek M.S.S. And in Jerome's Testament this
verse of St. John is read, without any doubt of its authenticity.

18. He has also quoted it in the solemn confessions of his Faith. --

19. Augustine was cotemporary with Jerome -- In his Commentary upon the first
Epistle of St. John, and upon this very chapter of that Epistle, Augustine uses
these expressions -- the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost are one.

20. In the exposition of the Faith, written to Cyrillus, by Marcus Celedensis,
an African, the writer thus expresses himself: To us there is one Father, and
one Son, who is truly GOD, and one Holy Spirit, who is also truly GOD; and
these Three are One: -- the precise words of the verse in question.

21. Phaebadius was Bishop of Again, in France, in the fourth century. He, cites
this verse, in his Book against the Arians. --

22. Cyprian was made Bishop of Carthage, A.D. 248. In his treatise De Unitate
Ecclesiae, written against Novatus, he uses these words: "it is written of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit -- And these Three are One."

23. Tertullian was born about the time of St. John's death, if some
Chronologists may be (...). But other computations, which indeed seem to be
much more accurate, place his birth about A.D. 140. In either case, it will be
no incredible thing to suppose, that Tertullian had conversed with Christians
of his own times, who had actually sat under St. John's ministration of the
Gospel. In those days arose, in Asia, the heretic Praxeas, who maintained that
there was no plurality of persons in the Godhead, but that the Father suffered
on the cross. Against the opinions of this man Tertullian wrote a treatise --
and alleges this passage of St. John -- which Three are One -- a literal
quotation of the verse in question.

To the evidence thus furnished by Individuals, I now beg leave to subjoin --
THE TESTIMONY OF COUNCILS, AND OTHER COLLECTIVE BODIES OF MEN -- in support of
the originality of the Verse in question.

1. The Council of Lateran was held at Rome, under Innocent III, A.D. 1215. Of
all the assemblies, of this kind, which the christian world ever saw, this was
the most numerous. It was composed of more than 400 bishops, of about 800
abbots, and priors, and of an equal number of deputies, from prelates,
colleges, and chapters, who could not attend in person. Among others, the Greek
patriarchs of Constantinople, and Jerusalem, were present; and the several
patriarchs of Antioch, and Alexandria, sent, each, a bishop, and a deacon, as
their representatives. The chief purpose of, convening this council, was, for
the examination of certain opinions of the famous Italian, Father Joachim,
founder of the congregation of Flora. These opinions were accused of (...), and
were unanimously condemned by the council: In whose act, or decretal,
containing the reasons of such condemnation, we find the verse now in question,
among other passages of scripture, thus particularly set forth. It is read in
the Canonical Epistle of John, that " there are Three which bear Witness in
Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit, and these Three are One."

2. About the close of the eigth century, the Emperor Charlemagne called
together the learned of that age -- instructing them to revise the M.S.S. of
the Bible then in use. -- To effect this great purpose, he furnished these
commissioners with every M.S. that could be procured throughout his very
extensive dominions* In their Correctorium, the result of their united labors,
which was presented in public, to the Emperor, by Alcuinus the testimony of the
Three (heavenly) Witnesses (...) read, without the smallest impeachment of its
authenticity.

3. In A.D. 484, an assembly of African Bishops was convened at (...), by King
Huneric, the Vandal, and the Arian. -- At the time appointed nearly four
hundred bishops attended this council, from the various provinces of Africa,
and (...) the isles of the Mediterranean sea; at the head of whom stood the
venerable Eugenius, bishop of Carthage, -- When Eugenius, with his Anti-Arian
prelates entered the room of consultation, they found Cyrila, their chief
(...), seated on a kind of throne, surrounded by armed man; who quickly,
instead of confuting the arguments of their opponents, offered violence to
their persons. -- Eugenius, and his prelates, withdrew from the council-room;
but not without leaving behind them a protest, in which -- this Verse of St.
John is thus especially insisted upon, in vindication of the belief to which
they adhered. -- "That it may appear more clear than the light, that the
divinity of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, is one, see it proved by
the Evangelist St. John, who writes thus: There are Three which bear record in
Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit, and these Three are One."

4. This verse of St. John was inserted in the ancient service-books of the
Latin Church.

5. This verse of St. John is found in the Confession of Faith of the Greek
church.

6. This verse is also found in the liturgy, or public service-books, of the
Greek church.

If there can be, at this time, an unerring method of demonstrating, that any
particular passage of scripture was considered, by the primitive Christian
church, as authen^^^ (...) bearing upon it the seal of divine inspiration, it
must be by showing such passage placed in its public creeds, or confessions of
faith, and appointed to be read in the solemnities of its religious worship.

7. The ancient version, or translation, of the New Testament into the Armenian
language, has always contained this verse.

8. The most ancient of all the Versions of the Books of the New Testament,
from the languages in which they were originally written, is the Old Italic.
This Version was made in the first century, and therefore WHILST ST. JOHN WAS
YET ALIVE; and was used by all the Latin Churches in Europe, Asia, and Africa,
for many centuries after his death. And thus the origin of the Verse in
question, is, at length, carried up, not by inferences, or implications, alone,
however fair, and obvious, but by PLAIN, AND POSITIVE EVIDENCE, to the age of
St. JOHN himself. For this most valuable, as well as most ancient, Version has
constantly exhibited the Verse 1 John v. 7. (p. 18 -- 55.) Throughout the vast
series of one thousand four hundred years, which intervened between the days of
Praxeas, and the age of Erasmus, not a single author, whether Patripassian,
Cerinthian, Ebionite, ARIAN, Macedonian, or Sabellian, whether of the Greek, or
Latin, whether of the Eastern, or Western, Church -- whether in Asia, Africa or
Europe -- has ever taxed the various quotations of this verse -- with
interpolation, or forgery. Such silence speaks, most emphatically speaks, in
favor of the verse. (p. 319, 320.)

THE RESULT, THEN, FROM THE WHOLE, is -- that THE VERSE, in question, SEEMS,
BEYOND ALL DEGREE OF SERIOUS DOUBT TO HAVE STOOD IN THIS EPISTLE, WHEN IT
ORIGINALLY PROCEEDED FROM THE PEN OF ST. JOHN. In the Latin, or Western,
Church, the suffrages of Tertullian, and Cyprian, of Marcus Celedensis, and
Phaebadius, in its favor, aided by the early, the solemn, the public, appeal
to its authority, by the African Bishops under Huneric; the Preface, Bible, and
conscripta-fides, of Jerome; the frequent, and direct, citations of the verse
by Eucherius, Augustine, Fulgentius, Vigilius, and Cassioderius: -- these,
supported, as to the Greek, or Eastern, Churches, by the Dialogue between Arius
and Athanasius, as well as by the Synopsis of this Epistle -- by the Armenian
Version, which (...) from Greek M.S.S. by the very early, and (...)of the
Apostolos in the same Greek Church (an usage which seems to be deducible even
from the Apostles themselves) and by its public Confession of Faith: -- ALL
THESE evidences, arising within the limit of the sixth century, (to pass over
the immense accumulation of testimony which has been produced subsequent to
that era) offering themselves to the test of the judgment, combined in one
point of view, unchecked by a single negation, unrebuked by any positive
contradiction, unresisted by any the smallest, direct, impeachment of the
authenticity of the verse, throughout all the annals of all antiquity: -- ALL
THESE CIRCUMSTANCES seize the mind, as it were by violence, and compel it to
acknowledge the verity, the original existence, of the verse in question." (p.
344 -- 346.)

N. B. The pages in the preceding work are much larger than it was at first
expected they would be, which is the reason that they do not amount (agreeably
to the proposals) to about 90 pages.


