Mr. Channing's SERMON, At the Execution, etc.

GOD admonishing his People of their Duty, as Parents and Masters.

A SERMON, PREACHED AT NEW LONDON, December 20th, 1786. OCCASIONED BY THE
EXECUTION OF Hannah Ocuish, a Mulatto Girl, Aged 12 Years and 9 Months. FOR THE
MURDER OF EUNICE BOLLES, Aged 6 Years and 6 Months.

By HENRY CHANNING, M. A.

A Child left to himself, brings his Mother to shame.

WISDOM. If I did despise the cause of my Manservant, or of my Maidservant,
when they contended with me: what then shall I do when GOD rises up? and when
he visits, what shall I answer? -- Did not he that made me in the womb, make
him?

JOB. NEW LONDON: Printed by T. GREEN. M,DCC,LXXXVI.

A SERMON, etc.
JEREMIAH VI.8. Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from thee:
--


SOLEMN and deeply affecting to the feeling mind is the present scene! -- We
here behold a truly pitiable object, one of our guilty race, who, left to the
guidance of an uninstructed mind; or rather to the uncontrouled influence of
the direful passions, malice and revenge, has perpetrated a crime which freezes
the mind with horror. -- She has been summoned before the Civil Tribunal; and,
after a fair and impartial trial, was convicted of the crime for which she is
this day to suffer.

The cry of innocent blood has entered into the ears of the LORD of Sabbath;
but this day will silence its claims. -- YES; in a few hours, will be executed
the fatal, the tremendous sentence which puts a period to the life of one, who
had never learned to live. -- In the beginning of life, a murderer, Justice
forbids that she should live out half her days: for -- Whose sheddeth Man's
blood, by Man shall his blood be shed. Genesis 9.6.
This is the voice of Justice and of the GOD of Justice: Therefore " a man that
does violence to the blood of any person, shall flee to the pit -- let no man
stay him." Prove. 28.17.


The present season is all-important: -- How shall I answer its claims? -- On
the one hand, the poor prisoner loudly claims every moment as her own: for that
her last sands are now falling, and that in a few hours she must launch into
that world whence there is no return. -- On the other hand, are the interests
of this numerous assembly of fellow-men, who are also soon, very soon to close
this mortal life; and the eternal state of each be determined according to his
present improvement of divine instruction. -- And, how big with important
instruction is the melancholy event, of which we are this day to be witnesses!
-- Principally then to my Auditory let the present opportunity be devoted.

To this I the more readily consent, from a conviction of the impracticability
of adapting a Discourse, upon this occasion* to the improvement of one who,
until within a few weeks, was ignorant of the first principles of Religion;
having been left to heathenish darkness in a Christian land. Yes; my brethren,
this poor prisoner, when committed to gaol, appeared to have no higher
principle than the pleasure of gratifying her ungoverned passions. -- And so
far from having the fear of GOD before her eyes -- O tell it not in Gath! --
she has repeatedly declared to me, that she did not know that there was a GOD,
before she was told it after her imprisonment.

Are there any in this assembly whose consciences reproach them with the same
cruel inattention to their Children and Servants? Such are this day called to
their duty in language which must pierce a Parent's heart. May every spectator
of this day's painful scene, learn the importance of faithfulness in the
relations of Parent and Master.

The melancholy event, which we are now called to contemplate, speaks to us in
thunder from the Mercy-Seat. -- Though wrath is kindled against us; yet HEAVEN
addresses us as he did his chosen people: Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, lest
my soul depart from thee.

I may not enlarge in showing the occasion of this passage: -- For this I say,
brethren, the time is short. -- What thou do, do quickly. -- In a word
therefore: this passage was delivered by the Prophet in the name of the LORD,
at a time when Judah had almost filled up the measure of her iniquities, and
exhausted the patience of her GOD. In the verse preceding our text we have her
character. As a fountain casts out her waters, so she casts out her
wickedness: violence and spoil is heard in her, before me continually is grief
and wounds. Then follows our text: in which we behold the mercy and compassion
of her GOD. Though he had sent unto them all his servants the Prophets, saying,
Obey my voice and I will be your GOD, and ye shall be my people. But they
hearkened not, nor inclined their ear, but walked in the counsels and
imaginations of their evil heart. GOD, at length wearied with their
incorrigibleness, is about to pour cut upon them the fury of his just
indignation. -- Yet, how shall I give thee up Ephraim! -- Mercy interposeth and
tenderly persuades. Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my soul depart, or as
the original more strongly expresses it, be disjointed from thee. We hasten to
apply this passage to the present occasion: in doing which, let us

I. Attend particularly to the instruction which GOD, in righteous judgment, is
this day calling us to receive.

II. Consider the argument by which attention to this instruction is here
enforced. -- Lest my soul depart from thee.

FIRST. We are to attend particularly to the instruction which GOD, in
righteous judgment, is this day calling us to receive.

Various are the ways in which the MOST HIGH instructs his people. -- His works
lie as an open volume to be read by all. The invisible things of GOD from the
creation of the world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that
are made, even his eternal power and Godhead. (...). 1.20.
-- His Word speaks in plainer language; and is profitable to direct, to make
the man of GOD perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. 2 Timothy 3.17.


But these means of instruction, without the special influences of divine
grace, are of no avail: -- For, the heart of the children of men being fully
set in them to do evil* they hearken not, nor incline their ear. We have loved
pleasures, and after them will we go.

But, when GOD speaks in the thunders of Judgment; the people, if not left to a
judicial blindness and hardness of heart, hear and fear and do no more such
wickedness. By thy Judgments, said David, is thy servant warned: and in keeping
of them there is great reward. The adverse events of Providence, frequently,
affect those whom nothing else could affect. -- Sensible objects gain
attention, where an address to the understanding will not be heard. The Senses
are an avenue by which there is an easy access to the heart. When this is
brought to espouse the cause of virtue, the understanding is easily convinced.

The melancholy event, of which we are this day to be witnesses, considered
with all its attendant circumstances, addresses every tender feeling, and
cannot fail to reach the heart. -- Struck with horror at the bloody deed --
Amazed at such an instance of cruelty and revenge in one so young. -- And every
tender emotion of the soul awakened at beholding this early victim sacrificed
to Justice: -- Will not every one present, with earnestness enquire --
Wherefore has our land been thus stained with a crime, which, with all its
painful circumstances, it has never known before? Wherefore are we called to
this scene of woe? -- What does the LORD require of us?

I answer, in the name of the LORD, that ye resolve with his Servant of old --
I will behave myself wisely in a perfect way: I will walk WITHIN MY HOUSE with
a perfect heart. Psalm. 101.2.


Shameful and unpardonable, my brethren, is the almost universal neglect of
family Instruction and Government. One of the truly unhappy consequences of
this neglect, we behold in the ignominious end of this poor girl who is now to
pay the forfeit of life into the hands of justice. Be thou instructed, O
Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from thee.

When I reflect on the nature of the duties in which GOD is now instructing us,
to which therefore we are now to attend; I could wish that the speaker had been
such an one as "Paul the Aged," rather than the Youth whom the request of the
prisoner has called to address you upon this occasion. But since this may not
be, permit me, with that respect which is due to my auditory, in the warmth of
love to my Country and the Souls of men, and with that fidelity which I owe to
our great Master and LORD, to point out some of those duties; to the discharge
of which you are obligated as Parents and Masters; and to the neglect of which
the melancholy scene of this day is in a great measure to be charged.

I. Family Devotion, though a very unfashionable, is, however, a very important
part of the duty of the Head of a family, if he would walk in his house with a
perfect heart. -- "Every house should be a Bethel, and every master of a
family, in his house, a priest of the MOST HIGH GOD." A daily reverential
attendance upon this duty, early impresses the young mind with a sense of the
divine omnipresence, and teaches the fear of that GOD whose eyes are in every
place. Shall the heathen, my brethren, guided by the dim light of Nature, bow
down at their family altars; and shall the families, in which the Sun of
Righteousness shines with the clear light of divine Revelation, pay no worship
to the true GOD? -- Are there no family wants to be supplied? No family
blessings to be acknowledged? -- Or are we like Israel of old, "who sat down to
eat and drink and rose up to play?" -- "She did not know, says GOD by his
Prophet, that I gave her corn and wine and oil, and multiplied her silver and
gold, which they prepared for Baal: Therefore will I return and take away my
corn in the time thereof, and my wine in the season thereof; and I will recover
my wool and my flax given to cover her nakedness." Hosea 2.8, 9.


2. Children and Servants should be early taught to read. This is an advantage
which the children in a family generally enjoy. But are not our servants, my
brethren, too often forgotten? How few have the means of instruction? Most of
those who have, instead of being spurred to that application, without which
there can be no proficiency, are constantly interrupted by our many calls. At
length ambition flags, and, being discouraged, they trifle away the little time
allotted them. Their consequent little progress is now imputed to a want of
genius peculiar to their complexion. -- Now, distinguished from his brethren,
and highly favored will be that servant, who is not left, either to heathenish
darkness in a Christian land, or to spell out unassisted the principles of
Religion, and every truth which respects his eternal salvation. Hard is their
lot! -- Humanity drop a tear. -- I would here anticipate an objection which may
perhaps be made to the idea of duty in the relation of Masters to Servants.

Objection. Servants bought with our money are our absolute property: and may
we not do as we will with our own?

While he, who is not steeled to the feelings of a generous mind, blushes at
this objection; I am not careful to answer in this matter. But, in a word; --
they are not your own: for they are bought with a price. If you alienate them
from his service who has bought them even with his own blood, the debt
contracted on your part will, I fear, render you insolvent, and consign you to
that prison whence there is no discharge 'till thou have paid the uttermost
farthing. -- The blood of souls will be charged to your account. -- Think well,
-- How will you discharge it? -- I hasten to another part of the duty under
consideration.

3. Early instill the great principles of Religion and Virtue. -- Those under
our care should be taught that great first principle of Religion -- There is a
GOD. -- As the young mind enlarges, it should be made acquainted with the
glorious Perfections of GOD. This will lead to explain and enforce our
obligations to him as our Creator, Preserver and Redeemer. Did the Redeemer
when on earth take little children into his arms and bless them? Can Christians
then forget to devote theirs to him who thus loved them? -- Point them to their
Savior on the cross, and let his agonizing death teach them the evil of sin,
and its dreadful punishment. The beauties of holiness and its glorious rewards,
are also to be set before them in language adapted to their capacities, and
calculated to reach the heart.

The beginning of our days is an important part of human life.

"Just as the twig is bent the Tree is inclined."

The subsequent periods of life will take their stamp from that of childhood.
Happy is it when the first impressions are in savor of virtue. To effect this
there must be line upon line, and precept upon precept. The first openings of
the mind are to be carefully watched; and every opportunity of instilling that
which is good, faithfully improved.

Here, I am aware, will start up that frightful spectre, prejudice of
education; with which some men appear panic-struck. To deliver themselves from
this, they exert themselves to the utmost: 'till at length, having effected
their purpose, their lives show that to be delivered from, what they call, the
prejudice of education is, in other terms, to be divested of every virtuous and
religious principle. Far be it, however, from any one to suppose that we should
have no higher support for our principles in religion and virtue, than
education. -- A slender support indeed! -- No; my brethren, the mind properly
cultivated will, when matured by age, know its own importance, and search
whether those things are so which it had received as true.

That the mind of man, in the first buddings of reason, discovers an ardent
thirst for knowledge, and, incapable of determining the quality of what is
offered, drinks in with avidity what is first presented is a truth which will
not be disputed. -- Since then the mind cannot be kept a blank until brought to
maturity: Those, who do not choose to give virtuous principles the first
possession, must, unavoidably give this advantage to those which are vicious.
That Society may long be secured against the influence of minds thus early
formed to the service of the enemy of all Righteousness, will be the prayer of
every friend to virtue and his country. -- But to pursue our subject:

With the knowledge of GOD is connected that of our duty to Him, our Neighbor
and ourselves. Every duty should be clearly explained and the discharge of it
strictly enjoined. Thus did the Father of the faithful approve himself faithful
in all his house: -- GOD himself bearing witness for him. I know Abraham, said
he, that he will command his children, and his household after him, and they
shall keep the way of the LORD. Genesis 18.19.


4. To private instruction is to be added the public instructions of the House
of GOD. The LORD loves the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of Jacob.
Psalm. 87.2.
Here those committed to our care behold the worship and order of the Gospel,
with its Ordinances and Instructions: -- hear the word of salvation at the
mouth of the Messenger of the LORD of Hosts: -- and learn that fear of the LORD
which is the beginning of wisdom, and that knowledge of the holy which is
understanding. For this purpose was the direction given, Deuteronomy. 31.12, 13.
Gather the people together, men and women and CHILDREN, and thy stranger that
is within thy gates, that they may hear, and that they may learn, and fear the
LORD your GOD, and observe to do all the words of this Law; -- and that their
CHILDREN, which have not known any thing, may hear and learn to fear the LORD
your GOD.

When we attend with our children upon the public instruction, the great object
in view should be to train them up in the nurture and admonition of the LORD.
-- This, however, will not be the weightier matter of the law where the Pulpit
is prostituted to serve the interests of a party -- But, the faithful Minister
of that Religion which breathes Charity and good will to man, will not
distinguish himself in the sacred desk, by uttering severe invectives or artful
insinuations against the Ministers and Churches of other denominations. -- When
this takes place, one says, I am of Paul; another, I am of Apollos. -- But my
brethren, let it be your concern that you and your children may be of CHRIST.
Again,

5. The beginnings of an amiable disposition are to be cultivated. This
supposes that we study the dispositions of those under our care: that we may be
able to distinguish the good from the bad. The tempers of mankind are various,
and require as different modes of cultivation as the various soils under the
hand of the discerning husbandman. The tender benevolent disposition is already
fitted for the seed. Hasten therefore to scatter the good seed, and 'ere long
it shall yield a joyful crop.

The first dawnings of that which is amiable and praiseworthy should be
encouraged. -- Particularly: that ingenuous sincerity which gives the impress
of gold to every other virtue: -- an unshaken attachment to truth: -- a modest
and respectful deportment toward Superiors: an obliging attention to Equals:
an easy condescension to Inferiors: and that compassion for those in distress
which leads to imitate him who went about doing good. A mind, thus liberally
endowed, should not be left unguarded against that by which many strong men
have been slain. Therefore those under our care should be early inspired with
sentiments which will raise them superior to irregular desires, and fleshly
lusts which war against the soul. These too often like a strong man armed take
captive the unguarded Youth, and lead him to the strange woman, whose house is
the way to hell, going down to the chambers of death. Prove. 7.27.
-- This leads to observe,

6. The beginnings of a vicious disposition should receive an early and
effectual check. Vices are like those weeds which, having once taken root, are
with the utmost difficulty destroyed. A bad natural disposition if not early
subdued will, 'ere long, bring forth nothing but briars and thorns, to pierce a
parent's heart with many sorrows. To prevent this too often unhappy case: the
command of a parent should enforce the motives to virtue. Thus did David
command Solomon, when instructing him in the way of wisdom. And thou, Solomon
my son, know thou the GOD of thy Father, and serve him with a perfect heart and
with a willing mind; for the LORD searches all hearts, and understands all
the imaginations of the thoughts; if thou seek him, he will be found of thee;
but if thou forsake him he will cast thee off forever. 1 Chronicles. 28.9.
But the language of parental authority in all cases should be the last
resource. When the yearnings of parental tenderness in the mild and gentle
language of persuasion prove ineffectual, then the decisive tone of authority
becomes necessary. Withold not correction from the child, says Solomon, for if
thou beatest him with the rod he shall not die. -- Thou shall beat him with the
rod and shall deliver his soul from hell. Prove. 23.13, 14.
Here, however, excessive severity becomes equally prejudicial with an excess
of indulgence: for "human nature is like the spring of an engine, which, being
forcibly pressed, upon the first liberty returns back with so much the greater
violence." Happy is he who knows the golden mean; who can temper the severity
of reproof with the tenderness of a parent.

A due proportion should ever be observed between the crime and the punishment.
While lighter offenses are passed with a gentle rebuke; more heinous crimes
call for greater severity. A light reproof in the latter case would countenance
rather than correct the offense: and, let me add, the parent or master would
not be guiltless. Heavy is the charge brought by Heaven against Eli, for his
indulgence to his sons, when they made themselves vile, and wounded Religion by
their impiety. For their aggravated wickedness they receive this gentle rebuke
from their father: -- Why do ye such things: for I hear of your evil dealings
by all this people; Nay, my sons: for it is no good report that I hear: you
make the LORD's people to transgress. 1 Samuel 2.23, 24.
This is construed into a neglect on the part of the father; for which the rod
of the Almighty came upon him and his house. For I have told him, said the LORD
to Samuel, that I will judge his house forever, for the iniquity which he
knows: because his sons made themselves vile and he restrained them not. 1 Samuel 3.13.
We may not here point out very particularly where parental restraint is
necessary. Every thing that savours of impiety or a contempt of GOD and his
service should not be so much as named among children. But above all things,
James 5.12. But above all things, my brethren, swear not, etc.
restrain them from that profane abuse of the sacred name of GOD, with which
the virtuous ear is, at this day, so often wounded. To effect this it may be
sufficient, having before taught them the fear of the LORD, to show them how
pitiable in the sight of observers, is the character of that man who, without
even the shadow of honor, pleasure or profit in return, can wantonly trifle
with his Maker, and thus sell his soul for nothing.

Further, parental restraint should extend to every thing which is opposed to
that good name which is better than precious ointment. -- Here I cannot but
particularly mention those servile vices, falsehood and dishonesty. These
discover a meanness of soul incompatible with the manly virtues.

"A wit's a feather, and a chief's a rod;
"An honest man's the noblest work of GOD."
To be just to ourselves, our neighbor and our GOD, is the sum of moral
virtue: for he has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does the LORD
require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with
thy GOD? Micah 6.8.


The smallest deviation from the path of righteousness will, even in early
life, give a wound to reputation which will not be easily healed. To the
consideration I might add that of the numerous unhappy instances, in which the
little pilferings of childhood passing unpunished have arisen to that height of
wickedness which is to be punished by the Judges; and thus the end is public
infamy, or an ignominious death. Therefore it is of the last importance that
children should learn to conform every action to the golden rule of equity. --
Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them. This
great law of benevolence and justice cannot be too early inculcated or too
deeply impressed on the mind while tender. -- But I have already been more
particular than I intended. --

Yet with the striking instance before us of the truly melancholy consequences
of furious and ungoverned passions, I may not pass on without urging the
absolute necessity of a very early restraint upon these. When Anger, Malice and
direful Revenge get possession of the heart of man; he becomes a monster, an
enemy to Society and fit only to her^ with his fellow-monsters of the desert.
Cursed be that anger which is fierce, and that wrath which is cruel! -- Where
is contention? Where is murder and every evil work? In the heart of the furious
and revengeful man. -- O my soul, come not thou into his secret; unto his
assembly, mine honor, be not thou united.

7. Enforce your instruction by your own example. It is a common though very
just observation, that example goes before precept. Those heads of families who
indulge themselves in furious passions, -- intemperance, -- falsehood, --
dishonesty, -- profane swearing -- or an impious contempt of God and Religion
will be found, with respect to those under their care, blind leaders of the
blind. To these the words of the apostle, apply. -- Thou therefore who teach
another, teach thou not thyself? Romans 2.21.


8. Finally, Brethren, pray for your families. Except the LORD keep the City
the watchman waketh but in vain. -- Without the blessing of the kind Parent of
the Universe; the anxious concern, faithful instruction and prudent government
of an affectionate parent will end in disappointment and sorrow. To the Father
of mercies, therefore, who like as a father pitieth his children; pitieth them
that fear him: apply earnestly and with unceasing supplication for the blessing
of an affectionate and dutiful family. -- Whether this be a blessing worth
wrestling for with the GOD of Jacob: ye who are parents best can tell.

I must now hasten, remembering that the time is short and with brevity,

SECONDLY. Consider the argument by which attention to divine instruction is
enforced in the text. -- Lest my soul depart from thee.

By this is to be understood, the withdrawing from a Nation, a Family or an
Individual the gracious presence of that GOD, in whose hand it is to make
great, and by whom the haughtiness of man is bowed down.

Thus when a people favored of the LORD will not hearken nor incline their ear
to his instruction; their national blessings are accursed from Heaven, and
their pleasures will be bitterness in the latter end. Though for a season they
may be prospered, and riot in the bounties of Providence; yet let them not
flatter themselves with security, while that hand can reach them, which plucked
down from the height of national dignity the peculiar people of the Most High.
They are waxen fat, said GOD by his Prophet, they shine: yea they overpass the
deeds of the wicked: they judge not the Cause, the Cause of the fatherless, yet
they prosper: and the right of the needy do they not judge. Shall I not visit
for these things* says the LORD: Shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation
as this? Jer. 5.28, 29.
Be thou instructed, O MY COUNTRY! lest thy GOD depart from thee.

But the present occasion leads me to consider the argument in the text, more
particularly as it respects divine instruction addressed to families. The
argument in this view implies, that, when Heads of families are instructed in
their duty, if they refuse and will not hear, the LORD will withdraw his
presence from them and write their dearest blessings accursed. For such GOD
has his quiver full of arrows which will pierce them to the heart.

Dutiful and obedient children are an heritage of the LORD. Isaac was the
obedient son of the father of the faithful: at whose command he yielded himself
as a lamb to the slaughter. Faithful Eliezer of Damascus was the servant of
Abraham who was faithful in all his house. These are among the blessings of
that man who is instructed out of the Law of the LORD. Blessed is the man that
fears the LORD, that delights greatly in his commandments. His seed shall
be mighty upon the earth: the generation of the upright shall be blessed.
Wealth and riches shall be in his house: and his righteousness endures
forever. Psalm. 112.1, 2, 3.


But those, who, though they acknowledge the fear of the LORD, will not regard
his instruction; being found unfaithful in their houses; will realize the
withdrawing of the divine presence in the fate of an unfaithful Eli: to whom
was fulfilled the following message from the LORD. Them that honor me I will
honor: and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed. Behold, the days
come that I will cut off thine arm, and the arm of thy father's house; that
there shall not be an old man in thine house. And the man of thine, whom I
shall not cut off from mine altar, shall be to consume thine eyes and to grieve
thine heart: and all the increase of thine house shall die in the flower of
their age. 1 Samuel 2.31, 33.
These evils, I might add, are the natural consequences of too great parental
indulgence. Appetites and passions unrestrained in childhood, become furious in
youth; and ensure dishonor, disease and an untimely death. So true it is that
a child left to himself brings his mother to shame. Prove. 25.15.


APPLICATION.
May I now be permitted to apply the subject in particular addresses -- First,
-- to HEADS OF FAMILIES.

Fathers and Brethren,

Permit one to address you upon this occasion, who acknowledges that he knows
not the joys or sorrows of a Parent's breast: yet, GOD forbid that he should be
a stranger to that respect and warmth of affection which becomes a Son: for he
was his father's son, tender and beloved in the sight of his mother. Suffer me
then: while with fidelity as in the sight of GOD, yet affectionately and with
all respect I entreat an elder as a father and the elder women as mothers.

I do now beseech you, in Christ's stead, that you attend to the solemn
admonitions of Heaven this day. Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem! Let this
instance of aggravated wickedness in one so young, alarm your fears for the
little ones committed to your care, and engage you to be just to yourselves, to
your Children, to Society and to your GOD. The curse of the Lord is in the
house of the wicked; but he blesses the habitation of the just. Prove. 3.33.


The happiness of an affectionate parent depends much upon the conduct of his
children. For the truth of this, fathers, I might appeal to yourselves: And
doubt not, but that with feelings known only to a parent you would declare,
with Solomon, a wise son makes a glad father; but a foolish son is the
heaviness of his mother.

But if the happiness of parents thus depends upon their children, may we not
expect that that happiness which is real and permanent will be preferred? What
then can we think of those, who rise up early and sit up late and eat the bread
of carefulness that they may leave an inheritance to their children: while the
provision for their minds is scarcely thought of? (...) set thine eyes upon
that which is not? for riches (...) make to themselves wings; they fly away;
but a good education is a durable portion. Wisdom is the principal thing,
therefore get wisdom; and with all thy getting, get understanding. Prove. 4.7.
Surely every man walks in a vain show, surely they are disquieted in vain;
for he heapeth up riches and knows not who shall gather them. Psalm. 39.6.


It is indeed a part of parental duty to attend to the wants of a family and
"provide things honest in the sight of all men.". -- If any provide not for his
own, and especially for those of his own house, he has denied the faith and is
worse than an infidel. This is the declaration of an inspired Apostle. -- But
what do ye more than an infidel, if, in providing for your children and
servants, your care be confined to their bodies while their Souls are left to
starve? -- If your children ask bread will you thus give them a stone? Suffer,
fathers, this boldness of speech: -- if you condemn it I must appeal to a
HIGHER TRIBUNAL.

Do you love your children? O then, as you regard your own happiness and
theirs, guard them as the apple of your eye. While their minds are tender and
open to every impression, leave them not unguarded to receive their first
impressions from a corrupt heart and a degenerate world. Be assured, if you
leave them uncontrouled to the government of their passions, and the almost
irresistible influence of ill example, -- I speak as to wise men; judge ye what
I say, -- they will soon come forth well versed in all the mysteries of
iniquity. Then will they repay your fond indulgence, or rather cruel neglect,
into your own bosoms. Will they render you the returns of filial obedience and
sincere affection? -- To obey is a lesson they were never taught. And as you
never gave them any proofs of the affection of a parent; but on the contrary, "
cruel like the Ostriches in the wilderness," left them exposed to be trampled
under foot by every passenger: you cannot expect that they will regard you with
the warm affection of a son. -- O ye parents, why will you thus wring out to
yourselves the full cup of wormwood and gall? -- Who has bitterness? -- Who
has woe? -- Is it not he who has a son that hearkeneth not to his father's
instruction and despises his mother when she is old? -- Is it not he who has
a son that being left to himself brings his mother to shame?

But if you are not yet alarmed for your helpless offspring; and are yet to be
convinced of the dangers attending childhood and youth; go into our streets
and, if your hearts can endure, be witnesses for yourselves. -- Behold on every
side children unrestrained practicing iniquity with greediness. Not only those
vices which frequently attend meanness of birth and education, such as theft
and lying; but also those, which arise from a total neglect of family
government, mark the present rising generation. Your own observation must
determine the justice of this remark. It is indeed painful to observe children
through a want of early education, possessing nothing amiable or praiseworthy;
but on the contrary, devoted to guilty passions, and choosing the way which
leads to death. -- They are malicious and revengeful and love contention. --
But do they stop here? -- Gladly for the honor of human nature and my Country
would I now draw the veil. -- But fidelity forbids. -- Be astonished, O ye
heavens, and give ear O earth! A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in
our land: and there are those who love to have it so. Children that have but
just learned to speak are heard lisping forth horrid oaths and impious curses.
They probably would not have known that there is a GOD; had they not been
taught to trifle with his Name, that Name which is great and terrible, for it
is holy. And equally ignorant would they have been with respect to a future
world; had they not learned to curse their companions and, with impious
boldness, damn their souls to hell. -- But I tread on unhallowed ground. -- I
cannot proceed. -- My soul shudders at the recollection of the horrid
expressions of cursing and blasphemy, with which the virtuous ear is so often
pained. -- I dare not repeat them. -- Should I attempt it, it would but renew
your pain: and I fear, lest, like the " fretting leprosy," its touch should
leave me unclean. --

Now, ye virtuous Parents, suffer me, while you are beholding these scenes of
wickedness, to bring before you your little families, helpless and exposed to
this torrent of vice and impiety: They are looking to you alone for guidance
and protection. Are you sure that you can protect them? Are there not numerous
painful instances of -- But why should I add to fears already insupportable? --
Difficult indeed is a parent's duty. But can the difficulty so far discourage
you that you can relinquish your charge and leave them to certain infamy and
ruin? Can a woman forget her sucking child? The more difficult the duty, the
greater are the exertions necessary to discharge it with fidelity and success.
But amidst all your exertions forget not that except the LORD keep your little
city, you watch but in vain. Therefore, with humble importunity, wrestle with
the GOD of Jacob, and let him not go until he bless you in your families.

And now, fathers and brethren, while you are instilling the principles of
wisdom and virtue, and endeavoring to make your children such as will honor
you in life and be blessings to Society, do not forget, I beseech you; that the
FEAR of the LORD is the beginning of wisdom: and to depart from evil is
understanding. -- O teach them to fear that name which Angels adore, and at
which devils tremble. -- Tell them, -- O tell them, and write it upon the palms
of their hands, that they may never forget: THE LORD WILL NOT HOLD HIM
GUILTLESS THAT TAKES HIS NAME IN VAIN, Exodus 20.7.

But how long shall it be that the saying of the Prophet shall apply to us!
Because of swearing the land mourns. Jer. 23.10.
O ye Guardians of our public peace! Shall an insult offered to an inferior
magistrate not pass with impunity: and shall the barriers of virtue be broken
down and the Throne of the KING OF KINGS be openly insulted; and they who are
not to bear the sword in vain, be silent? Forbid it Virtue! Forbid it O MY
COUNTRY!

But recollecting that the time is short, I close this address with but one
consideration further. -- It is appointed unto men once to die, but after this
the Judgment: Heb. 9.27.
For the LORD himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of
the Archangel, and with the trump of GOD. 1 These. 4.16.
Heaven, earth and hell are moved at his presence, and the sleeping dead awake
to sleep no more. -- Then, fathers, you with the children and servants
committed to your care shall be summoned before the Judgment Seat of CHRIST. --
Solemn Tribunal! -- All-important day! -- If in this decisive trial you can
make your appeal to HEAVEN: -- Lo! Here am I and the children which thou have
given me: of those which thou gave, none have perished through my indulgence,
or forgetfulness of thee; -- unutterable will be your joy and great your
reward. -- Well done, thou good and faithful servant: enter thou into the joy
of thy LORD. Amen.

I would now with the warmest affection, address myself to the Younger part of
the assembly.

My Young Friends,

To you the present scene speaks in striking language, teaching you the value
of a parent's tender care. -- Think not that crimes are peculiar to the
complexion of the prisoner, and that ours is pure from these stains. Surely an
idea so illiberal and contracted cannot find a place in the breast of a
generous youth. -- Know, my brothers, that that casket, notwithstanding its
color, contains an immortal soul, a Jewel of inestimable value; which,
polished by divine grace, would shine in yonder world with a glorious luster:
while the Jewel in a brighter casket, being left in its natural state, would be
blackness and darkness forever.

There behold, my young brethren, the fate of one, who, with a mind not below
the common level, has been left unrestrained to the guidance of guilty passions
and a corrupt heart. -- Have you virtuous and affectionate parents who, with
anxious concern, endeavor to instruct you in those principles which are
necessary to secure you from infamy like this? Can you refuse them an
unreserved obedience and the returns of grateful affection? -- Can you wish to
add one pang to those which a parent's heart has already felt on your account?
-- Think, O heart-rending thought! think what would be their feelings, if they
whom their souls love should for their overmuch wickedness be made, as this
unhappy criminal, a public spectacle of infamy and guilt! -- Could there be any
sorrow like unto this sorrow? -- Spare, O spare a parent's aching heart and let
there be no cause to look forward to a scene which cannot be borne even in
thought.

Hear, my brother, the instruction of thy father, and forsake not the law of
thy mother: for they shall be an ornament of grace unto thy head and chains
about thy neck. Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of
evil men. Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away: for they sleep
not except they have done mischief; and their sleep is taken away, unless they
cause some to fall. For they eat the bread of wickedness and drink the wine of
violence. But the path of the just is as the shining light, that shines more
and more unto the perfect day. Early choose this path of wisdom, and your own
experience will prove that the ways of wisdom are ways of pleasantness, and
that all her paths are peace. Great indeed will be your peace when a dying
Parent shall pronounce you an obedient and affectionate child; and those lips
which had not instructed you in vain, shall close with commending you in the
quivering accents of death, to that Being in whom the fatherless finds mercy.
May he hear and be well pleased with this last effort of parental love: and
repay your respectful obedience and sincere affection into your own bosoms. And
may GOD in his infinite goodness, grant, that when you shall take the places of
your fathers, you may never have cause to feel the unutterable pangs of that
parent's heart, who has a son that is a grief to his father, and bitterness to
her that bare him.

I would now turn my address to the whole Assembly.

Men and Brethren,

I beseech you, in the name of the LORD, to consider seriously the things of
which you are this day witnesses. We have here a striking evidence of the
depravity of human nature; that we are indeed transgressors from the womb. We
here see the natural productions of a heart uncultivated and left to itself;
that indeed, it is deceitful above all things and desperately wicked. At one
view we now behold the consequences of the first apostasy, and the issue of
actual transgression. Surely the way of transgressors is hard: for he that
pursues evil pursues it to his own death. Let us therefore hear and fear and
do no more wickedly. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, for rulers
are not a terror to good works, but to the evil. If thou do that which is evil
be afraid; for ye see brethren that they bear not the sword in vain; for they
are the Ministers of GOD, to execute wrath upon him that does evil. Wherefore
be subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake.

Let us learn from what we now behold, that it is an evil and bitter thing to
forsake the LORD our GOD. Doubtless the pity of every one present, is excited
toward this criminal, thus in the beginning of life condemned to death, and
now surrounded by the officers of justice, for execution. Indeed, that heart
must be past feeling which can unmoved, be a witness to a scene like this. But,
while we indulge a generous pity for a fellow creature in distress, let us fear
lest we fall into a worse condemnation, as criminals before the Tribunal of
Heaven. For thus says the faithful and true Witness; He that believes not is
condemned already. John 3.18.
Is this prisoner then condemned? So is the unbeliever. -- Is she held in bonds
unto the time of execution? So is the unbeliever fast bound in the chains of
sin and fettered by his guilty passions unto the final, dreadful day of
execution: that day in which he that made him will not have mercy on him, and
he that formed him will show him no favor, Let us therefore brethren, take
heed lest there be in any of us an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from
the living GOD. And when CHRIST who is the believer's life shall appear, then
may we also appear with him in glory. Amen.

After having devoted to the service of my Auditory so many of these, to the
prisoner, all-important moments, I must now be indulged in addressing myself to
her, in a few words with great plainness of speech.

To the Prisoner.

Hannah, the time for you to die is come. -- Yes; poor girl! -- in about two
hours, your eyes will be shut by death and you will not see the light of this
sun again forever. -- This is the last time that you will ever hear my voice
from this place: for you are now going where I cannot see you; instruct you; or
even pray for you. -- You are going where you will find that those things which
I have told you are true. -- Yes, you will soon see that there is a great GOD
who loves goodness and good people; but is angry with the wicked every day,
and will punish forever those whose sins are not pardoned before they die. --
You will soon see that Savior who came into this world to save sinners. You
will one day stand before his Judgment Seat, and if you do not, this day, truly
repent of your wickedness and trust in him alone for mercy; he will pronounce
against you a sentence infinitely more dreadful than that which has already
been pronounced. --

You are now going to be hanged until you are dead: after that you will know,
better than I can tell you, either the joys of Heaven, or the miseries -- the
miseries -- O my soul! -- the miseries of hell. Oh Hannah! repent of your
wickedness: this is the only time. -- Be ashamed before GOD of your crimes. --
Think how cruel you was, in not sparing the little girl, when she cried to you
for mercy. -- Don't you wish for mercy from GOD? -- You have told me that you
do. -- If he is not more merciful than you, your soul cannot be saved.
Remember, if he has mercy upon you, it will be from his own goodness; not from
any good thing which he sees in you: -- He sees nothing in you but wickedness,
-- a poor wicked creature covered with the innocent blood of a helpless child
crying to you for mercy and you would show no mercy. -- Repent and believe in
CHRIST, he is the only Savior: if you are saved it will be for his sake alone.
Pray earnestly to GOD that he would pity your ignorance and have mercy upon you
for CHRIST's sake. -- Think, Hannah, of what you have to do -- hasten, or it
will be too late -- your time is short, -- poor girl, -- how much is to be done
and how little time have you to do it in? -- Your day is already far spent,
and, O dreadful thought! the night of death is close at hand. -- The guard, the
officers of justice with all the dreadful attendants of your death, are now
around you waiting for me to stop. -- I must say no more. -- Poor girl! --
farewell. -- May GOD in his abundant goodness give you repentance unto life,
and have mercy on your soul. AMEN AND AMEN.

APPENDIX.
AS the Public may wish to be informed more particularly respecting the
criminal, Hannah Ocuish, than they have yet been: we have collected the
following particulars, which it may not be improper to annex as an appendix to
the preceding discourse.

She was born at Groton. -- Early in life she discovered the maliciousness and
cruelty of her disposition: as appears from the following fact, which was
represented in evidence before the grand jury. When about six years old, she
with a brother about two years older than herself, meeting a little girl at a
distance from the neighborhood, they endeavored to get away her clothes and a
gold necklace which she had on. -- After beating the child until they had
almost killed her, they stripped her, and disputing about the division of the
clothes the child recovered, and getting away came home, covered with blood.
This affair was immediately examined into, and the select-men of the town
concluded to bind them both out.

Their mother, who is one of the Pequot tribe of indians, is an abandoned
creature, much addicted to the vice of drunkenness. -- She, it seems, not
liking to have the girl bound out; brought her away and left her at a house,
about three miles from the city of New London, promising to return in a few
days and take her away again. But she did not return 'till after several
months, when urging the family to keep her longer they at length consented. --
She continued in this family until she was apprehended for the crime, for which
she was executed.

Her conduct, as appeared in evidence before the honorable Superior Court was
marked with almost every thing bad. Theft and lying were her common vices. To
these were added a maliciousness of disposition which made the children in the
neighborhood much afraid of her. She had a degree of artful cunning and
sagacity beyond many of her years. -- In short, her mind wanted to be properly
instructed, and her disposition to be corrected.

We now come to the particulars of the horrid crime for which she suffered.

On the 21st of July, 1786, at about 10 o'clock in the morning, the body of the
murdered child was found in the public road leading from New London to Norwich,
lying on its face near to a wall. Its head was covered with stones, and a
number lay upon its back and arms. Upon examining the body the skull appeared
to be fractured; the arms and face much bruised, and the prints of finger-nails
were very deep on the throat. -- The neighborhood were immediately engaged in
making search and enquiry for the murderer. The criminal made use of her usual
art, to prevent suspicion. -- She said that she saw four boys in her mistress's
garden near where the child was found: that she called to them for being in the
garden and soon after heard the wall fall down. After searching and enquiring
for these boys to no effect, suspicions became strong that she was the guilty
person. On the 22d, she was closely questioned, but repeatedly denied that she
was guilty. She was then carried to the house where the body lay, and, being
again charged with the crime, burst into tears and confessed that she killed
her; saying if she could be forgiven she would never do so again. The
particulars which she then gave, and which appeared in the course of the trial
were as follow.

On the morning of the 21st, she went to a brook which is near her mistress's
house, to get a pail of water: -- when at the brook, she saw the little girl
come into the road, going to school. She immediately hastened home with the
water, and setting it down at the door, ran across the garden to overtake the
child: -- when near her, the criminal jumped over the wall and called to her:
offering her a piece of calicoe which she then held in her hand. The child
coming to her, she struck her on the head with a stone which she had taken up
for the purpose, and repeating the blows the child cried out, Oh, if you keep
beating me so I shall die. She continued the blows until the child lay still.
But after a few moments, seeing that she stirred; she took her by the throat
and choked her 'till she was dead. Being asked why she laid stones upon the
child. She said; it was to make people think that the wall fell upon her and
killed her. -- Upon being asked why she killed her: she said that she had
intended giving her a whipping because she had complained of her in strawberry
time (about five weeks before) for taking away her strawberries.

Such an instance of deliberate revenge and cruelty in one so young, has
scarcely a parallel in any civilized country.

When the criminal was first committed to prison she appeared uneasy with her
situation; but after a little time seemed to be quite contented and happy. --
She would divert herself with the children that went to see her, and frequently
would make very shrewd turns upon those persons who made severe remarks upon
her.

When arraigned at the bar, she, at the direction of her council, plead "not
guilty." During her trial she appeared entirely unconcerned. -- After the
verdict was brought in, and she was carried back to the prison; a person
visited her and told her what must now be her punishment; and that she must
prepare for death, and for another world: she seemed greatly affected, and
continued in tears most of the day. -- After this she seemed as unconcerned as
before, and was very backward in conversing with the person who had thus
alarmed her fears. It appeared that some persons had been there afterward and
encouraged her with telling her that she would not be hung.

When she was brought to the bar to receive sentence of death, her stupidity
and unconcern astonished every one. While that benevolent tenderness which
distinguishes his honor the Chief Justice, almost prevented utterance, and the
spectators could not refrain from tears; the prisoner alone appeared scarcely
to attend.

About a fortnight before her execution she appeared to realize her danger, and
was more concerned for herself. She continued nearly in the same state until
the Monday night before her execution: when she appeared greatly affected;
saying, that she was distressed for her soul. She continued in tears most of
Tuesday, and Wednesday which was the day of execution. At the place of
execution she said very little -- appeared greatly afraid, and seemed to want
somebody to help her. -- After a prayer adapted to her unhappy situation, was
offered to HEAVEN, she thanked the sheriff for his kindness to her, and then
passed into that state which never ends.


