Mr. Austin's ORATION.

AN ORATION, DELIVERED JULY 4, 1786, AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF THE
TOWN OF BOSTON, IN CELEBRATION OF THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

By JONATHAN L. AUSTIN, ESQUIRE.

TANTAE MOLIS ERAT -- CONDERE GENTEM. VIRG. BOSTON: PRINTED BY PETER EDES.

At a meeting of the freeholders and other inhabitants of the town of Boston,
duly qualified and legally warned in public town-meeting assembled at
Faneuil-Hall, on Tuesday the fourth day of July, Anno Domini 1786, ten o'clock
in the forenoon:
On Motion -- Voted,
THAT the Gentlemen, the Selectmen, be and hereby are appointed a Committee to
wait on JONATHAN LORING AUSTIN, Esquire and, in the name of the town, to thank him
for his spirited and elegant Oration this day delivered by him, at the request
of the town, upon the anniversary of the Independence of the United States of
America; in which, according to the institution of the town, he considered the
feelings, manners, and principles, which led to that great national event; and
to request of him a copy thereof for the press.

Attest. WILLIAM COOPER, Town Clerk

GENTLEMEN,
RELYING on that candor which first induced me to comply with your request, I
submit the Oration delivered yesterday to the perusal of the public.

JONATHAN L. AUSTIN.
July 5, 1786.
AN ORATION.
A FIRM reliance on your candor, my ever honored friends and fellow-citizens,
encourages me to appear before you on the present occasion; and, in compliance
with your request, to attempt a review of those "feelings, principles, and
measures, which fixed the important era we now commemorate. -- When I behold
so many worthy patriots, who, during the late glorious struggle, have shone
conspicuous in the cabinet, and in the field, -- when I read in each smiling
face and placid eye, the happy occasion for joy and 'gratulation; the
transporting subject fires my bosom, and with emotions of pleasure, I
congratulate my country on the return of this anniversary -- Hail
auspicious-day! an era, in the American annals, to be ever remembered with
joy, while as a sovereign and independent nation, these United States can
maintain with honor and applause the character they have so gloriously
acquired!

NO example can be more honorable, none more becoming a grateful people, than
to offer their unfeigned thanks to the supreme Governor of the universe on the
natal day of their political existence. This is a tribute they owe to him, by
whose goodness they have been protected, and to whose gracious interposition
they must ultimately ascribe that great event.

AT this early period of our independence, the force of oratory cannot be
needful to revive those feelings which led us to oppose the imperious demands
of Britain. -- Thank heaven, those feelings are not extinguished, the
enlivening spark, the generous ardour still glows in every bosom.

HOW often, amid the rude din of arms, have the citizens of this metropolis
been summoned together, to resolve on measures for their common safety, or to
weep over the remains of their slaughtered brethren? how often have our
patriots, with all the energy which the cause of freedom inspired, warned us of
impending dangers? how have our hearts glowed, while they urged a resentment of
the numberless injuries we suffered? -- yes, my friends, with pleasure we can
now ruminate on events which have passed, and with the highest satisfaction
recall instances of courage and magnanimity, when life, liberty and property
were suspended on the decision.

BY reverting to that cimmerian darkness from which we have just emerged, I
mean not to open fresh wounds, or to raise an unmanly inveteracy against our
enemies; but rather, to rivet on our minds the injuries we have suffered, and
to impress those cruelties so wantonly exercised in the course of the late war;
that our feelings may be more poignant at the recollection; and that we may be
roused not to revenge, but to a steady uniform perseverance in support of the
freedom and independence so happily acquired.

IT would be needless to run over the historic page, and recite the causes
which have raised other countries to empire, or reduced them to vassalage This
has been sufficiently illustrated by the gentlemen who have gone before me on
this pleasing occasion. America at present furnishes sufficient topic, and is
an ample field for contemplation and improvement. -- But as similar causes will
always produce similar effects; so we may rest assured, that no nation will
long continue free, after it has lost its virtue.

WHAT country, my friends, can produce so many events, in the course of a few
years, as must ever distinguish the American page? A young continent contending
with a nation, whose establishment had been for ages, and whose armies had
conquered the powers of the world? -- What spirit, short of an heavenly
enthusiasm, could have animated these infant colonies, boldly to renounce the
arbitrary mandates of a British parliament, and instead of fawning like
suppliants, to arm themselves for their common defense? -- You dared to appeal
to that GOD, who first planted the principles of natural freedom in the human
breast -- principles, repeatedly impressed on our infant minds by our great and
glorious ancestors, and may yonder sun be shorn of its beams, ere their
descendants forget the heavenly admonitions.

THE right assumed by the British parliament, to bind the colonies in all cases
whatever, naturally caused that opposition from men determined to be free,
which took place on their attempting to put this right into execution. -- Your
feelings were then roused in your country's cause -- you could not behold with
indifference that vaunting nation, with all the arrogance that pride could
inspire, sending forth hosts of new created officers to collect a revenue,
levied by arbitrary imposition; or to revel on property fleeced from
industrious citizens.

THIS right of Britain to bind the colonies in all cases whatever, was the
political creed? Was ever slavery portrayed in more striking colors? Our
lives, liberties and property to depend on the arbitrary disposal of a British
parliament! The insulting declaration made you clamorous in opposition, united
your determinations, and rendered you formidable in the defense of your
liberties.

THE records of your assemblies can witness how early you began your measures
to frustrate the intentions of your enemies. The plans you adopted and pursued,
loudly speak your resolution and perseverance; and plainly evince, that your
opposition did not arise from a hasty disposition, to resist the due exercise
of the British government -- America was always ready to pay every submission
to her authority, consistent with the established rights of freemen; she
acknowledged the king as sovereign and head of her constitution, and as such,
transmitted her humble petitions for a redress of grievances. These loyal
addresses were continued for many years, though treated with the greatest
contempt, or answered by aggravated impositions. An appeal to heaven at length
put them to silence; and the memorarable 19th of April 1775, dissolved that
bond which held us before united. In this critical situation, though the sword
was drawn in defense of your cause, yet your pens were still employed to ward
off the fatal blow, and stop the effusion of human blood.

BUT alas! when Britain, like a determined foe, drove you from every resource
but that of opposition; and declared that nothing short of absolute submission
should appease; you keenly felt the iron hand of tyranny grasping your dearest
rights; fearless of danger, you girded on the sword, and sounded the alarm of
war.

AT this period of our conflict, America appears blessed with the peculiar
attention of heaven. These States united to the astonishment of our enemies,
adopted measures, the effects of rational and dispassionate deliberation,
pursued them with attention, and with caution and firmness carried them into
execution: measures, which will ever be esteemed by all nations as the most
prudent and decisive, evincing how sacredly dear we considered our liberties,
and how jealous of our honor in the defense of them: measures which exhibit a
striking proof, that decency and order should ever be the established principle
of a free people, and that liberty, though held tenacious, should never be
sullied with rashness.

THE principles, which actuated you in this glorious revolution, are similar to
those which have governed all nations, possessed with the spirit of freedom.
Bred up in sentiments which have ever stimulated men well informed of their
natural rights, with hawk-eyed jealousy, you soon perceived every disguised
attempt to deprive you of them. The dogmatical epithets "of giving and
granting" were too derogatory to your feelings, and too dishonorary to be
obeyed, you therefore contrasted your ideas of right with their assumed
declaration, and asserted that the British parliament had no right to bind the
American colonies in any case whatever." The declaration of Britain, was,
however, soon succeeded by a determined resolution to put the right into
execution, and to strain their exertions to the full stretch of their power.
Officers were sent over to exercise their commissions; and armies transported
with all the artillery of war. But, though destruction and death were foremost
in their ranks, yet amid these complicated dangers you stood undismayed.

TO put the right into execution on one side, and to oppose it on the other,
were the primary causes of your late exertions. On this foundation lay the vast
superstructure of your opposition -- this was the seed in embrio, from whence
has sprang a new world The American States are spread over a great continent
and make a WORLD within themselves. Doctor PRICE. It will be shocking to see in
the new world, a repetition of all the evils which have hitherto laid waste the
old world. IDEM.
in the chart of empires.

SUCH feelings, principles and measures, led on to the important era we now
commemorate -- gradually we ascended, 'till we attained the summit -- impelled
from one degree of opposition to another, we at length obtained the prize, now
held so deservedly sacred, not like cowards, who exult in the sunshine of
success, but like heroes, who are inspired by encountering difficulties, we
declared ourselves free and independent, in the moment of the greatest danger.
In support of this declaration, with one heart, and a firm reliance on the
protection of Divine Providence -- we pledged to each other our lives,
fortunes, and sacred honor.

AND now, my friends, permit me to congratulate you, on this glorious birthday
of our independence, -- a day, which cut the cords that bound us to an
unnatural parent -- from this date we change our character from vassals to
freemen -- no longer bound in swaddling clothes, and laid at the footstool of a
royal master, but arrayed in the glorious garb of independence, we are seated
among the nations of the world -- oh blessed emancipation! -- ye worthy
patriots -- ye faithful sons of genuine virtue, salute with rapture this
returning day! hail INDEPENDENCE, ye blooming daughters, with your grateful
songs. Let no envious brow disturb this gladning scene -- let no wretch wear
the sullen gloom of sorrow -- be every humble tie forgot, each care suppressed,
amid the general joy.

BUT while we rejoice at our envied acquisition, let us not forget the price at
which it was purchased. The flourishing plant of AMERICAN LIBERTY, has been
largely sprinkled, with the blood of her favorite sons. The long catalogue of
WORTHIES who nobly fell, while rearing its infant growth, forbids the most
humble attempt to do honor to their particular memories -- eight long years
have been the burial days of our slaughtered brethren -- the solemn road of
death we have often trod -- we have been conversant with all the horrors of the
grave; and visited the tombs as the dwellings of our friends -- OH YE
ILLUSTRIOUS DEAD! we revere your memories, and while honor, virtue, and
patriotism are known in America, your names shall be handed down with glory and
applause!

WE, my fellow townsmen, can early date the era of British slaughter, witness
the 5th of March 1770 -- and though succeeding years have enlarged the field of
melancholy contemplation, yet from this period we open the bloody scroll, and
begin our tale of DEATH -- yonder street can witness the sanguinary purposes of
Britain; there, our brothers blood stained the footsteps of the murdering
soldier -- there, our eyes were first pained with garments rolled in blood, and
our ears pierced with the reiterated groans of dying citizens.

THE wanton destruction of our towns, and property, can never be obliterated
from our remembrance. We have been often called to shed the tear of sympathy,
and to condole with our distressed friends. In particular, when the devouring
flames reduced Charlestown to a heap of ruins, that deep-wrought specimen of
the horrors of war, in minds unaccustomed to such dreadful scenes, excited
emotions which cannot be expressed.

BUT I forbear -- PEACE with her balmy wings affords a pleasing reverse. -- The
sound of the trumpet, and the alarm of war are no longer heard in our land. We
may now, with the highest satisfaction, anticipate the future glories of these
United States, and with pleasure behold our demolished towns, like the phoenix
from her ashes, rising to our view, with improved beauties. -- While the
historian records the destruction of Charlestown, and the ever-memorable battle
on BUNKER'S HEIGHTS, he will not be unmindful to relate, that from the ruins of
the old, a new town is now rising, on a more enlarged and regular plan. -- Nor
will he forget to notice, with equal admiration, the enterprise and ingenuity
of our inhabitants, in the rapid construction of that extensive and noble
BRIDGE The length of the Bridge from the entrance of the wharf at Charlestown
side to the entrance of the wharf at Boston side, wharf included 1503 FEET.
Wharf at Charlestown side is 100 FEET. Wharf at Boston side 45 FEET. The length
of the Bridge exclusive of wharves 1358 FEET. The breadth of the Bridge 42
FEET. Ornamented with 40 lamps Greatest depth from the bed of the river to the
upper side of the plank flooring 46 feet 9 inches, smallest 14 feet. The first
pier of this Bridge was drove on the 14th June 1785, and the Bridge completed
on the 17th June 1786.

across Charles river, which joins her to this metropolis. May the late
sufferings of our friends and neighbors, be more than compensated by their
future advantages; may the origin of their distress prove the instrument of
their growth and prosperity.

IF we frequently revert to first principles, and often bring to our
remembrance the events which took place at the commencement of this contest, it
will enable us to form a just estimate of that INDEPENDENCE, which has cost so
much blood and treasure. It will lead us, with one voice, to acknowledge the
kind and protecting hand of heaven stretched forth for our relief, when
destitute of all human aid. Unexperienced in the art of war; unprovided with
arms and ammunition, and without the support of a single ally, we dared to
oppose the force of Britain, a force even dangerous to the safety of Europe --
at this period, an American soldier became formidable by his enthusiasm. The
fear of danger was dispelled his breast, and LIBERTY AND CONQUEST were the
motto of his weapons!

AT this time, we beheld a British general, and a formidable army, captives to
an American militia; a general renowned in war, with a phalanx of veterans
suppliants to our clemency. We beheld the long reputed conquering troops of
Britain, led through this country in ignominious bonds, following the trophies
of their conquerors. -- Many are the acts of courage and good conduct, which
have been manifest during our late contest; particularly, when our illustrious
general, at the head of a few continental troops, baffled the force of our
enemies, and by wise and cautious maneuvers captured a band of Hessians.

WE should therefore look back with satisfaction and pleasure on what we have
hitherto accomplished; such a review will serve to animate us in our farther
pursuits, and give courage and confidence in times of danger. From our earliest
infancy to the present hour, we have been led through every changing scene as
the peculiar favorites of heaven, at this period therefore to distrust the
gracious intentions of the Almighty, would be such base ingratitude "As chills
my blood with horror but to name it."

AS an independent nation, our conduct should be sounded on the most liberal
principles, and our views, measures and pursuits should be draughted on an
enlarged scale. If we are not governed by national sentiments, our actions will
be trifling, our acquirements contemtible, and our honor levelled with the dust.

IN ATTENTION therefore, in any of the States, to the repeated calls of
Congress to discharge the debts contracted in their behalf, argues, not only,
an undue estimate of our noble acquisition, but eventually tends to the
subversion of the federal union.

WE are happy on this occasion to notice the late patriotic decisions of our
venerable political fathers for promoting our national honor; this example, if
followed by the severel legislatures, will enable CONGRESS to preserve the
dignity of these United States, establish our INDEPENDENCE upon a basis as
lasting as it is glorious, and for ever silence the vaunting arrogance of our
enemies at the fancied prospects of our disunion.

A GOVERNMENT, destitute of the confidence of the people, can never maintain
that respectability so essentially necessary to their prosperity^ Neither
foreign or domestic loans can ever be expected, when suspicions of honor or
punctuality prevail. No substitute in the place of money can possibly remedy,
but will rather serve to increase the evil -- it will effectually prevent the
circulation of specie, occasion, in many instances, excessive usury, and
finally plunge such a government into the greatest distress.

HOW we shall maintain, as a NATION, our respectability should therefore be the
grand subject of enquiry -- this is the object to which we must attend -- for
the moment America sullies her name, by forfeiting her honor, the fame she has
acquired from the heroism of her sons, and the virtues she has displayed in the
midst of her distress, will only serve, like a train of mourners, to attend the
funeral of her glory* but, by a due cultivation of manners, a firm adherance to
the faith we have pledged, an union in council, a refinement in sentiment, a
liberality and benevolence of conduct, we shall render ourselves happy at home,
and respectable abroad; our constellation will brighten in the political
hemisphere, and the radiance of our stars, sparkle with increasing luster.

MANY other important considerations claim our particular attention, among
which, are agriculture, manufactures, and commerce. -- The lands in this
country will afford ample employment for numbers of individuals, and America
prove such an assylum for the poor, as no other country can boast -- even our
barren wilds may be brought into fruitful fields, and the wilderness be made to
blossom like the rose: here, the industrious husbandman may enjoy his property
with safety, cultivate his field with confidence, and deposit the produce of
his labor with security. The late honorable institution for the promotion of
agriculture, must excite the most pleasing sensations in every friend to
America. The respectability and knowledge of this society, we flatter
ourselves, will be productive of the most beneficial improvements.

AS an INDEPENDENT NATION, we should also encourage manufactures. Some measures
have already been adopted by this State with a view to promote this essential
object. Blessed with superior advantages we ought to be inspired with national
pride, and study to bring forward our numberless resources: but alas! the
frippery of dress, and the extravagance of fashion have been too prevalent
among us. -- Too fondly have we rushed into the arms of Britain, without
considering the fatal tendency of our wanton imprudence. -- Had we pursued
different measures, had we paid proper attention to our own manufactures, our
importations, I presume, would have been more cautiously regulated, and a few
years would have furnished us, independent of strangers, with a variety of
articles for our own consumption. -- No nation is so capable of becoming
independent, if deprived of foreign connections. Our fertile soil, the variety
of our climates, and the ingenuity of our inhabitants, would render America a
field of plenty, and a garden of luxuries.

BUT however we may flourish among ourselves, yet commerce is an object which
merits our particular atttention. Blessed with internal riches, we have it in
our power to extend a beneficial commerce throughout the world -- hitherto, we
have acted like strangers to our mercantile interest; and too inconsiderately
plunged ourselves into every excess of folly. -- Our valuable exports have been
wantonly sacrificed for European trifles, which, far from enriching, have
served to impoverish our country -- thank heaven we are at length roused from
that lethargy which has too long pervaded each State in the union -- the late
commercial acts of a few States, exhibit a proof of our patriotism, and may
have a tendency to rouse the attention of Britain; but we have now before us a
far nobler and more extensive prospect, a commercial system ripening to
maturity -- with heartfelt satisfaction we anticipate the many benefits
resulting from a convention of the several States -- the resources of this
extensive continent will not only be better known, but mutual interest will be
promoted and local jealousies removed. The northern and southern States will
become more united in their commercial, as well as national views; and the
trade of each will receive mutual assistance -- principles of liberality will
be inculcated; our ship building and navigation increased; and our produce
distributed, both in our own ships, as well as in those of all nations,
throughout the world -- in a word, this commercial convention may be productive
of the highest advantages, promoting at once the lasting union, and mutual
happiness of the confederate States. May heaven grant to the members, wisdom in
their debates, union in their principles, and stability in their decisions.

NOW, if ever, is the time to keep a more than ordinary watch over our manners;
to encourage industry, frugality and economy, and "to check that subtle secret
poison, which lurks under the pomp of luxury, and the charms of pleasure." The
eyes of Europe are upon us. Our enemies view us with jealousy, and watch our
smallest operations; while our friends, with pleasure seated in their
countenances, rejoice at our national happiness -- whether our foes shall
congratulate each other on our fall; or our friends rejoice at our prosperity,
depends on our union, virtue, and patriotism.

THE American history has become a chart, wherein at one view, we can behold
the transaction of different ages and nations, men and manners -- do we revere
the stern virtues of the SPARTAN? -- do we respect the polite and learned
ATHENIAN? -- are we animated with the heroism, and honor of the ROMAN? --
virtues like these have shone conspicuous in America, and patriotism the most
rigid has been frequently displayed. -- The steady uniform measures of an
AMERICAN CONGRESS, when surrounded with dangers, evince, not only the greatest
fortitude, but superior wisdom and address. -- The persevering virtues, the
polite manners, the valor and bravery of the AMERICAN ARMY, demand our loudest
approbation and applause. In our illustrious GENERAL, we behold -- here
language fails me to do justice to his merit! -- He is -- WASHINGTON -- To
excite our emulation to generous and humane actions, let us trace these virtues
in the conduct of our ILLUSTRIOUS ALLIES.

THE alacrity and assistance of FRANCE, their benevolence and magnanimity,
demand the most cordial thanks of America -- with pleasure and satisfaction we
reflect on the union which subsisted between the two armies. All national
distinctions were lost in the one Godlike principle of benevolence. Engaged in
one cause, commanded by one general, they freely mingled their choicest blood
in the field of battle. Thus allied and united, how formidable and determined!
witness the 17th October 1781, when the arms of a British army were piled
beneath the standard of our UNITED FORCES -- this alliance, while it adds
luster to the annals of France and America, will serve to dwindle the British
page to a mere epitome of greatness.

MAY that Almighty Being who sets up one, and puts down another, still
vouchsafe to bless, prosper, and defend our country -- and "as religion is one
of the best cements of society, the firmest prop of government, and the fairest
ornament of both," may we be zealous to maintain it, and to cultivate those
virtues which exalt a nation.

MAY knowledge and learning, under the genial smiles of peace, liberty, and the
never failing patronage of government, expand and flourish in this western
world -- hither, those liberal arts transferred, that sweeten, that embellish
existence here below -- hither, may nations less adorned by freedom, pour their
warm blessings, turn their wishful eyes, and while regretting theirs, extol our
fortune -- and may the circling moon observe no race more happy in all her
visitations! animated with these glorious prospects;

"Let every face be brightened into joy,
"And PUBLIC HONOR, every heart employ:
"Eternal sunshine over each bosom play,
"And every bliss, illumine every day.
"While heaven's high King, well pleased, approves our song,
"And guides the pastimes of the virtuous throng."

