THE TRUE INTEREST OF THE UNITED STATES, AND PARTICULARLY OF PENNSYLVANIA,
CONSIDERED; WITH RESPECT TO THE ADVANTAGES RESULTING FROM A STATE PAPER-MONEY:
WITH SOME OBSERVATIONS ON THE SUBJECT OF A BANK, AND ON Agriculture,
Manufactures and Commerce.

BY AN AMERICAN.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by CHARLES CIST, at the Corner of Fourth and
Arch-streets. M,DCC,LXXXVI.

THE TRUE INTEREST OF THE UNITED STATES, AND PARTICULARLY OF PENNSYLVANIA,
CONSIDERED, etc.
THE sovereignty and independence of the United States of America being
established, it becomes an object of the utmost importance to them to adopt,
and steadily to pursue, such a system of national policy, as may most
effectually promote the prosperity, strength and duration of that
establishment. Nature has done her part for this rising empire: -- The wisdom
and virtue of its citizens must accomplish the rest.

THE objects which conduce to the well-being of a people are so numerous and
extended, as to render the consideration of them all, a task too great and too
complex for an individual. A rational scheme of civil polity, executed in a
faithful administration of government, is, doubtless, one of the most momentous
and essential of these objects: but even this comprehends a great variety of
interesting concerns. We shall, therefore, confine our observations, in the
course of this Essay, to some of those points which appear more peculiarly
connected with the circumstances of this country, and our national happiness.

A CIVILIZED nation, without commerce, is a solecism in politics. It is in the
rudest state of mankind only, that a people can exist, without any
communication with other societies, or commercial intercourse among themselves,
every one supporting himself by his own labor. Indeed so absolute a state of
nature can only be conceived, but has scarcely existed in reality. The wants,
the fears, the weakness, nay the very nature of man, necessarily constitute him
a social animal: And, in the very origin of society, their mutual necessities,
with the various talents, means and opportunities of individuals for supplying
them, must have produced a reciprocity of services, and an occasional
interchange with one another of that property, which each had acquired by his
own exertions.

COMMERCE may then be considered as coeval with man himself, and barter as its
first stage.

IT is obvious, however, that the exchange of one kind of commodity for another
must have proved too imperfect a species of traffic to answer the purposes of
society, after civilization had multiplied their wants, and extended the
objects of them beyond their mere necessities.

IN order, then, to remedy the inconvenience of barter, certain substances have
been adopted, amongst the various nations of the earth, as the scale or
standard for measuring the value of every species of property; thereby to
ascertain the relative worth of every commodity, compared with others, and with
this common standard.

THE substances, most universally employed for this purpose, are silver and
gold, though the former is esteemed the standard. These metals possess an The
value of the precious metals is, however, enhanced, by their peculiar aptitude
to perform the office of an universal money far beyond any real, inherent value
they possess. This extrinsic value of gold and silver, which belongs to them
when under the modification of coin or in bullion, is totally distinct from
their inherent value, as a commodity. For, as Dr. Franklin has justly remarked,
"gold and silver are not intrinsically of equal value with iron, a metal in
itself capable of many more beneficial uses to mankind. Their value rests
chiefly in the estimation they happen to be in among the generality of nations,
and the credit given to the opinion, that that estimation will continue:
Otherwise* a pound of gold would not be a real equivalent for even a bushel of
wheat." (See the Doctor's Remarks on a Representation from the Board of Trade
to the King of Great Britain, dated 9th February 1764.) We are apt to confound
the inherent value of the commodity with its extrinsic value as a money; and to
unite the two, in estimating the intrinsic value of the substance. Whereas
Bank-notes, or any other species of symbolical money, may, under certain
regulations, acquire that "estimation" among a people, necessary to constitute
money, and to answer all the uses of a circulating medium of alienation in a
State.
intrinsic value, by reason of their extraordinary purity and scarceness; --
and certain other qualities render them suitable materials for receiving such
criteria, as that they may be readily distinguished, in the transactions of
men, for that standard, whereby the relative worth of all commodities is
ascertained. The distinguishing marks given, by the authority and sanction of a
State, to certain portions of metal, denominate them coin. These, which we call
actual-money, are graduated (if we may use the expression) according to the
proportion and quality of metal they contain, by an arbitrary scale, termed
money of account; which, in every country respectively, represents an
invariable scale for measuring value.

BUT it is to be observed, that gold and silver coin derives not its intrinsic
value from performing the office "By money" (says sir James Steuart) I
understand any commodity, which, purely in itself, is of no material use to
man, but which acquires such an estimation from his opinion of it, as to become
the universal measure of what is called value, and an adequate equivalent for
any thing alienable. Political Economy, Book I. chapter 6.
of money; but possesses it as a commodity. For, as Vide his Observations on
National Industry.
Mr. Anderson expresses it, Money, considered in itself, is of no value. -- But
among civilized nations, who have found how convenient it is for facilitating
the barter or exchange of one commodity for another, it has received an
artificial value. -- So that, although useless in itself, it has come to be
accepted among all civilized nations, as a token proving that the person who is
possessed of it had given something of real value in exchange for it; and is,
on that account, accepted of by another in exchange for something that is of
real utility and intrinsic worth. -- In strictness, therefore, the employment
of gold and silver-coin, in alienation, is no more than bartering one commodity
for another of equal value, or rather price. The intrinsic value of such coin,
does, in fact, render it in some degree an imperfect medium of alienation; for,
being itself a commodity, it is liable to rise and fall in value, like every
other article of commerce: -- And, accordingly, we find that the price of
silver is continually varying in the London market; and the English East India
Company send silver to China, in order to purchase gold.

THUS money, formed of the precious metals, may be considered in a twofold
point of view -- as a merchantable commodity, and as a medium of alienation. In
the former capacity, it adds to the riches of a country, merely in proportion
to its intrinsic value: But, as money, it can no otherwise produce this effect,
than paper or leather-money, or any other sign of property.

IF we recur to the original use of money, -- as an instrument by the
intervention of which alienation might be effected, and the necessity of barter
superseded, -- it must appear evident, that we judge very erroneously, when we
suppose intrinsic value to be inseparably connected with it. At the same time
it must be acknowledged, that species of money, which possesses intrinsic
value, has one advantage that does not appertain to symbolical money; namely,
that being itself a merchantable commodity, it may be bartered, at a foreign
market, for other commodities. This advantage, however, as shall be shown in
the sequel, is not more than equivalent to those that are deducible from a well
founded symbolical money, which is capable of answering all the domestic and
internal purposes of a circulating medium in a nation.

FROM what has been premised we may infer, that money, in its "Money is an
universal medium, or common standard, by a comparison with which the value of
all merchancise may be ascertained; or it is a sign which represents the real
value of all commodities." Black. Comm. I. 279.

Lord Shelburne, speaking in the House of Lords, called "money one type of
property: Paper (he adds) is another." Vide Anderson* in Nota.


proper signification, is not wealth, but the sign, token, or representative of
it. The absolute riches of a country consist in the abundance of those
productions of nature, that minister directly to the support, the convenience,
and the enjoyment of mankind. Where nature has bestowed these gifts with a
liberal hand, the nation, collectively, may justly be termed rich, though
destitute of money: On the other hand, where these blessings appear to have
been dealt out to a people in a more sparing manner, they are comparatively
poor, notwithstanding their country may abound with gold and silver-mines. For
if we consider the former country as totally unconnected with any other; it is
evident that the wants of all its inhabitants may be supplied by the means of
bartering; but if we place the other in the same unconnected state, it is
equally plain, that their gold and silver can be of little use to them; -- the
real, inherent worth of those metals being very small, and the country
deficient in those things which constitute true and substantial riches. -- In
the one case, the necessity of bartering among themselves is attended with
inconvenience. In the other, the scarcity or want of the necessary articles
themselves, excludes, in a great degree, the possibility of barter and the use
of money, and occasions proportionable distress.

LET us now view each of these countries as opening a commercial intercourse
with the other and with foreign nations. -- The wealthier country, by exporting
the superfluous quantity of its produce, would be enabled to procure in return,
either gold and silver, or such other commodities as they might require to
supply those artificial wants, which refinement of manners may have created.
Thus the wealthy State might increase its riches.

BUT the poorer country would be obliged to send abroad their gold and silver,
to purchase a sufficiency of those articles which their more immediate
necessities might require. Should the quantity of these metals, furnished by
such a country, be only adequate for this purpose, its inhabitants would
certainly continue poor; or, if the quantity should be so great as to introduce
amongst them, from other countries, not only the necessities and conveniences,
but luxuries and the superfluities of life; the effect would be a prevalence of
ignorance and "There may be too much money in a nation. And there is certainly
too much, if it renders the great body of the people idle, and enables them to
purchase what they want from foreigners, without any labor or industry of their
own." Characteristics of the present Political State of Great Britain.

"When money can be obtained in great quantities by little labor, the slower
and better means of obtaining it by manufactures and industry will always be
neglected. Corruption, with all its dreadful train of ills, immediately
follows; the bulk of the people become sunk in indolence and misery, and a few
riot in all the excess of dissipation and extravagance." Anderson's
Observations on National Industry.


sloth, the parents of wretchedness.

HENCE we see that the real riches of a nation do not consist in money; but
that they may subsist without it.

COMMERCE and money are so intimately connected, that, to form a just idea of
either, we should consider both. The former, as we have already observed,
originated from the necessities of mankind; the latter was invented as an
expedient, for conducting the operations of the other with the greater
facility, by removing the difficulties and inconveniences of barter. Commerce,
consisting in the continual exchange and mutual transfer of those things
amongst men, which their respective wants, whether natural or artificial, have
rendered desirable; and the use of money being introduced, as the medium or
instrument by which this was to be effected; it follows, that these two objects
should bear a due proportion to each other. The more extensive the alienation
of property is in any country, the greater will be the quantity of money,
caeteris paribus, requisite for carrying it on.

HENCE we may trace the fallacy of that opinion, maintained by some, that it is
immaterial, whether the quantity of money in a nation be great or small, as the
value of all the labor and commodities within it, taken together, must be
equal to the whole sum of its money. -- Were such a nation cut off from all
communication with every other, there might be some truth in the position: But
as money is a medium, not only of the internal commerce of every nation,
separately considered; but of their commercial intercourse, one with another;
it is plain that the quantity of this universal medium in each country must not
only bear a certain proportion to the alienation within that country, but the
entire quantity therein must also be in a relative ratio to the quantities in
all the other trading countries of the world between whom there is an
intercourse, collectively, compared with the amount of the alienation in them
all.

A COMMERCIAL intercourse between nations would have a tendency to give to each
a quantity of this universal medium, proportionate to its share in such
negociations. But either the natural advantages, or those resulting from
political institutions, which one country possesses above another, destroy this
kind of equilibrium in the commerce of nations, and create that difference
which constitutes one rich and another relatively poor: -- The manner in which
this effect may be produced, has been briefly pointed out.

AS the riches of a country do not absolutely depend on the quantity of money
it possesses; but on the extent and productiveness of its lands, the number and
industry of its inhabitants, and the plenty and intrinsic value of its natural
produce -- the abundance or scarcity of these denominate it really rich or
poor. And as the alienation and interchanging of these real riches of a country
constitute its trade; the utility and indeed necessity of employing some
substance which may represent these riches, as the medium of transfer,
demonstrate likewise the necessity of "If a nation has a quantity of money
equal to its commerce, the lands, commodities and labor of the people shall
bear a middle price. This state is the best, and tends most to enrich the
people, and make their happiness lasting." Considerations on a Paper Currency,
written by the late Tench Francis, Esquire. Attorney General of Pennsylvania.
proportioning that medium to the degree of alienation, according to the great
commercial scale of price and value.

NOW as, in the commerce of nations, certain natural and political causes,
either separate or conjunct, destroy that equilibrium before spoken of; and
make the balance so preponderate on one side or the other, as that some enjoy
the balance of trade in their favor, while others have it against them, the
use of COIN, as an universal medium, is evident -- answering as an equivalent
to make up those deficiencies that arise from a wrong balance in the foreign
commerce of countries.

THIS, indeed, is the chief preeminence which gold and silver possess, as a
circulating medium of trade, over symbolical money. In many respects they are
inferior to it. The immense quantities of these Sir William Blackstone tells
us, that above a thousand millions of bullion are calculated to have been
imported into Europe from America, within less than three centuries; and the
quantity is daily increasing.
metals which are continually procured from the bowels of the earth, and
introduced into the dealings of men, under the modification of coin, render
them, in some degree, improper substances to be the "No material money, let it
be contrived as it will, is exempted from vicissitudes in its value as a metal.
This is proved by the universal risings and sinkings in the price of
commodities, in consequence of circumstances peculiar to the coin. These
risings and sinkings of prices, I say, are properly risings and sinkings of the
value of the coin, and that again is a lengthening and contracting of the equal
parts of the scale of value which is attached to it." Steuart's Political
Economy, vide note 13.
invariable measure of value. They have suffered a progressive depreciation in
the estimation of nations, in consequence of their great increase: Besides
which, they are liable to perpetual fluctuation of price, owing to their being
a commodity; and being, as such, in demand among trading nations, may be drawn
away from that country where it was employed as an instrument of facilitating
its commerce.

IF we take a retrospective view of our subject, this inference may be deduced
-- that the principal use of coin, is the enabling a nation the more easily to
pay an unfavorable balance on its foreign trade. This, however, should it not
proceed from any natural deficiencies on the losing side, a wise State will
take care to rectify: if the contrary, such adverse trade should be entirely
discontinued.

IT being evident, that a "Pennsylvania, before they made any Paper-money, was
wholly stripped of its gold and silver, though they had from time to time, like
the neighboring colonies, agreed to take gold and silver coins at higher and
higher nominal values, in hopes of drawing money into, and retaining it for the
internal use of, the province. During this weak practice, silver got up by
degrees to 8/9 an ounce, and English crowns were 6, 7, and 8/ pieces, long
before Paper-money was made. But this practice of increasing the denomination
was found not to answer the end. The BALANCE OF TRADE carried out the gold and
silver as fast as it was brought in, the merchants raising the price of their
goods, in proportion to the increased denomination of the money. The
difficulties for the want of cash were accordingly very great, the chief part
of the trade being carried on by the extremely inconvenient method of barter;
when, in 1723, Paper-money was first made there, which gave new life to
business, promoted greatly the settlement of new lands, by lending small sums
to beginners on easy interest, to be repaid by instalments; whereby the
province has so greatly increased in inhabitants, that the export from hence"
(England, where this was written) "thither is now more than tenfold what it
then was; and by their trade with foreign colonies they have been able to
obtain great quantities of gold and silver to remit hither, in return for the
manufactures of this country. -- New York and New Jersey have also increased
and improved greatly, during the same period, with the use of Paper-money." --
Vide Dr. Franklin's Remarks on a Representation from the English Board of Trade
to the King of Great Britain, dated 9th February 1764.
symbolical money is capable of answering all the purposes of a circulating
medium within a State; we shall proceed to examine, how far this country may be
benefited by such a currency; and on what principles it had best be instituted,
to advance the true interest of the whole community.

THAT excess of the real riches of any country which belong to its inhabitants,
beyond what their own use and consumption may need, is as unprofitable to the
proprietors, without the means of alienation; as treasure, in the possession of
the miser, is useless to his neighbor: In both cases, it is the alienation of
the property that contributes to its value. Thus, although the American States
comprehend a great and fertile territory, capable of yielding an almost
infinite variety of valuable productions, and inhabited by a very large number
of enterprising, industrious people, who possess the products of their labor;
yet, if destitute of a circulating medium which should represent these real
riches, the country might with propriety be called poor. But how is this
representative value of the real riches of a nation to be obtained, by the
people, in the first instance?

THIS question opens to us the nature and use of CREDIT. Money being the
representative of real value, the possession of it denotes, that the owner had
given some equivalent for it. Therefore, as the acquisition of money must
necessarily be subsequent to the means of acquiring it, those means (which must
have consisted of some of the constituents of real riches, equivalent to the
money) must have been obtained by the aid of a credit. As coin, or real money,
as it is sometimes styled, is considered as the representative of actual,
coexistent value; so credit may be said to represent anticipated value; -- and
symbolical or paper-money may be termed the evidence or token of credit: --
Hence this kind of currency is denominated paper-credit or bills of credit. --
The obvious use of credit is to supply the place of actual money. It furnishes
a mode of conducting the operations of alienation or commerce, without the
immediate intervention of money or occasion of barter. But being used merely as
a substitute for actual money, it should be regulated by the same scale: and
this evinces the propriety of a State not issuing a greater sum in a
paper-money (which is the evidence of credit) than is wanted to supply the
deficiency of its actual money; so that the amount of its coin and paper-credit
might form a sum sufficient for its alienation. If, therefore, those things
that constitute real riches, abound in a country where there is little coin,
that country will need a large supply of paper-credit to represent that
proportion of its riches which the disproportionate quantity of its coin could
not effect, in order to enable it to carry on an alienation adequate to its
riches.

AS too extensive a credit must needs operate in a manner similar to the
circulation of too much money, the great end to be obtained, with respect to
this point, is, to determine on the best possible standard for ascertaining the
requisite proportion. This may vary in different countries, according to the
nature of the commerce and other circumstances peculiar to each. For this
reason, we shall apply the principle to these States; to which our enquiries
more immediately relate.

MONEY, and consequently credit, being instrumental to commerce, it should be
subservient to its interest. The extensiveness and fertility of the lands in
this country render "It has always appeared to me." says Mr. Anderson, "a
little surprising, that mankind should have in general entertained such just
ideas with regard to the means of making manufactures flourish, and such
defective notions concerning improvements in agriculture. For there is no man
so ignorant as not to know at once, that the only possible way to make a
manufacture thrive, is to procure a ready vent for the goods; as without this
every other encouragement, however liberal, must be ineffectual. And is it not
sufficiently obvious, that agriculture, although it has been distinguished by
another name, is, to every intent and purpose, a manufacture in as strict a
sense of the word as the forming a yard of broad-cloth; and differs not in any
respect from other manufactures, as to the means of making it flourish?"
Observations on National Industry.
agriculture the main source of its wealth. But, as this fund can only be
productive, in proportion to the degree of labor employed in drawing forth its
riches; and as that labor must also be antecedent to even that share of its
products which is necessary to afford the agent the means of exertion, and to
subsist him in the intermediate time; the anticipation required is produced, by
the instrumentality of credit.

THE productions of the earth being essential to the existence of man, makes
the possession of lands the most valuable species of property; and they are
esteemed the best security for any credit given. The lands of this country may
be considered as our great staple, and the culture of them as our principal See
the foregoing note.
manufacture. In this point of view, they may be justly deemed the best
standard for determining what amount of a circulating medium the exigencies of
the State may demand, and its abilities support: -- For the same reason, they
are the fund on which that species of credit ought to be established, which
applies in a manner peculiarly beneficial to the interest of this country, and
suitable to its circumstances.

IT will be readily understood, that we here allude to that credit which is
furnished by a State to the cultivators (or, what is, in America, much the
same, the proprietors) of landed estates; to enable them, by anticipating the
products of several years labor, so to augment industry and multiply the means
of carrying it on, as to accelerate improvements; and thereby enrich both
individuals and the State. Such a credit is that created by means of a State
LOAN-OFFICE. This is an Governor Pownall, a gentleman of extensive political
talents, and well acquainted with the interests of this country, speaks of this
institution in these remarkable words -- "I will venture to say, that there
never was a wiser or a better measure, never one better calculated to serve the
uses of an increasing country, that there never was a measure more steadily
pursued, or more faithfully executed, for forty years together, than the
Loan-Office in Pennsylvania, formed and administered by the Assembly of that
Province." -- This writer gives a sketch of the Loan-Office Act of
Pennsylvania, passed in the year 1739, which he styles, "the completest of the
kind, containing all the improvements which experience had from time to time
suggested, in the execution of preceding Acts." -- Vide his "Administration of
the Colonies." -- By this act, the trustees of the Loan-Office were to lend out
the bills on real security of at least double the value, for a term of sixteen
years, to be repaid in yearly quotas or instalments, with interest: Thus one
sixteenth part of the principal was yearly paid back into the office, which
made the payment easy to the borrower: The interest was applied to public
services; the principal, during the first ten years, let out again to fresh
borrowers.

The new borrowers, from year to year, were to have the money only for the
remaining part of the term of sixteen years, repaying by fewer, and of course
proportionably larger instalments; and during the last six years of the
sixteen, the sums paid in were not to be remitted, but the note burnt and
destroyed; so that at the end of the sixteen years the whole might be called in
and burnt, and the accounts completely settled.

The trustees were taken from all the different counties in the (then)
province, their residence in different parts giving them better opportunities
of being acquainted with the value and circumstances of estates offered in
mortgage. They were to continue but four years in office; were to account
annually to committees of Assembly; and at the expiration of that term, they
were to deliver up all moneys and securities in their hands, to their
successors, before their bonds and securities could be discharged, etc. etc.
etc.


institution so admirably adapted to the circumstances of this country, so well
calculated to relieve its necessities, founded on such sound principles of
national policy, and the prosperous effects of which have been so fully
experienced, that it is indeed much to be wondered, how the people of America
remain so inattentive to the most important interest of their country, as not
to have it established in every State in the Union! We are well aware of the
prejudices that have been entertained against a paper-currency; and, indeed,
the manner in which it was issued, during the late war, afforded too much
grounds for such prejudices. But arguments drawn from the abuse of a thing, do
not militate against the excellence of the thing itself or its use: And this
observation will strongly apply to the subject before us.

ACCORDING to the principles before laid down, our circulating medium ought to
keep pace with the advanceing improvement of the country: Yet we know that the
balance of our trade with foreign nations is adverse; and, consequently, that
the gold and silver-monies of the country must diminish in the same degree.
Here, then, is the great and direct source of that distress and embarrassment,
which pervade the United States, arising from the insufficiency of a medium of
alienation. While the cause continues, it is in vain to look for a cessation of
the effects; and it is greatly to be feared, that unless a timely stop be put
to the evil, the country will be involved in a general calamity. The remedy is
in our own power. Should we neglect to apply it, or suffer ourselves to be so
far either influenced or deceived, by false representations and partial
interests, as to sacrifice the general good to private views, we would neither
deserve nor enjoy those means of national happiness that now lie within our
reach.

LET us then (to use the expression of an The author of the characteristics of
the present political state of Great Britain. -- The same writer observes that
"the more the lands of any country are locked up, the less must the country be
improved: And the more easily lands can be transferred and exchanged in
commerce; industry, trade and manufactures, will be more speedily and
successfully promoted."
anonymous writer) coin our lands, and thereby obtain from those most valuable
of all mines, a sufficient circulating medium of commerce. for this purpose let
LOAN-OFFICES be instituted in the several States, on principles similar to
those whereon the loan-office of Pennsylvania was established for many years.
The medium furnished by means of this institution, is founded on the basis of
credit; and, as it is expressly calculated to promote, in the first instance,
the extension of agriculture, that great staple manufacture of this country,
which of course forms the greatest part of its commerce. -- at least that
branch which tends most to its interest, -- it is the best medium we can employ
to advance the national welfare. It is, besides the only species of money
partaking of the nature of credit, that is not liable to abuse.

FOR, being established on that kind of it denominated "Private credit is
established upon a security, real or personal, of value sufficient to make good
the obligation of repayment both of capital and interest: This is the most
solid of all." Sir James Steuart on Political Economy.
private credit, it cannot exceed, in quantity or nominal value, the actual and
real worth of the security which it represents. The demand for money must ever
be proportionate to its uses; and thus the necessary quantity may be easily
accommodated to the demand. Nor can there be any doubt of this being a proper
standard of regulation with respect to a loan-office money; because, the uses
originating from, and being applicable to, funds of the most valuable and
substantial nature, namely lands, the borrower would not be willing to pay
interest for a greater sum than he could reasonably suppose might be employed
to his advantage. Added to this, that the sum lent would not exceed one half
the estimated value of such fund, pledged as a security for its repayment or
redemption.

THE value of lands is usually computed at the purchase of a certain term of
years; that is, being themselves a fund, the profits accruing from its
employment within a given portion of time, will determine the value of the
stock producing those profits, compared with the profits arising from the use
of money, the measure of that value, in the same country. So that, if the
circulating medium of a country be duly proportioned to its commerce, and if
that medium or money will yield an average profit of six per centum per annum,
to those who make use of it, the value of lands in that country may be
estimated at about sixteen years purchase: On the same principle the interest
of money is regulated, by a comparison with the productive value of labor and
lands. This suggests the use of a well-regulated credit; which, by operating as
stock, augments the profit on the actual capital employed in conjunction with
it.

HERE we trace the beneficial effect of the credit obtained by the
agriculturist from a loan-office, in a symbolical money. The lands, in an
improved country only, can be valued at any certain number of years purchase.
But in this new country, the progressive improvement of the lands from year to
year, is continually increasing the capital of the landholder. And this effect,
-- this immense source of national wealth and fund of credit, -- will not
cease, until the cultivation of our lands shall have arrived at such a height
and become so general, as that the annual profits of farming will not surpass
the interest of money. The very low price which improvable lands bear in this
country, is no criterion of their value; but arises solely from the
insufficiency of the means necessary for acquiring and improving them; for an
uncultivated soil is of as little use, as a diamond in the bosom of the mine.

As money derives its value from its uses, it is evident, that, when the
quantity does not exceed those uses, its value will not be impaired. The
difficulty, with respect to a symbolical money in general, is to ascertain the
productiveness and to secure the certainty of the fund, which creates the uses.
Taxes are a sufficient fund for supporting the credit of a paper-money,
provided due regard be had to these essential points. The credit of paper
issued by Banks founded entirely on mercantile credit, in those commercial
countries which enjoy a favorable balance of trade, may also be rendered
sufficiently stable, by prudence and circumspection in the managers. But in
both instances, neither can the productiveness of the fund be ascertained, nor
its certainty be secured, by any real standard. The operations of a merely
mercantile Bank are, in a peculiar manner, liable to extend credit beyond its
proper bounds, in countries which carry on a disadvantageous foreign trade:
because the interest of the proprietors will lead them to circulate a
fictitious money, in their paper-credit, to as large an amount as they may
suppose consistent with their own safety; and this very credit adds to the
means of accelerating that trade, already prejudicial to the nation. The notes
of such a Bank are issued on mercantile credit. "This," says Sir James Steuart,
"is established upon the confidence the lender has, that the borrower, from his
integrity and knowledge in trade, may be able to replace the capital advanced,
and the interest due during the advance, in terms of the agreement." It is this
kind of credit that the same author styles, the most precarious of all.

THE great temptations that lie in the way of Banks on mercantile credit, on
the one hand, and of States on the other, to issue their paper on their
respective funds of mere confidence, in too great quantities; by over-rating
the productiveness of those anticipated funds on which that confidence is
grounded (and which are, necessarily, subject to some uncertainty, from the
nature of them) -- those very circumstances tend to render the credit of such
paper very delicate.

BUT that species of paper-money, that is issued on the security of lands,
which are made an actual equivalent deposit for its redemption, from the moment
of its going into circulation, is not liable to any objections on this score.
The fund itself, that is, the land, is actually existing; and the credit,
established on it, represents the value of this fund, and not of the
anticipated profits to be derived from the employment of it. The more firmly to
establish the credit of a loan-office money, no person can borrow from the
State more than one half the estimated value of his land: And in order to
disseminate the advantages of this credit the more extensively, and to enhance
its usefulness, moderate sums only (not exceeding, perhaps, two hundred pounds)
are loaned to individuals, let the value of their lands be what they may; -- by
which means, this institutition is peculiarly adapted to benefit the new
settlers and lesser proprietors of lands, a class of people who most stand in
need of encouragement in this country.

THIS kind of money, being established on permanent and certain funds, is
extremely well calculated not only for a circulating medium within the
particular State which issues it, but also as a medium of trade between the
several States; for, as Sir James Stuart observes, it is the interest of every
trading State to have a sufficient quantity of paper, well-secured, to
circulate through it, so as to facilitate payments every where, and to cut off
inland exchanges, which are a great clog upon trade, and are attended with the
risque of receiving the paper of people, whose credit is but doubtful.

IT is a trite objection to paper-money, that it banishes gold and silver from
the country where it obtains. This has been often invalidated. Dr. Franklin (in
his remarks on the report, etc.) has shown, that it is an unfavorable balance
of trade that draws the gold and silver out of the country, and that the
"necessity of substituting some medium in their stead has induced the making of
paper-money which could not be drawn away." So far is the paper-money the cause
of this effect, that, by increasing alienation and the means of exciting
industry, it has a direct tendency to increase the stock of coin ih the
country. And, as the quantity of paper-money in a country will not suffer any
diminution of its value while it does not exceed its uses, this currency can
have no effect in raising the price of labor and commodities, while kept within
those bounds.

A LOAN-OFFICE money being employed in the improvement of lands becomes
realised in a species of property which, in these states, is productive of much
greater emoluments, both to the public and to the proprietors, than can be
derived from the use of small monied capitals, in any manner of trade,
honorable to an individual, or consistent with the common weal.

AT the same time that the cultivator of the soil is, by this means, enriching
himself, and increasing the real wealth of his country in a direct point of
view, other salutary consequences result from a loan-office credit. Its
circulating paper, by filling up the chasm in the medium of alienation,
occasioned by the scarcity of coin, encourages industry and genius, promotes
arts and manufactures; enlivens commerce, gives the means of comfortable
subsistence to the poor, and enables all classes of people to contribute to the
support of Government and establishment of public credit, by a regular and
liberal payment of taxes. Indeed the revenue that might be obtained from the
interest on a loan-office money, would, of itself, form a very considerable
fund, applicable to public uses.

THE numerous and important advantages, accruing from this kind of institution,
are by no means exaggerated. On the contrary, a little reflection will suggest,
to any person acquainted with this country, many other instances wherein its
operations must be extremely serviceable: But the nature of the institution
need to be only understood to demonstrate its utility. -- Neither is it a
scheme founded on mere theoretical principles, as the experience of See note
page 9.
Pennsylvania can testify: She, as well as some of her sister States, has
heretofore felt the invigorating influence of this cheering political sun. --
May it speedily arise to re-enlighten this western world; and, by diffusing its
benign rays throughout our infant empire, quicken the feeds of industry, art,
manufactures, and commerce!

IF we compare the nature and effects of this loan-office money with the paper
circulated by a mercantile Bank, how great is the contrast! -- We have shown in
what manner the circumstances of this country require an increasing currency;
while, at the same time, the unfavorable balance of its foreign trade is
continually draining away its coin. "The only occasion where coin is necessary
in the liquidation of paper, is for payment of the balance of trade with
foreign nations. -- But surely nothing is so ill judged as to erect an
imaginary balance within the same state; or, rather, to permit money-jobbers to
erect it, at the expense of raising interest, and hurting trade, in the very
places where it stands in the greatest need of encouragement." Steuart's Pol.
Oec.
From thence we inferred the necessity of calling in the aid of credit, as a
substitute for money, and plainly pointed out lands as the proper fund for
supporting that credit.

WHEN we consider for what purposes a credit is useful and necessary, in this
country, we must be convinced that that species of it which is furnished by a
mercantile Bank, is so far from answering the end, that it has a direct
tendency to defeat it. The use of credit being to supply the place of real
funds, it is obvious that it can only prove beneficial to a nation, when those
funds are employed in promoting and extending such branches of its commerce as
tend to enrich it, by increasing its exports and diminishing its imports. This
is the effect produced by the paper-credit, created by Government, by means of
a loan-office.

BUT a mercantile Bank cannot lend on any other security than mere confidence,
grounded on opinion only. The farmer, who is desirous of borrowing a little
pecuniary capital toward enabling him to improve or cultivate his estate,
cannot obtain a farthing from the Bank, on the security of his lands, be their
value what they may: Whilst the merchant, whose property is of the most
precarious and delusive nature, may readily procure a fictitious capital to
facilitate his importation of foreign merchandise. Thus, the farmer being
excluded from this credit, with which the importer is so easily accommodated,
the balance of trade against the country will increase by the very means which
ought to operate in its favor.

WHO, then, are to be benefited by this Bank? -- We have seen that the farmer
is not; neither are the people at large. The State might, indeed, be
occasionally obliged and indulged with favors from the directors: But, we would
ask, would it be consistent with the dignity, the interest, nay the safety of
Government, to lay themselves under obligations to, and render themselves
dependent on a private trading company? -- Every independent man will answer --
No. The State has funds of credit of a much superior kind; and is not under the
necessity of submitting to such an indignity. The only class of people who
could derive any advantage from a mercantile Bank among us, would be those
connected with the institution itself; except, perhaps, in some comparatively
few instances. The wrong balance of our trade, by increasing the demand for
money, would raise the price above its value as a circulating medium and common
standard. And, by this means, the stockholders might draw an interest on their
Bank property, far beyond its just level. We have already seen the Bank in
Philadelphia making a dividend to the proprietors of its funds, of more than
double the legal interest of money. It is not, therefore, to be wondered, that
some of these proprietors, especially those most intimately connected with the
institution, should be extremely anxious to support what is so very subservient
to their private interests.

BUT let us turn our attention to the tendency of this Bank, in some other
respects. -- The farmer can borrow nothing from thence. -- When he applies to a
monied man for a loan from his private fortune, on the security of his lands,
he cannot succeed; because no person will lend his money even on landed
security, at six per cent per annum, while he can invest it in a fund which
will yield him twice that interest. What then must be the consequence? The
farmer, finding himself unable, with all his toil, to cultivate his lands to
any advantage, without the assistance of some credit; being debarred from the
acquisition of it; and observing the superior emoluments derived from banking,
without any labor; sells his lands, and becomes a Bank-stockholder. This
inducement will have a general operation, and the same cause which leads the
farmer to sell, produces a disinclination in the monied man to purchase, landed
estates: Consequently, the value of lands must sink; and agriculture, the great
support of our country, must decline.

NOT only the cultivation of lands is obstructed by these means, but also the
improvement and extension of our cities and towns. Many who possess unimproved
town-lots would erect houses on them, if, by mortgaging their ground, they
could obtain money for the purpose; but the Bank renders this impracticable.
Even monied men, who own property of this kind, will not employ it in building,
when bank-stock will afford them greater profits than the rents of houses, on
the same amount of fund. In this manner, the Bank has a direct tendency to keep
house-rent high; and to prevent the employment of masons, carpenters, smiths,
and all that numerous and useful body of mechanics, who derive their
subsistence, almost wholly, from the construction of houses. The proprietors of
houses in Philadelphia were formerly very well satisfied to receive the legal
interest of their money in rents; but, while twelve per cent per annum can be
obtained by banking, the landlord may exact double rent for his house. Yet were
he to sell it, he would probably not procure more than the capital of the legal
interest. So that the Bank may be justly considered as an auxiliary cause of
our exorbitant rents; a circumstance so grievous to the tenants, so necessarily
productive of the high price of labor among our artisans and mechanics, and so
prejudicial to the whole community. -- In short, such a train of evils result
from the high interest of money, alone, that its baneful effects may be traced
every where, and every class of our citizens must ultimately experience them. A
few monied men and private individuals derive, indeed, an immediate benefit
from this source; but the cultivator of the soil, the industrious manufacture
and mechanic, in fact the State itself, become inevitably sufferers.

It is easy to conceive, why persons, who have embarked their funds in the
Bank, are so averse to a currency issued by Government. In proportion to the
scarcity of money, will be the demand for credit; and while the Bank can
monopolize this credit, it may also monopolize the emoluments accruing from it.
Any competition with the proprietors of the Bank would lessen their profits;
and, for that reason, will be opposed. This opposition to a State paper-money
was exhibited in a striking manner by the friends and supporters of the Bank,
when the Legislature were about issuing the bills of credit now in circulation;
but, notwithstanding the fears that were suggested of its depreciation, the
sufficiency of the funds appropriated for their redemption have fully supported
their credit.

IF it be the interest of the State to issue a paper-currency, which, we
presume, is incontrovertible; and if the primary object of the Bank, namely its
own immediate profit, be incompatible with the interest of the State, in that
particular, is it not reasonable to suppose, that every species of influence
which the Bank possesses, will be exerted against so advantageous and necessary
a measure of Government? -- Apprehensions of an undue exercise of influence
from so powerful and uncontrollable a combination of property in private hands
cannot, therefore, be ill-grounded, in the infant state of our public credit.
Such apprehensions have existed in old, trading nations, where the consequences
could not prove so dangerous to the State. -- When the British Parliament
extended the term, for which the Bank of England held its charter, only ten
years beyond its ordinary duration of twenty-one years, Mr. David Hartley
sounded the alarm; and, in his letter of the 22d of June, 1781, to the Lord
Mayor of London, on that occasion, (published in Almon's Remembrancer for that
year) has pointed out the injurious tendency, with respect to Government, of
the additional influence given to the Bank, by that measure.

IN the year 1721, an attempt was wade to institute a Bank in Ireland. Upon
that occasion, the House of Commons, by a majority of 150 to 80, "resolved,
that the erecting or establishing of a public Bank in that kingdom would be of
the most dangerous and fatal consequences to his Majesty's service, and the
trade and liberties of the nation." Addressing the King on this subject, they
say, "As this was a matter of universal and national concern, your dutiful
Commons took the same into their most serious consideration, and not finding
any solid or good foundation for establishing a public Bank, so as to be
beneficial to the nation, or even consistent with the welfare or liberties of
it, think themselves obliged in duty to your Majesty, and justice to themselves
and those whom they represent, to offer their humble opinion to your Majesty,
that the establishing of any public Bank in this Kingdom, will be greatly
prejudicial to your Majesty's service, and of most dangerous and pernicious
consequence to the welfare and liberty of this nation. Your faithful Commons do
therefore most humbly beseech your Majesty, out of your tender concern for the
good of all your subjects, to deliver them from the apprehensions they lie
under, of the POWER and INFLUENCE of a public Bank, if once erected, by giving
such directions as your Majesty shall think proper, to prevent the
establishment of the same in this Kingdom."

HENCE it is plain, that the Legislature of Pennsylvania have not been
singular, in their dread of the consequences of a Bank.

UPON the whole, if we trace the "No method has hitherto been found to
establish a medium of trade, in lieu of money, equal in all its advantages to
bills of credit, funded on sufficient taxes for discharging it; or on land
security of double the value for repayment of it, at the end of the term: The
experience of near half a century in the middle colonies has convinced them of
it, among themselves, by the great increase of their settlements, numbers,
buildings, improvements, agriculture, shipping and commerce." Vide Doctor
Franklin's Remarks, etc.
effects of a public Loan-office money, through its various operations, it will
be found in every respect highly beneficial, and in no instance detrimental, to
the State: Whereas, those of a great mercantile Bank, in the present
circumstances of our commerce, are totally opposite.

COMMERCE is so intimately connected with money, that the importance of a well
regulated commercial system is to obvious to need any comment. It is a subject
highly interesting to this country, especially under its present circumstances,
and claims the serious attention of every good citizen. Our internal
prosperity, -- our strength and respectability among nations, -- depend so much
on the right management of this great concern, that there is no duty more
incumbent on those who have the administration of our public affairs, than to
watch over its operations with an eagle-eye.

WHEN the circulating medium bears a due proportion to the alienation, or, in
other words, the commerce, of a nation, the course of exchange, may justly be
deemed the criterion of the state of its foreign trade. If the balance be
adverse, exchange will be high; and if it be favorable, bills will be low. For
should the commodities imported into a country exceed in value those exported
from it, in any given time, the demand for bills would raise their price above
the par of exchange; and the exports surpassing the imports would produce a
contrary effect. But if the excess of the latter were so far to overbalance the
former, as to render the remittance of bills more unprofitable than that of
gold and silver; coin and bullion would then be exported to pay the balance due
to the foreign country.

THIS, as we have before observed, is the use of coin, and the cause of the
superior worth attributed to it in the capacity of a money. The substance of
which it is made being in universal estimation among mankind, it is a commodity
conveniently transportable from one country to another to make up those
deficiencies in its foreign trade, which the country exporting it cannot
otherwise supply. When, therefore, coin is in demand for this purpose, a
premium will be offered for it; and its price will rise, like that of any other
commodity in similar circumstances, according to the demand. Now, as the sum of
a circulating medium, necessary for the purposes of alienation within a
prosperous country, must be greatly beyond that of the coin any occasions can
require for its negotiations with foreign nations; any cause which might
contribute to "In England, as bullion has been wanted or not wanted for
exportation, its price has varied from 5/2 to 5/8 per ounce. This is near 10
per cent. but was it ever said or thought, on such an occasion, that all the
bank-bills, and all the coined silver, and all the gold in the kingdom were
depreciated 10 per cent? -- Coined silver is often wanted in England for
change, and one per cent. is given for it by some bankers; are gold and
bank-notes, therefore, depreciated one per cent?" -- See Dr. Franklin's
Remarks, etc.
advance the price of coin, above the rate of the general currency of that
country, (suppose a paper-money) ought to be considered as raising the price of
the coin, in its quality of a commodity, and not as a depreciation of the
currency, in its office of a money. Because, in such a case, the high interest
or premium that coin would command, would occasion a diminution of the price of
even "If a nation's commerce, on uses of money, exceed the quantity of it,
their lands, labor, and commodities, shall fink beneath their worth in other
countries. Few purchasers of land will be found, in regard to the superior
profit that must attend the use of money in trade; the wealthy merchant shall
be at the head of affairs: With few competitions, he shall be able to grind
down the farmer in the sale of his commodities; and, when those fail to support
him, in the purchase of his lands. The artisan's labor shall be depreciated by
the merchant who exports it, or the needy farmer who uses it. The wealthy only
shall accumulate riches, the Commonwealth shall decline, and in time farmers
and artisans must desert the place for another, where their labor shall be
better rewarded. -- Here, the use of Paper-money will shake off the fetters and
clogs of the poor. Merchants will multiply; they will raise the price of labor,
and of the fruits of the earth, and thereby the value of land. An equal
distribution of gain and profit shall succeed, and destroy the partial
accumulations of wealth." -- Francis's Considerations on a Paper Currency.
landed property, the truest riches of a people, and one of those species of
property of which money is designed only to represent the value: Yet the
intrinsic value of the lands would continue unaltered; nor could they, with any
propriety, be said to have depreciated.

BUT this is merely a supposable case; as that favorable balance which
constitutes the commercial prosperity of a country, excludes the possibility of
that competition, which advances the price of coin above its value as a money.

THE foregoing considerations sufficiently show, that the grand desideratum in
the commerce of a nation, is to maintain a favorable balance in its foreign
trade; which is evidenced by a general course of low When exchange rises so
high as to occasion a demand for coin, to substitute as a remittance in lieu of
bills, a premium above its ordinary value as a money will be given for it; and
thus the interest of money will rise in the country above its just level: For
Dr. Franklin has observed (in his Remarks on the Report, etc.) that whenever
bills of exchange have advanced in price in this country, the purchaser has
invariably been obliged to give more in silver, as well as in paper for them,
the silver having gone hand in hand with the paper. -- "Low interest," says Sir
James Steuart, "is principally advantageous for carrying on to keep circulation
full, by facilitating the melting down of property."
exchange.

THOSE measures, therefore, that tend to increase the exports and diminish the
imports of a nation are the essential means of obtaining that end.

FOR this purpose, the internal commerce of the country must be promoted, by
increasing its real riches. -- "Those who wish to make agriculture flourish in
any country, can have no hope of succeeding in the attempt, but by bringing
commerce and manufactures to her aid; which, by taking from the farmer his
superfluous produce, gives spirit to his operations, and life and activity to
his mind." Anderson on National Industry.
Agriculture must be extended, population encouraged, the acquisition of raw
materials facilitated, and domestic manufactures, especially of the natural
productions of the country, established: -- The commercial prosperity, and
consequently the real independence, of the American States, will be accelerated
or retarded, according to the progress of these.

WE have already endeavored to enforce the necessity of establishing a
circulating medium, on the fund of our lands, as a primary step to advance the
interest of the whole community, by putting in the hands of the landholder the
means of improving his estate. But improvements in agriculture will avail but
little, unless a demand be kept up for the products of landed estates. The
demand for the supply of foreign countries, depending on a combination of
various circumstances, must prove extremely fluctuating. For this reason, the
more it can be rendered independent of such extraneous causes, the more regular
will be the demand. And, therefore, the nearer the number of tradesmen,
mechanics, artists, and all that description of people who usually inhabit
towns, approaches that of the agriculturists, by so much the less will the
interest of the latter be affected by the precarious operations of foreign
trade. Also, the fuller the population of the nation is, -- provided a
sufficient proportion of the inhabitants be employed in useful handicraft
trades, mechanic arts, and as merchants in conducting the business of
alienation, -- the more beneficial will be the nature of its commerce,
considered in a national point of view. In such circumstances, the export-trade
of the country will be enlarged, while its importations of foreign manufactures
will be lessened in the same rates; and thus the interest of the "It would be
of much importance to the State," says Mr. Anderson, "if country gentlemen, and
the Legislature at large, would learn to distinguish with precision between
those kinds of commerce and manufactures that tend only to enrich the merchant,
and those that at the same time tend to enrich the country and augment its
internal prosperity; for these are often disjoined; so often, indeed, that
those kinds of traffic which are in general most profitable to the merchant,
are least beneficial to the country." -- Observations on National Industry.
merchant will be made to coincide with that of his country: -- Otherwise,
however patriotic principles a merchant may possess, he will find them assailed
by his private interest. A few individuals in a nation may be actuated by such
exalted sentiments of public virtue, as to sacrifice their own interests to the
general welfare; but these instances must be rare; and professional men of
every description are necessarily, as such, obliged to pursue their immediate
advantage.

UNTIL the country becomes pretty fully populated, the price of labor will
continue high; and, although this would be no disadvantage to a wealthy
country, if cut off from foreign trade, yet it would be a considerable
obstruction to the establishment of domestic manufactures; which, we have
shown, are "There are some instances of nations peculiarly situated which have
flourished by means of commerce, without agriculture; there are also a very few
examples of manufactures flourishing among a people who could have little
dependence on the produce of the soil: But there is not among all the records
of past ages a single proof of a people who have enjoyed, for any length of
time, a spirited agriculture, without the aid of commerce, or manufactures, or
both." Anderson's Observations on National Industry.
essential to a flourishing state of agriculture.

IN order, therefore, to create a demand for domestic manufactures among us,
the introduction of those foreign ones, which interfere with them, must be laid
under certain restrictions; and these must be continued, until the competition,
occasioned by the disparity of prices in the foreign and domestic articles of
the same kind, shall be destroyed, by a gradual reduction of the price of labor
at home. -- These restrictions may consist in duties on the imported "Dr.
Price, speaking of the foreign trade of the American States, has this
sentiment. -- "Indeed, I tremble when I think of that rage for trade which is
likely to prevail among them. It may do them infinite mischief. All nations are
spreading snares for them, and courting to a dangerous intercourse. Their best
interest requires them to guard themselves by all proper means; and,
particularly, BY LAYING HEAVY DUTIES ON IMPORTATIONS." Observations on the
American Revolution.
commodity, bounties on the domestic manufacture, and, in some cases, both
cooperating, with relation to the same article. -- Sir James Steuart has so
well expressed our sentiments on this head, that we will convey them in his
words. Treating of the means of instituting manufactures in a State, he says --
"The ruling principle which ought to direct a statesman is to encourage the
manufacturing of every branch of natural productions, by extending the home
consumption of them; by excluding all competition of strangers; by permiting
the rise of profits, so far as to promote dexterity and emulation in invention
and improvement; by relieving the industrious of their work, so often as demand
for it falls short. And, until it can be exported to advantage, it may be
exported with loss, at the expense of the public. To spare no expense in
procuring the ablest masters in every branch of industry, nor any cost in
making the first establishments; providing machines, and every other thing
necessary or useful to make the undertaking succeed."

THE carrying trade of the United-States is also an object of great national
importance. The country abounds with naval stores; and ship-building is, or may
be, one of our most beneficial employments.

THIS species of manufacture is of such a magnitude as to demand the attention
of Governments in a particular manner. The same principles on which those
measures are founded, which have been mentioned as necessary to promote
domestic manufactures, generally, may be applied to the encouragement of this.
-- Sir Josiah Child (in his discourse on trade) declares himself of opinion,
that, in relation to trade, shipping, profit and power, the The Act of
navigation was passed in the 12th Car. II. A. D. 1660. -- Sir Josiah Child
wrote about eighteen years afterward.
English Navigation-Act is one of the best and most politic laws that ever was
made in England; and without which, that country would not have had one half
the number of shipping, or trade, nor have employed half the number of seamen,
which it did at the time he wrote. Our policy undoubtedly dictates the
propriety of imposing extraordinary duties on dutiable commodities impo^^^^
from foreign countries into these States, in vessels (...) abroad or owned by
foreigners; especially on articles of mere luxury: Although some considerations
may render particular exemptions and discriminations indispensable and proper.
In We will not attempt to specify those cases to which the first part of this
proposition may be applicable: A combination of circumstances must designate
these. -- But our infant East India trade seems to come under the latter head.
It is true, that the importations from the East consist principally in those
things, which are usually denominated articles of luxury. But, as many of these
have, by long habit, acquired among us the character of necessaries, and are
therefore constantly imported from Europe, at second hand; policy dictates the
expediency, of giving every possible encouragement to the American merchant, in
carrying on a trade directly to the East Indies. Thus will the profits on that
trade, now enjoyed by strangers, center with our own citizens; while this new
channel of commerce will employ an additional number of American shipping and
seamen, and furnish a vent for an article, the natural production of this
country, much esteemed in the East.
some instances, certain kinds of merchandise ought, perhaps, to be exonerated
from all duties, whether imported in American or foreign bottoms: But in other
cases, such exemption might properly be restricted to goods imported in
American vessels only.

BUT a very obvious and important reflection arises here: -- And that is, that
every effort which can be made by individual States, for placing our foreign
trade on an advantageous footing for this country, is liable to be frustrated,
by other States counteracting them, or not coinciding in similar measures. The
want of that uniformity, which is necessary to give efficiency and permanency
to the commercial system of a nation, will render, in a great degree,
ineffectual, all partial regulations for the advancement of our trade. A power
must necessarily be lodged somewhere, for adjusting the commercial, as well as
the political, interests of the several States in the Union, to one general
scale; and, according to the principles on which our foederal Constitution is
framed, this power ought to be vested in the SUPREME HEAD OF THE UNION, in
order to establish the commerce of the United States on the solid basis of
national system.

IN the mean time, the unsettled state of our foreign trade lays us under a
double obligation assiduously to promote our By raising large flocks of sheep,
sufficient quantities of wool may be supplied for the manufacturing of coarse
woollen cloths, stockings, common hats, etc. -- Hemp furnishes us with the
valuable article of cordage; and flax-seed, which is a considerable export from
this country, yields an oil that is applied to various useful purposes: A large
supply of coarse and middling linen cloths may also be drawn from hemp and
flax, such as sail-duck, sacking, oznabrigs, sheeting, and the like. --
Virginia and North Carolina grow cotton of a very good quality, which may be
manufactured into various kinds of clothing, etc. Thread and cotton stockings,
of an excellent fabric, have long been made among us. The sine hats of this
country are much superior to any imported. -- All manufactures of leather may
be carried on to the greatest advantage. -- Iron (besides excellent castings
and the manufacture of steel) may likewise be wrought into all kinds of heavy
work, and into nails and sundry other articles, much to the benefit of the
country. -- Paper is already made here, of an excellent quality and in large
quantities. Glass-houses have heretofore been erected in diverse parts of the
continent, and good glass has been made at them. Gunpowder, a very important
article, has been brought to great perfection here. -- Potashes are likewise a
very suitable manufacture for this country. -- Besides, several articles of
manufacture are produced from wheat, barley, rye, hops, tobacco, etc. -- The
culture of silk might also prove a mine of wealth to the middle and southern
States. -- The cultivation of the vine, madder, rhubarb, and sundry kinds of
fruits, would likewise be productive of real emolument to the country.

These, and a multitude of other materials, that are and might be supplied by
the United-States, would, with proper encouragement, employ great numbers of
our citizens in trades and manufactures, from which they would derive profit,
and the public a national benefit.


inland commerce and home-consumption. The United-States occupy a vast extent
of fertile country, lying in various climates, yielding the necessaries of life
in the utmost abundance, and furnishing a great diversity of commodities, and
raw materials for manufacturing.

THE commercial intercourse carried on between the several States, by sea,
should be restricted to American vessels; and the communication from one part
of the country to another, inland, ought to be rendered as easy and convenient
as possible, by improving the roads, opening canals, and removing all
obstructions to the navigation of the rivers, where practicable, -- in order to
facilitate and promote the interior commerce of the United-States.

THE influence of example, manners and fashion, may also greatly contribute to
our success, in the pursuit of these great objects of national prosperity. Here
the real patriot is enabled to testify his love to his country; and this he may
evidence in a variety of ways, -- according to his talents, his opportunity, or
his station.

WE have endeavored, in the course of these observations, to fix the public
attention on some of those momentous concerns, on which the prosperity of this
country so much depends. The circumscribed limits of an Essay would not suffer
us, even had other circumstances permitted, to enter into so full a discussion
of the subject, as its importance merits. But the reasoning, so far as it goes,
will, we apprehend, be fully satisfactory to every disinterested and
unprejudiced reader. --

FINIS.

