THE TESTIMONY OF THE TWO WITNESSES, EXPLAINED AND IMPROVED.

BY ISAAC BACKUS, PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN MIDDLEBOROUGH.

THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS IS THE SPIRIT OF PROPHECY.

REV. XIX. 10. PROVIDENCE: PRINTED BY BENNETT WHEELER, AND SOLD BY JAMES
ARNOLD, ESQUIRE. AND THE PRINTER. M.DCC.LXXXVI.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE woeful practice of calling evil good, and good evil; of putting darkness
for light, and light for darkness, bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter, has
been the main source of delusion and slavery in all ages. Isai. v, 20. But, as
it has now involved the world in very great perplexities, it is hoped that this
brief essay, to open the nature and evidence of CHRISTIANITY, will be heartily
received; and that our dear Countrymen will be as noble as the Bereans were;
and search the scriptures daily for light in this matter, which is of infinite
concernment to us all.

June 16, 1786.
THE TESTIMONY of the TWO WITNESSES.
REVELATIONS XI. 3. And I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall
prophecy a thousand two hundred and threescore days clothed in sackcloth.


THE most important events, from the apostolic age to the end of time, are
exactly described in this book; among which the affair of these two witnesses
has a peculiar place. Who they are, why called two and no more, how they
prophecy, and the effects thereof, are questions which have puzzled many, and
have caused much controversy. Such darkness has attended it, that many serious
minds have been for avoiding any concern therewith. But since a blessing is
pronounced upon those who shall read and hear the words of this prophecy, and
keep the things which are written therein, how can any be willing to disregard
such blessedness? Therefore, with earnest desires after it, let us attempt a
brief answer to the above inquiries.

I. WHO are these two witnesses? In the words following we are told, that they
are the two olive trees, and the two candlesticks standing before the God of
the earth. This refers to the state of the church soon after her return from
Babylon. That return was encouraged and promoted by the civil power; but when
her enemies, by false accusations, procured a counter order from thence, the
Jews neglected the house of God, and pursued their own private concerns. Thus
they went on for a number of years, and then the prophets Haggai and Zechariah,
were sent to reprove and expostulate with them for this iniquity, and to call
them to repentance and reformation; to promote which, a candlestick, all of
gold, with a bowl upon the top of it, and an olive tree on each side, was set
before one of these prophets. And upon his enquiring what it meant, the answer
was, "This is the word of the Lord unto Zerubbable, saying, Not by might, nor
by power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of hosts: who art thou, O great
mountain? Before Zerubbable thou shall become a plain, and he shall bring forth
the head-stone thereof with shouting, crying, grace, grace, unto it." Zech. iv.
2 -- 7.

THE work they were called to, was to build the house of God; the mountain in
the way of it was the opposition of the world; Zerubbable was their governor,
whom the spirit of God would carry through all difficulties so as to finish his
house, and free grace should have all the glory. The candlestick represented
the church of God, the oil his gracious influence, and the two olive trees the
medicines through which it was communicated; for they emptied the golden oil
out of themselves, ver. 12. So says our Lord, Sanctify them through thy truth,
thy word is truth, John xvii. 17. Among his ancient people oil was made use of
for food, for medicine, for ornament, for consecration, and for light,
especially in their tabernacle and temple.

THE Manna which was their food for forty years in the wilderness, tasted like
fresh oil; and it was to make them know, that man does not live by bread only,
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. Number. xi. 8. Deuteronomy.
viii. 3. Mat. iv. 4. Every word of his feeds the soul, when received by faith.
Oil was also of a kind and healing nature, and for that end was poured into the
wounds of the man who fell among thieves; and of how much greater efficacy is
grace to wounded consciences? Oil likewise made their faces to shine; which was
but a shadow of the beauties of holiness that shine in willing converts. Psalm
civ. 15. cx. 3. Anointing was required in all their consecrations. The
tabernacle, and all its rich furniture, with the priests who ministered
therein, were consecrated in this way: and oil had a special place in their
public offerings. Yea, with an horn of oil David was anointed king over the
Israel of God; all which were shadows of the head and members of the Christian
church, that spiritual house, that holy and royal priesthood. 1 Pet. ii. 5, 9.
Rev. i. 5, 6. And the oil for light, in the Jewish tabernacle and temple,
represented the influences of the holy Spirit, whereby the gospel church is
made the light of the world, and the pillar and ground of the truth. Mat. v.
14. 1 Timothy iii. 15, 16.

II. BUT why are these witnesses called two and no more? In Zechariah's time
there was but one testament, as well as one church; what then was intended by
the two olive trees? Answer, The occasion and design of witnesses is to prove
points of importance which are disputed, especially in the affairs of
government: and all such disputes in our world came in by calling in question
the truth and equity of God's revealed will, whereby all ought to be governed.
And for him to foretell exactly the future actions of moral agents, and his just
dealings toward them; and then clearly to record the accomplishment of those
predictions, with the verification of his promises and threatenings, are the
strongest evidences that can be given, of his right to govern the world, and
that he governs it right.

HENCE he warns all against fearing any man as his prophet, whose prophecy does
not follow or come to pass. And Christ is there promised as the antetype of
Moses, who must be heard in all things, upon the penalty of being destroyed
from among the people. Deuteronomy. xviii. 18 -- 22. Acts iii. 22, 23. And to these
two witnesses, of express predictions, and their exact accomplishment, he makes
his appeal against the brazen obstinacy, and wilful treachery of the Jews, who
were transgressors from the womb. Isai. xlviii. 1 -- 8. His prophets were
mortal, but their words were not so. Many of them were verified in the
Babylonish captivity, and to expose the folly of unbelief and disobedience in
those who returned from it, he said, My words and my statutes, which I
commanded my servants the prophets, did they not take hold of your fathers? and
they returned and said, Like as the Lord of hosts thought to do unto us,
according to our ways, and according to our doings, so has he dealt with us,
Zech. i. 6. They acknowledged that his words were truth, and also that they
were according to justice and equity; so that here were two olive trees, two
witnesses, when there was but one church. And how much deeper root did these
trees take when our Savior came, and fulfilled the law, both moral and
ceremonial, and accomplished all the prophecy concerning him, which had been
published from time to time for four thousand years?

HE was first promised as the seed of the woman, then of Abraham, then of
Judah, then of David, in whose line was Zerubbable, the builder of the second
temple; and the promise of his being made as a signet, pointed directly to
Christ, the precious corner stone in Zion. Hag. ii. 23. Acts iv. 11. Matthew
has proved that Joseph was the legal heir to David's crown, and Luke has traced
the line from Mary up to David, whose family was reduced so low as not to be
able to provide a lamb, even when the Son of God was publicly presented in his
house; a greater glory than ever appeared in the temple built by Solomon. That
they were so poor is evident, because the birds then brought were not allowed
of, when the firstborn was presented, but only in case of inability to provide
a lamb. Levi. xii. 6, 8. Luke ii. 24. Well then did the prophet say, Who has
believed our report? -- for he shall grow up as a root out of a dry ground. Who
could believe that a child thus born could be the mighty God, the Messiah so
often spoken of, who should conquer all his enemies, and establish an
everlasting kingdom! None ever did believe it but such as were taught of God.
John vi. 44, 45.

DAVID was so taught, and thereby was led exactly to foretell the rage of Jews
and Gentiles against Christ; his being betrayed by a professed friend, and
having his hands and feet pierced, and gall and vinegar given him by his
enemies; his last prayer to the Father; his resurrection, ascension, and
session at the Father's right hand, with his glorious gifts to his people, and
vengeance on his impenitent foes. Psalm ii. 1 -- 12. xvi. 10, 11. xxii. 1, 16.
xli. 9. xlv. 1 -- 7. lxviii. 17 -- 21. lxix. 21. cx. 1 -- 6. All which, with
innumerable other predictions, were exactly verified in Jesus Christ; so that
though John, who came to prepare his way, was a burning and shining light, yet
his greatest witnesses were the works, which were foretold by the Father, and
finished by the Son. John v. 36. viii. 17, 18. The apostles explained the
prophets, and recorded the perfect accomplishment of their predictions, and
also the laws and orders of the gospel church; and upon this foundation both
Jews and Gentiles had access by one Spirit unto the Father, and both partook of
the root and fatness of the olive tree. Ephesians. ii. 18 -- 22. Romans xi. 6, 17. Thus
the two candlesticks appear to be the old and new testament churches, and the
two olive trees, the special laws and institutions given to each of them,
through which God communicated his grace. Twelve patriarchs constituted the
first, and twelve apostles the last of these churches; and their union is
undoubtedly represented by the twenty-four elders whom John saw. The apostles
were set before the prophets, as their true interpreters, in the first building
of the Christian church, and so they will be in her triumph over Babylon. Rev.
v. 8, 9. xviii. 20.

III. HOW do these witnesses still prophecy, since the volume of inspiration is
completed? Answer, As the nature and order of the first creation, the
primitive state of man, his fall, and the only way of recovery, as well as the
future state of rewards and punishments, could not have been clearly known by
him without pure revelation, so none can preach these great articles aright
without the spirit of faith. Those who are in the flesh, cannot please God. If
any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. 2 Cor. iv. 13. Romans
viii. 8, 9. The gospel ministry is committed to none but faithful men. To such
only does he say, Lo I am with you always, even unto the end of the world. 2 Timothy ii. 1, 2. Mat. xxviii. 20. And (...) they speak unto men to edification,
and exh^^^^tion, and comfort, they prophecy; and thereby the secrets of
unbelievers hearts are made manifest, and they are turned from sin to God. And
each person so turned, has the witness in himself of the eternal truth of the
record which God has given of his Son, while others charge him with lying
therein. 1 Cor. xiv. 3, 24, 25. 1 John v. 9, 10. And as with the heart man
believes unto righteousness, so with the mouth confession is made unto
salvation; and saints receive one another as Christ receives them, to the glory
of God. They first give themselves to him, and then unto the church by his
will. Romans x. 10. xv. 7. 2 Cor. viii. 5. Which is the exact nature of a gospel
covenant; and it can no more be the duty of any soul to keep any covenant
contrary to the revealed will of God, than it can to fear man instead of him.
And these spiritual weapons were more extensively victorious in the apostolic
age, than the Roman sword had ever been. And as God has ever governed the world
with a special regard to his elect, in and by whom his witnesses are held up,
so their cries have procured blessings or plagues upon the earth, as often and
as far as their wills have been one with his will. 1 John v. 14, 15. Luke
xviii. 7, 8. James v. 17, 18. Also the light which they have held up, has been
terrible to guilty consciences; therefore they are truly said to smite the
earth with plagues as often as they will, and to torment its inhabitants.
Context, ver. 5, 6, 10.

IV. WHY do these witnesses prophecy so long in sackcloth? Answer, Because the
beast bears sway all that time; only his reckoning is by months, and theirs by
days. Rev. xi. 2, 3. xiii. 5. His kingdom was founded in darkness, while they
are the children of light; and months are named from the moon, which rules the
night, as the sun does the day. The ceremonial law put a specialty upon every
new moon; but when Christ came he took that handwriting out of the way,
nailing it to his cross, and warned his church against being brought into
bondage, under those weak and beggarly elements, by deceitful philosophy, and
the commandments of men. Gal. iv. 9.10. Col. ii. 8 -- 23. The fundamental order
of his kingdom is, that none can see it, nor have any right to power in it,
until they are born again; and also that all striving about who shall be the
greatest, is excluded therefrom. John i. 12, 13. iii. 3. Matt. xviii. 3, 4. xx.
24 -- 27. Lordship one over another is here declared to be of the Gentiles; and
by them is the holy city trodden under foot the forty and two months wherein
the witnesses prophecy in sackcloth; which has ever caused mourning in
themselves, and their being despised by others. And mourning in themselves, and
being despised by the world, are undoubtedly the ideas intended by that
clothing. And when they shall have finished their testimony, the beast that
ascends out of the bottomless pit, shall make war against them, and shall
overcome them, and kill them, and their dead bodies shall lie in the street of
the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our
Lord was crucified. And they of the people, and kindreds, and tongues, and
nations, shall see their dead bodies, three days and an half, and shall not
suffer their dead bodies to be put in graves. And they that dwell upon the
earth shall rejoice over them, and make merry, and shall send gifts one to
another; because these two prophets tormented them who dwelt on the earth. Rev.
xi. 2, 3, 7 -- 10.

AND how exactly does this describe the present state of things through the
world? How is truth fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter? A dead body
or form of it is kept above ground, but how is its life and influence shut out
by men in power? This city is so large as to include the place where our Lord
was crucified; which was done by the accusations of church officers, enforced
by the secular arm. And within this city will be found all the blood which has
been shed under the Christian name. It is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt.
The spirit of Sodom was pride, fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness;
neither did they strengthen the hands of the poor and needy, but were haughty
and daring in their abominations before God. Ezekiel. xvi. 49, 50. Egypt reaped
great advantages by the Israelites; but turned them all to gratify their own
lusts, and most cruelly to oppress the very people from whom they derived those
advantages. And how full is the word of this spirit in our day!

THE beast that overcame and killed the witnesses, came out of the bottomless
pit. In his first form he arose out of the sea, and in his second he arose out
of the earth; but then he exercised all the power of the first beast. He was as
spotted as a leopard, as cruel as a bear, and as terrible as a lion; yet he was
very changeable. He was, and is not, and yet is. He is the eighth, and is of
the seven, and goes into perdition. Rev. xiii. 1 -- 12. xvii. 8 -- 11. The
Roman empire was the greatest beast in the world. Dan. vii. 7, 8. His heads
appear to be different forms of their commanding power. Kings, consuls,
dictators, decemvirs, and tribunes, were all fallen before the apostle wrote,
when pagan emperors ruled; and Christian emperors ruled but a short time,
before the little horn, the bishop of Rome, assumed the command over all the
churches; to whom the ten horns gave their power. This eighth is of the seven;
for his arbitrary power, which he carried to an amazing length, was enforced by
the sword of the magistrate, which was first brought into the church by
Constantine; and this practice was of the Gentiles, by whom the holy city has
been trodden under foot.
Now compare these characters with plain facts. Christ commands his servants to
let the children of the wicked one, grow together with his children, in the
world, until the end of it; while he commands his church to put away wicked
persons from among them. Mat. xiii. 30, 38. 1 Cor. v. 12, 13. But leopards,
bears and lions, are not more opposite to the tender feelings of humanity, than
many are to this liberty and purity. When the only true head of the church was
desired to interpose his influence in the division of an estate, he said, Man,
who made me a judge, or a divider over you? And he commanded his ministers to
depart out of every city, where his gospel was not freely received, and not
forcibly to carry away so much as the dust of their feet. Luke x. 7 -- 12. xii.
14. But all earthly heads of the church have ever done the contrary.

THE head of the church of Rome arose out of the raging confusions of the Roman
empire, by a mystical confounding of Jewish ceremonies with Christian worship,
which is as bottomless as the ocean; and he assumed the power of dividing all
the world among his votaries. No sooner was our American world discovered, than
he, the very next spring, presumed to dispose of it in as ample manner, by a
formal deed, as any man could of his farm. And when temporal princes were set
up as heads of the church, they exercised the same power. In each nation, their
head, which arose out of the earth, set up by the people, like a harmless lamb,
yet spoke like a dragon, under the influence of the two horns, of church
censures and corporal punishments. All our American charters were given from
that power; and from thence came our late most cruel war. The society in London
who sent their missionaries into our colonies, had an annual sermon delivered
before them, by the bishop of Gloucester, on Feb. 21, 1766, wherein he said,
"The spreading of GENTILEISM in the colonies, calls for our rejected charity."
Glocester's sermon, p. 11.
And the next month it was resolved in Parliament, that they had a right to
BIND US IN ALL CASES WHATSOEVER. -- And before said society, on Feb. 20, 1767,
the bishop of Landaff accused the inhabitants of these colonies of being
"infidels and barbarians;" which, said he, "was contrary to the pretenses and
conditions under which they obtained royal grants and public authority." And
after expressing his desires and hopes of the speedy establishment of bishops
here, he said, "This point obtained, the American church will soon go out of
its infant state, be able to stand upon its own legs, and without foreign help
support and spread itself. Then the business of this society will have been
brought to the happy issue intended." Landaff's sermon, p. 7, 24, 25.
And the tea act, which brought on the war, was passed that year. Thus all the
blood that was shed therein, was procured by the accusations of church
officers, enforced by the sword.

AND we are to remember, that the beast which John saw had a mouth like a lion;
a beast that goes forth to seek his prey in the night, and does it by sitting
up a dreadful roar, and then listening for the noise of creatures in their
flight, and pursuing them by the ear and not the eye; for when the morning
comes they retire into their dens. Psalm civ. 20 -- 22. So, in a very dark
time, twenty thousand mercenaries were brought from Germany, to add terror to
the roarings of the British lion, who blindly pursued his prey, from the lofty
mountains of Canada, to the plains and thickets of Carolina and Georgia, but
could not catch it. Yet this bloody chase was no sooner over, than the
merchants of Babylon, even the great men of the earth, filled this country with
her splendid and costly wares; by means of which public credit, or the faith of
government in America, has been bought and sold for a trifle. And the spirit of
pride and luxury, like Sodom, and of tyranny, like Egypt, has prevailed
amazingly. No effectual care was taken to secure a medium of trade among us,
and yet public and private debts are demanded with great rigor; as if brick
could be made without straw. Yet hereby the word of God is verified, which is
infinitely more precious than gold.

UNDER the plausible pretenses of religion and government, the worst of evils
have long been covered among all nations; but God has promised to destroy this
covering, and to reveal and consume the man of sin, by the spirit of his mouth,
and the brightness of his appearing. Isai. xxv. 7.2 These. ii. 3 -- 12. Toward
which he has now made great advances. Calling in question the truth and equity
of God's revealed will, and sitting up the inventions and will of man against
it, was the way whereby sin and death came into our world. The first Adam, our
public head, revolted from heaven, and seized upon the earth as his own; and we
all bear his earthly image, until we are born again, and so are changed into
the image of our second head, the Lord from heaven. Romans v. 12 -- 21. 1 Cor.
xv. 21, 22, 47 -- 49. To prepare whose way several eminent men were raised up,
in different ages; as Noah, to save the human race from complete destruction by
the deluge, and Abraham, to be the father of the church of Israel; each of whom
were eminent types of Christ, as Moses also was of his prophetical, Aaron of
his priestly, and David of his kingly offices. But in the antichristian
apostasy, the veil of the ceremonial law was drawn over the truth and glory of
the gospel. The covenant of circumcision, which Jesus had nailed to his cross,
was taken from thence, and called the covenant of grace; from whence it was
declared that dominion is founded in grace. Common believers were put in the
place of Noah and Abraham, and officers in the place of Moses, Aaron and David;
and a successive power in officers has been held up as a sacred thing ever
since. Teachers procured the crucifixion of our Lord, by saying, If thou let
this man go, thou art not Caesar's friend; and an appeal to the king's laws,
has been the refuge of hirelings in every age: But how has God now rent away
this veil of darkness?

FOR no man can claim any power in our government that was not lately derived
from the consent of the people, without appearing an enemy to his country; and
this authority is acknowledged to be good by the greatest Princes in Europe.
And money forms the only qualification of the electors of our highest rulers;
and it was a sorcerer who first offered money for power in the Christian
church; and by such sorceries the whore of Babylon has deceived all nations.
Acts viii. 18 -- 21, Rev. xviii. 23. Yet many in our country still call
themselves ministers of Christ, who refuse to be governed by him, and insist
upon being supported by secular force. Under the law God called such the sons
of Belial, and poured his vengeance on them and their followers; and the way
wherein he has promised to bring wars to an end, is by exalting his house above
all earthly powers, and drawing the nations freely to obey his laws, enforced
in his name. 1 Samuel ii. 12, 16. Micah iii. 5 -- 12. iv. 1 -- 5. Col. iii. 17.
Multitudes are so averse to this, as clearly to verify the prophecy of Jude,
who says, Woe unto them; for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ran greedily
after the error of Balaam for reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Core.
In each of which cases man is to be seen rejecting the authority of God, and
exalting self above him.

ELECTION is an honorable word with them, when applied to particular men, whose
persons they have in admiration because of advantage; but when God makes use of
the same word, to display the glories of his grace, men discover a perfect
enmity against it. Like Cain, they would be accepted without faith in the blood
of atonement; and because God gave Abel that faith, and had respect to him and
his offering in that way, Cain had a bloody rage against him; because his own
works were evil, and his brother's righteous. Heb. xi. 4. 1 John iii. 12. As
Cain was the elder brother, and government was then in families; Abel was still
a good subject and never injured Cain in any respect by his having the true
religion. Genesis iv. 7. Neither did true religion ever injure any man in the
world; and yet what enmity have many against it! Balaam knew that God had
chosen Israel for his peculiar people, who should dwell alone, and not be
reckoned among the nations: Yet, for an earthly reward, he taught Balak to lay
a snare, to draw them into whoredom and idolatry, and so to destroy that
distinction. And Christ warns his church against this snare of Balaam, of
Jezebel, and of the whore of Babylon. Number. xxiii. 9. xxv. 1 -- 3. Rev. ii. 14,
20. xviii. 3, 4.

THE church is presented as a chaste virgin to Christ, unto whom none can be
married, until, by the work of his Spirit in their hearts, they are made dead
to sin and self-righteousness, and alive to God; which great change is openly
declared in baptism; and it is adultery for any to profess to be his in any
other way. Romans vi. 2 -- 4. vii. 1 -- 6. Before this change we all love the
creature above the Creator; and to go after any but him for temporal comforts,
is playing the harlot. Coveteousness is idolatry; and many make a god of their
belly. Hosea ii. 5 -- 8. Ephesians. v. 5. Phil. iii. 19. Yet daily attempts are made
to draw the saints into this whoredom and idolatry, and that with Core's
language. After it was most clearly discovered that God had chosen Moses as his
prophet, and Aaron as the head of the priesthood, Core gainsayed it, saying, Ye
take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation are holy every one of them,
and the Lord is among them. Number. xvi. 3. Which is the exact language of all
teachers who refuse to be governed by the laws of Christ, the only antitype of
Moses and Aaron. They rule the church with force and cruelty, and trample down
the good pastures, and foul the deep waters with their feet. That is, they
corrupt the word of God, and try all arts to darken every thing therein which
condemns their deceit and cruelty. And our only way of deliverance from such
evil beasts, is the way of faith in and obedience to our spiritual David. Ezekiel.
xxxiv. 4, 18 -- 25. Under the law he gave his people rest, on the seventh day,
in the seventh year, and after seven times seven years; and under the gospel he
first gives them rest, and then they work for him. Heb. iv. 1 -- 10. But they
who worship the beast can get no further than six, the toiling number, be they
in units, tens or hundreds, they can never have enough; they have no rest day
nor night. Isai. lvi. ii. Rev. xiii. 18. xiv. 11. Beasts act according to their
carnal inclinations, without any regard to truth or equity; and so do those who
empower some to judge for others about religious worship, and to enforce their
judgments with the sword. This beast has often changed his name and
appearance, upon which the cry has been, Who is like unto the beast? who is
able to make war with him? And when his fraud has been detected, and his power
defeated, he has soon assumed another name and form, and then has pursued the
same argument. Thus he was, and is not, and yet is; though he shall finally go
into perdition. Rev. xiii. 4. xvii. 8. And how earnest should all be for this
great event? For then all will know, that religion never gives officers a right
to the property of the people for nothing, nor the people a right to require
officers to go a warfare of their own charges; and also that no birth or doings
of nature can give any soul a right to the promises of grace, without personal
faith therein. Ezekiel. xiv. 20. Gal. iii. 22. Heb. vi. 18.

NONE can be built upon the Rock without hearing and doing the sayings of
Christ; and his sayings demonstrate, that the only heirs of the blessings of
his kingdom, are the poor in spirit, the mourners, the meek, such as hunger and
thirst after righteousness, are merciful, pure in heart, peacemakers, and
persecuted for righteousness sake; to whom he says, All things whatsoever ye
would that men should do to you do ye even so to them; for this is the law and
the prophets. And those who are opposite hereto he calls dogs and swine, to
whom holy things are not to be given; and teachers, who by their fruits
discover a contrariety to this law of equity, he calls wolves, and commands us
to beware of them. Mat. v. 3 -- 12. vii. 6, 12, 15, 24. Hence it is certain,
that the distinction between his church and the world, is not carnal but
spiritual. The bloody sign of circumcision was a seal to Abraham, of the faith
he before had in Christ, in whom all the families of the earth shall be
blessed. A descent from Abraham by blood, or a purchase with his money, were
shadows of the purchase of Christ's blood, and of regeneration by his grace.
But since his death, attempts to build his church upon the covenant of
circumcision is falling from grace. The natural distinctions which it made
among mankind, could not be countenanced by Peter nor Barnabas without
dissimulation. Romans iv. 10 -- 12. Gal. ii. 12, 13. v. 1 -- 4. For by that
covenant Abraham could not circumcise any Gentile, until he had bought him as a
servant with money; neither could he retain any such in his house without
circumcising him. Kings were to come out of him, and his seed were to take the
land of Canaan by the sword, when the iniquity of its inhabitants should be
full, of which God was the sole judge. Genesis xv. 16. xvii. 6 -- 14. David was
the king who finished that conquest, but for the wickedness of his posterity
the crown was taken from them, and was overturned, overturned, overturned,
until Jesus came, and it was given to him. Ezekiel. xxi. 25 -- 27. Luke i. 32. And
he says to his disciples, Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is
nothing, but the keeping of the commandments of God. Ye are bought with a
price, be not ye the servants of men. One is your Master, even Christ, and all
ye are brethren. And those who laid heavy burdens on men's shoulders, which they
would not move with one of their fingers, he called serpents and a generation
of vipers. 1 Cor. vii. 19, 23. Mat. xxiii. 2 -- 8, 33.

AND how full is our world of such at this time! Boston now imitates Jerusalem
herein, for no man in Boston has ever been compelled to support any religious
teacher contrary to his personal choice, since 1693; while her teachers and
lawyers have resolutely denied this liberty to the country, and have claimed a
power to compel every parish to settle and support such teachers as they have
called orthodox. And at the commencement of our new Constitution, this practice
was called GODLINESS, in capitals, while honesty was put in small letters. And
a door was left open for the admission of Roman catholics into the highest
offices in our government: to justify which, it was said, "Religion must at all
times be a matter between God and individuals." Address before the
Massachusetts Constitution, 1780, p. 17.
Since which one of their most noted teachers, has published a book in London,
wherein he carries his notions of the gift of grace so high as to say,
"Infallibly, if the greater part of the human kind, notwithstanding this gift,
and the abounding of it, are left to perish eternally, in consequence of the
lapse through Adam, a broader foundation is really laid for their groaning
under the damage by him, than for their rejoicing in the opposite advantage
derived to the world through Jesus Christ." And he holds forth that personal
doings and sufferings, either here or hereafter, will bring every child of Adam
to virtue and eternal happiness; for, says he, "In what point of light soever
we take a view of sin, it is certainly, in its nature, a finite evil. -- And
the consideration of hell as a purging fire, is that only which can make the
matter sit easy upon one's mind -- This is certainly most agreeable to the
natural notions we entertain of the only good God. -- Nor can I suppose that
any soberly thoughtful Deist would ever have recurred to mere reason, in
opposition to revelation, for the support of a hope toward God, if he had
entertained this idea of its design and tendency." Chauncy on Salvation for all
men, 1784, p. 85, 87, 319, 324, 325, 361.
And who can describe the joys that have been among the nations, upon the
opening of such a door! Especially when it is followed with claims of
infallibility, in carrying the doctrine of purgatory in London and Boston
beyond what it is in Rome! How can the two witnesses any more torment their
consciences?

BUT where is the Son of God all this whi^^^ Since he came in the flesh, he is
the only comma^^^ in his church. And teachers who are influe^^^^ by the spirit
of antichrist, are of the world, there^^^^ speak they of the world, and the
world hears them. 1 John iv. 1 -- 6. In the last days perilous times shall
come; for men shall be lovers of their ownselves -- Ever learning, and never
able to come to the knowledge of the truth. -- But their folly shall be
manifest unto all men. 2 Timothy iii. 1 -- 9. And how is this word now fulfilled?
Can greater folly be discovered, than to deny our original depravity, and to
hold that God intends the final happiness of every child of Adam, and yet that
he must torment many of them in hell for ages of ages, before they will yield
to receive it. P. 295.
In the mean time, if their sufferings must procure it, where are Christ's
merits? Rivers of blood have been shed between contending sects, under his
name; but any man might as soon tell what was the language of Babel, as he can
now tell what is orthodoxy in any national church upon earth. And as they now
own, that religion is ever a matter between God and individuals, all may know
that all force to support soul-guides, is contrary to religion. God calls his
covenant with Abraham, the covenant of circumcision. Acts vii. 8. But men took
away that name, and added the name grace to it. And all the plagues of Babylon
will come upon those who do not come out of this practice. Rev. xviii. 4. xxii.
18.

BECAUSE Noah was a gracious man, and the saving of his house in the ark was a
figure of our being saved by baptism; and because Abraham was a gracious man,
whose household constituted the Hebrew church, and were commanded by him to keep
the way of the Lord, good men have imagined that religion would fail from among
them, if their infants were not baptized. But the experience of four times
forty years in New England, has entirely destroyed the covering of this
iniquity. Our Plymouth fathers held that the church was INDEPENDENT of the
world, and to be governed wholly by the laws of Christ: But the massachusetts
rejected that name, and called the church CONGREGATIONAL. They both held that
none had any right to a governing power in the church but regenerate persons;
and that all office power is derived from Christ, by his word and Spirit, to
each particular church, and not by any local succession from any other men in
the world. And our Plymouth fathers held, that each church was to act as a
united body, their votes being equal; but the Massachusetts held that no church
act was complete without the consent of the elders, and that rulers ought to
compel the people to support them. After forty years, they allowed the children
of godly parents to be active in baptism, without any account of their
regeneration. At the close of the second period such were also allowed to come
to the ordinance of the supper, as a converting ordinance. But an extensive
revival of religion, at the close of the third period, brought many to the
knowledge of the new birth, which alarmed hirelings; and the land has been
filled with controversy ever since. The year 1780, completed four times forty
years, since New England was planted; and it was a remarkable year of grace to
many, and also of evidence that the name does not belong to the covenant of
circumcision.

ISRAEL were not to set up any rulers over them, but brethren in their church;
and adultery and blasphemy were capital crimes among them. Therefore all but
communicants in congregational churches, were excluded from any vote in the
Massachusetts government, the spring after Boston was planted. And they enacted
the next year, "That if any man have carnal copulation with another man's wife,
they shall both be punished with death." Prince's annals, p. 28, 35.
And they hanged a number of persons for adultery, many years before they did
any for heresy. When they lost their charter, their scheme of compelling the
world to submit to the government of the church, was destroyed; and the world,
by the help of ministers, have tyranized over the church in New England ever
since.

A CHURCH on our western borders holds that "Infant baptism is administered in
a view of the parents being in covenant; but does not suppose the infant
itself, to be possessed of any right whatever, to the privileges of the
covenent of grace." That their children, as well as others, are born under the
curse; and that parents are under covenant obligation to train them up in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord. Therefore when a man came from Connecticut,
who had been heard to blaspheme his Maker, and made suit to a young widow in
their church, who had children under their care, they warned her not to marry
him; and because she did it, they excluded her from their communion. But for
this, the terms, grace, saving grace, were dressed up in a most ridiculous
manner, and were thus held forth to the world, from the press in Hartford and
in Norwich. Huntington's plea, p. 29. Answer from Stockbridge. p. 40, 65, 87.
And as the act of that church was approved of by a number of ministers, who
were unwilling to receive members by letters of recommendation from those who
hold that the birth or doings of nature, can bring any into the covenant of
grace, "without a particular and personal examination," the sacred warning
against dogs and the concision, was turned against them from the press at
Hartford, in 1780; the year wherein the other reflections against them were
published there. Huntington's letters, p. 5, 1^3.
Two years after these pieces were printed in Boston, but without this clause,
which truly explains their sentiments; and their testimony seemed to be
overcome and killed thereby. And then the minister who had triumphed over them,
turned his artillery against the baptist churches, and said, "When you
re-baptize those in adult years, which we have baptized in their infancy, you,
and they jointly renounce that Father Son and holy Ghost, whom we adore and
worship, as the only living and true God, and on whom we depend for all our
salvation." And address to his anabaptist brethren, by Joseph Huntington, D. D.
printed at Norwich, 1783, p. 23.
And what is to be our punishment?

MR. Cotton, the father of the congregational scheme, says, "The reason of the
law (which is the life of the law) is of eternal force in all ages; Thou shall
surely kill him, because he has sought to thrust thee away from the Lord thy
God. Deuteronomy. xiii. 9, 10. This reason is of moral, that is, of universal and
perpetual equity, to put to death any apostate seducing idolater or heretic."
Cotton against Williams, 1647, p. 67.
And on April 15, 1668, Mr. Mitchel, minister of Cambridge, before the chief
rulers of the Massachusetts, took another law of Moses, which says, The man
that will do presumptuously, and will not hearken unto the priest (that
stands to minister there before the Lord thy God) or unto the judge, even
that man shall die, and turned it against the fathers of the baptist church in
Boston, which procured a sentence of banishment against three of them. And in
the year 1700, Mr. Stoddard took the same law to prove that, "Every man must
stand to the judgment of the national synod." Late history, vol. i. p. 376,
385. vol. ii. p. 26.
Their sentences were put in the place of the perfect judgments which were
given from Aaron's breast plate, which was lost in the Babylonish captivity;
after which the priests who could not show a register of their lawful descent
from Aaron, were, as polluted, put from the priesthood, until a priest stood up
with Urim and Thummim. Ezra ii. 62, 63. The words signify light and perfection,
or manifestation and truth, Cruden's concordance at the word Thummim.
of which God manifest in the flesh has an infinite fullness; and none are
kings and priests in his church, but those who are washed in his blood, and
sanctified by his grace, and such are thereby enabled to manifest the truth to
every conscience, instead of handling the word of God deceitfully. John i. 14
-- 17. 2 Cor. iii. 18. iv. 1, 2. Rev. i. 5, 6.

YET a public complaint is now made, that "A general spirit reigns against the
most liberal and generous establishments in religion; against the civil
magistrates encouraging or having any thing more to do about religion, than to
keep the civil peace among contending sects." And the advocates for this
liberty are implicitly accused of favoring infidelity. But to move rulers to
exert their power for the support of ministers, they say, "The church has never
been of any political detriment here, for it never has been vested with any
civil or secular power in New England. -- And, God be thanked, the senatorial
Assembly of this happiest of all the United States [Connecticut] still embosoms
so many Phinehas's and Zerubbable's, so many religious patriots, the friends of
Jesus and his holy religion; and that the Messiah's cause is here accompanied
with civil government and the priesthood; allusively the two olive trees upon
the right of the candlestick (the churches) and upon the left; the two golden
branches, which through the two golden pipes, Moses and Aaron, empty the golden
oil out of themselves, and diffuse their salutary influence of order and
happiness through the community. The congregational and presbyterian
denomination, however hitherto despised, will, by the blessing of heaven,
continue to hold the greatest figure in America; and, notwithstanding all the
fruitless labors and exertions to proselyte us to other communions, become
more numerous than the whole collective body of our fellow protestants in
Europe. The whole proselytism of New England in particular, for sixty or
seventy years past, has not exceeded eight or ten thousand, while our augment
in that term, by natural increase, has been half a million." Election sermon at
Hartford, May 8, 1783, by Ezra Styles, D. D. President of Yale-College, p. 70,
72, 73.
And one of the present ministers of Boston said the same year, "If the power
of dismissing its pastors is determined to be lodged in the church, without the
intervention of any indifferent persons, the clergy of New England are of all
men the most miserable." Thatcher's observations, p. 11.
But from whence came their office power? "In general (say they) the induction
of the ministers of the first churches, was performed by laybrethren, and this
was called ordination, but should be considered what in reality it was, only
induction or instalment of those who were vested with official power. These
were all ordained before by the bishops in England." Styles, p. 61.


THUS they hold their power from the lord bishops in England, who had theirs
from Rome, or from the king. And rulers who have renounced foreign
jurisdiction, cannot force the people to support such teachers, without
violating the INDEPENDENCE of America. Yea, and also violating the fundamental
laws of Christianity, which they must declare their firm belief of, in order to
take any seat in our Legislature. For by those laws all elders are to be
subject to the church wherein they preside, and not lords over God's heritage.
1 Peter v. 1 -- 5. The name clergy is derived from the word here translated
heritage, which ministers have arrogated to themselves, to hide their scandal
of lording it over the church. Gill on the place.
They mean thereby to claim a like power in the Christian church, as the
priests had in the church of Israel. And as those priests could turn a king out
of the temple, teachers who have claimed such power, have reigned over kings of
the earth. 2 Chronicles. xxvi. 20. Rev. xvii. 18. Many of them were lately zealous
for excluding the king's power from this land, who still hold their power over
the parishes which they received in his name; and violence has often been used
with persons who have conscientiously refused to acknowledge that power. Three
men were imprisoned at Worcester for this cause, betwixt the compiling of our
new Constitution, and the commencement of government upon it; and others since.
And a new Law-book was published in Connecticut in 1784, which does not allow
any man to live therein, without paying taxes to such teachers, or else giving
in a written acknowledgement to the power that supports them. And for refusing
to do it, two gentlement were robbed that fall of some lands in Woodstock, as a
baptist tenant thereon had before been of a cow.

THESE gentlemen are of the posterity of the pastor of the baptist church in
Boston, when their meeting house was nailed up in 1680, at the instigation of
congregational ministers. Dr. Increase Mather was one of them; but he was so
clearly convinced of his error afterward, that he freely went into the same
house, and assisted in ordaining a pastor of that church. And his son then
delivered a sermon, wherein he exhorted good men to go as far in communing
together as they could without sin; but where any sinful terms were imposed, he
says, "There the injunction of Heaven upon them is, Be ye separate, says the
Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you. The imposers are
the schismatics." Late history, vol. ii. p. 50.
Which things touched the heart of Mr. Hollis, a baptist gentleman in London,
in such a manner as to make him the greatest benefactor to Harvard college, of
any man upon earth. Yet of late, directly after three robbers were hanged in
Cambridge, three baptists therein were robbed of their property for parish
teachers; and when they sued for recompense, the case was turned against them
in Cambridge, October 27, 1785, by the same judges who condemned the other
robbers; and that notwithstanding, our constitution says, "No subordination of
any one sect or denomination to another shall ever be established by law."

WHERE money is forced away from any people, and given to religious teachers,
it bribes them to exert all their influence for the increase of such power; and
this bribes rulers to continue in that practice. And the people are bribed with
the opinion, that grace has brought them into a like covenant as Israel were
in, who had a right to treat all others, both as to worship and commerce, as no
others had a right to treat them. And a gift blinds the eyes of the wise, and
perverts the words of the righteous. Yea, thereby the wicked compass about the
righteous, therefore wrong judgment proceeds. Deuteronomy. xvi. 19. Hab. i. 4. The
characters of men are therefore out of the present question; which is not how
many wise and righteous men have been thus blinded, but whether religion or
government requires the cotinuance of this blindness among us?

IN 1708 the ministers in each county in Connecticut, were vested with a
classical power over the churches, "upon all occasions ecclesiastical." And in
1744, the first church in Canterbury had no way to avoid hearing a candidate
whom they had voted out, but by renouncing that power. Yet, for doing it, the
ministers of Windham county so plainly exalted themselves into the seat of God,
as to take his warning against seducers, Deuteronomy. xiii. 1 -- 3, and to turn it
against their worship, saying to the people, "If there seem to be never so many
appearances of God's power attending it, you may not go after it, any more than
after a false God." Late history, vol. ii. p. 37, 169.
Since which above forty thousand people in New England have withdrawn from
that sect, and the most of them have turned to the baptist denomination; who
are now accused, by a minister of said county, of renouncing the only living
and true God: But how does he prove it? He says, "If a baptized person is not
one of God's visible covenant people, baptism is without any signification at
all." Huntington's letters, 1780, p. 95.
True: But what is baptism? It is the answer of a good conscience toward God.
1 Peter iii. 21. And this we could not do in our infancy. One Lord, one faith,
one baptism, and speaking the truth in love, is the only way to keep the unity
of the Spirit in the bond of peace. Ephesians. iv. 3 -- 15.

MEN who bear the sword are to punish none but such as work ill to their
neighbors, while in religion each one stands or falls to his own Master. This
is good order; and none can violate it without being self-condemned, which is
most opposite to happiness, the great end of government. And teachers who cause
divisions contray to this doctrine, are to be marked as deceivers. Romans xiii. 1
-- 10. xiv. 4, 12, 22. xvi. 17, 18. This was directed to the church of Rome,
from whence divisions have spread through all the world; by putting baptism
before faith, and by imposing other rules of faith, than ever came from our one
Lord. Ministers, by what they have done upon the foreheads of infants, have
called them Christians, without their own knowledge or choice; and rulers, as
far as they could extend their power, have forced all to support such teachers,
or else to give in a written acknowledgment to the power that did it. Which two
points exactly answer to the two parts of the body, on which the beast caused
all to receive his mark; and the church obtains victory over him gradually.
Rev. xiii. 16 -- 18. xv. 2. Our fathers, when they came to this country; seemed
to have gotten the victory over the beast, and over his image; but his mark,
and the number of his name, are among us to this day.

GOD always required a liberal support for his worship and ministers, and
cursed the blessings of those who refused to obey him herein. The best rulers
in Israel, by word and example, stirred up the people freely to bring it in;
and then, in concert with church officers, took care to secure it, that it
might be appropriated according to his appointment; but they did not collect it
by force. So now, ministers are called to watch for souls as they who must give
account; and their hearers are commanded to communicate unto them in all good
things, as they can answer it to God who is not mocked. Each one is also
required to communicate unto the poor, as God has prospered him, who loves a
cheerful giver. Deuteronomy. xxvi. 1 -- 16. xxviii. 16 -- 19. 1 Cron. xxix. 1 -- 14. 2 Chronicles. xxiv. 9 -- 14. xxxi. 2 -- 21. Hag. i. 4 -- 14. ii. 17 -- 19. Mal. ii. 2.
iii. 8 -- 11. Luke x. 4 -- 12. 1 Cor. ix. 7 -- 14 xvi. 1, 2. 2 Cor. ix. 6, 7.
Gal. vi. 6 -- 9. Heb. xiii. 16 -- 18.
Thus rulers, ministers, and people, are all taught to act toward each other
as they can answer it to God, in whose hand their life and breath is; and who
only can prosper or blast any of their designs as he pleases. And he assures
us that all worship and fear which is taught by the precepts of men, is vain
worship, and will worship. Isai. xxix. 13 -- 21. Mat. xv. 9. Col. ii. 22, 23.
Yet truth is now so much fallen in the street, and equity is so much shut out,
that they who depart from these evils are daily exposed to be made a prey of,
and have no appeal but to HIM who says, "According to their deeds, accordingly
he will repay, fury to his adversaries, recompense to his enemies, to the
ISLANDS he will repay recompense; so shall they fear the name of the Lord from
the west, and his glory from the rising of the sun; when the enemy shall come
in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him."
Which standard is the REDEEMER, to whom the Father says, "This is my covenant
with them, says the Lord, my Spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I
have put in thy mouth shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth
of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed's seed, says the Lord, from
henceforth and forever." Which prophecy is applied to future times, which will
be life from the dead. Isai. lix. 14 -- 21. Romans xi. 15, 26. So in our context
the resurrection of the witnesses is followed with vengeance on their enemies,
and then with great voices in-heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this world are
become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign forever
and ever. And he will be so far from teaching any that grace abates their
obligation perfectly to obey his law, that his ARK will be seen, wherein it is
kept whole. The mercy-seat, the only meeting place between God and his people,
was just as long, and just as broad as the ark. Exodus xxv. 21, 22. Rev. xi. 19.
By one offering Christ has perfected forever them who are sanctified; upon
which foundation they come boldly to the throne of grace, and obtain mercy and
grace to serve God acceptably, who is a consuming fire. Heb. iv. 16. x. 14 --
22. xii. 28, 29. His seed of grace in their hearts can no more be reconciled to
sin, than fire can to water; and he will make it victorious over all
corruption, which insures their final perseverance. 1 John iii. 3, 9. v. 4, 18
-- 20.

PARTY names, and worldly distinctions, have deceived men amazingly; but
revelation assures us, that the essence of Christianity is TRUTH and LOVE, and
that all DECEIT and CRUELTY is of antichrist and the devil. The number of the
beast is the number of a man; and those who obtain a full victory over him,
stand and act entirely upon the word of God, compared to glass, for the clear
views it gives, both of him and of themselves, and to fire, for its powerful
and purifying influence. And their song unites the laws of Moses and the Lamb,
saying, Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God almighty; just and true
are thy ways, thou king of saints. 2 Cor. iii. 18. Jam. i. 23. Jer. xxiii. 29.
Rev. xv. 2, 3.

SAINTS are his kingdom, his church, in distinction from all others; and the
justice and truth of his ways is their joyful theme. Moses says; "He is THE
ROCK, his work is perfect; for all his ways are judgment; a God of truth, and
without iniquity, just and right is he. -- Set your hearts unto all the words
which I testify among you this day; which ye shall command your children to
observe to do all the words of this law: for it is not a vain thing for you;
because it is your life." And the Lamb says, "Except ye eat the flesh of the
Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. It is the Spirit that
quickens, the flesh profits nothing; the words that I speak unto you, they
are spirit, and they are life. The Spirit of truth will guide you into all
truth." Moses says, "Their rock is not our Rock, even our enemies themselves
being judges: For their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of
Gomorrah; their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter. Their
wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruel venom of asps." And the Lamb says
"Ye are of your father the devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do: he
was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is
no truth in him. -- He is a liar, and the father of it." Deuteronomy. xxxii. 4, 31 --
33, 46, 47. John vi. 53, 63. viii. 44. xvi. 13. And in evident reference to
this song of Moses, the first man that offered money for power in the Christian
church, was declared to be in the gall of bitterneses, and in the bond of
iniquity. And as such have equal votes for rulers, with the best saints in our
land, and many of these votes are procured by spiritous liquors, how clear is
the evidence that we are in the city which is spiritually called Sodom and
Egypt?

THE great mystery of godliness is, that God was manifest in the flesh,
justified in the Spirit, seen of angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed
on in the world, received up into glory. Which godliness has the promise of the
life that now is, and of that which is to come. And we are commanded to
withdraw from perverse disputers, who suppose that gain is godliness. And this
is absolutely necessary, in order to lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty. 1 Timothy ii. 2. iii. 16. iv. 8. vi. 5. For it was long
since allowed in England, that necessity is consistent with liberty in God, by
those who denied that it could be so in men; because he is not in a state of
probation, and cannot be tempted as we are. Whitby on the five points, p. 300.
Chubb's tracts, vol. ii. p. 37, 40.
And a late popular author in Boston says, "God was eternally good; and as he
saw it necessarily, he was as necessarily good, and yet not contrary to his own
will and choice." And he represents God as an infinitely good Being, "who aims
at making his creatures happy without any selfish end." Mayhew on God's
goodness, 1763, p. 45, 77.
Soon after which a minister nearly connected with him, denied that God put man
in innocence upon so severe a trial for life as perfect obedience to the moral
law; for says he, "The test of Adam's subjection to God, was a command, not of
the moral, but positive kind; a command, not deduceable from reason, but
knowable only by revelation from heaven. -- The first parents of men, while
innocent, in common with their posterity since the lapse, could have obtained
life in no way but that of grace through faith." Chauncy's twelve sermons,
1765, p. 19, 20.
And in 1784 he published a book in Boston, the title page of which informs us,
that it is to give a view of man "as an intelligent moral agent; having within
himself an ability and freedom to WILL, as well as to do, in opposition to
NECESSITY from any extraneous cause whatever."

THUS have men denied the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, and have
turned his grace into lasciviousness. Jude 3.4. For if we believe not, yet he
abides faithful; HE CANNOT DENY HIMSELF. His promise and his oath are two
immutable things, in which it was IMPOSSIBLE for God to lie. And as Christ had
engaged to fulfill the law for his people it was not POSSIBLE for him to escape
death, the penalty of it. And a clear view of the law, as holy, just and good,
and of the infinite excellency of Jesus and his righteousness, laid a NECESSITY
upon Paul to quit all confidence in the flesh, and freely to preach the gospel
through the world; yea, and to warn the churches against teachers of opposite
doctrine, as being dogs This Huntington turned against those ministers who
would not allow, that nature can bring infants into the covenant of grace.
and evil-workers, contrary to the spirit of circumcision? 2 Timothy ii. 13. Heb.
vi. 18. Mark xiv. 35. Romans vii. 7 -- 12. 1 Cor. ix. 16. Phil. iii. 2 -- 9.
Saints CANNOT but hearken unto God, and speak the things which they see and
hear of him. Acts iv. 19, 20. Hence a WILL in man opposite to NECESSITY from
any cause without himself, is ENMITY against God, and cannot be subject to his
law, which is to love him with all our powers, and to love our neighbors as
ourselves; upon which Christ says, This do, and thou shall live. Luke x. 28.
And to hold that these terms are severe, is to hold that there is something
unlovely in Him, whose revealed will is the only perfect law of liberty. James
i. 13 -- 25. To imagine that grace exempts us from the perfect authority of the
moral law, shields the mind against conviction; for sin can only be known by
the law. And to imagine that necessity is inconsistent with our liberty, exalts
the mind above being bound by promises and oaths, and so above all government.
Hereby men who make merchandise of the people, and promise them liberty, are
themselves the servants of corruption. 2 Pet. ii. 3, 10, 19. For oaths are to
lay a necessity upon officers to be faithful, and upon witnesses to speak the
truth; and when the opposite of this prevails, judgment is turned into
wormwood, instead of running down as free and refreshing waters. Amos v. 7, 24.
And an eminent author in England informs us, that these evils have prevailed so
far in the British empire, that about a million perjuries are committed therein
annually; Price's observations, 1784, p. 67.
the chief of which are in their management of the merchandise of fine wares,
and of slaves and souls of men; in which America has also had a dreadful share.

No property can be held, nor government maintained, if the express condition
thereof is violated with impunity. And the highest degree of moral obligation,
is to believe and obey all the revealed will of God, who is the only fountain
of all goodness and truth. And when Adam took and eat of the forbidden fruit,
he became a robber and a rebel; and it is only of mercy that all his race are
not consumed. Lam. iii. 22, 39. And scornful men, who go to the king with their
ointment, and build their hopes upon the life of their own hands, are in
covenant with death, and at agreement with hell. But God will dash and confound
all their schemes. Isaiah xxviii. 14 -- 20. lvii. 9, 10. He declares with an
oath, that if Noah, Daniel and Job were in the land, they should deliver only
their own souls by their righteousness; and also that he has no pleasure in the
death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live. Ezekiel. xiv.
20. xxxiii. 11, 15. But the ways of men are so unequal, as often to recur to
his sayings about personal agency, to prove that we were not made sinners in
Adam, and that we cannot be made righteous by faith in what Christ has done for
us, while they are as fierce as bears and lions against allowing others equal
liberty with themselves. For if death be the wages of sin, and eternal life the
free gift of God, which he may bestow on whom he will, while he pays others
their just wages, it is infinitely dangerous for any to indulge their lusts,
and to neglect the great salvation. Neither could men gratify pride and
covetousness, under the name of godliness, if each one had equal liberty to
obey God, who says, Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness,
but rather reprove them. Ephesians. v. 1 -- 11. And he also says, I will give unto
this last even as unto thee. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with
mine own? Is thine eye evil, because I am good? So the last shall be first, and
the first last; for many be called, but few chosen. And to deny this liberty is
like the Gentiles. Mat. xx. 14 -- 16, 25.

YET a late noted minister in Boston said, "There is no medium betwixt his
being actually kind and merciful to all, and his being positively cruel and
unmerciful to some." And he asserts that any system of doctrine repugnant
hereto, "is absolutely and wholly false." May hew on God's goodness, p. 35, 85.
And his near companion has lately said, "Another power in our nature is that
of self-determination, which gives rise to our volitions, and consequent
actions, and is, in true propriety, the cause of them. This power in us men,
whether it be called self-determination, or by any other name, is the only
basis of moral obligation; unless this be first supposed, to talk of moral
agency is a contradiction to common sense, and in itself a gross absurdity."
Those who improve this power well, he says, " Deserve the applause of their own
hearts -- and have so conducted themselves as to be worthy of it." Chauncy on
God's benevolence, 1784, p. 128, 138, 217.
Yet in the same book he says, "No eye but God's can take in the whole scheme
of creation and providence. -- The existence of moral evil cannot be conceived
of without permission, at least, from the Deity. -- And how intelligent moral
beings that are finite, should be wholly incapable of becoming faulty, in any
kind or degree, is beyond all conception." And he is forced to own that the
only satisfying reason which can be given for the past and present state of
things in our world is, "So it pleased a sovereign good God -- Nor should we
ever have heard of Christ, or of the way of redemption through him, if the
motive hereto had not been within the breast of God." Ibid. p. 170, 178, 204,
213, 279.
But how this can be, and yet the choice of man be always determined by motives
within himself, and he be able to exercise this power so as to deserve the
applause of his own heart, we are not informed. In regeneration the soul is
taught, that all is right in God's government, and that all is wrong in us,
until pardon and cleansing is received from him, which we are daily to come to
him for, through our heavenly Advocate. 1. John i. 8 -- 10. ii. 1, 2. And souls
who are thus reconciled to him truly say, We joy in God, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom we have received the atonement. Romans v. 11. But this author has
applied these words to "mankind universally;" and builds his scheme very much
thereon. And he is so opposite to any idea of holiness or justice, as to
represent that all the human race are subjected to sufferings, "not an account
of any sin or sins, they had been guilty of previous to that subjection, but by
the will of God;" which assertion he tries to reconcile with equity, by
promising every child of Adam immortality and glory in another world. Chauncy
on salvation for (...) p. 27, 3^. (...) 121.
As if God did evil, that good may come! Romans iii. 4, 8. This writer is so
partial in the law, as to strain the promises beyond all bounds, while he
denies that any of its penalties mean without end. But least this should not be
believed, of the words forever and ever, he asserts that where they are applied
to future torments they include, "comparatively speaking, but a very small part
of the wicked;" though God says they include the whole world, and all the
world. Rev. xii. 9. xiii. 3. xiv. 11. xix. 3. xx. 10. And such general terms on
both sides ought to be explained by comparing spiritual things with spiritual,
instead of confounding natural and spiritual things together. Two resurrections
are spoken of in the last of these chapters, the first of souls, the second of
bodies; after which the wicked will be cast into the burning lake; and no human
bodies or souls can be raised but by the voice of Christ. John v. 25, 28, 29.
Yet this author denies that we read of more than one resurrection in Rev. xx.
and he therefore holds that the second resurrection will be a recovery of all
the damned from hell. And his key to this whole scheme, is the passage which
informs us, that when Christ shall have put all his enemies under his feet, he
will give up his mediatorial kingdom to the Father, that God may be all in all.
1 Cor. xv. 24 -- 28. Page 197, 294, 391, 403, 406.
As if making them his footstool, were crowning them with glory! So far from
it, that our only time for reconciliation is whilst we are in the way with him;
and he assures us that he will never be a mediator for any after they are cast
into prison, or die in their sins. Psalm ii. 12. Mat. v. 17 -- 26. John viii.
21. And to believe the contrary, is most certainly, a being left to strong
delusion to believe a lie, because they had pleasure in unrighteousness. 2 Thessalonians. ii. 10 -- 12.

AND this is the case of those who make themselves the standard, eating the
bread of others for naught, and are busy-bodies in other men's matters. 2 Cor.
x. 12 -- 16. 2 Thessalonians. iii. 6 -- 11. 1 Peter iv. 15. Yet this writer took these
very scriptures, above forty years ago, to justify these evils in New England;
Chauncy's thoughts, 1743, p. 42, 43.
and he has published the most for that end since of any man upon earth. Indeed
in 1768 he said, "We are, in principle, against all civil establishments in
religion. -- The consequence of these establishments has been of infinite
damage to the cause of God and true religion, in all ages, and in all places."
Chauncy against Chandler, p. 152, 153.
Then it was an infinite evil to suffer from men, in the view of him who now
denies that it can be so to sin against God! And in 1778 he published a sermon
in Boston, wherein he accused our rulers of indulging an accursed thing among
us, because they had not forced away more money from the people for his sect of
ministers. So we read that in the last days, men shall be lovers of their own
selves -- and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. 2 Timothy iii. 1
-- 7. And that the unlearned and unstable wrest the scriptures unto their own
destruction. 2 Peter iii. 16. Which is a solemn warning to all, against
thinking that finite can comprehend infinite, or that debtors and criminals are
adequate judges of their own causes.

No man on earth can have any more right to use force with others about
worship, than he has to lodge with his neighbor's wife. Confounding type and
antitype together has been the main covering for this iniquity. But as the
mother of the first son whom Abraham circumcised, was an allegory of mount
Sinai, and the Christian church was built on mount Sion, when the saints shall
arise and follow the Lamb thereon, being not defiled with women, Babylon will
fall. Gal. iv. 22 -- 31. Heb. xii. 18 -- 29. Rev. xiv. 1 -- 8. And all the late
shakings among the nations are calculated, in infinite wisdom, to bring about
this glorious event. As life was forfeited by sin, and could only be recovered
by blood, the life of the flesh, so it was shed in sacrifices, and in
circumcision, until Christ came and gave his life for us. And all men worship
the beast, whose names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb slain
from the foundation of the world. Rev. xiii. 8. Abel was as ^^^ly saved by
faith in his blood, as any believer is now. Heb. xi. 4. And those who wilfully
continued in the practice of those sacrifices, after the death of Christ, were
as if they slew a man, or blessed an idol. Acts vii. 48 -- 51. Isaiah lxvi. 1
-- 8. Some have attempted to prove that a nation was born at once, according to
this prophecy, when the INDEPENDENCE of America was declared: But that glorious
event is yet before us. Necessity brought Pharaoh to send Israel away with rich
treasures, on the very night which God had told Abraham of four hundred and
thirty years before; and necessity will bring the world to relinquish their
tyranny over the church, when that prophecy is fulfilled.

NECESSITY is consistent with liberty in God, because he cannot be deceived;
but men have denied that it can be so in them, because they have held fast
deceit, and have refused to return. Like Sodom, they have caused his people to
err, by their lies, and by their lightness; being guilty of stealing his words
every one from his neighbor. Jer. viii. 5, 6. xxiii. 14, 30, 32. They have
taken the promises, the property of believers, and put them to their own use,
without regarding the precepts, with which they are inseparably connected. God
ever requires our highest esteem, and o^^ first regard in all our conduct. The
spoils of the first city that was taken in Canaan were all consecrated to him;
and Israel could not stand before their enemies, until they destroyed the
accursed practice of dissimulation and sacrilege from among them. And we are
referred to the valley where this was done, as our only door of hope of
deliverance and happiness. We are there taught that the Christian name implies,
that he who blesses himself in the earth, shall bless himself in the God of
truth, and he that swears in the earth, shall swear by the God of truth.
Joshua vii. 11, 13, 15, 26. Isaiah lxv. 10, 15, 16. Hosea ii. 8 -- 15. Romans ii.
21 -- 29. All true worshippers know every man the plague of his own heart;
which distemper we derived from father Adam. It is a propensity to follow our
own inventions, instead of upright obedience to our Creator. 1 Kings viii. 38.
Eccl. vii. 29.

THE highest rulers in Israel were only executive officers; and his law which
they were to execute, entered that the offense might abound; but where sin
abounded, grace did much more abound; that as sin has reigned unto death, even
so might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life, by Jesus Christ
our Lord. Romans v. 20, 21. The law was added because of transgressions, until
Christ came, to whom the promise was made; and he has concluded all under sin,
that the promise might be given to them that believe. Gal. iii. 13 -- 22. The
plague of sin in them, is a most powerful reason for their looking to him for
healing, as the poisoned Israelites did to the brazen serpent. John iii. 14,
15. All who did not look thereto died, and all who did look, at the call of
God, lived. But many plead, that if the promise is not truly ours before we
believe, then unbelief cannot be a sin in us. Others insist upon it, that if we
have not power in our wills to come when we please, we are not dealt with as
moral agents. But grace cannot reign in us, if it cannot command our hearts and
lives. The promise of Christ, Lo I am with you always, was given to the eleven,
after Judas was gone to his own place; and their only successors therein, are
faithful men who teach all his commandments. Mat. xxviii. 16 -- 20. 2 Timothy ii.
1, 2. To enforce which he says, With what measure ye mete, it shall be measured
to you again. I am the door: by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved. He
that climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber. Mat. vii. 2,
12. John x. 1, 9. And in vain do any try to evade the evidence of his verity
and authority.

HAM and Ishmael had eminently pious fathers; but what a curse did their own
scornful behavior bring on themselves and their posterity! Nimrod was a mighty
hunter among them, the beginning of whose kingdom was Babel, from whence
Babylon has her name; and her galleys and gallant ships have carried blood and
slavery round the world. Jews and Mahometans have retained the letter of
circumcision in their worship; the first of whom are monuments of judicial
blindness among all nations, and the others have enslaved Asia and Africa, and
are now retaliating the cruel slave trade on Europe and America. Forcing money
from any people for religious teachers, is taxing them where they are not
represented; and how awfully was this evil requited to the nations in the late
war! By such taxes thieves and robbers were supported in churches; and what a
plague have another kind of them been to their supporters in their houses and
highways! Yet the cry of many teachers now is, Cast in thy lot among us, let us
all have one purse. And much of the learning of the present day has been made
use of, as the old savages did of their arrows, in shooting from their
hiding-places at honest men who refuse to be confederates with them. Germany
has been long ransacked for stories to prejudice the people against equal
liberty and believer's baptism; but how was Britain involved in debt, and
America in blood, by the late forces that were brought from thence! And an
eminent historian in that country assures us, that for more than a century
after the death of Christ, "The churches were entirely independent; none of
them subject to any foreign jurisdiction, but each one governed by its own
rulers, and its own laws." After which teachers adopted a maxim from heathen
philosophers, "That it was an act of virtue to deceive and lie, when by that
means the interests of the church might be promoted." Mosheim's eccl. hist.
vol. i. p. 77, 155, 314.
And no man has proved that infant baptism was ever named in the world, till
after the adoption of that maxim; since which the bringing of infants to a
minister in the church, has been called their coming to Christ; whereas none
can come to him but such as are taught of God, and such only are the children
of his church. John vi. 44, 45. Isaiah live. 1, 13.

BLIND guides among the Jews swore by gold and offerings, and not by the temple
and alter whereby they were sanctified; upon which an eminent father of
New England said, "The estate of a saint is most happy and blessed, though the
person never come near an office; but on the contrary, an officer, if he be not
also, and first a saint, is a most wretched and accursed creature." Robinson
against Bernard, p. 217.
Anathama is the portion of every man who loves not our Lord Jesus Christ, the
only altar that can sanctify us and our gifts. 1 Cor. xvi. 22. Heb. xiii. 10 --
18. The national holiness of the Jews obliged them to put away their strange
wives, and the children that were born of them. Deuteronomy. vii. 3 -- 6. Ezra x. 19,
44. From whence seducers took occasion to forbid marriage, and to command men
to abstain from meats, which God has created to be received with thanksgiving
of them who believe and know the truth: for it is sanctified by the word of God
and prayer. 1 Timothy iv. 1 -- 5. Family relations, with other temporal
enjoyments, are, in this way, sanctified and holy to believers; and will be
much more so in the latter day, after God shall pour out his fury upon the
families that call not on his name. 1 Cor. vii. 14. Jer. x. 25. Zech. xiv. 20,
21. None can escape his vengeance but he that walks righteously, and speaks
uprightly. he that despises the gain of oppressions, that shakes his hands
from holding of bribes, that stops his ears from hearing of blood, and
shuts his eyes from seeing evil. These will be so far from supporting
teachers with the power of saying, Thou shall give it me now; and if not, I
will take it by force, that they will say, The Lord is our judge, the Lord is
our lawgiver, the Lord is our king, he will save us. Galleys and gallant ships
shall then be a prey to the lame, whom they were designed to enslave or
destroy. Isaiah xxxiii. 14 -- 24. His word, which is the only perfect law of
liberty, contains three maxims which never should be forgotten by any. First,
that none should be chosen into office, but those who have been useful and
faithful in private stations. Secondly, that such, like the olive, fig tree,
and the vine, prefer the yielding of good fruit and happiness to others, to any
promotion or power over them, Thirdly, that the man who makes use of any bribes
or party influence to get into office, or to keep himself in power, is a
bramble, that would set all on fire rather than not have his will. Judges ix. 7
-- 15. Acts xx. 28 -- 35. Many of the primitive saints sealed these truths with
their blood, and thereby overcame the great accuser. And as the way for the
first coming of Christ was prepared by one who came in the spirit and power of
Elias, so his future coming to reign on the earth will be introduced by the
resurrection of the souls of those old martyrs; which may intend the revival of
their spirit and power in the churches; for when they shall arise satan shall
deceive the nations no more, and when the two witnesses shall be raised, time
shall be no longer. Rev. x. 6, 7. xi. 11, 15. xii. 11. xx. 3 -- 6. And whether
both prophesies do not point to the same glorious event, is humbly referred to
the great Ruler of the universe.

FINIS.
AT Mr. PHILIP FREEMAN'S, in Union-Street. Boston, and at Mr. JAMES ARNOLD'S,
in Providence, may be had the AUTHOR'S late Church HISTORY OF NEW ENGLAND, in
two Octavo Volumes.


