SOME CONSIDERATIONS, Propounded to the several Sorts and Sects of PROFESSORS
of this Age.

On the following important Subjects.

I. The JEW OUTWARD, being a Glass for the Professors of this Age; with a
Postscript to the same Subject.

II. A WARNING, in the Bonds of Love, to the Rulers, Teachers, and People of
this Nation, concerning their Church and Ministry.

III. An ADVERTISEMENT to the Powers and People of this Nation.

IV. An ANSWER to that common Objection against the UNITED FRIENDS, that they
condemn all but themselves.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, An EXHORTATION to the UNITED FRIENDS, everywhere scattered
abroad.

By a Universal FRIEND to all Mankind.

Wherefore the Lord said, forasmuch as this people draw near me with their
mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have removed their heart far from
me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men; therefore behold
I will proceed to do a marvelous work amongst this people, even a marvelous
work and a wonder; for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the
understanding of their prudent men shall be hid.

Isa. xxix. 13, 14. A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the land.
The prophets prophesy falsely, and the priests bear rule by their means, and my
people love to have it so; and what will ye do in the end thereof?

Jer. v. 30, 31. I said, days should speak, and multitude of years should teach
wisdom. But there is a spirit in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty
gives them understanding. Great men are not always wise, neither do the aged
understand judgment; therefore I said, hearken to me; I also will show mine
opinion.

Job xxxii. 7 -- 10. Hear my words, O ye wise men, and gives ear unto me, ye
that have knowledge; for the ear tries words, as the mouth tastes meat. Let
us choose to us judgment, let us know among ourselves what is good.

Job xxxiv. 2 -- 4. But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only,
deceiving your own selves; for if any be a hearer of the word, and not a doer,
he is like unto a man beholding his natural face in a glass; for he beholds
himself, and goes his way, and straightway forgets what manner of man he
was.

Jam. i. 22 -- 24. PRINTED IN THE YEAR MDCCLXXIX.

INTRODUCTION to the friendly READER.
IT was the language formerly to the chosen people of God, that my people have
committed two great evils; they have forsaken me, the fountain of living
waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water.
This was ever and anon the complaint of the Lord concerning Israel, from the
beginning to the end. The Lord did delight to beget, nourish, and bring up that
people for himself; but they were almost continually revolting from him, and
rebelling against him. He did mighty things for them; but they still forgot
him. He redeemed them by his outstretched arm; he fed them, he defended them;
but they knew him not, Isa. i. 3, but decked themselves with the ornaments
which they had from him, and then lift up the heel against him, Ezekiel. xvi. 7,
and Deuteronomy. xxxii. 15. In plain terms, they got what knowledge they could from
him into their own vessels, and then they would set up for themselves, without
fresh bubblings up of life from the spring from whence their knowledge came.
The priests said not, where is the Lord? but could handle the law, and teach
the knowledge of it, without him; and the prophets could prophesy by another
spirit, Jer. ii. 8. And thus the Lord God of life lived not in them; but they
lived upon such things as once came from the life; but, being separated from
the spring, were dead, and nourished but the dead part in them, the estranged
from God. And thus, though their professions were great, and they multiplied
prayers, sacrifices, and fasts, and drew nigh to God with their lips, yet their
hearts were far from him. They had forsaken the fountain; they drank not of the
waters of the spring, of the rock that followed them; but they drank of the
waters of their own cisterns. They set up that knowledge of the law for their
light which they had hewed out by their own understanding, without the spirit
that wrote it. This was Israel's error of old* They drank very zealously of the
waters of the law; but they drank it not from the spring, but out of the
cisterns which themselves had hewed.

And as it was thus with Israel of old, so has it been with Israel since. The
Christian Israel has been always backsliding, always forgetting the Lord!
Still getting what they could to live of themselves, but refusing to live on
him: Getting what knowledge they could from the scriptures without him; getting
what they could from their exercises and experiences; but neglecting the spring
of their life. And this Israel also dies; this Israel likewise withers, and
becomes a scorn to the heathen; for though they speak great words of their God,
yet they themselves are but as the heathen; uncircumcised like them,
unacquainted with the virtue and power of life like them; always striving
against sin, in that which cannot conquer, and so they also are slaves under
their lusts and corruptions, like the heathen; and know not the truth, which
makes free indeed.

Exceeding great has been the apostasy of this age! Mighty was the appearance
of God inwardly in his people's spirits! Mighty was the appearance of God
outwardly in the nation! Many ways and great hopes were there of a thorough
reformation. But how suddenly was the pure spirit of the Lord forgotten, and
departed from, and his work overturned both within and without? Inwardly in his
people's spirits, and outwardly in the nation, whose revolting was but a type
of the inward! And how has the spirit of the Lord mourned after his people,
often reproving them for their backslidings? But they have been (as Israel of
old) like the deaf adder, justifying themselves, and complaining against the
witnesses of God (as Israel did against his prophets) who from the Lord testify
against them. And it cannot be otherwise; for the dead waters in Israel's hewn
cisterns will never agree with the waters of the living fountain, but will
withstand their testimony.

How shall the charmer charm wisely enough to make apostate Israel hearken to
his voice? I have not backslidden, says one in one form; I have not
backslidden, says another in another form: I have not backslidden, says one
in one notion; I am not backslidden, says another in another potion: I am
believing, hoping, and waiting in what the Lord has already revealed, and
following on to know him. This has been thy manner from thy youth, that thou
obeyedst not my word; but still have been justifying thyself, as if thou had
obeyed. And yet your backslidings are written upon your foreheads, as with the
point of a diamond. For who among you retains his freshness? An evident
demonstration that ye are departed from the spring, and hold your knowledge,
experiences and hopes, in the dead part; and your choicest prop of comfort is
the remembrance of what you once had. Ah! poor, barren, dead souls, is this
your best support? Return, return; enter into the house of mourning, and let
the living lay it to heart.

Now let not men run on in heats against us; but let them seriously consider,
whether we be of God or no: And let them consider not with the reason and
understanding which is alienated from God; but with the witness which lies hid
in the heart. There is one great palpable argument that we are of God, which is
this, all the world is against us: The worldly part everywhere fights against
us; the worldly part, in every sort and sect of men, opposes us; the rage of
men everywhere rises up against us: But those that are so hot against us, if
at any time they become but meek and calm, patiently considering our cause, and
consulting thereupon with the testimony that they find in their own hearts
concerning us, they soon become pacified, and see that we are no man's enemies,
against no righteous law, not against relations, not against governments, not
against any thing in the world that is good, but only against that which is
evil and corrupt. And of a truth, the corruption of things God has shown unto
us, and daily calls us forth after an immediate manner to witness against.

Therefore let men be sober, and take heed what they do, lest they be found
fighters against God; for the reproaches, the scoffs, with other persecutions,
which seem to be cast at us, light on him. (Inasmuch as it is done unto one of
the least of the brethren, Christ said it was done unto him.) It is not as we
are men, but as we are obedient to him, as we stand witnesses for him, that we
meet with these things. Now as it is not we ourselves that do these things, but
the life and power of God in us, so it is not we that are struck at, but that
life and power. If it were not for that, we might be as acceptable as other
men. It is because we are not of the world, but God has called us out of the
word, that we are so hated of the world. This is the true cause, though the
world will no more now acknowledge it than it would in former ages. Yet I do
not speak this for my own sake, to avoid my share in the cross: For the
reproach of Christ is greater riches than the treasures of Egypt, to all those
who have respect unto the recompense of the reward. Yea, the presence of God,
the sweet power of life, makes up all our losses; so that we have no cause to
complain. It is very sweet, pleasant and profitable, for us to be found
sufferers for God; but we know it will not be profitable for you to be found
persecutors: And this is told you in true love and good will, by one who wishes
no evil to you, for all that evil that you are endeavoring to exercise toward
us. O that God would open your eyes, that ye might see whom ye have opposed,
and against whom ye have hardened and strengthened yourselves, that ye might
bow to him, and receive life from him, and not perish in your gainsaying and
opposition.

What the envious may judge of these lines, I little care for, well knowing
that the most eminent authors have been exposed to envy, and been obnoxious to
the censures of pedantic critics. Whatever any may think, this I am well
assured of, that my chief scope has been for the promotion of the gospel of
peace and purity, and for the good of all mankind, not only to delight my
reader, but also to lead him to virtue. If I may be so happy as to have
contributed thereto, I shall think my pains well rewarded; and if not, I shall
have at least this satisfaction, that, according to my ability, I have
endeavored to be beneficial to others, and to edify my fellow mortals in that
which is good; which I cannot but think to be well pleasing to God. And if I
have performed any thing that is good, the honor and glory thereof belong to
him who is the giver of all good gifts: And it is from him alone I have
received all my ability to do any good thing, unto whom belong praises;
everlasting praises are due unto God that is holy. Amen. Thus concluding, I
wish the reader discretion, and an impartial judgment.

The JEW OUTWARD:
Being a glass for the professors of this age; wherein, if they read with
meekness, and in the true light, such of them as have not outstood the day of
their visitation, may see their own spirits, to their own everlasting advantage
and comfort, by learning subjection to that which has power in it to destroy
the evil spirit in them. Containing some exceptions and arguments of the Jews
against Christ's appearance in that body of flesh in their days; which the
present professors may view and compare with their exceptions and arguments
against his appearance (in spirit) in this age; that they may see and consider
which of them are the more weighty.

"Who has believed our report? And to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?

Isaiah liii. 1. "Beware therefore, lest that come upon you which is spoken of
in the prophets; behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and perish: For I work a
work in your days, a work which you shall in no wise believe, though a man
declare it unto you.

Acts xiii. 40, 41.
The PREFACE.
THE Lord God, of infinite goodness, has ever dearly loved mankind, yet could
never so appear to them since the transgression, as to be owned by them, till
the veil was taken from before their hearts. Israel in Egypt hearkened not to
Moses, because of their anguish and bondage. When they were led out, they were
ever and anon murmuring and picking quarrels against him. Samuel they rejected
(as the Lord lays to their charge) though they might excuse themselves, and say
they had just exceptions against his sons. Elijah, that mighty man of God, the
great restorer of Israel, and pleader against Baal by fire, his life was sought
for: And though there be not a particular record of their usage of the prophets
about those days, yet in general he complains that they were all slain but
himself, 1 Kings, xix. 10. Micaiah was smitten on the cheek, and jeered by the
false prophet who smote him, and said, "Which way went the spirit of the Lord
from me to speak unto thee?" And he was commanded to be put in prison, and fed
with bread of affliction and water of affliction. Jeremiah was put into the
dungeon, even to the danger of his life; and by those few that were left that
seemed singly to enquire by him concerning the will of the Lord, Jer. xlii. 2,
3, disdainfully rejected, chap. xliii. 2. Why should I spend time in particular
instances? What profit can I expect? For though all their bad dealings with
them are not related in scripture, yet Christ testifies that they did deal
badly with them all; some of them they stoned, some of them they scourged in
their synagogues, some of them they killed and crucified, and others they
persecuted from city to city: Yea, says Stephen, "Which of the prophets have
not your fathers persecuted?" And they have slain them which showed before of
the coming of the Just One; ye make it such a strange thing that if Christ had
been a prophet, that they should have owned him: Why, which of the prophets was
owned? And ye have still some exception or other now against the same spirit
that was in the prophets in former ages, even against the messenger whom God
has sent in this age, that it is not from God; ye take arguments from one
prophet's words to oppose another prophet with; and from one prophet's manner
of coming to oppose another prophet's coming: If John come neither eating nor
drinking, ye reject him for his austereness: If Christ come both eating and
drinking, ye reject him for his liberty and freedom in the life. Now what was
the reason of this? Christ himself gives the reason, Matt. xi. 19. Wisdom is
justified of her children; ye are not the children of wisdom, ye are not
begotten of the life, of the spirit of the prophets, and so cannot justify that
spirit. Ye have gotten the letter of the prophets; ye are born of that, but ye
are not born of the life, ye are not born of the wisdom: And so whoever comes
forth in the same birth from the letter with you, that is, being one of your
church members, him ye can own; but if any prophet come forth with that same
spirit, him ye cannot own. He that is born after the flesh, cannot but
persecute him that is born after the spirit. Jerusalem was all along the
persecutor of the prophets, from the beginning to the end.

And is this nothing to you, O ye professors of this age! Search and see, who
have been the persecutors among you, but they who have had the name of the
church and her prophets? Who have slain the witnesses? The church of Rome has
slain the witnesses against her, and the Protestants have slain the witnesses
against them. If a man were never so truly zealous, yet if he could not conform
to the common prayer book and ceremonies, how was he persecuted, though owning
the same Christ in his very heart and soul; yet, because his practice was a
testimony against the false church-worship, must be hunted up and down to
courts, imprisoned, fined, banished. And to this day the Lord can bring forth
no birth of his spirit, but the zealous professor hates, reviles, and seeks to
destroy it. If the Lord lay any law upon the conscience, if it be not suitable
to their apprehensions from the letter, how do they reproach, disdain, revile
and endeavor to render such odious to the magistrates, to the churches, and to
the people of the world?

Now this I have to say to you all: All you who rest in any form whatsoever,
short of the life itself, ye had even as good have stayed in Egypt, as to fix
by the way, and to take up a rest in the wilderness, short of Canaan. In plain
terms, ye had as good have abode in popery or episcopacy; ye had been as
acceptable to God there as here, not that I say your forms of Independency,
Anabaptism, or Quakerism, are as bad as Popery, etc. nay, they are all somewhat
nearer, and the last of them very much nearer: But your fixing there, and the
dead spirit feeding there on the dead thing, is as remote from life as if it
had gone quite back again. And this dead spirit is as hateful to God here, as
it is among the Papists; yea, and in one sense more, because it makes a
pretense beyond them.

Look about ye, look about ye, all sorts of devout professors; see where ye
are. Are you not dead in your forms? Is not the good old puritan principle
(wherein once was true life in its measure) dead and buried there? Consider
with yourselves; has that grown in your forms? Or has it been slain there?
Speak the truth in your own hearts; can you truly say, from a sensible feeling
in the life, that that principle is still alive in you? While Abel lived in
you, Cain could not rise up in his dominions; but now the right seed is slain,
the murdering nature appears.

But why should we wonder at these things? There is no new thing under the sun.
The state of the world is just as it always was; the power of truth in every
age has been still opposed by those who cried up the form. It were a wonder if
it should be otherwise. I should much more wonder, if the teachers and
professors of this age should own truth, than that they fight against it and
persecute it. Well, friends and brethren, be strong in the Lord, and faithful
to his truth, in the power of his might; bear the reproach, the afflictions of
this age, the persecutions of this your day. Verily your eyes shall see that
there is a reward for the righteous, and your hearts shall be satisfied with
it, when the children of the kingdom (of this age as well as of all former
ages) shall be shut out in utter darkness, where shall be weeping, wailing and
gnashing of teeth.

"The stone which the builders refused, is become the head-stone of the corner.
This is the Lord's doing; it is marvelous in our eyes," Psalm cxviii. 22, 23.
"I thank thee O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these
things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes. Even so
Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight," Matt. xi. 25, 26.
The JEW OUTWARD. Some Exceptions and Arguments of the Jews against Christ's
Appearance, etc.
THE Jews were once the only outward visible people of God, who were chosen by
God for a peculiar people, who had the promise of and expected the Messiah;
whose faith and hope of salvation was in him, yea, and at that very time they
were looking for him, yet, when he came he was a stone of stumbling, and a rock
of offense to them, and they could by no means receive him. They were full of
reasonings, doubts and contendings about it; but could never, with all their
wisdom from the letter, determine that was he. Though he lived as never man
lived; though he spoke as never man spoke; though he did what never man did;
yet still some exception or other they had from the letter of the scriptures,
to which his manner of appearance, his conversation and his doctrine, did not
suit in their judgment; and so, after many disputes and debates, they at length
delivered him up to death, as a blasphemer, a deceiver, a seducer of the people.

Many exceptions and arguments they had against him, against his descent, his
doctrine, his practices, his miracles, his followers, etc. which I shall refer
to heads, to make them more obvious.

1. They excepted at his descent and kindred. Is not this the carpenter's son?
Is not his mother called Mary, and his brethren James and Joses, and Simon and
Judas, and his sisters, are they not all with us? Matt. xiii. 55, 56. What!
this that glorious Messiah! the great King of Glory, of whom all the prophets
prophesied and spoke great things! surely it cannot be. And they were offended
in him, ver. 57. It was this made them they could not receive that heavenly
doctrine of his which otherwise might have been life to them, when he taught
them that he was the bread of life that came down from heaven; but they
murmured because of it, and said, "Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose
father and mother we know? How is it then that he says, I came down from
heaven? John vi. 41, 42. So again, John vii. 27. We know this man whence he is;
but when Christ comes, no man knows whence he is. This was a close argument,
and was raised up to eat out a deep impression of his being the Christ, as may
appear from the foregoing verse. "He speaks indeed boldly, and deep things,
etc. as if he were the Christ, but how can he be he, seeing it is known from
whence he comes?"

2. At his country or place of his education and residence, which was Nazareth
of Galilee. Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth? John i. 46. Shall
Christ come out of Galilee? John vii. 41. Search and look; for out of Galilee
arises no prophet, ver. 52.

3. At the time and season of his coming; he came (as to their sense) before
Elias. With this argument they pinched the disciples, as is signified in that
query of theirs to Christ; "Why then say the scribes that Elias must first
come?" Matt. xvii. 10. This could not but be a sore argument in the mouth of
the scribes, who might reason with the disciples on this wise: What poor,
ignorant, sottish, deluded people are you, to own this man for your master, and
take him for the Messiah? Elias must first come, and restore all things. If
this man preached ever so heavenly doctrine, and did ever so many miracles,
yet, if he pretend to be the Messiah, he can be but a deceiver: For the true
Messiah comes not before Elias; and every one knows that Elias is not yet come,
nor his work of restoring all things so much as begun.

4. His doctrine administered abundance of offense to them, and they were
continually stumbling at it. That heavenly doctrine mentioned a little before,
that he was the bread of life, they murmured at, John vi. 41. When he did but
say God was his father, they presently flew out upon him and said, he made
himself equal with God, John v. 18. When he said destroy this temple, and in
three days I will raise it up, they misunderstood him, and brought it forth as
an argument against him at the time of his suffering, Matt. xxvi. 61, and cast
it as a jeer in his teeth, Matt. xxvii. 40. When he did but say to the man sick
of the palsy, son, thy sins are forgiven thee, the scribes and Pharisees
presently exclaimed against him, who is this that speaks blasphemy? Who can
forgive sins but God alone? Luke v. 21, and chap. vii. 19. When he preached
very powerfully against covetousness, the Pharisees derided him, Luke xvi. 14.
Yea, when he did but preach a parable or two about the widow of Sarepta, and
Naaman, the Syrian (it coming a little close to their state) all they in the
synagogue were so filled with wrath, that they rose up and thrust him out of
the city, and led him unto the brow of the hill, to cast him down headlong,
Luke iv. 28, 29. At his saying that Abraham rejoiced to see his day, and he saw
it, and was glad; the Jews replied, thou art not yet fifty years old, and have
thou seen Abraham? John viii. 57. How absurd and impossible was this to them,
that a man of not fifty years should say, that Abraham (who lived so many ages
before) saw his day? And instead of giving them an argument to demonstrate it
to them, he only returns them a more confident affirmation, verily verily I say
unto you, before Abraham was I am, ver. 58. Which so enraged them that they
took up stones to cast at him, ver. 59. Now mark, the life speaks what it sees
and knows, and so it gives forth its testimony. The wise professor, not being
in the life, cannot know or receive the testimony; but calls for arguments and
demonstrations to his wise eye. The life refuses to answer him; but instead
thereof, only affirms the thing more strongly and confidently. This (being so
far from what he looks for, and requires to satisfy him) kindles disdain and
rage in him: And he looks upon the life, for this way of proceeding, as worthy
to be stoned. What, when they should lay before Christ a fair argument, whereby
they might plainly convince him by evident reason that he could not see
Abraham's day, and he instead of answering it should only bring forth a more
confident affirmation, would not men's wisdom, in this age, even hiss at such a
thing? Yet this was the way of the life then in that day, and the life may, at
his pleasure, take the same way again now, to offend the wise and knowing.

When he spoke of his being the good shepherd, and of his laying down his life
for his sheep (and of the hireling's flying, in time of danger, to save
himself) John x. 11, 12, many of the Jews said he has a devil, and is mad, why
hear ye him? ver. 20. Many of them that were then the people of God (the
separated ^^^ple, for the Jews were a separated people from the world, and
studied the law, and observed the ordinances of Moses) looked upon Christ as a
man not fit to be heard speak, but as a madman, as one that had a devil, as one
that might have great power of deceit from the devil, to bewitch men from
truth; why hear ye him? What good can ye expect from him? He has a devil and
is mad. O how desperately will bold flesh venture to judge of the life and
power of God, when it has got a little knowledge from the scriptures, and a
way of worship, duties and ordinances! When he said, I and my father are one,
John x. 30, they took up stones again to stone him, ver. 31, and made no
question but they did well in doing of it, as appears by their answer to his
demand, for which of his good works they stoned him, they replied very
confidently, for a good work we stone thee not, but for blasphemy, and because
thou being a man, make thyself God, ver. 32, 33. And when he said, if a man
keep my saying he shall never see death, John viii. 51, then said the Jews unto
him, now we know thou have a devil. Abraham is dead, and the prophets are dead;
who make thou thyself? ver. 53. Were not Abraham and the prophets holy men?
had not they the sayings of God, and did they not keep the sayings of God? yet
they are dead. Such a kind of speech as this must needs be from the devil; now
thou make manifest from what spirit thou speak; now we know thou have a
devil. And indeed how could the professors of that age digest such things,
being so contrary to what appeared to them to be certain truth in the
scriptures?

And there were many other things as hard to them, though the exceptions which
might or did arise in their minds are not particularly mentioned; as when he
says, I am the door of the sheep, all that ever came before me are thieves and
robbers, but the sheep did not hear them, John x. 7, 8. How offensive must this
doctrine needs have been to them, going carnally to understand and reason about
it? What ^ were all the prophets and holy men before thee thieves and robbers?
Did the truth never come till thou broughtest it? What became of our
forefathers in former ages? Were they none of them God's sheep? Did none of
them find the door? For thou say thou art the door, and thou have been but
of late: And whereas thou say the sheep did not hear them, that is utterly
false; for they did hear Moses, and they did hear the prophets, and we have
their writings, and will keep to them, for all thee, let who will be thy sheep.
When he said that he came not to send peace, but division, Matt. x. 25, how
readily might they reply, that his own mouth discovered him not to be the
Messiah, the savior, the peacemaker; but the worker of divisions, the cause
of breaches in families, setting three against two, and two against three? Luke
xxi. 51. When he said, whosoever commits sin, is the servant of sin, John
viii. 34, might they not well except against this, as condemning the whole
generation of the righteous, and making null the way of sacrifices, which God
had appointed for sins committed at any time by his people, which could not but
presuppose their commission of sin? Did not Abraham, Isaac, David, Moses, and
the rest of the prophets, all commit sin, and were they the servants of sin? He
taught also that the children of the kingdom should be cast into utter
darkness, Matt. viii. 12. O how harsh would this sound in the ears of the
zealous professing Jews, who were waiting and hoping for the kingdom? So in his
doctrine there seemed many contradictions to the fleshly understanding: For one
while he said, I judge no man, for I came not to condemn the world, and yet was
not he continually judging and condemning the scribes, the Pharisees, the
priests, the lawyers, and that whole generation of professors? So again he came
to seek and to save that which was lost; to preach the gospel of peace; and yet
another while he says, he came not to send peace, but a sword, and to kindle a
fire, and to set men at variance, etc. Again, one while he said, I and my
Father are one; another time, my Father is greater than me; one while he bid
men do as the scribes and Pharisees taught; another while he bid men beware of
the leaven or doctrine of the Pharisees and Sadducees, Matt. xvi. 12.

But to what purpose should I heap up any more instances? O thou that read
this, wait, to know in thyself the ear that cannot hear Christ's doctrine While
thou condemnest the Jews, do not run into the same error of unbelief and
gainsaying; but wait to know the voice of Christ in this day, and to receive
the ear that can hear it; for though thou should be willing to hear, yet
thou can not till thy ear be opened: Nicodemus, who could acknowledge Christ
a teacher come from God, yet could not receive the doctrine of the new birth
from him, John iii. 4. And there were many things the disciples themselves were
not able to bear: For when at a certain time he spoke of giving his flesh to
eat, not only the Jews, John vi. 52, but they also stumbled, ver. 61. And who
is there among professors that can now bear it, or receive Christ's own
interpretation of it? who says, that the flesh which they understood profits
nothing; but the flesh which he meant was spirit and life, ver. 63.

At his practices and conversation. How is it that he eats with publicans and
sinners? Mark ii. 16, Behold a gluttonous man and a wine-bibber, a friend of
publicans and sinners, Luke vii. 14. This man, if he were a prophet, would have
known who and what manner of woman this is that touches him, for she is a
sinner, Luke vii. 39. At the publicans and sinners drawing nigh to hear him,
the Pharisees and scribes were offended, and murmured, saying this man
receives sinners, and eats with them, Luke xv. 1, 2. And when he went to
Zaccheus's house they all murmured, saying that he was gone to be a guest with
a man that is a sinner, Luke xix. 7.

Again, because he healed on the sabbath, and justified his disciples in
plucking ears of corn on the sabbath, they were filled with madness, and
communed what they might do to him, Luke vi. 3, and took counsel how they might
destroy him, Mark iii. 5, 6. Another time, the ruler of the synagogue spoke
with indignation about it, Luke xiii. 14, yea, the Jews did persecute Jesus,
and sought to slay him, because he had healed a man, and bid him take up his
bed and walk, on the sabbath day, John v. 8, 16. And some of them made it a
strong argument against him, this man is not of God, because he keeps not the
sabbath day, John ix. 16. What! come from God and be a breaker of ordinances!
Can these two stand together? Read and consider what more strict ordinance of
God under the law than the sabbath? What one ordinance more conducing to the
honor and worship of God? Did not their whole religion and worship much depend
upon it? How could this possibly but be a great offense to them, in that spirit
and literal wisdom from the scriptures wherein they stood? Yet Christ, in his
spiritual appearance, was lord of the sabbath, and in his fleshly appearance he
does not lose his dominion. Again, they excepted against him, that he did not
teach his disciples to fast and pray, as John did, Luke v. 33, but could suffer
them to transgress the traditions of the elders, Matt. xv. 2. He was not strict
after the Jewish way of devotion, nor strict after John's way neither; but
against the traditions of the godly elders of the Jewish church; against
sanctifying of the Lord's sabbath, (justifying his disciples in plucking ears
of corn thereon, whereas their forefathers, the Jews, were not so much as to
gather manna on that day) against fasting and prayer, for he justified his
disciples in that they did not fast and pray as John did, saying, how could
they mourn while the bridegroom was with them? Matt. ix. 15. And consider which
way the Jews (in the state they stood) could understand such an answer as this,
to rest satisfied therewith.

6. They excepted against his miracles, partly because he did them on the
sabbath day, John ix. 16. Whereupon they concluded he could not be of God (for
if he had been of God, he would have observed the day which God commanded) and
if he wrought them not by the power of God, by whose power then must he work
them? So they concluded, he casts out devils by the prince of devils, Matt.
ix. 34. He has Beelzebub, and by the prince of devils casts he out devils,
Mark iii. 34. And having thus concluded in themselves, there was no ear open in
them to hear any thing that might be said to the contrary. And again, partly
because he did not answer their wills, in giving them such a sign as they
required: For this was still their tone, master we would see a sign from thee,
Matt. xii. 38. What sign show thou to us, seeing that thou do these
things? John ii. 18. And they more particularly express what sign they would
have, a sign from heaven, Luke xi. 18. What sign show thou, that we may see
and believe thee? John vi. 30. We are ready to be convinced, we are ready to
believe, if thou would give us sufficient ground of believing in thee. As
for all thy healing people, and casting out devils, Beelzebub, the prince of
devils, may furnish thee with power wherewith to deceive and bewitch us from
the law and ordinances of Moses, which we are sure are of God; but show show us
a sign from heaven, or else blame not us for not leaving Moses to run after
thee.

7. They excepted at the testimony which the spirit of God in him gave
concerning him. When he spoke the inward testimony, which the spirit of God
gave from within, saying I am the light of the world, he that follows me
shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life, John viii. 13,
they presently cried out, thou bear record of thyself, thy record is not
true, ver. 14. Mark his answer, it is written in your law that the testimony of
two men is true; I am one that bear witness of myself, and the father that sent
me bears witness of me, ver. 17, 18. How would such an answer pass now in
these days, though the same life should speak it? Would not the wise professors
of this age think strange at it? Yet the thing is known at this day, even the
life which the Father begets, and the Father's testifying of it, and with it,
and thou that read this, might know it, could thou wait in the loss of
thy own life, wisdom and knowledge, for it.

8. They excepted against his disciples and followers which were women,
publicans, and sinners* the common people, yea, the meanest, the poorest, and
most ignorant (in their account) who were fittest to be deluded and led away.
Are ye also deceived? Have any of the rulers, or of the Pharisees, believed on
him? But this people who know not the law are accursed, John vi. 47 -- 49. The
common people, the ignorant people, the unsettled people, such as know not the
law, such as understand not the scriptures, they run after him and cry him up,
but which of the settled ones, which of the truly zealous ones, which of the
wise men in the knowledge of the law and prophets, which of the orthodox
scribes and Pharisees, who keep close to Moses, which of these believe in him?
Whom of them can he deceive? As for the heady people, who (for want of
knowledge from the scriptures) are ready to run after every new fangle, they
are not worth minding, they are accursed; and therefore no marvel though God
give them up to follow this deceiver, and to cry up his new light, and forsake
the good old light of Moses and the prophets.

9. They excepted against him, that he did not rebuke his disciples and the
multitude (spreading their garments, cutting down branches from the trees, and
strewing them in the way) with the children that cried Hosanna to him as he
rode on the a^^'s colt to Jerusalem; but he rather justified them, Luke xix.
31, Matt. xxi. 15, 16. What a ridiculous and vainglorious piece of pageantry
would this seem to the fleshly wise eye?

10. That he did not show sufficient authority for what he did. By what
authority do thou these things, and who gave thee this authority? etc. Mark
xi. 28. Thou take upon thee great authority over the people of God, over
their teachers, yea, over God's temple, sabbath and ordinances; but where is
thy authority so to do? Show us that, etc.

11. They excepted when he spoke of his sufferings and death: We have heard in
our law that Christ abides for ever; and how say thou the Son of Man must
be lifted up? Who is the Son of Man? John xii. 34. Surely he that is to be
lifted up cannot be the Christ that is to abide for ever, and not to die! So
that here in one breath thou have overthrown all that thou have been setting up
by thy preaching and mi^^c^es. Now which way could they understand this thing?
Nay, the very disciples themselves could not swallow it, but were startled at
it, and Christ was fain to hide it a long time from them. And yet if there be
any thing held forth now in these days by the same spirit (as concerning light
and perfection, or other truths which are seen in the spirit) because men
cannot apprehend them with their carnal understanding, and make them agree with
their carnal knowledge of the scriptures, what liberty do they take to
themselves to speak both against the truth itself, and also against them who
have seen these things in the spirit, and speak them from the spirit? Now
whosoever becomes a disciple, must wait in obedience to know the doctrine, and
not think to enter with that wisdom and carnal reasoning from the scriptures,
which the scribes and Pharisees and the professors of that age were shut out
with.

There were many other things which they could not but except against: As at
his answers to their questions, to which sometimes he was silent, and gave no
answer at all; at other times, he answered not directly, but in parables: (And
how offensive is this to man's wisdom? who requires a positive and direct
answer.) And sometimes his answer might seem quite from the thing, as John xii.
34, 35.

His not giving respect to persons (for it was a known thing of him that he
regarded not men's persons, Matt. xvii. 16) could not be very pleasing to them
who loved greetings, and sought honor one of another; he showed not respect to
Herod, but spoke contemptuously of him, as men would account it: Go, says he,
and tell that fox, he did not show respect to the reverend and grave doctors of
the law; nay, nor to the high priest himself. Nay he did not show respect to
his own disciples, but said to Peter (when he mildly and affectionately desired
his death might be avoided) get thee behind me, Satan; how harsh and rough a
reply might this seem? If Peter had erred, through his affection and tenderness
to his master, a meek spirit would gently have informed him; but to call him
devil, and say, get thee behind me, what kind of spirit does this savor of?
Would that professing Jew say, who knows not the true meekness, but seeks
after a fleshly meekness, which is a servant to the fleshly wisdom and
prudence, but not true born. Nay, he did not speak respectfully to his own
mother (as man's spirit, by its rule of respect, would judge and condemn him)
for, at the marriage at Cana, when they wanted wine, "she says unto him they
have no wine;" he says unto her, woman, what have I to do with thee? John xi.
3, 4, and in a manner denied all his relations, Matt. xii. 48.

Lastly (to instance no more) at his harsh censures of all the professors of
that age (who observed the law of Moses, and Israel's statutes) with all their
laborious and godly teachers; justifying none but himself, and what he taught,
and a few of his followers. He told them, that they had not the love of God in
them, John v. 42. Did this not, think ye, seem to them a very harsh charge? And
why not the love of God? because they did not follow him and his new doctrine;
yea, would they be ready to say, they did love God, and kept his commandments,
sabbaths and ordinances, which he transgressed.

He laid this also to their charge, that they did not believe Moses, John v.
46. What an unjust charge might this seem? when they were so zealous for Moses;
and their very dislike of him, and controversy against him, was for the sake of
the law and ordinances of Moses.

Another charge he laid to them was, that they were not the children of
Abraham, or of God; but of the devil, John viii. 39, 42, 44. What a rash,
censorious man might they account him? thus to speak of them who were the human
seed of Abraham, who were such strict observers of God's laws and ordinances
(which is the property of his children) and such enemies to the devil, that
they would not be drawn from the truths and way of worship, taught by Moses and
the prophets; no, not by all the miracles he could work.

He called them a faithless and perverse generation, Matt. i. 17, 18. He told
them that they did not know God; though they said with confidence that he was
their God, John xii. 54, 55. How could they bear this? They had been studying
the law and the prophets, and had a great stock of knowledge from thence, and
were strict and exact in worship (some of them, as well as Paul, might be,
according to the law, blameless) and now to be told they did not know God: Nay,
he that abounds in knowledge, devotion and worship, yet not being in the life
and pure power of the spirit, has not one draught of the true knowledge.

He told them that they should die in their sins, John viii. 21. (O hard word,
and severe judgment!) and yet he had told them a little before, he judged no
man, ver. 15. Yea they did think themselves exceedingly wronged by him; and
thought that no man that had any thing of God in him could speak such things,
but only one that was an enemy to the people of God, and led by the spirit of
Satan. To this effect they express themselves, ver. 48 of that chapter, say we
not well thou art a Samaritan, and have a devil? Yea, when Christ charged them
with going about to kill him, they seemed to themselves so clear in their own
consciences, that they answered, thou have a devil, who goes about to kill
thee? John vii. 29. How easily might they close up the controversy, and by this
very thing conclude him to be a false prophet? He says, we went about to kill
him; when, God knows, there was not such a thing in our hearts: Can this man be
a true prophet? Yet Christ knew the professing Jew to be the murderer, and in
and for his religion's sake still seeking to slay him. And there is no such
murderer of Christ, the life, upon the earth, as the zealous professor and
worshipper out of the life. He that is in the life cannot persecute any man; he
that is out of the life cannot but persecute him that is in the life. Hereby
the true and false Christian may be discerned, by the weakest, simple and
single eye.

And for their teachers and expounders of the law, how exceedingly bitter did
he seem against? And how heavy things was he continually laying to their
charge? He called them blind guides, hypocrites, painted sepulchers, graves
which appear not, and pronounced woe upon woe against them; read that one
place, Matt. xxiii. 33, ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape
the damnation of hell? What! speak thus of our zealous teachers, who study the
law, are strict in practicing of the ordinances, and take such pains to
instruct us in the mind of God, from Moses and the prophets! Was such a man as
this fit to live? nay, and he does not show a gospel spirit. Mark how sharp and
bitter his words come from him, for indeed a sharper speech, with greater
vehemence and indignation of spirit, can hardly be spoken; and they might seem
to aggravate this sharp condemnation of his, from his own confession; he
himself had confessed, that they sat in Moses's chair. Now he might have shown
some honor to Moses's chair, and to their office, which was of God, and
doubtless good, and not have gone about to make them thus odious in the eyes of
the people. Nay, he himself had bid men do as they said, but in ver. 3 of that
chapter. Now was it likely that ever men should mind what they said, or observe
their doctrine, when he had thus represented them as oppressors of the
conscience, ver. 4, as devourers of widows houses, and making long prayers in
hypocrisy ver. 15, as making their proselytes more the children of hell than
themselves, as neglecters of the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy,
and faith, ver. 23, as appearing righteous to men, but full of hypocrisy and
iniquity, ver. 28, as of the same generation that killed the prophets, ver. 31,
32, as deceivers; as such as led into the ditch, and bid men beware of their
leaven? Were these good kind of encouragements for people to hear them? Yea, he
charged them with shutting up the kingdom of heaven against men, and not going
in themselves, nor suffering men to enter that were going in, ver. 13. How
could they observe what they taught without hearing them? and would Christ wish
any to hear such men as these? Yet for all this, without doubt they were not
without their justifications against Christ in these respects; and also had
their charges, on the other hand, ready against him. Now how did they shut up
the kingdom of heaven against men? Did not they teach the law, and direct men
to the ordinances of God, and open the prophets words to them? Was this
shutting up the kingdom of heaven? and would not they suffer men to enter? Why
their work was to win people to their profession* they would compass sea and
land to make a proselyte. How (...) might the Jews have pleaded against Christ,
that he did slander their godly ministers, who were very painful and zealous in
opening the scriptures, and teaching the way of God? Nay, he himself could not
deny but they taught well; for he himself says, whatsoever they bid you
observe, that observe, and do, Matt. xxiii. 3. But mark now, that ye may
understand the thing: It is thus, any teaching or expounding of scriptures out
of the life, shuts up the kingdom, for the life is the kingdom, and words from
the life yield the savor of the kingdom; but words out of it, though ever so
good and true, reach not to the life in another, but only build up a knowledge
in the contrary wisdom, and teach to hold the truth in the unrighteousness,
where Satan's kingdom stands, and where he has the dominion of all that is
brought thither. And so this kind of teaching and knowledge shuts up the door
and way of life, and must be lost, before the kingdom can be found. They shut
up the true kingdom, but they opened another kingdom, they opened the kingdom
another way, which was in truth shutting of it; and they had disciples and
children of the kingdom, whom they pleased with the hope of life, and fed with
promises and comforts; but these the Lord would shut out. Many shall come from
the east and west, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in
the kingdom of heaven; but the children of the kingdom shall be cast out into
utter darkness, Matt. viii. 11, 12. This is true at this day in the present
dispensation, as it was then in that dispensation; though men make it a great
accusation against us, charging us that we say none are the people of God but
ourselves, and as if all were damned but we. These are men's harsh and unsavory
expressions; we use not to speak after this manner, but soberly open the state
of the thing as it stands in the truth, and as it has been revealed unto us by
him who is true, and cannot lie; which is thus:

That through which men are saved, is the dispensation of truth in their age.
The measure of light which God gives forth in every age, that is the means and
proper way of salvation in that age; and wherever men get or profess of the
knowledge of truth declared in former ages, yet making use of that to withstand
the present dispensation of truth in their age, they cannot thereby be saved;
but may thereby be hardened against that which should save them. And this we
are assured of from the Lord, that as the Jews could not be saved by the law of
Moses (making use of it in opposition to the shining of the light of God in the
prophets in their several ages) nor afterward could be saved by magnifying and
observing both the words of Moses and the prophets, and their belief from
thence of a Messiah to come, making use of those things to oppose that
appearance of Christ in the flesh, which was the dispensation of their day
then; no more can any professors be saved now by the belief of a Christ come,
or any thing which they can learn or practice from the scriptures, making use
thereof to oppose the dispensation of this day; which dispensation is the
immediate and powerful breaking forth of the light of the spirit in the hearts
of God's people, who have earnestly sought, and in much sorrow and perplexity
of spirit longed and waited for him, after this long dark night of the
antichristian apostasy.

There remain yet some other exceptions against him, about the time of his
suffering death, with his hard usage, which should not wholly be passed over:
As,

1. His disrespectful or irreverent answering of the high priest, as it seemed
to them, when he asked him of his doctrine, John xviii. 19. His answer was,
that he spoke openly in the world, not in secret, why ask thou me? Ask them
that heard me. Whereupon one of the officers struck him, saying, answerest thou
the high priest so? ver. 22. The plainness and simplicity of the life, which
bows to God, and cannot regard man in the transgression, seems rude and
unmannerly to the lofty spirit of the world.

2. His silence at the testimonies brought against him, and to the high priest
when he questioned him, Mark xiv. 60, 61. Indeed either the speaking or silence
in the life, is offensive to the carnal professor, who knows not the law of
the life in this particular; but can either speak or be silent, according to
his own will. This is the difference between the true and false Christian; the
false Christian's knowledge and religion stand in his own will, in his own
understanding, he speaks in his own time; both which are crucified in him that
is born of the spirit.

3. When he did speak the truth himself, the high priest rent his clothes, and
charged him with blasphemy, Matt. xxvi. 64. And those that were by fell in with
the high priest, and said, he was worthy of death, ver. 66. Then they spit in
his face, and buffeted him, and smote him, and mocked him, and blindfolded him,
and struck him on the face, bidding him prophesy who smote him, Matt. xxvi. 67,
68, and Luke xxii. 63, 64. When they brought him to Pilate, they would have
Pilate take it for granted that he was an evil-doer, and worthy of death: For
when Pilate asked for their accusation against him, they answer, if he were not
a malefactor, we would not have delivered him up unto thee, John xviii. 29, 30.
Pilate refusing so to proceed in judgment, ver. 31, they begin to bring in
their charges: We found this fellow perverting the nation, and forbidding to
give tribute to Caesar, saying that he himself is Christ, a king Luke xxiii. 2.
Pilate examines him herein; but professes he can find no fault in him at all,
John xviii. 38. Then the chief priests accused him of many other things, Mark
xv. 3, and were more fierce; saying, he stirs up the people, teaching
throughout all Jewry, beginning from Gallilee to this place; this indeed was
his great offense, he taught with the authority of the spirit, and not as the
scribes. Then Pilate sent him to Herod, where the chief priests and scribes
stood vehemently accusing him, who questioned him much, but he answered him
nothing. And Herod, with his men of war, set him at naught, and mocked him, and
arrayed him in a gorgeous robe, and sent him back to Pilate, Luke xxiii. 9 --
11. Pilate professed that he could not find him guilty of this second charge,
neither of perverting the people, ver. 14, therefore chastising him, he would
release him, ver. 18, but the people, by the persuasion of the chief priests
and elders, cried all at once away with this man, and release unto us Barabbas,
ver. 11, but let him be crucified, crucify him, crucify him! ver. 21, etc. Now
when Pilate had scourged him, and the soldiers had stripped him, and put on him
a scarlet robe, and had put a crown of plaited thorns on his head, and a reed
in his right hand, and had bowed the knee to him, in mockery, and spit on him,
and smote him with a reed, he brings him forth to them again, hoping this might
appease their malice, and they might be content to spare his being crucified;
they tell him they have a law, and by their law he ought to die, because he
made himself the Son of God, John xix. 4, 8. See how they turn and wind every
way to make the innocent an offender, and to make some law, of one kind or
other, take hold of him; but when all their accusations would not prevail with
Pilate, but still, from the sense of his innocence, he had a mind to release
him, they use another subtle artifice, telling him, if he let this man go, he
was not Caesar's friend, John xix. 12. This carries it with Pilate; now he
disputes no farther, but delivers him up to their will, Luke xxiii. 5. Now thou
who read this, take heed of judging the Jews for all this wickedness, while
the same nature is alive in thee which did all this in them; for assuredly
thou, in whom that nature which did it in them is not subdued, would have
done the same thing, had thou lived in those days. Thou that disdainest and
persecutest the appearance of Christ in this age, would have disdained and
have persecuted his appearance in that age. Do not deceive thy soul.

The Jews did as little think that ever they should have put a prophet, or any
good man, to death, much less the Messiah, as thou can: Yea, they could blame
their fathers for killing the prophets, and say, if they had lived in those
days, they would not have done it; and yet do thou not read what they did?
The persecuting spirit was ever blind, and could in no age read its evil and
bitter nature, and its enmity against the life and power. Be not thou blind in
thy day, as they were in theirs; and an enemy, under pretense of being a friend.

4. Another exception or argument against him, about the time of his suffering
death, was, that he did not put forth his power to save himself from the cross:
He saved others, let him save himself, if he be the Christ, the chosen of God,
Luke xxiii. 35. Is it likely that this is the Son of God, and that he did so
many miracles by the power of God, and cannot now save himself from the cross?
This, his suffering death on the cross, did a little stumble some of the
disciples, as may appear, Luke xxiv. 20, 21, and was enough to have overturned
the faith of any which stood not in the spirit and in the power. The soldiers
also could mock, and manage their argument against him, saying, if thou be the
King of the Jews, save thyself, Luke xxiii. 37. And they that passed by reviled
him, wagging their heads, and saying, thou that destroyest the temple, and
buildest it in three days, save thyself. If thou be the Son of God, come down
from the cross, Matt. xxvii. 39, 40. Likewise the chief priests, with the
scribes and elders, mocked among themselves, saying, he saved others, himself
he cannot save. Let Christ, the King of Israel, descend now from the cross,
that we may see, and believe, Mark xv. 31, 32. One of the thieves also railed
on him, saying, if thou be the Christ, save thyself and us, Luke xxiii. 39. And
when he cried out to his God, Eli, Eli, etc. they derided him: This man calls
for Elias; let us see whether Elias will come and save him, Matt. xxvii. 47,
49. And after he was dead, the chief priests and Pharisees spoke of him as of a
known deceiver, ver. 63, and seem, in a pious zeal for the church, to take care
that there be no further occasion, after his death, for the reviving and
spreading of his deceit, and error, ver. 64. Thus the holy one, the pure one,
the just and true one, in whose heart and mouth was no guile found, was
numbered among transgressors, accounted a deceiver, and put to death as a
blasphemer, by the zealous priests and professors of that age, who were so
confident of the righteousness of their cause, on the behalf of the law of
Moses, and their sabbaths, temple, etc. against him, that when Pilate washed
his hands, as clear of his blood, all the people answered, and said, his blood
be on us, and on our children, Matt. xxvii. 25.

Now let men consider what the great exceptions are, which they have against
the living appearance of Christ in his spirit (now toward the close of the
apostasy) and against us his witnesses, whom the Lord has called forth to
testify his name. Many exceptions men have against our persons, our doctrine,
our practices, for want of miracles, etc. Is this generation more wise or just
in their exceptions than the former was? Consider the main ones a little.

Their great exceptions against our doctrine are: 1. That we preach up a light
within, and that he that receives that light, receives a perfect gift; and
growing up in it, grows up to perfection, which in this life, through faith
and obedience to this light or perfect gift, may be attained, and the body of
sin put off, and the new man Christ put on.

Answer. Indeed we cannot but preach up the light within, and declare unto men
how great things it has done for us; even that which we could never by any
means meet with from any light without. And this is perfect, and tends to make
perfect, carrying on its work daily. Now he that feels its virtue, cannot doubt
of its power; he that sees the body of sin daily going off, cannot doubt but
he may be stripped. Indeed, if a man strive against sin in his own will, and by
his own gathered knowledge, he cannot get much ground, and so it is hard for
him to believe perfection. But he that feels unity with that which is perfect,
cannot but acknowledge that it is able to perfect him, and in faith and
patience is encouraged to hope and wait for it.

2. That we deny that Christ that died at Jerusalem, and his imputed
righteousness, and set up an inherent righteousness.

Answer. We know no other Christ than that which died at Jerusalem, only we
confess our chief knowledge of him is in spirit. And as Christ said in the days
of his flesh, that the way to know his father was to know him; and he that knew
him knew the father also; so we now witness, that the way to know Christ is to
know the spirit; and he that knows the spirit, knows Christ also; with whom
Christ is one, and from whom he cannot be separated. And as for imputed
righteousness, it is too precious a thing to us to be denied by us; that which
we deny, is men's putting it out of its place, applying it to them who are nor
in the true says, and walk not in the true light: For in the true light, where
the fellowship is with the father and the son, there alone the blood cleanses,
1 John i. 7. And there alone the righteousness is imputed to him, who is
cleansed by the blood in the light, and not to him who knows it not. And as for
inherent righteousness, we meddle not with that word, but this we say, that our
life exceedingly lies in feeling the righteousness of Christ wrought and
revealed in us; and we wish men could come out of the reasoning about it, into
the feeling of the same thing with us: For then we are sure they would not so
sharply, nor so long contend.

3. That we deny the ordinances and means of salvation.

Answer. We deny nothing that the apostles and Christians formerly practiced;
nor do we deny any thing that any now practice in the light, and in the faith;
but the setting up such things in the will, that we deny; or the imitating
these without the command of the spirit, that we deny also. And this we
testify, that Antichrist crept in here, and that they are his great cover to
keep men from the life; and therefore warn men to mind the life, and to take
heed they be not kept from the substance by the shadows, where Antichrist lies
lurking to bewitch from the substance. And we are sure that these, in
Antichrist's hands, are not the means of salvation; but keep from the sight of
the holy city, where the life and salvation is. And we read that the outward
count was given to the Gentiles; who trod under foot the holy city, Rev. xi. 2.
And we have found by experience, that while we ourselves were crying up the
outward court, we did trample under foot the city, though we then knew it not.

Their exceptions against our persons are, that we are ignorant, illiterate,
and also unsettled persons, who have still been seeking up and down, etc.

Answer. What persons are fittest for God to make use of, toward the recovery
of his people out of the apostasy? Does not God choose that which is weak, and
mean, and contemptible, that his glory might the more appear? Is not this a
more likely way for him to steal upon the world, than if he appeared in the
wise and learned ones? And among whom is his appearance to be expected? Among
those that are settled upon their lees in the apostasy? Or among those who have
mourned, panted, and sought to come out of it, and could not be settled without
his appearing to them, and fixing of their feet upon the rock. But have we been
unsettled, since God has fastened us on the living foundation? Nay, here is no
more going out; but he that abides faithful, remains a pillar in the house of
God. Men except likewise against our practices, as that we show not respect to
persons, and that we are not strict, after their manner, in duties, etc.

Answer. We have heard that voice, fear God and give glory to him, Rev. xiv. 7.
(not only as it is written there, but in spirit) and where the Lord is exalted,
the glory of the creature falls: Read Isa. ii. ^ow all falls in that day, that
God alone might be exalted. And we cannot, in this mighty day of the Lord, any
longer give to man that honor which he has gathered in the fall, and which
pleases the falen nature, and not that which is born of God. And or duties, we
have bewailed, in the sight of the Lord, our former running into duties without
his spirit: And we must confess, we can only pray in the spirit; ^ing in the
spirit; wait in the spirit; speak in the spirit, as that gives utterance, and
not of ourselves, or when we will, but as we see life, strength and power from
on high, leading and assisting us. And our re^igion consists neither in willing
nor running, but in waiting on the spirit and power of the Lord, to work all in
us and for us. All these things we look upon to be our duty, and practice them.

It is likewise excepted against us, that we do not work miracles.

Answer. We point to that which wrought all the outward miracles formerly, and
which now works great inward miracles in spirit; and we are sure ^he same
power which we have received the gospel ^n, is of the same healing virtue. But
that power works according to the purpose of its own will, and not according
to the will of man. Yea, though Paul had the gift of healing, yet he left
Trophimus, at Miletum, sick, 2d Tim. iv. 20. Neither was the will or wisdom of
man satisfied in all those miracles that Christ and the apostles wrought. It is
enough for us to feel and live in the moving of the power; in which we rejoice,
and are more satisfied, that by it our names are written in the book of life,
than we could by any such outward and visible appearance, and manifestation of
it. But if we did work outward miracles, yet if thou had not an inward eye to
see them with, thou would not be able to distinguish by what power they were
wrought.

To what purpose should I mention any more particulars? Is it not enough? Oh!
fear before the Lord! and do not lose the present dispensation of life through
mistake, or because ye cannot have things suited to your corrupt wills; but
know the gospel, which is an inward dispensation, and does not consist in
outward shadows, but in inward virtue, life and power. For the kingdom of God
is righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy spirit. Come to wait for that,
to feel that, to unite there* and then we shall not differ about that which is
outward. But it is Antichrist's way, by the magistrate's power, to force an
agreement about the outward, which destroys that tenderness of conscience which
preserves the inward.

And now let me put one question to you; where is the deceit of the ages after
Christ to be expected? Did the Jews deny Moses and the prophets writings, or
ordinances? Nay, were they not very zealous for these? And were not these their
cover under which they persecuted Christ, and vented all their malice against
him? So can it be expected now, that the deceivers of this age should deny the
apostle's writings, or the practices therein mentioned? Of is it not rather to
be expected, that under their crying up of these, they should hide their enmity
against the life? Search and see, has not every after-age of professors took
up the words and practices of them who were persecuted in the foregoing age;
and under the profession of those words and practices, have hid their spirit of
persecution? There is a remnant only among professors to be saved; the
generality of them have still been persecutors, creeping into the form, getting
that for a cover upon their backs, and then fighting against the life and
power. Oh! wait on the Lord in his fear, that ye may be found worthy to know
the persecuted truth on the one hand, and the persecuting spirit on the other
hand, in this day of large profession, and also of bitter persecution!

Now what might be the cause, or how could it come to pass, that the zealous
worshippers of that age should thus err in their zeal, and be thus ^eady and
rash against him, whom they looked for to be their Savior? How came they thus
to err in vision, and stumble in judgment, in so weighty a matter? Show unto us
the cause, that we may see whether the same cause be not in us: For undoubtedly
if it be, it will produce the same effect; and so we may ignorantly draw upon
our heads the same heavy wrath in our day, that they did in their day.

Answer. The causes were many; I may mention some few of the principal ones;
which if they be seen into and removed, by that power which is able to do it,
such as are of a more inferior influence, will not be able to stand.

1. One cause of their blind zeal, and bitterness against Christ, was their
ignorance of the scriptures, and of the power of God. If they had known the
scriptures in the true light, they could not but have known Christ, from whom
the scriptures were given forth; and if they had known ^he power of God, they
could not but have known (...) who came in the power. Yea, (...) ^hey had
knowledge enough of (...), in the letter: They knew the words of scripture,
they could make large expositions of them. They knew what was said in scripture
concerning the power of God, but they knew not the thing itself; and so turned
against it, and made use of the words which came from it, and testified of it,
against it.

2. A second cause of this their sad miscarriage in their zeal was, their
putting the law and ordinances, and writings of the prophets, out of their
proper places. They exceedingly magnified and cried them up, in that carnal way
wherein they apprehended and practiced them, but understood not the right end
and use of them. And by these means, practicing the shadows in the carnal mind,
they lost the substance, which the proper use of the shadows was to have
pointed them unto.

3. Their high conceits of the goodness of their state in relation to God, and
of their certainty of their knowledge of the truths of God, from Moses and the
prophets. They were confident they knew God aright, and that he was their
father, and that they were his children and people. And so Christ's appearing
in a seeming contrariety to these, notwithstanding all his powerful preaching
and miracles, they made no question but they might boldly conclude him not to
be of God.

4. Christ coming in a way that they looked not for him. They had concluded
from the scriptures how Christ must appear; and he coming in a far different
manner, they could not own him, but looked upon him as a deceiver, one that
pretended to be Christ, but was not like to what the scriptures said of Christ.
So what the scriptures says of Christ's second coming, is hid as much from the
carnal eye of professors in this age, as what was said concerning his first
coming, was hid from them in their age; and he will steal upon them as a thief,
at a time, and in a way, and after a manner, that they expect not.

5. (Which is the main-one, and the cause of all the former) because they were
from the light within, from the true light in their own hearts and consciences.
The light within is the great ordinance of God, and the proper means to give
the knowledge of him, 2 Cor. iv. 6, without which it was never received under
any dispensation: For the light that shines abroad, or from without, can alone
be known and received by the light that shines within. Christ himself opens
this in a parable; the light of the body, says he, is the eye; if therefore
thine eye be single, clear, without beams or motes, thy whole body shall be
full of light, Matt. vi. 22. But if that be evil, if that be dark, if that be
closed by the God of this world, all Moses's words, all the prophets words,
yea, all Christ and the apostles words, cannot give thee light. Can I see the
light of the sun, moon, or stars, or of any fire or candle, if I have not a
natural eye, and if that natural eye be not open? So neither can I see the
light of any dispensation of life, if I have not an eye within me open,
wherewith to see it. So that which gives me the sight of the things of God, is
the eye which God has given me; by that may be read the eternal power and
godhead in the creatures, in the books of Moses and the prophets, in the
writings of the evangelists and the apostles; as the spirit leads and opens,
yea, the same spirit that opened to these without books, may again open to any
of us without books at his pleasure, and will not be limited to books; and we
then may read also as they did, even within in the spirit, and in the immediate
life; but without this, can none of the things of God be read aright. Now the
God of this world had blinded this eye in the Jews; yea, they themselves had
stopped their ears and closed their eyes, etc. they would not see this way,
they would not be converted and healed this way. They would keep up the
knowledge which they had gathered from Moses and the prophets, without this
eye; and with that they would see, or not at all.

Thus being from the light within, they could not see the place of life within,
where life is to be received: They could not see the womb of wisdom which is
within, and so could not enter into it, and be born again; and being not born
of the wisdom, how could they justify the wisdom? Being not born of the light,
how could they know or own Christ, whose coming and appearance was in the
light? For that appearance of Christ the life, in that body of flesh, could not
be discerned by all men's wisdom in the letter; the disciples themselves came
not so to know it, but my father which is in heaven has revealed it to you.
And mark it: The disciples who were illiterate, and not so knowing of the
scriptures that were written of Christ, yet they knew Christ: But the scribes
and Pharisees, who were very skilful in the letter, could not know him. What
was the reason? The reason lay in the difference of the eye, or light,
wherewith they looked; the one looked with an outward eye, the other with an
inward eye. And a little inward light will do that, which a great deal of
outward light will not do. And this I can certainly affirm, that all the light
that men can gather from the scriptures, cannot give them the knowledge of
Christ as he has appeared in this age; nay, nor as he has appeared in any
age, since the days of the apostles; but a little true inward light will give
the knowledge of this thing, and open those scriptures infallibly, in its
season, which all the generations of wife and learned men have been
controverting and disputing about, in that wisdom and searching spirit which is
never to understand them. This then is the main and full reason of this deep
error of the Jews, and their desperate splitting upon the rock, which would
have saved them. They were begotten of the letter, which was given forth in
former ages; but not of the life, which was raised up in their age; and so they
knew not how to turn to the light within, which alone was able to give them the
true and certain knowledge of the things of God.

Now consider these things well, O ye professors of this age! and take heed
that ye do not fall after the same example of unblief. Be not high-minded, but
fear. Be not so confident of what you have gathered by your wisdom for truth
from the scriptures, after the manner that they were, of what they had gathered
by their wisdom; but fear lest ye should be mistaken as they were; and wait for
the opening of that light in you, which was shut in them; even the true eye, in
the true light, by the holy anointing; where there never was nor can be any
mistake. The Jews fell by unbelief. Unbelief of what? They believed the
scriptures, they believed according to that knowledge they had gathered from
the scriptures; but they did not believe in the living word. They had a
knowledge abiding in them, which they had gathered from the scriptures, but
they had not the living word abiding in them; and so their faith was but
unbelief, for the living faith stands in the belief of the living word in the
heart, which the scriptures direct to; without the knowledge of which, all
knowledge of words is vain; and without faith in which, all faith is vain also.
Now says the apostle to the Gentile, Christian, thou stand by faith, Romans
xi. 20. By what faith? By faith in that word in the heart, which they neglected
and turned from, Romans x. 8. For Moses had taught them, after the laws and
ordinances about worship and sacrifices, that the word that they were to obey
and do, the word that could give them life, and make them obedient to all the
commandments without, was in their heart and mouth, Deuteronomy. xxx. 14. And so the
prophet Micah, when they proposed sacrifices and oil to please God with, brings
them to this, which was given to them in common with mankind, Micah vi. 8. For
all ordinances, and laws, and observations, and practices without, are but to
bring the life within, which is to be found again there, where it was lost, and
still lies slain and hid, even in the field or house where it was lost. And he
that seeks abroad, never finds it, but when the candle is lighted in his own
house, and he searches narrowly in the field, in his own heart, and the eternal
eye begins to open in him; then he cries God was in this place, and I was not
aware of it. Ah! how the enemy bewitched me, to run from mountain to mountain!
and from hill to hill! and has hereby covered my eye from beholding the
mountain of the Lord's house, and from feeling the spring of my life, which I
further and further ran from, all the while I was seeking abroad. Therefore, O
ye professors, be not so conceited like the Jews, and running after them into
their desolation and misery, but learn wisdom by their fall! Do not you set up
their ordinances and scriptures, after the manner they set up theirs; for this
is your danger, for this I clearly, in the light of the Lord, testify to you,
that if ye gather a knowledge and wisdom from the letter of the scriptures,
after the manner that they did, without knowledge from the word within, and
without a light within from that word, ye lose the living faith; ye are but
dead branches, and your knowledge of scriptures, and practices, and faith, and
duties, etc. that ye here hold and observe, are but for the fire; and the
flames of eternal wrath shall kindle more fiercely upon you because of them,
than upon the Jews; for ye stumble at the same stumbling-stone at which they
stumbled and fell, and it will fall upon you also. And as you have more
scriptures than they had, and ^^e experience of their fall to warn you, so your
destruction will be exceeding dreadful if you neglect so great salvation;
whereof at this day there are so many living and powerful witnesses, as they
are known and owned to be in the light of the Lord, though despised in your
exalted and conceited wisdom.

Now to help any honest and single hearts among you over this great
stumbling block of a light within, consider these few things:

1. That all the knowledge, all the true knowledge, that ever ye had of God,
was from a light within. I do not deny that ye might receive your knowledge
through the scriptures, and some warmth formerly in those things which ye call
ordinances and duties; but that whereby ye received the knowledge was the light
within, the eye that God secretly opened in your spirits. This was the way ye
then came by it, though ye perhaps might feel the thing, but not know how ye
came by it; even as a babe may see truly, but does not understand its own eye,
or know how it sees.

2. While this eye was kept open in you, your knowledge was true in its
measure, and serviceable to you, and did draw you nearer to God, making you
truly tender, meek, sweet, humble, patient, loving, gentle, and of precious
breathing toward God, and after righteousness. Oh! how lovely were you to God
in this state? When Israel was a child, I loved him. God remembereth at this
day the kindness of your youth, and is seeking after you. Oh! why do you so
harden your hearts against him?

3. That wherever this eye is shut, the virtue of the true knowledge is lost,
and the sweet fruits thereof wither. The outward part of the knowledge may be
retained; yea, perhaps much increased, but the life is gone, and the pure sweet
savouriness, to God, vanished. And if this eye were but a little opened against
you, your death and unsavouriness might soon be seen and felt in you, in all
your knowledge, duties, ordinances; yea, in your very graces and experiences.
You have a faith still; yea, but it wants the savor of your former faith: Ye
have some kind of love, gentleness, and meekness; yea, but it is only a thing
formed by the fleshly wisdom and reasoning, but not natural from the living
spring, not such as ye once felt, etc. for the true and living eye being shut,
that which is then best, or afterward attained, is held but in the dead part,
and serves but to feed death.

4. The great work and design of the enemy of your souls, is not to steal away
the bulk of your knowledge, or to draw you from ordinances or duties; but to
steal the life out of your spirits. This I have experienced from my childhood:
I might still have knowledge enough of any kind; but that which I wanted was
life, and I was still sick under all the sorts of knowledge that ever I met
with, and under all ordinances and duties, for want of life. The Lord had given
my soul a taste of true life, whereby I became unsatisfied without it, and no
manner of knowledge or enjoyment could take me up by the way: Yea, when through
extremity I seemed willing to be content with any thing; yet still my heart was
sick after that one thing, which alone could truly ease and satisfy it. Now if
the enemy can prevail herein, to blind the inward eye, and steal away the life
within, he has enough. Then abound as much as thou will in knowledge, in zeal,
in duties, in ordinances, in reading scriptures, praying, meditating, etc. thou
art the surer his hereby, and so much the better servant to him; for how much
the richer thou art in knowledge, experiences, hopes, and assurance, without
the life or power, so much the more acceptable, and honorable, and useful, art
thou in his kingdom.

Therefore see where ye are; is the inward eye open in you? Do you know the
light within? Surely he that sees by a light within, can hardly speak evil of
it. Or has the enemy, by some of his artifices, drawn a veil over that eye
wherewith once ye saw in some measure? Oh! be not slight in a matter of so
great weight! Oh! please not yourselves with the eye of the perishing wisdom,
with death's eye, and with death's knowledge of scriptures, and the Son of God;
which speaks great words of the same of true wisdom, but is a stranger and
enemy to the thing! Oh! life is precious! eternal life is precious! To have the
word of God abiding in the heart, and to feel the true light give the true
life, who can set a value on this? Ah! do not lose your souls for a trifle, for
a little such knowledge of the scriptures, as the earthly part can gather!

This I cannot but exceedingly despise, although the scriptures I truly honor,
for their testimony of that whereby I live. If ye see not the way of life by
the inward light, which alone can show it, ye lose your souls. If the god of
the world has blinded that eye in you, what are all your treasures of wisdom
and knowledge? What are all your hopes? And what will become of you? All these
sparks of your own kindling from scripture, will not secure you from the bed of
sorrow. O ye several sorts of professors, why will ye die with the
uncircumcised? Why will ye go down into the pit, among them that know not the
Lord?

But what shall I say to this generation? The spiritually-wise foreseeth the
storm and hides himself; but the spiritually-foolish run on headily, and are
punished. The clouds have long been gathering; but the sick eye cannot discern
the signs of the times and seasons; and so because judgment comes not as men
expected, they grow hard, and wear off the sense wherewith they were somewhat
affected at the first threatening of it, but assuredly both judgment and mercy
hasten, and they will come, and will not tarry.

For the same Lord God Almighty, which confounded the heathen Babel, when their
sins and vain confidence were ripe, which they built to prevent any future
flood, for though they once had the true knowledge of God from an inward light,
Romans i. 21, yet they soon left that, not liking to retain God in their
knowledge, ver. 28, but running out into imaginations, and so building a Babel,
whereby their foolish hearts became darkened to the light which God had made to
shine in them; which showed what might be known of God unto them, ver. 19. Yea,
the Lord God which overthrew the Jews Babel, which they had built from their
knowledge of the laws and ordinances of Moses, and the scriptures written to
them, they running out into imaginations also, whereby they likewise thought to
prevent the overflowing scourge from coming near them, Isa. xxviii. 15, the
same God will overthrow the Christians Babel, which they have built from the
prophets and apostles words, by their own imaginations and conceivings in the
high-mindedness, out of the fear, whereby they think to escape the deluge of
eternal wrath. For their city also shall be thrown down with violence, and
shall be found no more at all, Rev. xviii. 21. And the great work of this day
is to discover the rottenness of their wall, and the untemperedness of the
mortar wherewith they have daubed it. He that reads, let him understand; but
the uncircumcised in heart and ears cannot.

"But the Lord will manifest all things in his time, and give his truth a
passage in the earth, and his people a quiet habitation therein, how black
soever the face of things now appear, as relating to them. Oh! how happy will
the day be, when the Lord shall have wrought down the selfish spirit in man,
and shall have raised up his own noble and equal principle. Then shall
righteousness spring up and spread abroad throughout the nations; and the work
of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness, quietness,
and assurance for ever."

A few Words to such as have felt the Power of the endless Life drawing, and
have faithfully followed the Leader of the Flock of Israel; who has of late
led his ^heep in such Paths as have not been known all the Night of the
Apostasy.
O YE children of the Most High! who have felt the breath of the eternal spirit
begetting you in the pure life, and drawing you out of this world, out of the
vanities, out of the corruptions, out of the course and fashions, out of (...)
ways and forms of worship, yea out of the very root and principle thereof, into
the worship and spirit of truth, and into the fear of the Most High, which is
wisdom's place and habitation, where the pure law of life is received, and the
salvation begun, wrought out, and perfected: O ye dear plants of the right hand
of eternity! fear not what is to come to pass in this visible creation, to
break the corrupt state thereof, and to make way for the springing up and
spreading of his pure life and righteousness, which the corrupt estate, spirit
and principle of the world cannot but oppose until it be brought down and
subjected, sanctify the Lord of Hosts, and let him be your fear and dread, that
he may compass you with the arm of his power, and hide you under the shadow of
his hand, until he has planted the heavens, and laid the foundations of the
earth, and say to Sion, in the sight of all her enemies, thou art my people.
The Lord my God watch over you night and day! and preserve his living principle
pure and fresh in you, and you in perfect subjection unto it; that he may
delight in what he has begotten and preserved in you, and ye may be satisfied
in the opening and overflowing of the love of his heart toward you.

Even so, O Lord, thy will be done concerning this generation of thy people,
whom thou have begotten to thyself, and brought forth by thy mighty power, to
testify to thy truth in this present day. Dispose of them as it pleases thee,
and let not their faith in thee, nor thy faithfulness to them, fail; but let
them be a praise to thy name throughout all generations, and tendered by thee,
as the first fruits of thine appearance, in the glorious light of the
everlasting day, after this great, long, thick, and dark night of apostasy from
the life and spirit of the apostles, which has so long eclipsed and covered
the brightness of thy beauty from the sight of the earth. Amen.

POSTSCRIPT to the JEW OUTWARD. Or, to the several PROFESSORS of this Age.
Where is the wise? Where is the scribe? Where is the disputer of this world?
Has not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? 1 Cor. i. 20.
THESE have always been the enemies and opposers of truth, and setters up of
false images thereof in all ages; the wise, the learned, the great disputants.
To these truth has still been mean and contemptible, their eye has still
overlooked it, and their imaginations have still outrun it, finding out
somewhat else in the stead thereof; for which they have been still able and
vigorous to contend, and against the truth itself. And indeed how can the wise
eye see that, how can the learned eye acknowledge that, which comes quite out
of the way of its knowledge and learning, even in a path that it is not at all
acquainted with? Wisdom is justified of her children. Those that are wise to
salvation, those that are learned in the spirit, those that can dispute in the
power of the life and demonstration of the spirit, these know her habitation,
and her outgoings, and can own her in every age, and in every dispensation and
coming forth: But the wise and learned of this world are shut out of this
wisdom, and in all the searches after truth cannot find her; and if at any time
they do find and taste somewhat of her, yet they cannot keep her; but the
wisdom, and learning, and strength of the earthly part in them, soon betrays
and makes a prey of the simplicity that is in Christ, and of his pure gospel;
which cannot be comprehended, nor will take up a dewlling place with this
wisdom, but brings it to nothing, tramples upon it, and keeps it down for ever,
where it abides.

Three sorts of enemies, of the wise, the learned, the great disputants, truth
always had. First, of such as have denied the true form of knowledge and
worship. Secondly, of such as have owned the form, but denied the power.
Thirdly, of such as have had a taste of the power, but afterward erred from
it; and so held that, which they had once a true taste of, in the unrighteous
part, and likewise added to it by their own imaginations.

When Israel was in Egypt, that poor illiterate company of brick-makers, in
bondage under that wise people, the Egyptians, with all their wisdom, could not
own their God, or their worship; but their God was an unknown being to all that
wisdom, Ex. v. 2, and his worship and sacrifice the abomination of their eyes,
Ex. viii. 26. And Jannes and Jambres, with other wise magicians, withstood the
appearance of God; and Pharaoh and his people, with their wisdom, thought to
have kept God's Israel from multiplying, Ex. i. 10, and to have held Israel
still under their servitude, after the Lord was risen to stretch out his arm
for their deliverance, Ex. v. 8, 9. And how did all the wise nations still
watch to make a prey of God's Jerusalem? How did they count the towers? How
often did they think to divide the spoil? Judge, v. 28 Isa. xxxiii. 18. How did
Senacherib and Rabsheka make her their own? And when the Lord did at any time
give Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers, how did they think to keep
her under for ever? The wise Assyrian, the Moabite, the Ammonite, the Edomite,
the Philistine, the Amalekite, the wise Babylonian, or Chaldean, thought to
keep her under, as Pharaoh had done, even till their wisdom and knowledge
perverted them also, Isa. xlvii. 18; and the prince of Tire, who was wiser than
Daniel, Ezekiel. xxviii. 3, he also could insult over Jerusalem, and rejoice at
her downfall and captivity, chap. xxvi. 2.

But to come closer; come to Israel itself. That people, by all the wisdom it
could gather from the law, by all the experiences it had had of God's power, by
all the faith that was wrought in them upon deliverances, yet had not eyes to
see, nor ears to hear, nor hearts to perceive; but were a people that did
always err in their hearts, and did not understand the way of truth and peace.
The prophets among them still fools; yea, the spiritual man mad, Hos. ix. 7.
The priests were generally ignorant of the Lord, for though they had the ark of
his presence, his tabernacle, his temple, altar, sacrifices, worship, etc. yet
they did not know where he was, nor did enquire after him, but contented
themselves with a form of knowledge and worship. And they that handled the law,
knew not him that gave the law, and was the sole true interpreter of the law;
but the pastors transgressed against him, and the prophets prophesied by
another spirit, Jer. ii. 8. They were wise, and did abound in their own
meanings, guessings, and gathered knowledge; but they knew not the truth, no
not of the letter according to the law, and according to that light which God
sometimes caused to shine among them from his prophets. Hence it was that that
people, with their rulers, their teachers, their priests, their prophets, were
generally enemies to the prophets whom God raised up, hating, persecuting,
imprisoning, stoning them, etc. The prophets of God, that spoke his truth in
his wisdom, in his life and power, in the demonstration of his spirit, they
could not away with; these were fools with them, these were madmen with them, 2
Kings, ix. 11, Jer. xxix. 26. These ^^re poor illiterate herdsmen and
ploughmen; they ^^d learned men, that were brought up at the schools (...) the
prophets, that could prophesy divine things, ^^eet things, that could open the
law learnedly: These prophets and the priests the rulers cherished, ^^d the
people loved, Jer. v. 31, and xxiii. 26, 27, Ezekiel. xiii. 3, etc. Yea, among
that people such as had a taste of the truth, as Korah, Dathan and Abiram might
have, for surely it was not a small matter that could so lift them up to oppose
Moses and Aaron in that manner, and to stand out the contest against them, even
in the Lord's presence, Numb. xvi. 18, but an apprehension of God's being on
their side, from some appearance of his to them, and as Balaam had, whose eyes
were opened to see the beauty of the tents of Jacob; yet these, through the
prevailing of the fleshly lusts and wisdom, become enemies, and try always to
prevail over Israel, even over the truth, and over the power. It presently
hangs down its head: Nay, if he do but so much as hide his face, it is
troubled; and all the fullness, which it immediately before had from God, is
not able to keep up its life one moment; but it pants, and fails, and withers,
until a new supply of refreshment be administered to it. And he that knows this
in any measure will not wonder at the distress and misery of such, for want of
God's presence; and at their cryings out after the spring of their life, even
as the heart pants after the waterbrooks, though they should have fullness of
all outward things, yea, and also fullness of knowledge in things of religion,
even concerning all conditions and estates. The thing that I wanted in my great
misery, it was not outward knowledge, it was not experience of God's mercy and
goodness; but this I wanted, the issuings forth of his fresh life, and livingly
to know where to wait for it, and livingly to know it when it appeared: For it
was still near me all the time of my darkness, and did preserve me, and appear
unto me; but I livingly knew it not, but thought I would be wiser than others:
For I saw many deceived, and so I would not own it in such a way as it then
appeared in me, lest I also should be deceived like others; but waited for such
an appearance as could not be questioned by the fleshly wisdom. And he that
waits for that, and so despises the day of small things, cannot but refuse the
little seed; and so, not being received into his earth, it can never grow up in
him into a great tree; whereby the glory of the kingdom will be hid from him,
and he shut out of it, when others enter into and sit down in it. Therefore, he
that will be wise, let him become a fool, that he may be wise; let him receive
that for his light, his king, his guide, which man's wisdom never did, nor
never will own. He that ever looks to enjoy the comforter, let him receive the
reprover, the convincer of sin, and wait for his law of judging him through the
whole course of his sinful state and nature, passing along with him through the
whole condemnation, until he arrive with him at the justification of the life,
which the fleshly wisdom, nor any of his knowledge of the things of God, as
they are held in the fleshly part, must never arrive with him at.

Has not God made foolish the wisdom of this world?

The wisdom of this world is precious in the eye of the world; and the wisdom
of God, in his poor, weak, despised earthen vessels, is still foolishness with
them; but the Lord so orders it, that he still justifies his despised wisdom in
his despised vessels, and makes the wisdom of the world appear foolish to all
the single and upright-hearted who thirst after, and wait for the revelation of
his truth. Now two ways especially the Lord makes the folly of this world's
wisdom appear:

First, in that by all their wisdom they cannot find out the true knowledge of
God, ver. 21. The world by wisdom knew not God. Though there be an exceeding
desire kindled in them to know God; though they take all the ways that heart
can imagine to attain their desires; though they study and meditate ever so
hard; though they get ever so many arts and languages; nay, though they read
the very scriptures ever so diligently; though they keep ever so strict to the
forms of church orders and disciplines; even though they labor in the very
fire; yet what they get, what they gather, what they understand, what they
comprehend by this wisdom, it is all but very vanity, Heb. ii. 13. It reaches
not the immortal, it nourishes not the immortal, it satisfies not the soul, it
refreshes not the seed; but only feeds and pleases the earthly part, the
earthly understanding, the earthly mind, the earthly desires and affections;
even the man's part, the man's spirit, the man's nature; which though elevated
and raised ever so high, is still but earth.

Secondly, in that all their wisdom cannot teach them to come down to, to
submit to, to come into God's way of having their wisdom crucified, and that
raised up in them which might receive the truth. This they can never learn in
the fleshly wisdom. They may indeed come thus far, even to see that there is no
way of entrance but by death; and to seek death, that they may enter into the
life, but they cannot find it. The seed of Jacob, in his seeking, misses not;
but this seeker never finds; to this asker it is never given, and to this
knocker it is never opened: And that is it which makes this wisdom in every
appearance, in every sort of profession and sect of professors, so rage at the
seed of Jacob, even because it finds itself still shut out of the life into
which an entrance is administered to the seed. And how can that which would
fain have the kingdom, but rage against that which takes the inheritance from
it? How can every sort of professors but strive to slay the heir, that the
inheritance may be theirs? Were it not for the living seed, and the living
power and virtue, which break forth in them and among them, the religion and
worship of the first birth might pass for current; but this is it which darkens
the glory of all professions and professors upon the earth, even that living
thing which God has begotten in his people, and his living presence with it,
and blessing upon it. At this all the zealous sacrificers, teachers and
professors, out of the life, rage and are mad, and would break the cords and
bands wherewith this strives to bind them unto God's altar.

Now look over all ages; could the wise heathen stoop to God's dispensation to
the Jews? Was it not foolishness and abomination to them? Or could the wise
Jews stoop to the law within, to the word in the heart, although directed
thereto by Moses, Deuteronomy. xxx. 14, to learn there to do justly, to love mercy,
and to walk humbly with their God? Micah vi. 8. Could they wait there to have
their hearts circumcised by that word of power, and so to be washed and made
clean? Nay, were they not drowned in the outward sacrifices, temple, incense,
new mons and sabbaths, and such kind of observations, and could not hear the
truth of the Lord as it was delivered by Moses, nor as it was opened by the
prophets? Isa. i. 2. So that this people, seeking to know the Lord from the
letter, by this wisdom, could never come to the knowledge of him, but the place
of his light and wisdom was hid from them.

Again, when Christ came (in the days that are past) and the kingdom was
preached, and the everlasting way of redemption and salvation made manifest,
could the wise eye in the Greeks, or the wise eye in the Jews, see it? Did not
the Greeks shut themselves out by a wisdom above the letter (as they thought)
and the Jews by a knowledge and wisdom which they had gathered out of the
letter? How wise were they from the letter to reason against the king of life?
This man cannot be of God, for he is a breaker of his sabbath. He is a
Nazarite, and can any good thing come out of Nazareth? He says the son of man
must be lifted up, but we read that Christ abides for ever.

The apostle Jude compares such to the angels that kept not their first estate;
the angels that fell had a place and standing once in the truth, but they kept
it not, they abode not in the truth, but fell from it, and so became devils,
enemies to the truth from which they fell: So those that fall from the truth,
from the power, from the living virtue whereof they once tasted, from the true
wisdom which once appeared to them, and begun to season and savor them, in
their fallen wisdom they become the greatest enemies, the greatest accusers,
the greatest opposers, and the stiffest maintainers of a false image of that
truth which they once had some knowledge of, and some unity with. Thus it was
in the Jewish state: Now come to the apostles days. First, they had all the
wise men of that age against them; all the wise Greeks, all the wise Jews, the
learned men, the able disputants of all sorts. The Greeks could not find wisdom
in that knowledge of Christ which they held forth, nor the Jews could not find
power in it, 1 Cor. i. 22; and so one accounted it foolishness, the other
stumbled at it, ver. 23. There were many sorts and sects of wise men among the
Jews, but not one sort could own the truth, though they were looking for it,
searching the scriptures about it, and disputing concerning it. The very thing
then in agitation and enquiry among them was, when the kingdom of God should
come. The king himself directs them where it was, that they might know where to
expect and wait for it, Luke xvii. 21, and in many parables opens it to them;
but it was still hid from the eye of that wisdom wherewith they did strive to
see, understand and comprehend it. So that all the several sorts of wise men of
that age, even those who were admirers of the law and prophets, yet were
strangers and enemies to the truth, because they joined to that wisdom, and to
that learning and comprehension of the scriptures, out of the sight whereof it
came.

Secondly, for such as did own Christ after the flesh, such as were convinced
by his miracles, as Nicodemus and many of the more honest sort of the Jews
were; yet Christ did not commit himself to them, John ii. 24. He knew this
faith, and this owning of him, which was founded upon the wisdom and ingenuity
of the creature, would fail; and so he would not own it in Nicodemus, but bids
him look after the new birth, John iii. 2, 3; nor in such as followed him up
and down, upon this or any other fleshly account; but sometimes withdrew, and
hid himself from them, Luke v. 16, John vi. 14, 15; and sometimes preached
doctrines which stumbled them, and made them withdraw from him, John vi. 66.
And so in the apostles days there were many that could get the form, and gain
advantage thereby to the fleshly wisdom, to withstand the power, 2 Timothy iii. 5.
2 Cor. xi. 13.

Thirdly, there were such as had tasted of the heavenly gift, and of the powers
of the world to come, and yet fell away, Heb. vi. 4 -- 6. There were such as
denied the Lord who bought them, 2 Pet. ii. 1, such as fell from the love of
the truth, to the love of the world again, ver. 22, 2 Timothy iv. 10.

Such as had a standing in the church's heaven (like the angels which fell) but
kept not their habitation, but were swept down from thence to the earth by the
dragon's tail, Rev. xii. iv. these are the noblest champions (in the earthly
wisdom, and for a corrupt estate and false image) of all the rest.

Now as the prophets of God among the Jews had these enemies, and as the
apostles also had these enemies, so all along the apostasy these enemies have
been rife. The witnesses have had a wise sort of direct opposers among the
Papists, a wise sort of secret underminers among the Protestants, and also
another wise sort of them among themselves, as had some taste of the truth, but
departed from the power of it into the earthly wisdom, and understanding; and
this last sort fight more furiously and more vehemently against the truth, and
are more subtle to assault it, than the other two. Oh! there is no such bitter,
deadly enemy to Christ and his truth, as he who once had some taste of the
virtue of it, and is now turned from it into the earth, into the wisdom and
love of the world, and yet still holds some of the notion of that truth,
whereof he once felt the power, in the earthly part.

To come yet closer* There is in every man, not thoroughly sanctified, that
wisdom which is not of God; that wisdom from which God hides his precious
truths; which wisdom lies ready to catch every discovery and revelation of
truth to him, that it might improve it, and grow rich and wise by it. Now this
wisdom cannot attain to the knowledge of any of the things of God; neither can
this wisdom keep the true knowledge; but whatever this wisdom catches, it
presently corrupts. The true wisdom, the true light, the true knowledge of
Christ, is like the manna in the wilderness; it daily comes down from heaven,
and must daily be gathered fresh. The true light springs from the life, and
must be held in the life, in the vessel which the life forms, in the new
bottle, in the new understanding; not in the fleshly part, nay, not in the
natural part; for as the natural man cannot receive the things of the spirit, 1
Cor. ii. 14, so neither can he retain them. The old storehouse, into which
earthly things were gathered, must be burnt up, and not made a treasury for the
things of God; but the new understanding, which is given by him that is true, 1
John, v. 20, which new forms and preserves, and is all in the natural. Sink out
of the earthly part, and read, that thou may be able to say within thyself,
and concerning thyself, where is the wise? Where is the scribe? Where is the
disputer?

The wise part, the knowing part, the reaching part, in every man, will be
putting forth its hand to gather of the tree of life; but what has it ever
been able to gather? I know men may gather notions of any kind, of any sect, of
any sort of professors, of any appearance or dispensation; but who is able to
come near the life, to touch the power, the truth, the everlasting spring, or
any stream or drop of water that issues from it? And he who has a true touch
or taste thereof given him, can his wisdom add to it? Nay, can he so much as
retain it? David had a true sense and experience of this, who cried out, O
continue thy loving kindness to them that know thee, and thy righteousness to
the upright in heart. Indeed if he like not to retain the thing itself in his
knowledge, he may improve the notion, and bend that to the disposition of the
earthly part in himself and others; but this is not the truth, but a dead
image, or a dead remembrance of what once was truly living. Oh! how does the
soul that is begotten of the divine breath, that is born of the living power
and virtue, depend upon God for his continual breathing? There is nothing that
has so much from God, and yet nothing is so little able to live without him.
If he withdraws from it, he is against God's temple, against God's day of
worship, gives his disciples such scope and liberty, as neither the Pharisees
nor John gave their disciples; but reviles our strict and godly teachers and
expounders of the law, calling them hypocrites, blind guides, etc. And mark
with what a rough severe spirit he reproves them; whereas they call him master,
and speak mildly and gently to him. Oh! what Jew in that nature, in that
wisdom, in that spirit, could but find matter and occasion of stumbling at
Christ, even from the law and the prophets?

And as they have stumbled at the dispensation and appearance of God's spirit
in all former ages, so have all the generations of wise men since the apostasy,
all the learned men generally, their councils, synods, convocations, and
assemblies, been stumbling at the appearance of his spirit in this age, looking
for some such like building as had been in the apostles days, and not
understanding or observing how the Lord has took down that building, as it had
been set up in the world, and how he prepared a place in the wilderness for his
true church, of which Christ is the head, unto which he gave her wings to fly.
Rev. xii. And how afterward the false woman, or false church, got up in her
stead, who with a golden cup of fornication bewitched the kings and inhabitants
of the earth, Rev. xvii. 2, even peoples, multitudes, nations, and tongues,
ver. 15. So that they mistook her for the true church, and went into her bed of
whoredoms. Which of all the learned men, which of all the councils of the
Papists, have seen this, nay which of the Protestant councils, or convocations,
or assemblies, have beheld the state of the true church? Nay, have not every
sort and sect of the Protestants endeavored to build up some image or likeness
of the true church; not so much as suspecting that she was fled into, and was
to abide in the wilderness for a time, times, and half a time? Oh! what
darkness has covered the earth, and gross darkness the people? Oh! how has
God befooled the wise men of every sort! the wise men of every age! the wise
Protestants, as well as the wise Papists! the wise Independents, Baptists, and
Quakers, as well the wise Episcopalians and Presbyterians! And how blind and
sottish are nations and people, that still they think to find out the truth by
having a synod, assembly or convocation of the wise men gathered together! to
keep up strict their forms of church orders, and rules of discipline; indeed
they are fittest to rear up an image, like Babel, to please the earthly part of
man, and the earthly powers and interests, but truth never came in by that way,
but the wise and learned have still been shut out from it, and have proved
enemies to it. And whosoever comes out of the apostasy from the spirit and from
the truth, to the truth and spirit again, shall find nothing so great an enemy
as the wisdom in himself, and directions from the wisdom in others: For that
which God leads is a simple, a weak babe, a child to the wisdom of this world,
and he leads it in a path which is wholly out of the line of this world's
wisdom and knowledge of the scriptures, as the path God chose in Christ, and
the apostles days, that are past, was out of the line of the Jews knowledge or
the scriptures. Such is the recovery out of the apostasy: It is hid from all
the fleshly-wise men of this age, even as the entrance into the truths of the
kingdom was hid from all the fleshly-wise men of that age. Happy is he who
cease from striving after the knowledge and comprehending of the things of
God in this world's spirit and wisdom, and waits in the hum^^^ty and fear of
the Lord, first to be made a fool, that afterward he may be made wise unto
everlasting life.

Oh! learn to be sober! come out of this drunken fury, and consider things
mildly and seriously. Do not make a great outcry of ordinances, ordinances!
the means, the means! that is, keeping up strict to church orders, rules, and
disciplines. This is the voice of the clamorous woman, who with her loud noise
would fain keep you from listening to the still voice of true wisdom, which
cannot be heard in

A WARNING, in the Bonds of Love, to the Rulers, Teachers, and People of this
Nation, concerning their Church and Ministry.
THAT there was a fight between the dragon and his angels, and Michael and his
angels, concerning the new testament church and ministry, is manifest even from
the letter of the scriptures, Rev. xii.

That the dragon and his angels, though they could not get the better, as
relating to the power, yet they did get the better as relating to the form,
insomuch as that they overcame the third part of the true ministers, and drew
them from their standing in the firmament of God's power, off to their earthly
ministry; and that the true church herself also was fain to fly into the
wilderness, from the face of the dragon, for her safety and preservation, where
she was to be nourished and fed by God, all the time of Antichrist's reign;
this likewise is not only revealed in the spirit, but is also manifest from the
letter, Rev. xii.

That after this flight of the true church, and overcoming of the true
ministry, the dragon erected his false church and ministry, which had but at
best the form without the power, over all nations, peoples, multitudes and
tongues; this is also as evident, to them that read the prophecies of the
revelations, in the light of that spirit in which they were wrote. Is not the
false woman, after the true woman was fled, manifestly described, Rev. xvii.
which has a bewitching of fornications? ver. 2, 4. Mark she has not the true
cup of, her cup is not filled with the wine of the kingdom, it is not the cup
of the true spouse, who keeps chaste and loyal to her husband, but the cup of
fornication, wherein is a form of doctrine* and discipline, and order, and
church government, which leads from the life, which bewitches from the power,
which lulls asleep in a form of profession and worship of Christ, without
knowledge of, guidance by, and subjection to his spirit. And this is the
government, ministry, and way of Antichrist, wherever it is found; how
curiously soever the cup be gilded, yet it is but the cup of fornication, which
bewitcheth the heart with its golden appearance, and then leads it into
adultery from the life.

And the dragon does not only set up a false church over the nations, in many
parts whereof the truth had before appeared, Rev. xvii. 15, but a false
ministry also.

There is a false prophet, which deceives with miracles and false appearances
of truth, advanced in this corrupt state; which false prophet continues and
upholds his deceit over the nations, till the mighty appearance of Christ, in
spirit and power, does judge him, Rev. xix. 20, 2 Thessalonians. ii. 8. There is a
beast, with horns like a lamb, who does great wonders, so that he makes fire
come down from heaven on the earth, in the sight of men, and deceives them
that dwell on the earth, etc. Rev. xiii. 13, 14. Insomuch that he draws the
kings and inhabiters of the earth, in a mystery of deceit, into the bed of
whoredom and false worship, instead of the pure way of life, and pure worship
of the living God, in his spirit, and in his truth, Rev. xvii. 2.

Is it not further manifest, that this false church and false ministry, set up
in the world by the power of the dragon, persecuted God's witnesses to the
truth in all the ages of Antichrist's reign? So soon as the church was fled
into the wilderness, the dragon forthwith went to make war with the remnant of
her seed which keep the commandments of God, and had the testimony of Jesus
Christ, Rev. xii. 17. And it was given unto him to make war with the saints,
and to overcome them, and power was given him over all kindreds, tongues and
nations. And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are
not written in the book of life, of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the
world; if any man have an ear, let him hear, Rev. xiii. 7, 8, 9. And he had
power to give life unto the image of the beast, that the image of the beast
should both speak, and cause that as many as would not worship the image of the
beast should be killed. And he causes all both small and great, rich and poor,
free and bond, to receive a mark in their right hand, or in their forehead; and
that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name of the
beast, or the number of his name, Rev. xiii. 15, 16, 17. Yea, the woman, the
false church, which the dragon had set up, by his power in the nations, instead
of the true, was drunken with the blood of the saints, and with the blood of
the martyrs of Jesus, Rev. xvii. 6. Oh! the misery, and lamentable hard usage
of the witnesses of Jesus, who have been true lambs born of the power, faithful
to the power, witnessing against every form and appearance of religion,
doctrine, and worship, which has appeared without the power, even in the days
of greatest profession and highest devotion under the apostasy from the power;
how have these been reviled, and persecuted, and devoured, by the wolves in the
sheep clothing, who had got the outside, the garment, the name of Christ and
Christianity, the profession of church, ministry, and ordinances, but have
wanted the life, the virtue, the thing itself; and so have turned against it,
and kept it down, that they might keep up their form! O! ye professors,
consider, has it not been so in all former ages, and is it not so in this
present age? For let but the spirit and power appear, the form without the
power is soon detected to be what it is. And this properly Antichrist, and
Antichristianism, viz. not openly to appear in a direct denial of Christ, his
truths, and worship, but to set a way of knowledge and worship without his
spirit. Another spirit creeping into the form, that is Antichrist, and the
setting up observation and practice of the form out of the life and power, that
is Antichristianism, and this is the persecutor, destroyer, and devourer, about
religion.

Now though the Lord has suffered this false church and false prophet to reign
long in the dragon's power, and to revile and persecute his poor lambs, in
every age of Antichrist's reign; yet the Lord has appointed a season to judge
this false church, Rev. xvii. 1, to cast the false prophet into the lake, Rev.
xix. 20. Yea, and to torment with fire and brimstone all the false worshippers,
Rev. xiv. 9, 10, 11.

Oh! how deeply does it concern this land! her rulers, her teachers, yea the
whole people thereof, to consider their ways, to consider their worship, to
consider their church state, to consider their ministry, that they be not
overwhelmed at unawares in the bitter wrath of the Almighty, before which there
is no standing? Oh! that they could mourn, and pray, and wait for the eye of
God's spirit; for his pure light, which searches and discovers all the
deceits of Antichrist; that they might not be bewitched, with any of the wine
of the fornication of the false woman, whose heart is snares and nets, and her
hands as bands, to entangle her lovers in, and keep them from the pure bed of
life, where the father of life, with the son and spirit, are enjoyed and
worshipped.

If men consult concerning these things in the wisdom of the flesh, they will
be entangled, and err; for that eye cannot see the mysteries of the kingdom, or
the course either of truth or deceit. The gospel, the eternal truth, the true
church, the true ministry, are all spiritual, not new shadows, as the things
under the ministration of the law were, but the spirit and substance, and they
can only be seen by the spiritual eye of the children of wisdom. The wise and
diligent enquirers into the comprehending part, cannot find the womb or the way
of life, or the way of the worship of that which is begotten in the life, or
God's way of ministry, which he has appointed for the feeding and preserving
of the life. The prophets of old could not be known, discerned, or owned, by
the fleshly eye of observation in Israel after the flesh, but they still
rejected them, esteeming and magnifying the false prophets above them; how much
less can the prophets and ministers of the new testament be seen by man's eye?
Are they the prophets and ministers of Christ, which a nation cries up for
such, and which the eye of wise men therein admires, and pitches upon? Or, are
those they which the renewed eye, in the light of the Lord, sees to be fitted,
sanctified, and called forth by Christ unto that service? Ah! poor inhabitants
of this land! must ye fall into the pit before your eyes be opened!

The great controversy of this age is about church and ministry, which must
carry it, the form or the power? Whether the church and ministry shall take
place which was before the apostasy, or that which has sprung up, as a root out
of a dry ground, in the apostasy? Whether man's wisdom shall determine which is
the true church and its true ministry, or whether the spirit of God shall
determine it? Whether a nation, with the ministers it sets up, shall be the
church and ministry, or whether God's holy nation, which he calls and
sanctifies by his spirit, and the ministers which he chooses and sends to
gather and build up in the holy faith, and pure power of life, shall be the
church and ministry? Our eyes wait on the Lord, to see this controversy
determined, and our hope of help is in his arm; nor are we at all afrighted at
the rising of any strength against us, our hearts being given up to God's
truth, and to suffer for its testimony, according to God's will, meekly and
patiently in his strength; but we pity this poor land, yea, in the bonds of
love we pity the rulers, the teachers, and people therein. Oh! that they might
be humbled, and in fear of the great God surrender to him his due, before he
appear in his strength to force it from them.

An ADVERTISEMENT to the Powers and People of this Nation.
BECAUSE of my dear love to my native country, and because of the dregs of that
cup which the Lord has already caused it to drink of, which cannot be spared
unless the Lord's will be effected without it, which dregs are so bitter,
terrible and dreadful, as will make the stoutest hearts to faint, and the most
confident countenance wax pale: I say for this cause, in love am I constrained
to add these few lines, -- that if it be possible this nation may apply itself,
in the fear and dread of the eternal majesty and power, to make its peace with
him against whom it has long warred, not only by much outward wickedness,
looseness, vanity, and profaneness, but more especially by setting up an
invented form of godliness, and persecuting the power, and to whom it is not
yet reconciled in this matter, nor found so much as willing to be reconciled.

The Lord God of heaven and earth, of glory, of majesty, of everlasting power,
victory and dominion over all, who made both heaven and earth, and has the
command of all things therein, he disposes of nations, of governments, of
earthly powers, according to his pleasure, and who may say unto him, what do
thou? Who may implead him for making a rich nation poor? A strong nation weak?
Or for bringing down the high and mighty, the strong, stout, honorable, and
noble in a nation, and exalting the poor, the mean, the persecuted? And if he
turn his hand again, and lay them flat whom he had lifted up, and exalt the
other even unlooked for, who can withstand him, or who can contradict him? Now
what is in the Lord's heart, who is thus mighty and absolute, he will certainly
bring to pass, how unlikely, how contrary, how impossible soever it seem to the
eye of man; if he will exalt his despised truth, which always was so to the eye
of the great and wise ones of this world, or give his people liberty to fear,
worship and obey him; if he will have truth and righteousness have the dominion
in men's hearts, and in the nations, and not in the wills and lusts of men, how
great and powerful soever; I say, if this be his intent, though generation
should rise up after generation to oppose him herein, yet will he be too hard
for them all, and they will all fall before him; and his truth, his people, his
holy eternal counsel, will he raise up, and cause to triumph over them all.

It is man's way to settle himself by outward strength against outward
strength, and then he thinks he is safe; not eyeing the invisible hand which
turns the wheels, and delights to overturn that which is outwardly strong, and
seems unremoveable, when it forgets him, and opposes itself against him.
The Lord God loves to take his enemies at the strongest, when they are most
wise, most mighty, even when nothing seems able to deal with them but himself.
This was it overthrew the foregoing powers one after another; they were
courting worldly interest, and strengthening themselves that way; but
overlooked God who raised them, and the work which he had raised them to
accomplish. This turned the head against them which had been for them; and how
then could they maintain their standing?

Oh! that the present generation could see the ticklishness of their standing,
and consider that this is their day of trial, and that the Lord's eye is upon
them, to observe their ways, to see whether they will now mind righteousness
and the liberty of his people, better than formerly they did; and that his
truth may in its life and power, and not in such a form or way of worship as
they may think good to prescribe, have its scope in the nation. The Lord's eye
and heart are upon his truth and upon his people; and as nations or powers deal
with that, so will he deal with them. Oh! therefore be not deceived; for though
the Lord has oftentimes long suffered his people to lie under reproach and
persecution, as he did Israel in Egypt for diverse ages, yet at length he has
still heard their groans, and has arisen to deliver: And though Pharaoh
afterward with all his strength went after them, and made no question but to
bring them back again under his subjection, and there was nothing in appearance
able to deliver them from him, yet he could not, but overthrew himself and his
strength utterly. Ye know not what strong cries and tears were put up to the
Lord before these late changes; that righteousness might be established in the
nation, and that his people might have liberty to worship him in his fear, and
according to the leadings of his spirit, without being yoked under any form of
worship which their hearts could not own to be of God.

Let not therefore my true love to the nation, and to the present powers
thereof, be despised by them; but let them fear before the mighty God of heaven
and earth, and in their hearts bow to him, that they may be humbled, and made
fit instruments in his hand for his service, and not be found enemies against
him. If they will be fit instruments for God to work by, they must be meek,
lowly, poor in spirit, waiting in God's fear for his counsel, and not hearken
to the fleshly wisdom of man, which is his utter enemy, and will persuade,
advise, and instruct them to settle the nation and church, as they call it, in
a way contrary to him. And remember this word: Be sure you smite none for
obedience to God. Limit not his holy spirit in his people; but limit the
unclean and evil spirit in those who manifest themselves not to be his people.
This is the true intent of government. How can he who governs aright under God,
hurt that which is of God, and for God? Or how can he spare that which his
sword is given him to cut down? Oh! how happy were it for the nation if they
would let truth have its scope, and let righteousness overcome them! and not
contend for shadows against the substance; but let the substance overcome all
those shadows which have held it in bondage, and upheld its enemy.

The great enemy of God, all this night of the apostasy, has been Antichrist;
who has not been an open enemy only, but has appeared as if he had been for
Christ, commanding the worshipping and honoring of Christ, yea, and with a
great zeal taking upon him to cause people to worship according to what he
determined to be right: And thus he gets into the temple, erecting an
usurping authority over the conscience, setting up and compelling to an
invented worship.

Against this kind of worship God has still been raising witnesses: But he
having the powers of the earth on his side, as was prophesied he should, Rev.
xvii. 13, has often prevailed over them, Rev. xiii. 7. And so the truth has
been suppressed, and false worships set up by the powers of the earth,
according to the proportion they have drank of the golden cup of fornication;
which does not only deceive in one way of manifest and gross false worship, but
has many mixtures and mysteries of deceit in it, Rev. xvii. 2, etc.

Now God has a time to call for an account of the sufferings and blood of his
saints, Rev. vi. 10, 11. He has a time to judge the great whore, Rev. xvii. 1.
And when the time of God's judgment comes upon the earth, God begins with his
own house first, and so with that which has taken upon it to separate from
Babylon, to see what he can find of Babylon therein, and he will judge that
before he fall upon the great body of the mystery of iniquity, 1 Pet. iv. 17,
Heb. x. 30.

Now therefore it behooves this nation to consider what of Babylon may be found
in fit, and to part with it, that it may escape the plagues of Babylon; Rev.
xviii. 4, which are very bitter, as ver. 7, 8, etc. These are the two main
things whereof Babylon is guilty:

1. An invented form of worship, a likeness of the true worship; but not the
true worship itself.

2. A persecuting, and endeavoring to suppress the power of the truth, even of
the purity of the godly religion and worship, by means of this form, because,
for conscience sake, men who are taught otherwise by the spirit of God, cannot
submit and subject thereto.

This God is coming down to plead with in that great city Babylon; and this God
will first plead within thee. O New England! consider what of this is yet
remaining in thee, or what of this thy heart hankers after, and part with it,
as thou love thy peace. The Lord is the witness of the integrity and fidelity
of my heart to thee in these lines. It will be hard for thee to escape the
Lord's hand* yet it is not impossible. If thou bow before the mighty God, and
lie abased at his feet, he can open that eye in thee which can let thee see thy
danger, and also the way how to escape it.

An ANSWER to that common Objection against the UNITED FRIENDS, that they
condemn all but themselves.
Objection.

IT is commonly objected against us, that we condemn all but ourselves; all the
churches, martyrs and worthies, formerly, diverse of whom sealed their testimony
with their blood, and all sorts of Christians and professors at present, who
are not just of our stamp and way, though otherwise ever so zealous.

Answer. The churches, the blessed martyrs, who suffered for the testimony of a
pure conscience toward God, and all the worthies of the Lord in their several
generations, who fought against the false church and spirit, were accepted of
God in their testimony against her, and are not disowned by us, but dearly
owned and honored therein; and for agreeing with them in their testimony in
several things. And for testifying against the hypocrisies and corruptions of
our age, do we suffer in this our day even as they did in their day, from the
same spirit that persecuted them; which, though it has much changed its form
and way of appearance, yet still retains the same nature.

But all things were not discovered at once. The times were then dark, and the
light small; yet they being faithful according to what was discovered, were
precious in the Lord's eyes; and what through ignorance they erred in, the Lord
winked at and overlooked, being pleased with that sincerity and simplicity of
heart which he had stirred up in them toward himself. But if they were now
alive in these our days, and should depart from the sincerity which was then in
them, and oppose the light and appearance of the spirit in this age, they would
not then be accepted of the Lord, but their former sincerity would be
forgotten. For the light shines more and more toward the perfect day: And it
is not the owning of the light as it shone in the foregoing ages, which will
now commend any man to God; but the knowing and subjecting to the light of the
present age. Even as in these our days that are past, there was, some years
ago, an honest zeal and true simplicity stirring in some churches, especially
among the Quakers, which was of the Lord, and was very dear to him; and had the
generations of this age abode there, they would have been able to have followed
the Lord in every further step and leading of his spirit* But departing from
that into some form or other, the true simplicity withered, and another thing
began to live in them; and so they settled upon their lees, magnifying the form
they had chose to themselves, till at length their hearts became hardened from
the pure fear, even to the contracting of a spirit of profaneness, insomuch as
they could mock at the next remove and discovery of the spirit as some new
light: And so by degrees have grown, and are growing, persecutors of that
spirit in its appearance to the people of the Lord, which they themselves had
once some taste of, while they were reproached and persecuted for Quakers. And
the god of this world, who at first tempted them aside into the form, has at
length prevailed so far to blind them therewith, that they can neither see what
spirit they themselves are of, nor what it is they are endeavoring to
persecute.

Let therefore people consider the truth of the thing, as it is before the
Lord: We do not cast dirt upon any in whom the truth of God has stirred and
appeared in any measure in former ages, or in this our age; but this we testify
against, viz. the setting up of any form without the life: For it is the erring
spirit that still cries up the form, to keep down the power by the form, and
so by the help of it to bewitch from the spirit wherein is the life, and not in
the form. This was the painted Jezabel of the apostles age; false teachers
finely dressed up themselves with the form of godliness, and then under this
cover they could deny the power, and make head against it, 2 Timothy iii. 5. How
easy is it for them to appear in the forms of doctrines of the gospel, in the
form of zeal, in the form of holiness, to pass in a nation for the true church;
and then to asperse them for heretics, who, appearing in the power, cannot but
deny that form which is without the power* This is the great witch of this age,
even that spirit of zeal and devotion which is best clothed and decked with
the form without the power, which though men, who judge of the things of God
after the flesh, justify, admire, and much contend for, in her several shapes
and dresses, some being for one, some for another, yet the Lord is searching
after her, and will find her out with his eternal flames, which will make her
manifest, and all her lovers shall dread her burning and bed of torment. Now as
all along the apostasy this bewitching spirit, this spirit which bewitcheth
from the power, has crept up under a form of church worship and holiness; so
the other spirit, the pure spirit of life, the spirit of true zeal and fear of
the Lord, has still appeared more and more out of the forms; who were the best
preachers and most eminent Christians, of the first rise of the professors of
this age, were they not those who least minded the form then, nay, indeed, who
were most against the form, and persecuted, for their conscientious testifying
against it? And who were the greatest persecutors then, but they who were the
most zealous for the form, both of the government and worship of the church of
England? And where is the persecuting spirit next to be looked for but in the
forms which should next appear? And where likewise is the appearance of the
true spirit next to be looked for, but in those whom the Lord should raise up
to testify against those forms, and to be the succeeding sufferers for their
testimony, as many of the professors of this age have been foregoing sufferers
for their testimony. Yet if there be any persons left, among any of the forms
which have appeared, whether former or latter, that have not lost their
sincerity and true zeal toward God, them we own and have unity with, so far as
they keep, or rather are kept, thereto. If there be any among the Episcopal
sort that in truth of heart desire to fear the Lord, and look upon the common
prayer book as an acceptable way of worshipping him, we pity their blindness,
yet are tender toward them, and would not have the simplicity persecuted in
them because of this, but rather cherished. If there be any among the
Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, Quakers, or any other sort, that in
truth of heart wait upon the Lord in those ways, and do not find a deadness
overgrown them, but a pure, fresh, lively zeal toward God, with an unfeigned
love to his people, our hearts are one with this; and we cannot fight against
this good thing in any of them, though in love to them we testify, that their
form and way of worship is their present loss and hindrance; yet we doubt not
but that the Lord, in his time, will make manifest to such the light of this
age, which is the very thing the people of God, in many foregoing ages, have
been praying for. But this is our lamentation, that forms and ways of worship
abound; but the pure principle, the pure spirit, is lost and drowned in them
all; and that men are hardened against our testimony, not from the remainders
of the simplicity in them, but because they are erred from the simplicity, and
fallen in league with another spirit, which has lain lurking in forms of
knowledge and worships, to tempt aside from the simplicity, and to hide the
sight of the life and power from the panting soul, all this night of the
apostasy.

Now mark how easy and natural it is to that spirit to enter into a form, to
cry up a form, to set up a form in a nation, city, or country; doubtless it had
been done in this nation long ago, had not the mighty hand of the Lord
withstood it. When the evil and unclean spirit is detected and driven out of
one form, if it does not suddenly get another to appear in, and tempt with, it
must needs lose many of its subjects. The strumpet, or false church, is forced,
as God discovers her nakedness and lewdness, to change her dresses and
appearances, to new trick and adorn her bed; and then, as if she also were
changed, and were now no longer the same, she comes forth again with boldness,
and tempts the young man again to come in to her, Prove. vii. 16. And thus she
casts down many wounded; yea, many strong men have been slain by her, ver.
26, who otherwise would have pondered the path of life, chap. v. vi. had they
not been ensnared by her flatteries, who forsakes the guide of her youth, and
forgets the covenant of her God, chap. ii. 17. There is no more certain and
ready way to suppress truth, and to betray the honesty which is singly
searching after it, than to present a form of godliness or worship, as the
proper way of meeting with it: For hereby the soul is lulled asleep with a
false hope, until the freshness of its desire begins to die, and its life to
wither; and then the fleshly part easily grows into unity with, and zeal for,
that form which indeed is of the flesh; though it appeared and tempted as if it
had been otherwise. And how many have gone a great way toward hell, and have
been deeply entangled and distressed in the chambers of death, by entering into
this strumpet's church or house, which they then, through the subtilty of her
deceit, took for the house or church of God? Prove. vii. 27. Consider the thing
a little seriously. When the evil spirit is driven out of his strong hold of
gross Popery, whither should he run but into Episcopacy? When he is driven out
of Episcopacy, whither should he run but into Presbytery? When he is driven out
of Presbytery, whither should he run but into Independency? When he is driven
out of Independency, whither should he run but into Anabaptism? When he is
driven out of Anabaptism, whither should he run but into Quakerism? And what is
his end of running into Episcopacy, but to save alive that spirit which was
hunted of Popery, and could abide no longer there, and so the better, and the
safer from being discerned, to reproach and persecute the other spirit,
wherever it appeared, under the nicknames of the several sorts and sects of
professors? etc. And what is his end afterward of running into Presbtery, but
to save that alive which is hunted out of Episcopacy, and to persecute the
former truly zealous spirit, where it should further appear afterward, by
means of that form? Thus the forms and appearances of things change; but the
fight is still the same, the evil spirit still getting uppermost, under a form
of godliness, and from thence shooting forth its arrows at those who seek after
purity of heart, and cannot but testify against those forms where the impure
one lodges.

This then is the sum of our answer in this respect; we are not against the
true life and power of godliness, wherever it has appeared, or yet appears,
under the veil of any form whatsoever. Nay, all persons who singly wait upon
the Lord in the simplicity and sincerity of their hearts, whether under any
form, or out of forms, that matters little to us, are very dear unto us in the
Lord. But we are against all forms, images, imitations, and appearances, which
betray the simplicity and sincerity of the heart, keep the life in bondage, and
endanger the loss of the soul. And too many such now there are, which hold the
immortal seed of life in captivity under death, over which we cannot but mourn,
and wait for its breaking off the chains, and its rising out of all its graves
into its own pure life, power, and fullness of liberty in the Lord.

An EXHORTATION to the UNITED FRIENDS, every where scattered abroad.
GRACE and peace be multiplied among you, my dearly and much beloved friends,
you that have received a blessing from God the heavenly Father in Christ Jesus,
the Lord of Glory, who by his unspeakable love, and his unchangeable light,
has drawn you off from the imaginary worships, and brought you in measure to
know him who was from the beginning. Dear friends, keep in the light by which
ye are enlightened, and in the knowledge of God which every one has received
for himself; watching against the seducings of Satan, that your eyes may be
kept open, lest deceit should prevail in any of you, by which truth might lose
its splendour, and the brightness of the Lord become darkened.

I write these things to you in true love, and though but young, yet as one
that has a desire for your ever well-being. For the Lord knows how often ye are
in my remembrance, desiring for you, that ye may not only know the truth, but
that ye may be found to be living witnesses of it; labor therefore for it, my
friends, that so, when the Lord comes, and calls to an account, every one may
be found faithful according to what he has received: For this is the talent
which the Lord has given, viz. the knowledge of him, who is the only true and
living God, and the messenger whom he has sent.

And I am the more constrained at this time to write to you, because I trust
the Lord has given me some sight of his great and dreadful day, and workings
in it, which is in hand, and greatly hastens, of which I have something to say
unto you, that ye may be prepared to stand in his day, and may behold his
wondrous working among his enemies, and have fellowship with his power
therein, and may not be dismayed or driven away in the tempest, which will be
great.

And as concerning those succeeding times, the spirit of the Lord has
signified, that they will be times of horror and amazement, to all that have
and yet do reject his counsel: For as the days of his compassion, forbearance,
warnings, and invitings, have been long, so shall his appearance amongst those
that have withstood him be fierce and terrible, as who shall abide his coming,
for the Lord will work both secretly and openly, and his arm shall be manifest
to his children in both.

Secretly he shall raise up a continual fretting, anguish and vexation among
his enemies, one against another, so that being vexed and tormented inwardly,
they shall seek to make each other miserable, and delight therein for a little
season; and then the prevailer must be prevailed over, and the digger of the
pit must fall therein; and the confidence that men have had one in another
shall fail, and they will beguile and betray one another, both by counsel and
strength; and as they have banded themselves to break you, whom God has
gathered, so sshall they band themselves one against another, to break, to
spoil and destroy one another; and through the multitude of their treacheries,
all credit or belief, upon account of their solemn engagement, shall fail; so
that few men shall count themselves, or what is theirs, safe in the hand of his
friend, who has not chosen his safety and friendship in the pure light of the
unchangeable truth of God; and all the secret counsels of the ungodly shall be
brought to naught, sometimes by the means of some of themselves, and sometimes
by impossibilities lying in their way, which shall make their hearts fail of
ever accomplishing what they have determined; and in this state shall men fret
themselves for a season, and shall not be able to see the hand that turns
against them, but shall turn to fight against one thing, and another, and a
third thing, and shall stagger, and reel, and be confounded in council and
judgment, as drunken men that know not where to find the way to rest; and when
they do yet stir themselves up against the holy people, and against the holy
covenant of light, and them that walk in it, they shall but the more be
confounded; for they that truly follow the leader of Israel shall be helped
with a little help, which all the ungodly shall not hinder them of, viz. the
secret arm of the Lord, maintaining their cause, and raising up a witness in
the very hearts of their adversaries to plead their innocence, and this shall
make them yet the more to vex themselves, for when they shall look to their
religion, to their power, policy or preferments, or friendships, or whatsoever
else they had trusted in, and relied upon, they shall have cause to curse it;
and when they look downwards to the effects produced by all those things,
behold then trouble, and horror, and vexation take hold on them, and drive them
to darkness; and having no help but what is earthly, and being out of the
knowledge of the mighty overturning power of the Lord God Almighty, they shall
despair and wear out their days with anguish; and besides all this, the
terrible hand of the Lord is and shall be openly manifested against this
ungodly generation, by bringing grievous and terrible judgments and plagues
upon them, bringing down all things in which their pride and glory stood, and
overturning even the foundations of their strength, yea, the Lord will lay
waste the mountain of the ungodly, and the strength of the fenced city shall
fail; and when men shall say, we will take refuge in them, they shall become
but a snare, and there shall the sword devour: And when they shall say, we will
go into the field, and put trust in the number and courage of our soldiers,
they shall both be taken away; and this evil also will come of the Lord, and
his hand will be stretched out still, and shall bring confusion, ruin upon
ruin, and war upon war; and the hearts of men shall be stirred in them, and the
nations shall be as waters, into which a tempest, a swift whirlwind is entered,
and even as waves swell up to the dissolution one of another, and breaking one
of another, so shall the commotions and swellings of people be; and because of
the hardships and sorrows of those days many shall seek and desire death,
rather than life.

Alas! my heart relents, and is moved within me, under a sense of these things,
and much more than I can write or declare, which the Lord will do in the earth,
and will also make haste to accomplish among the sons of men, that they may
know and confess, that the Most High does rule in the kingdoms of men, and
pulls down and sets up according to his own will; and this shall men do
before seven times pass over them, and shall be content to give their glory
unto him that sits in heaven.

But, Oh friends! while all these things are working and bringing to pass,
repose ye yourselves in the munition of that rock that is immovable, that all
these troubles, tempests and shakings, shall not be able to move, even in the
knowledge and feeling of the eternal power of God, keeping you subjectly given
up to his heavenly will, and feel it daily to kill and mortify that which
remains in any of you, which is of this world, for the worldly part in any, is
the changeable part, and that is up and down, full and empty, joyful and
sorrowful, as things go well or ill in the world: For as the truth is but one,
and many are made partakers of its spirit, so the world is but one, and many
are partakers of the spirit of it; and so many as do partake of it, so many
will be straitened and perplexed with it; but they who are single to the light
and manifestation of grace in them, waiting daily to feel the life and virtue
of it in their hearts, these shall rejoice in the midst of adversity; these
shall not have their hearts moved with fear, nor tossed with anguish, because
of evil tidings, because that which fixes them remains with them: These shall
know their entrance with the bridegroom, and so be kept from sorrow, though his
coming be suddenly as a thief in the night, and when a midnight is come upon
man's glory, yet they being ready and prepared, it will be well with them, and
having a true sense of the power working in themselves, they cannot but have
unity and fellowship with the works of it in the earth, and will not at all
murmur against what is, nor wish nor will what is not to be; these will be at
rest till the indignation passes over, and these having no design to carry on,
nor no party to promote in the earth, cannot possibly be defeated nor
disappointed in their undertakings.

And when you see divisions, and parties, and rendings in the bowels of
nations, and rumors and tempests in the minds of the people, then take heed of
being moved to this party or to that party, or giving your strength to this or
that, or couselling this or that way, but stand single to the truth of God, in
which neither war, rent nor division, is; and take heed of that part in any of
you, which trusts and relies upon any sort of the men of this world, in the day
of their prosperity; for the same party will bring you to suffer with them in
the time of their adversity, which will not be long after; for stability in
that ground there will be none. But when they shall say, come join with us in
this or that, remember you are joined to the Lord by his pure spirit, to walk
with him in peace and righteousness, and you feeling this, this gathers out of
all commotions, and noises, and parties, and tumults, and leads you to exalt
the standard of truth and righteousness, in an innocent and honest
conversation, to see who will flow unto that; and this shall be a refuge for
many of the weary, tossed and afflicted ones, in those days, and a shelter for
many whose day is not yet over.

So, dearly beloved friends and brethren, who have believed and known the
blessed appearance of the truth, let not your hearts be troubled at any of
these things! Oh! let not the things that are at present, nor things that are
yet to come, move you from stedfastness, but rather double your diligence, zeal
and faithfulness, to the cause of God: For they that know the work wrought in
themselves, they shall rest in the day of trouble, yea, though the fig tree
shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines, the labor of the olive
shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat, the flocks shall be cut off
from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls; yet the faithful will
rejoice in the Lord, and will joy in the God of their salvation, Hab. iii. 17,
18.

And how near these days are to this poor nation, few know, and therefore the
cry of the Lord is very loud unto its inhabitants, by his messenger of peace
whom he has sent, that they would prize their time while they have it, lest
they be overturned, wasted, and laid desolate, before they are aware; and
before destruction come upon them, and there be no remedy, as it has already
been upon many.

Oh inhabitants! inhabitants! of the land of the English nation, that thou and
thy rulers would have considered, and hearkened, and heard, in the day of thy
warnings and invitations, and not have persisted in thy rebellion against the
King of heaven, till the Lord was moved against thee, to cut off the thousands
and multitudes from thy streets, and the pressing and thronging of people from
thy gates, and then to destroy and ruin thy cities and streets also, and lay
desolate thy gates, when thou thoughtest to have replenished them again.

And, Oh! says my soul, that thy inhabitants would yet be warned, and
persuaded to repent; and turn to the Lord, by putting away every one the evil
that is in their hearts, against truth in themselves, and against those that
walk in it, before a greater desolation and destruction overtake them.

Oh! what shall I say to prevail with the inhabitants of this land? Oh! hearken
and hear, you that have ears to hear, but the uncircumcised in heart and ears
cannot, what the Lord is about to do in the land. The Lord has called aloud,
he has roared out of Sion unto them, but many of them have not hearkened at
all, nor considered at all.

Well, Oh my friends, and thou my soul, return to the leader of Israel, and
dwell in the pavilion of the house of your God, and my God, and shelter
yourselves under the shadow of his wings, where ye shall be witnesses of his
doings, and see his strange act brought to pass, and shall not be hurt
therewith, nor dismayed.

Oh, my friends, in the bowels of dear and tender love, have I signified these
things unto you, that ye might stand armed, with the whole armor of God,
clothed in righteousness, and your feet shod with the preparation of the
gospel of peace, and freely given up in all things to the disposing of the
Lord, who will deliver us, not by might, nor by sword nor spear, but by his own
eternal invisible arm will he yet save us and deliver us, and get himself a
name by preserving us; and we shall yet live to praise him who is worthy of
glory, of honor and renown, from the rising of the sun to the going down of the
same; the great and terrible name of God is to be praised, both this time,
henceforth and for evermore; everlasting praises are due unto God that is holy.
Amen.

But if the wicked and ungodly will not hear, nor obey the gospel, by the
messenger of peace whom God has sent, God's curse and vengeance will come upon
them, and his plagues will pursue them to destruction, if they proceed in this
work; and their wives shall be widows, and their children fatherless; the Lord
has spoken it. Methinks if they had the hearts of men or of flesh, they would
be afraid, and blush at the very thoughts thereof. My heart and soul melt
within me, and I am even bowed down, (with cries to God) in my spirit, to think
of the hardness of their hearts.

And will the Lord God Almighty cut short thy work in righteousness, and
shorten the days of oppression and cruelty, for thine elect's sake, which
cries night and day unto thee, and make known thy name and power to the ends
of the earth; and let the heathen hear and fear, and bow to thy righteous
scepter; and let the kings of the earth lay down their crowns at the feet of
the lamb, that through thy righteous judgments they may partake of thy tender
mercies, which endure for ever, that their eyes may be no longer withholden nor
blinded by the god of this world, the power and prince of darkness. And will
the Lord be pleased, for the sake of the dear Son of thy love, to open all
blind eyes, and unstop all deaf ears, and take the dark veils from off all
faces, that they may come to see thee who art invisible, and enjoy the same
precious life of pure unfeigned love, which abounds in the hearts of thy hidden
ones, and receive thy peaceable wisdom, to be governed, and to govern them
therein; then would they surely know the messenger of peace whom thou have
sent, and confess to thy glorious truth, and speak good of thy name, and
magnify thy power, and no longer count the blood of thy everlasting covenant,
wherewith we are sanctified, as an unholy thing.

But O thou righteous, holy, pure, eternal King, eternal Father, art unknown
unto all them that sit in darkness, and dwell in the spirit of enmity against
thee and thy people, though thou art come near to judgment, according to thy
promise, Mal. iii. 5.

And thy way of life and salvation is hid from them, therefore they hate us
without a cause, and thus evilly entreat us in the darkness of their minds, and
in the ignorance and hardness of their hearts, for which my soul does pity
them, and even entreat thee for them, that if possible their eyes may be yet
opened, with all those that the day of thy visitation is not over with, and
that their hearts may be yet softened, and their spirit humbled, that they may
see what they are doing in the dark, and consider the effect of their work,
which will assuredly follow: And if thy warnings and gentle visitations will
not humble them, then let thy judgments awaken them, and bring them down and
humble them, that they may perceive something of what thou art doing, in these
latter days, and art resolved to do to the ends of the earth, though the whole
world should gather and band together to oppose thy work and people; for thou
have begun, and thou will go through and perfect thy work; thou will raise thy
seed, and gather thy chosen from the four winds, and bring them from the ends
of the earth, and scatter the proud in the vain imaginations of their hearts;
and thou will break thy way through all that oppose thee in this the day of thy
mighty power, in which thou art arisen to finish transgression, and make an end
of sin, and to bring in and establish everlasting righteousness, that the
kingdoms of this world may become thy kingdom, and of thy Christ, as thou have
promised, and art now fulfilling: Glory, and honor, and thanks, and everlasting
praises, be to thy glorious name, for thou art the Lord God of Israel, and
blessed art thou; the Lord God of Israel, from everlasting to everlasting,
praises are due unto thee, holy God. Amen.

So, friends, ye are and have been warned again and again by the messenger of
the Lord, in love to your souls, and you are left without excuse, if never
words more should be mentioned unto you, by which ye might perceive how the
Lord does strive with you, that ye might repent, and be saved from the wrath to
come, though many feel little of it in their consciences; but his spirit will
not always strive with them, for if they will not believe the messenger whom
God has sent, but slight and reject the warnings and invitations, and neither
make conscience of what has proceeded out of their mouths, nor regard to
perform their own words, and public engagements, in that which is just, which
the Lord requires of them, nor remember his bypast and present mercies and
long-suffering toward them, but trample all under foot; I say if it be thus
with them, and they are resolved to go on, they will wholly be given up, and be
exceedingly hardened, and grow desperate in cruelty and oppression against God,
and his truth and people, till the whole earth is filled with violence; and
then, as true as God lives, will the flood come upon them, and they shall fall
after the manner of Egypt, and the weight of the dreadful judgments, due for
all their abominations and cruelties, shall sink them down into the pit that is
bottomless, and that suddenly, as the Lord has spoken.

From your friend and brother in the communion and fellowship of the gospel of
peace and purity, who is a lover of the welfare of all your souls.
Written in the month called August, 1779.
FINIS.

