LETTERS, BEING THE WHOLE OF THE CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN The Hon. John Jay,
Esquire, AND Mr. Lewis Littlepage. A YOUNG MAN whom Mr. JAY, when in SPAIN
Patronized and took into his FAMILY.

NEW YORK: Printed and Sold by FRANCIS CHILD'S, at the NEW-PRINTING-OFFICE, No.
189, Water-Street. M.DCC.LXXXVI.

ERRORS which have been discovered on compa^ing the printed letters with the
original (...) -- which the reader is desired to correct.
30 (...) 1930. page 5. For the ^^oves of France, read any. 31 Aug. 1780, page
8. For (...) retreat, read retreat. Same, same, After retreat in the country,
read word application. Same, same, For their authors I have read, read I can.
Same, same, For great respect, read a respect. 20 Novem. 1779, page 9, For
punctually returned, read punctually returned to you. 21 Novem. 1780, page 10,
For I shill with great pleasure, read I shall with pleasure. Same, same, For
the law and polities, read for the law and for politics. 15 June, 1781, page
12, For intended expedition, read intended embarkation. 15 June, 1781, page 13,
For Mr. Adams, read Col. Adams. 15 June, 1781, page 14, For I wrote, read Mr.
Jay wrote. 25 Jane, 1781, page 15, For subject to few expenses, read necessary
expenses. Same, same, For about seven leagues, read at seven leagues. 15 June,
1781, page 15, After most distant idea of desi^ting, read perfectly convinced
however of the generous and candid motives which influence your conduct. Same,
page 15, For incumbent on, read upon. Same, page 16, For Aranjues, June, 1781,
read 15 June, 1781. Same, page 19, For leaves us bath to disagreeable, read
leaves us both exposed to disagreeable 6 July, 1785, page 21 For 6 July, 1785,
read 6 July, 1781. 8 October, 1781, page 24, For as you do not possess and
opulent fortune, read as you know I do not possess an opulent fortune. Same,
page 24, After, I have obligations add innumerable obligations. Same, page 26,
After 'you observed particularly,' strike out 'to it' Same, page 26, For 'you
would have scarce any other expenses,' read you would be at Same, page 26, For,
and I think you will do well, read would. Same, page 26, For, this I have done
freely, read fully. Same, page 26, For, as you might have occasion for, read
find. Same, page 27, For, advancing no more at all, read money. Same, page 27,
For, not become reasonable, read seasonable. Same, page 28, For not been
acknowledged, read not yet been acknowledged. 25 November, 1781, page 32, For
House, read Horse. 13 December, 1781, page 33, For (...) to my further
correspondence, read any. 7 December, 1781, page 35, After, in my first
conversation, add with you. Same, page 35, For, by ignominious retreat, read by
an. Same, page 35, You may very unjustly accuse me, strike out may. Same, page
36, But a persuasion that it would be enough, strike out would be, and insert
was. Same, page 36, See note after the word money put a crotchet) after the
word advice and the word to, and before the word volunteer place the
monysyllable a. Same, page 36, See note and after the word No. add 12. Same,
page 36, Last line after trenches add the word here. Same, page 39, In fifth
line, for the wages, read his. Same, page 39, See postscript, strike out the
word paid, and in its place put the word did. 29 December, 1781, page 42, In
the 7th line from the bottom, after the words ascribe it, insert the word
either. Same, page 43, In the 9th line from the bottom, after the word
respects, stroke out the word your. 20 January, 1782, page 44, In the second
line, put the word an before the word ungenerous. 20 January, 1782, page 45, In
the 2nd line, strike out the word charge and put change in the place of it. 1
February, page 46, In the 13th line, after the word observation, strike out of
and insert ^^ 1 February, page 47, In the 8th line, strike out ceded and insert
receded. 1 February, page 48, See No. 29. where that letter is printed as of 4
February, 1781, instead of 4 February 1782. 1 February, page 49, The next
letter No. 30, is printed as of 26 February, 1781, instead of 1782. 27 March,
1782, page 50, In the 5th line, strike out an, before apostasy. Same, 1782,
page 50, In the 15th line, insert the words ten mouths, before experience.
Same, 1782, page 50, In the 17th line, insert I find, before coup de main,
Same, 1782, page 50, In the 19th line, read then avowed, instead of the avowed.
25 March, 1782, page 52, In the 11th line, after the word hope, insert the word
soon. 15 May, 1782, page 53, In the 11th line, after the words or any, insert
the word one. 10 June, No. 37, page 55, This is printed 10 June, 7821, rea^ 10
June, 1782. Same, page 56, In the last line of this letter, read allowance,
instead of allowances. 10 June, No. 38, page 56, In the 13th line of this
letter, strike out the single syllable Dis. 10 June, No. 38, page 56, In the
14th line of same letter, instead of conjectures up n, read conjectures en. 10
June, No. 38, page 57 I have no alternative but but to throw myself etc. strike
out the latter but. 19 October, 1782, page 57, In the 5th line, after the words
prevailed upon, add the word me. 29 October, 1782, page 57, In the 7th line of
this letter, after obligation, read upon instead of on. 29 October, 1782, page
58, The asterisk annexed to the word insensible, in the third line of this
page, should have been annexed to the word unlimited in the same line. Same,
same, In the 14th line of this page, instead of Artois who bad, read Artois who
bas. 59 December, 1782, page 59, Before designs, in the 5th line of this
letter, put the word my. Same, same, In the last paragraph but one, read
account instead of accounts. No. 48, page 65, The late of this letter as
printed is 14 Dec. 1785; but its true date is 4 Dec. 1785. No. 48, page 65, In
the 5th line from the bottom of this page, after the words be afterward,
insert the same day, and in the same line before the word notice, insert the
word other. No. 48, page 66, In the second line, instead of 15 June, 78, read
15 June, 1781. No. 48, page 66, In the 4th line of the same page, read
expressly indicated instead of especially indicated. No. 48, page 71, In the
third line, ^ead my design instead of your design. No. 48, page 71, In the 12th
line, read sentiments, instead of sentiment. No. 48, page 71, In the third line
^^ of the extract from (...) 7 December, 1785, after the word (...) (...) me.
No. 48, page 72, In the last line but one, after (...), add, in Madrid; and in
the next line strike out the word ignominious, and, put synony me ^s in its
place.
INTRODUCTION.
THEY who have read Mr. Littlepage's late Publications against Mr. Jay, have
doubtless observed, that all his Charges rest on no other Evidence whatever,
than his BARE ASSERTIONS. As it is impossible to prove Negatives, the only
question that presents itself is, whether any and what credit is due to his
Assertions? Although Mr. Jay flatters himself that his Character affords a
satisfactory Answer to this Question, to all who know and wish not to
misrepresent it; yet, as there is reason to believe that this Young Man's
Ebullitions have not been entirely spontaneous, nor designed to serve merely
his own Purposes, it is thought expedient to lay before the Public all the
Letters which have passed between Mr. Jay and him.

They will enable the Reader to perceive how far his conduct has been
influenced by candor and delicacy, and whether it exhibits those marks of
consistency and ingenuousness, which are necessary to create and support an
Opinion of his veracity. A comparison of those Letters with his late
Publications, will determine whether the Assertions and Accounts contained in
both, correspond with each other, or whether they are so contradictory and
repugnant as to have no claims to Credit: For Truth being immutable, it will
invariably speak the same Language, and all its Accounts and Relations forever
harmonize and agree.

LETTERS, etc.
No. 1. TO MR. JAY.
Nantz, March 10, 1780. SIR,
PROBABLY you may be surprised at this letter, when you are informed that it
comes from the person, whom Mr. T. Adams recommended to your protection in
Philadelphia: The anxiety which that worthy friend has always discovered for my
interest, will ever claim my warmest gratitude; and I am far from esteeming his
recommendation of me to you, as a trivial instance of friendship. You were, (I
doubt not) surprised at not hearing from me in America: I was, all she last
summer, in a very ill state of health; but never had the least idea that my
Guardian had neglected to inform you of my situation, and return the thanks due
to your generosity: Soon after my recovery, I was much chagrined at receiving a
message from Mr. Fleming, of Virginia, that you were to sail immediately; but
if my friends chose to send me to Europe, you would take care of me. I then
prevailed on my Guardian, to let me follow you; and, in a short time, embarked
on board a ship bound to Bourdeaux, but was driven into this port by distress
of weather, about the middle of February. For some time after my arrival, I
could hear nothing of you; and had the greatest reason to believe the
Confederacy lost; but at length was informed of your safe arrival in Spain: I
acquainted Doctor Franklin with my situation, and he advised me to write to
you, and remain in France, till you instructed me how to proceed: This I should
have done before, had I certainly known where to direct. I shall be much
obliged to you to write to me as soon as possibly, as I find it very expensive
in this country. Be pleased to direct your letter to the care of Mr. Bonfield,
in Bourdeaux, where I shall reside till it comes to hand. I have the honor to
be, with the greatest respect, Sir, your grateful, and much obliged humble
servant,

LEWIS LITTLEPAGE.

No. 2, FROM MR. JAY.
Aranjuez, April 3, 1780. DEAR SIR,
ON my arrival here, about an hour ago, your favor of the 10th of March was
delivered to me. The post for France will pass through this place this evening; I
have therefore just time to congratulate you on your safe arrival, and to
assure you, that I shall be happy in every opportunity of facilitating the
attainment of the objects of your voyage. This will at present be more in my
power here than elsewhere; I therefore advise you, to come to Madrid without
delay: -- Mr. Bonfield will direct you as to the manner of doing it in the most
convenient and least expensive manner -- the latter merits attention. I have
reason to believe this country to the full as expensive as the one you are in:
-- This is to be considered, however, rather as a disadvantageous circumstance,
than an unsurmountable obstacle, -- the more prudence will be necessary.
Perhaps your being driven to Nantz may have exposed you to difficulties on the
subject of supplies; if so, you may draw upon me for the expenses of your
journey. I am, dear Sir, your most obedient servant,

JOHN JAY.

Mr. Lewis Littlepage.
Mr. Jay, presents his compliments to Mr. Bonfield, and requests the favor of
him to deliver the enclosed to Mr. Littlepage.



Madrid, May 8, 1780. DEAR SIR,
AS the time in which I expected the pleasure of seeing you has elapsed, I fear
my letter from Aranjuez, has miscarried: -- I therefore send you a duplicate:
and am, Sir, your most obedient servant.

JOHN JAY.

Mr. Lewis Littlepage.
No. 3. TO MR. JAY.
Bourdeaux, May 3, 1780. SIR,
YOUR favor of the 3d of April, reached me a few days past at Nantz. I arrived
but yesterday in this city, and have now the agreeable prospect of being with
you in a shout time. My long residence at Nantz, was on Mr. Bonfield's acc^^^,
whose affairs would not permit him to leave the place sooner; though it was
really inconvenient to me for several reasons; as my expectation; of departing
every day, obliged me to take temporary lodgings in a Hotel, which unavoidably
incurred a double expense, and prevented me from studying the language with
necessary application. I am exceedingly obliged to you for your offer of
supplies, but fortunately bad letters of credit to Nantz: I was at first
apprehensive of being obliged to go to Paris, to M. Beaumarchais; but the
gentlemen, to whom I was recommended, have offered to advance whatever may be
necessary for the expenses of my journey. The only opportunity that at present
seems to occur for my getting to Madrid with convenience, is, in the company of
an Envoy from the Court of Hungary to Spain, who is daily expected in
Bourdeaux. Should I be disappointed in this, fortune must direct me. My most
respectful compliments to your Lady, (who I have heard is with you.) I am, Sir,
your much obliged, and very grateful humble servant,

LEWIS LITTLEPAGE.

NO. 4. To MR. JAY.
Bourdeaux, May 30, 1780. DEAR SIR,
MR. Bonfield yesterday informed me, that he had received a letter from you,
with permission for me to remain some time longer in France: My peculiar
situation, since my arrival in this country, has unfortunately prevented me
from an assidious application to acquire the French language grammatically. I
have bad little or no society with the natives of France, who were unacquainted
with the British language; and all that I have as yet attained, is a
superficial knowledge of a few words, sufficient perhaps for a traveller.

In consequence of your last letter to Mr. Bonfield, I shall this day leave
Bourdeaux, and reside at the country seat of a gentleman, some leagues distant;
where it will be less difficult to acquire the French pronunciation. If you
business will permit, I shall be happy to receive a few lines from you, and
hope you will ever believe me to be, Sir, your very respectful, and obedient
humble servant,

LEWIS LITTLEPAGE.

No. 5. FROM MR. JAY.
Madrid, June 16, 1780. DEAR SIR,
YOUR favor, of the 30th ult. has been delivered to me. It gives me pleasure to
hear you are in a French gentleman's family. -- You will there have an
opportunity of learning pronunciation as well as grammar. As you will doubtless
read French books, I think it would be well to choose such as would teach you
things as well as language; and of things, there are few more useful than those
which lead to a knowledge of mankind. History and memoirs are of this class; of
the latter, the memoirs of the late Marshal Duke "Memoirs politiques et
militaires," published by Abbe Millot.
D'Noailles merit attention. They respect recent and important transactions. I
am, dear Sir, your most obedient servant,

JOHN JAY.

Mr. Lewis Littlepage.
No. 6. TO MR. JAY.
St. Laurent, July 15, 1780. DEAR SIR,
YOUR favor, of the 16th of June, agreeably interrupted my application to the
barren rudiments of the French language: All the polite assiduities of the
worthy family in which I reside, have been able to render my situation little
better than a pleasing hermitage. Unacquainted with the principles of their
tongue, without society, or even one companion; you may suppose, I feel rather
sensibly the change from dissipation and the amusements of a populous city. The
memoirs of Noailles are not to be procured in this place; but as your advice
was in general terms, I presume any productions of the same kind, are to be
understood as equally instructive. My present study is the history of France;
though I have lately perused some of Voltaire's works, and a few moral and
political performances of Marmontelle. -- I find the French language extremely
difficult, both from irregularity and redundancy: to acquire in a few months a
sufficient collection of elegant words in a foreign language, is an evident
impossibility, and was never my expectation: I flatter myself, that my present
knowledge of its fundamental principles, will enable me hereafter, to read with
some degree of satisfaction its most useful authors: If you have no objection,
I would proceed immediately to Madrid. Be pleased to write to me and let me
know your sentiments. I am, with the greatest respect, Sir, your humble servant,

LEWIS LITTLEPAGE.
P. S. If you think it more advantageous for me to remain in this kingdom, till
I acquire the language in any tolerable degree of propriety, my residence here
must be at least the remainder of this year.



No. 7. FROM MR. JAY.
Madrid, August 19, 1780. DEAR SIR,
I HAVE had the pleasure of receiving your savor of the 15th ult. You will, in
my opinion, find the French language very important to you: -- In your present
situation, you may easily acquire a degree of proficiency in it, very difficult
to attain here. -- It therefore appears to me most advisable, that you should
confine your attention to it a little longer; -- such another opportunity may
not offer -- Do nothing by halves.

The opinion I have imbibed of you, renders me solicitous to see you, and will
unite with my esteem and regard for your friends, in inducing me to be
instrumental to your fulfiling their expectations, and being useful to your
country. -- You have a wide and glorious field before you; and virtue, learning
and prudence, will enable you to reap laurels in it. -- Never let these three
objects be separated, -- cultivate them, and you will have reason to value
their friendship: -- They will render you useful and respectable here, and what
is of most importance, happy hereafter. I am, dear Sir, your most obedient
servant,

JOHN JAY.

Mr. Littlepage.
No. 8. TO MR. JAY.
Bourdeaux, August 30, 1780. DEAR SIR,
IT is with infinite regret that I must acquaint you with my present
disagreeable situation. -- A few days after the date of my last (the 15th ult.)
I was seized with violent intermitting fevers, which continuing for some time
with increasing fervor, obliged me to leave my happy residence in the country,
and return to this city; not only on account of the inconvenience which my
disease unavoidably occasioned to the hospitable family, whom I but too much
incommoded, but for the benefit of medicine and Physicians; all the service,
however, which these two powerful supports of mortality have been able to
render me, is, to convert an irregular fever into an obstinate periodical
quartan; which has incredibly reduced me. To complete my chagrin, my worthy
friend, Mr. Bonfield, is dangerously ill of a putrid fever. -- The long
duration, and inveteracy of my own malady, have greatly impaired my strength,
and rendered me utterly unable to proceed to Madrid, which is at present my
only wish. This is, unfortunately, the day of my fever, and its approach
obliges me to resign my pen.

WEDNESDAY MORNING, AUGUST 31.
I find myself much indisposed from my yesterday's fever, which continued all
the night past. But as the post for Spain, this day leaves Bourdeaux, necessity
obliges me to conclude. Your favor, of the 19th instant, was this moment
delivered to me: The warmth of sincere friendship glows in every line. The
object, which you have so strikingly exhibited to my view, must undoubtedly be
animating to every mind endued with sensibility: But the happiness of being in
any degree useful to my country, is a summit to which my ambition dare not
aspire: -- Conscious dissidence forbids me to hope it. -- To my friends I may,
perhaps, be serviceable; at least, inability shall be the only obstacle. Your
desire I perceive is, that I should remain some time longer in France, for the
more perfect attainment of the language. Unfortunately, my residence in a
French family, was but of short duration; I am now amidst Americans and
English: However, during my short retreat in the country, I acquired a
sufficiency for the necessities of traveling, and common conversation: Their
authors I have read with tolerable facility, and some degree of taste. This,
joined with some more weighty reasons, will, I hope, procure your consent for
me to prosecute my long protracted journey to Madrid, as soon as my health will
permit. The sea air is here said to be the most efficacious re^^edy for my
disease; for which reason, as a fine opportunity now occurs, I shall make a
small voyage to the Isle of The, the appointed place of rendezvous for the
West India fleet.

I shall be happy to receive a few lines from you as soon as possible. I am,
with ^reat respect equal to my gratitude for your unmerited favors, Sir, your
most ^bedient humble servant,

LEWIS LITTLEPAGE.

No. 9. FROM MR. JAY.
St. Ildephonso, Sept. 16, 1780. DEAR SIR,
I AM sorry to find, by your letter of the 30th and 31st ult. that you was so
much indisposed. I hope your little voyage has, by this time, re-established
your ^^ alth,

Your reasons for coming on to Madrid, concur with my sentiments. Butdont begin
your journey till you have strength to bear it. If you can conveniently do it,
bring for me either a Bailey or Chambaud's French and English Dictionary; the
latter if to be had. I am, dear Sir, your most obedient servant,

JOHN JAY.

Mr. Littlepage.
No. 10. TO MR. JAY.
Virginia, New-Kent County, November 20, 1779. SIR,
YOU will receive this from the hand of my Nephew, Lewis Littlepage, the youth
whom you was so kind as to promise my friend, Mr. Thomas Adams, to take into
your care. I have a proper sense of your favor, Sir, and hope he will behave in
such a manner, as to deserve your patronage. I should have sent him to you
before your departure from Philadelphia, but was prevented, by his falling into
a bad state of health, from which he did not recover in time. Enclosed you will
find some of his performances, by which you may judge of his genius for poetry.
The elegy on the death of his friend, Col. Fleming, was wrote by him at the age
of fifteen years and three months; the ode on death, and the translation of
Horace's ode, a few months after. I shall be anxious to hear how he answers
your expectations. He fails for Bourdeaux, where he will be accommodated by a
Merchant, and forwarded to M. Beauma^^ais, at Paris, and by him, or M. Gerard,
will be sent to you at Madrid. Those gentlemen are desired to draw upon you,
for whatever they may advance for him; which be pleased to pay, and it shall be
punctually returned, by your much obliged, and most obedient humble servant,

BENJAMIN LEWIS.

No. 11. FROM MR. JAY.
Madrid, November 21, 1780. SIR,
MR. Littlepage delivered me your favor of the 20th of November, 1779, on his
arrival here from France, a few weeks ago: He fully justifies the character
given me of him by Col. Adams, and if he continues to ca^^ivate his genius
properly, will one day do honor as well as service to his country and
connections. As, be lives with me, his expenses will be consmed to clothes,
pocket money and the ^ like. I shall, with great pleasure, make the necessary
advances; though, I think it would be will, that I should be informed of the
limits to which you would choose they should be restricted. On the 26th of
September last, he drew a bill on me for 2008 livres, which I have paid. From
the specimens you send me, I think highly of his talent for poetry, which
though not to be neglected, ought not, in my opinion, to be the first object of
hi^ care. I have advised him to turn his attention principally, to such
sciences, as tend most to qualify him for the law and politics. I also think,
he ought to read men as well as books, and that the expense of doing it, is
only putting money at interest. My endeavors shall not be wanting, to fix and
confirm those liberal principles of morality and honor, which I find he has
already imbibed, and to extend his ambition beyond the limits of this life. I
am, Sir, with great respect, your most obedient humble servant,

JOHN JAY.

Col. Lewis,
It is proper to inform the Reader, That in the month of October 1780, Mr.
Littlepage arrived at Madrid, and being constantly in Mr. Jay's family, no
letters passed between them.

That from circumstances immaterial to this subject, it so happened, that a
coolness then subsisted and continued between Mr. Jay and Mr. Carmichael, his
secretary to the legation.

That Mr. Littlepage (whether with design to ingratiate himself with Mr. Jay,
or from o sense of his kindness to him, was then problematical) frequently
communicated to Mr. Jay, anecdotes of that gentlemen's conduct and language,
with which it was impossible Mr. Jay could be pleased.

That in the latter end of May or beginning of June 1781, Mr. Jay removed his
family to Aranjuez, one of the royal seats, at which the court were to reside
for some time: That while there, Mr. Littlepage took a fancy to go with the
Duke de Crillon to Minorca, and warmly solicited Mr. Jay's consent, but
without effect: That among other reasons which be urged in favor of his
project, be insisted largely on Mr. Carmichael's attempts to oppose and
misrepresent him, and how useful an acquaintance with the principal officers
would be, to frustrate the effects of such conduct in future. -- He enumerated
many instances and particulars, some of which were entirely new to Mr. Jay.

That Mr. Jay observed to him, that these were delicate subjects; that Mr. Jay
was in an unpleasant situation between Mr. Carmichael, and him, and his
friends; that therefore be wished to have all those facts and reasons so
ascertained, as to be able at all times fairly and fully to state them; that
verbal communications, whether of reasons or facts, were liable to be
forgotten, as well as misrepresented either by accident or design; and that the
word, even of an honest man, hardly gains full credit, in cases where be may be
considered as interested: That be wished to have no open rupture with Mr.
Carmichael on various accounts, and should endeavor to avoid it; but
nevertheless that prudence recommended cau'ion; and in case (...) a rupture
should take place, be wished to have it in his power to prove whatever he might
be obliged to say. He therefore wished Mr. Littlepage would reduce to writing
these and all his reasons for going on the intended expedition; telling him at
the same time, that it should not be made public, unless the regard due either
to Mr. Jay's or his reputation should render it necessary.

That thereupon Mr. Littlepage left Mr. Jay, and the next day sent him the
following letter:

No. 12. TO MR. JAY.
Aranjuez, l15th June, 1781. DEAR SIR,
NOTWITHSTANDING you friendly endeavors to dissuade me from my intention of
accompanying the Duke of Crillon in the ensuing campaign, I find my
inclination, honor, and let me add, my interest, too nearly concerned to admit
the most distant idea of desisting. Perfectly convinced, however, of the
generous and candid motives which influence your conduct, I think it
indispensibly incumbent upon me to explain to you in the most serious manner my
reasons for persevering.

In this unhappy era of war and commotion, politicians and soldiers are
equally necessary: at a distance from my native country, and consequently
incapable of serving it immediately in a military line, I think it still my
duty to embrace every opportunity of acquiring a degree of experience, which
may one day prove beneficial. Your partiality to my abilities induces you to
suppose polities my proper sphere: Friendship seems more prevalent than
judgment in that conjecture: My present object is the attainment of the Spanish
language: the alternative is to retire to some village, or spend a few months
in the army; thel atter is infinitely more agreeable, less expensive, and more
consistent with my future plans of life. -- Here, sir, permit me to call your
attention to some minute particulars, relative only to myself.

Neither your friendship nor my own caution can, I find, protect me from the
machinations of a powerful and insidious enemy: to his malicious insinuations I
can alone impute that universal coldness, with which every person in the least
influenced by him, continually avoids me. Suspicions to the prejudice of my
character are infused into the minds of all who appear disposed to treat me
with civility. Attempts have been, and are daily and hourly made, to irritate,
and render me discontented with you; and at the same time to seduce me into
pursuits which would tend to lessen your good opinion of my honor and morals.
The most infamous falsehoods have been reported even to yourself, On a certain
occasion here alluded to, Mr. Littlepage mentioned a circumstance respecting
Mr. Carmichael's attempting to lead him into very improper connections, which
Mr. Jay thought extraordinary and improbable, as well because be could not
easily conceive Mr. Carmichael capable of it, as because Mr. Carmichael had
expressed to him some apprehensions of Mr. Litt'epage's being led into them,
from some recent circumstances which had occurred, and respecting which Mr.
Carmichael had acted a part, which, as he represented it, was both honorable
and friendly to Mr. Littlepage. -- Mr. Jay mentioned this to Mr. Littlepage as
a fact, very inconsistent with the one he was then telling him. Mr. Littlepage
denied the whole of it in the most positive and express terms, and insisted
that Mr. Carmichael had related this without any foundation, and for (...)
other reason than to injure him in Mr. Jay's esteem.
by the same perfidious and cruel author. Your SECRETARY, MR. WM. CARMICHAEL,
is the person to whom I allude.

Justly incensed and disgusted at this unprovoked and inhumane treatment;
actuated by the most honorable and ardent desire of exculpating myself from
aspersions equally odious and illsounded, and of obtaining some degree of
respect amongst my present deluded acquaintances, I have formed the design of
entering, if possible, into the family of his grace of Crillon, and serving as
a volunteer in the intended expedition from Cadiz. The connexions which I may
there form; the reputation which only a decent line of conduct will inevitably
procure; may, perhaps, convince the world that malice, not candor, could injure
me. Mr. Carmichael at first warmly opposed my intention, but at present, for
obvious reasons, stimulates me to it, with the most artful appearance of
disinterested friendship.

Whether I shall succeed, or not, is as yet uncertain; but whatever may be the
event, those considerations, maturely weighed, will, I hope, induce you to
think more favorably of the design of your Excellency's most obedient, etc.

Lewis Littlepage.

His Excellency John Jay.
No. 13. FROM MR. JAY.
Aranjuez, June 15, 1781. DEAR SIR,
I HAVE considered your letter of today, with all the attention due to the
importance and delicacy of the subject.

The general reasons you urge for resolving to persevere in the plan of
accompanying the Duke of Crillon, on the expedition in question, are the same,
which we before fully discussed in conversation. I must heartily assure you
that my opinion remains unaltered. It cannot be necessary to repeat the reasons
I assigned to you for withholding my consent and approbation. The conversations
I had with your friend Mr. Adams on the subject, invariably led me to suppose,
that law and politics were to be your objects; and I considered your coming to
Europe, as designed for the purpose of facilitating the attainment of them, by
giving you opportunities of acquiring two useful languages, and of applying to
such pursuits and studies, an might conduce to qualify you for the bar, and for
public employments. My knowledge of you persuades me that your friends were
wise in proposing these objects to your attention, and therefore, though I admire
the spirit which actuates you on this occasion, I cannot forbear disapproving
your permitting it, to carry you out of the sphere proposed for you to move in.
You was recommended to my care; I promised that you should receive it -- hence
it became my duty to assist you in the attainment of the objects before
mentioned, but not to encourage or approve of your pursuing different ones. I
know that you ought, and I advise you s^cadily to follow, wherever your duty
may load you, without being deterred by dangers or evils of any kind whatever;
and were it your duty to go on the proposed expedition, I should cease to
esteem you, if you suffered any personal considerations to restrain you. You
seem to admit that your duty does not require you to take this step; and I
think you would do well to consider, how far it will AUTHORIZE it. This is a
delicate subject -- and yet the relations you stand in to your country, your
family, and your friends, ought to be well weighed, before you embark in a
measure, that may affect each of them. But you know my sentiments on all these
points, having before dwelt minutely on them. All I can do is to give you my
advice -- this I have done fully and heartily. As to the minute particulars you
mention; my feelings are too much awakened to hazard any other reflection on
them at present, than that in my opinion you ought not at any rate, to let them
drive you to such extremities. I shall be at leisure this evening, and shall
then be glad to have a full and particular conversation As Mr. Littlepage's
letter rather alluded to than stated several interesting facts, which in his
prier conversation he had mentioned, Mr. Jay wished to talk them over with him
again, thereby to fix them in his memory, and to be able to make memorandums of
them; not thinking it prudent to object to the letter, or propose that Mr.
Littlepage should either alter it, or write any thing further on the subject --
He accordingly had this conversation with Mr. Littlepage, and after they
parted, Mr. Jay made his memorandums.
with you about them. I am, etc.

JOHN JAY.

On the 24th of June, 1781, Mr. Littlepage set out from Madrid for Cadiz, after
having that day settled his accounts with Mr. Jay: -- While that was doing, he
said he did not recollect that he owed any thing to any body, except his
tailor, and a small sum he had borrowed of Mr. Carmichael; and requested that
Mr. Jay would accept and pay his orders in their favor for the amount.

The account then settle and signed by Mr. Littlepage, is as follows:

Account of money paid by John Jay, to, and for Mr. Lewis Littlepage.
To the amount of his bill on me, in favor of Mr. John Bonfield, dated
September 26, 1780, 2108 livers tournois. January 27, 1781, To cash, 30 hard
dollars, April 12, 1781, To cash, 8 ditto, May 17, 1781, To cash, 72 1-4 ditto,
June 24, 1781, To cash, 127 ditto, Total 237 1-4.

Madrid, June 24, 1781.
I acknowledge to have received from Mr. Jay, agreeable to the above account,
two hundred and thirty-seven hard dollars and a quarter; and also, that he paid
for me the abovementioned two thousand one hundred and eight livres tournois.
At my request he has also, this day, given me a letter of credit on Mr.
Richard Harrison, at Cadiz (...) any sum not exceeding one hundred and fifty
hard, or Mexican dollars; a (...) desire him to pay the amount of an order
which I shall give my tailor and Mr. Littlepage's tailor afterward, viz.
August 6, 1781, presented his account, and Mr. Littlepage's order written on
it, amounting to fifty-one dollars and fourteen reals, which Mr. Jay
immediately paid. -- But as Mr. Carmichael never presented Mr. Littlepage's
order in his favor to Mr. Jay, nor applied to him for the amount of it, Mr. Jay
knows nothing further of that singular transaction.
Mr. Carmichael on him.

Lewis Littlepage.

The next day, June 25th, I wrote the following letter to Mr. Littlepage's
Guardian, viz

No. 14. FROM MR. JAY TO COL. BEN. LEWIS.
Madrid, June 25, 1781. SIR,
THE only letter which I have as yet had the pleasure of receiving from you, is
the one which Mr. Littlepage brought with him from America, and is dated the
20th of November, 1779. In October, 1780, Mr. Littlepage reached Madrid, and on
the 21st of November following, I had the honor of writing to you and Mr.
Adams, informing you of his arrival, and the objects which I advised him to
pursue; and which, from conversations with Mr. Adams, I had reason to think,
were perfectly consistent with his, and your views. I also thought it
necessary, in mentioning the expenses he had incurred, to request that you
would fix the limits within which they should in future be confined.

From that time to this, he has been constantly in my family, and consequently
subject to few expenses. ^is time has, in my opinion, been upon the whole
usefully spent; and had his application been equal to his talents, his progress
might have been still greater.

As the Court pass the spring at Aranjuez, a royal seat, about seven leagues
distance from here, I removed my family there. About a fortnight ago, the
public were informed, that the Duke de Crillon, to whom I had formerly
introduced Mr. Littlepage, was appointed to command an expedition, to sail from
Cadiz, but for what place is still unknown.

Some days afterward, Mr. Littlepage surprised me, by a proposal to accompany
the Duke as a Volunteer on this expedition, and strongly solicited my consent
and assistan^^. I used every argument to dissuade him from it, but in vain; he
several time renewed his application, and pressed it with earnestness, and I as
often told him, that my opinion of the plan remained fixed, and that as I did
not approve of it, I could not patronize it. At length he wrote me a letter on
the subject, in which he repeated his former arguments, to show the expediency
of the plan; and also urged the tendency it would have to enable him, more
easily to from useful connections, in doing which he had experienced obstacles
from the malevolence of one of his acquaintances.

I shall, for your satisfaction, insert the first part of this letter, and my
answer.

Aranjuez, June 15, 1781. DEAR SIR,
NOTWITHSTANDING your friendly endeavors to dissuade me from my intention of
accompanying the Duke of Crillon, in the ensuing campaign, I find my
inclination, honor, and let me add, my interest, too nearly concerned to admit
the most distant idea of desisting. I think it indispensably incumbent on me to
explain to you, in the most serious manner, my reasons for persevering.

In the unhappy era of war and commotion, politicians and soldiers are equally
necessary. At a distance from my native country, and consequently incapable of
serving it immediately, in a military line; I think it still my duty to embrace
every opportunity of acquiring a degree of experience, which may one day prove
beneficial: Your partiality to my abilities enduces you to suppose polities my
proper sphere: Friendship seems more prevalent than judgment in that
conjecture. My present object is the attainment of the Spanish language, -- the
alternative is, to retire to some village, or spend a few months in the army;
the latter is infinitely more agreeable, less expensive, and more consistent
with my future plans of life.


ANSWER.
Aranjuez, June 1781. DEAR SIR,
I Have considered your letter of to day, with all the attention due to the
importance and delicacy of the subject.

The general reasons you urge for resolving to persevere in the plan of
accompanying the Duke of Crillon, on the expedition in question, are the same
which we before fully discussed in conversation. I must heartily assure you,
that my opinion remains unaltered. It cannot be necessary to repeat the reasons
which I assigned to you for withholding my consent and approbation. The
conversations I had with your friend, Col. Adams, on the subject, led me to
suppose, that law and politics were to be your objects; and I considered your
coming to Europe, as designed for the purpose of facilitating the attainment of
them; by giving you opportunities of acquiring two useful languages, and of
applying to such pursuits and studies as might conduce to qualify you for the
bar, and for civil employments. My knowledge of you, persuades me, that your
friends were wise in proposing these objects to your attention; and therefore,
though I admire the spirit which actuates you on this occasion, I cannot
forbear disapproving your permitting it to carry you out of the sphere proposed
for you to move in.

You was recommended to my care -- I promised that you should receive it: --
Hence it became my duty to assist you in the attainment of the objects
beforementioned, but not to encourage or approve your pursuing different ones.

I know that you ought, and I advise you, steadily to follow wherever your duty
may lead you, without being deterred by dangers or evils of any kind whatever;
and were it your duty to go on the proposed expedition, I should cease to
esteem you if you suffered any personal consideration to restrain you. You seem
to admit that your duty does not require you to take this step, and, I think,
you would do well to consider how far it will authorize it. This is a delicate
subject, and yet the relations you stand in to your country, your family and
your friends, ought to be well weighed, before you embark in a measure that may
affect each of them. But you know my sentiments on all these points, having
before dwelt minutely on them. All I can do is to give you my advice; this I
have done fully and heartily."


When Mr. Littlepage offered his services to the Duke, he promised to take him
into his family, if the permission of the Court could be obtained. The Duke
mentioned the matter to the Minister of State, but received no direct answer.
-- Some days elapsed without any thing further being done, -- the affair began
to be publicly talked of, and as Mr. Littlepage was in my family, my not
secondi^^ his application, gave occasion to various conjectures, and some
illnatured insinuations. To prevent further mistakes and misrepresentations, I
wrote the following letter to the Minister, viz.

Aranjuez, June 17, 1781. SIR,
"I find that Mr. Lewis Littlepage, a young American gentleman in my family,
has conveyed to your Excellency, through the Duke de Crillon, a request for his
Majesty's permission to serve as a Volunteer in the Duke's family on the
intended expedition.

"As my further silence on this occasion might appear singular, and perhaps
disrespectful, I take the liberty of mentioning the reasons which prevented my
taking a part in Mr. littlepage's application.

"He was placed by his Guardian and friends under my particular care and
protection, and I am persuaded it was their intention that he should confine
himself to such studies and pursuits, as might conduce to prepare him for the
profession of the law and for civil employments. The trust they reposed in me,
would not, therefore, permit me to consent to his quitting this line, and going
into a military one; especially as my private judgment led me to view an
adherence to the first plan as more conducive to his advantage.

"He has earnestly and repeatedly pressed me to consent, and on my continuing
to withold it, finally told me, he was determined to make the campaign, if
His Majesty's and the Duke's permission could possibly be obtained; and hoped
that I would take no measures to oppose it. I replied, that I claimed no
authority over him, and that I should never attempt to restrain him in any
other manner, than by honest counsel and disinterested advice.

"I ought to inform your Excellency, that this Gentleman's character is fair:
-- I think highly of his integrity and abilities, and should be succeed in his
application for his Majesty's permission, the reflection of his being in the
family of the Duke, would afford me much consolation. I have the honor to be
etc."

His Excellency the Count de Florida Blanca.

But whatever might be the light in which this project appeared to me, it is
certain that the Spaniards were much pleased with the idea of a young American
gentleman's offering to go as a Volunteer in their service. -- Mr. Littlepage
was much spoken of, and commended; and so popular did his application soon
promise, an indeed begin to be, that some, on whose attachment he had no great
reason to rely, and who at first treated the project with redicule, professed
to be convinced of its proving advantageous, and let slip no opportunity of
appearing to patronize cordially both it and him. He certainly gained much
personal credit by it, and there were gentlemen of weight and distinction who
advised me very seriously to give my consent to his going, and to support his
application for permission, adding, that it would serve the American cause,
etc. I answered these gentlemen, that, on this occasion, I could act in no
other capacity than that of Mr. Littlepage's friend; and that no consideration
of convenience, either to the public or myself, would ever prevail upon me to
depart from what I conceived to be the spirit of the trust you had reposed in
me.

Mr. Littlepage's idea was, in case he obtained permission, to set out in
company with the Duke, who daily expected to depart, and by that means avoid
considerable expenses; but it unfortunately happened that he did not get it
'till after much delay, and after the Duke was on the road to Cadiz. It was not
'till Saturday last that he was informed that his request was granted. I
advised him, before the Duke's departure, to take such explicit arrangements
with the Duke, as that no matters of expense might be lest unsettled, in case
he should have leave to go, (which I confess I did not think very probable) but
this was omitted. When the King's permission was signified to him, it was too
late; and no other alternative was lest him, than either to decline accepting a
favor he had strongly solicited, or set out post for Cadiz, and arrange this
business there as well as he could. The former could not be done consistent
with his honor, and the latter required expenses which I feared would be very
disagreeable to you. This dilemma reduced me to a very delicate situation --
presuming however, that you would prefer the expense, to the dishonor, I
consented to furnish him with as much money as might be necessary for his
journey and outfit, and proposed the pay of a Spanish Captain of foot, as a
reasonable allowance for his ordinary expenses. This did not correspond with
his ideas -- he chose rather to be left at liberty to draw upon me for such
sums as he might from time to time find necessary, assuring me at the same
time, that I might rely on his observing the most rigid economy. He expressed
his apprehensions that a Captain's pay, which is twenty-two dollars and one
half of a dollar per month, would probably be insufficient, and therefore
wished to be provided accordingly.

I told him that unlimited credit always appeared to me improper, especially in
cases where I was acting for others, that if Captains could live on this
allowance, it would also be in his power; and that, if he should be admitted
into the Duke's family, even less might be sufficient. That therefore,
notwithstanding my consistence in his prudence, I could not think of going
further; but hoped that he would endeavor, if possible, to live within that
allowance, and be cautious of rendering the bounty of his friends inconvenient
to them.

I accordingly furnished him with money sufficient to go to Cadiz, and provide
against casualties on the road, and with credit there on Mr. Harrison for as
much as, with what would probably remain of the former sum, would be necessary
to fit him out; and also the amount of a Spanish Captain's pay for six months:
which i^^vance apeared the more necessary, as many are of opinion the Duke is
going to South America. For my own part I doubt it; but yet, as it may be the
case, I could not think of letting him run the risque, without some money to
be-friend him. I also thought it prudent not to exceed six months, as before
that time, I might expect to receive your orders for my government in future.
-- He left us yesterday.

The Ambassador of France being on the most intimate footing with the Duke, and
it being of importance to Mr. Littlepage, that the Duke should have every
inducement to favor him with his friendship and protection, I gave him the
following letter to deliver to the Ambassador at Aranjuez, viz.

Madrid, June 24, 1781. SIR,
"MR. Littlepage informs me, that he has obtained permission to accompany the
Duke de Crillon, on the intended expedition. Although his embarking in this
business is contrary to my advice and approbation; I, nevertheless, wish he may
reap every advantage he promises himself from it. I esteem him as a young
gentleman, of whose talents and integrity I have a very good opinion, and as
such, request the favor of you to recommend him to the Duke's kind offices and
protection. The proofs I have had of your friendship for America, on several
interesting occasions, encourages me to take this liberty in favor of an
American. I have the honor to be, etc. etc.

His Excellency the Count de Montmorin.

Thus, Sir, I have given you a short, but accurate account of an affair, which
must from its nature be no less unexpected than interesting to you. How far my
conduct upon this occasion may coincide with your sentiments, is not certain;
but, however that may be, I flatter myself, you will do me the justice to
believe, that it was directed by the purest motives, and most disinterested
regard to what I thought right. If Mr. Littlepage's plan should meet with your
approbation, no inconveniences can result either to him or you, from my having
in vain advised him against it. But if, on the contrary, your sentiments
respecting it should correspond with my own, I hope you will further agree with
me in opinion, that he still merits your care and attention, and that a fine
soil ought not to be neglected, because all its natural productions are not
equally estimable. -- It demands only a greater degree of prudent, and perhaps
patient cultivation.

I must again take the liberty of remarking, that, in my opinion, your
allowance to him for expenses, ought to be restricted to some fixed limits: --
Your letter to me leaves them without bounds, and consequently leaves us both
to disagreeable differences in sentiment on a very delicate subject.

It is with equal cheerfulness, that I now repeat the assurances I before gave
you, of my readiness to be useful to Mr. Littlepage, whenever it may be in my
power. I will with pleasure and without hesitation, make him from time to time
such advances of money as may be necessary, and consistent with such orders as
I may receive from you: -- And I must request the favor of you, to send me
immediately, and by different opportunities, express and particular directions
about it.

The annexed account of what I have already advanced, and engaged to pay, will
show how necessary it is, that these matters be speedily arranged, and regular
remittances made; which may be done without difficulty or risque by bills of
exchange. The extent of my own expenses here, renders punctual reimbursements
indispensible; and lest unexpected occurrences, similar to the present, should
again tempt Mr. Littlepage into deviations from the line you may choose he
should observe, I really think that the sooner you give him and me your
sentiments and orders about it, the better.

The object of the expedition is, as I said before, unknown; but the more
general opinion is, that it is not very distant, and will soon be decided. If
no accidents should happen to Mr. Littlepage, I expect he will return in the
fall, and I hope, before that time, to have the pleasure of receiving an answer
to this letter. Whatever intelligence I may in the mean time receive of, or
from him, shall be immediately communicated to you. He has promised me to write
to you and Mr. Adams before he leaves Cadiz. I shall transmit this letter to
the Delegates of Virginia, in Congress, and request the favor of them to
forward it to you. I have the honor to be, Sir, your most obedient and very
humble servant,

JOHN JAY.

Col. Benjamin Lewis.
No. 15. FROM MR. JAY.
Madrid, June 28, 1781. DEAR SIR,
I hope this letter will find you safe at Cadiz and in as good plight as so
fatiguing a journey may be expected to have left one, so little accustomed to
riding post, as yourself. -- Being at a loss how to direct my letters to your
Uncle and Mr. Adams Mr. Jay mislaid the memorandum he had of their addresses.
I must beg the favor of you ^o send me their addresses, and also those of
Cols. Fleming and Mer. Smith. -- Nothing new has occurred since you left us. --
Mr. Harrison will enclose your answer to me. -- We all present you our best
wishes. I am, dear Sir, yours, etc.

JOHN JAY.

Mr. Lewis Littlepage.
No. 16. TO MR. JAY.
Cadiz, July 3, 1781. DEAR SIR,
I ARRIVED here on Saturday last, after a very fatiguing and disagreeable
journey: The extreme heat of the weather obliged us to hire a coach at Cordova.
The General received me with the greatest cordiality and satisfaction, and has
even honored me with the office of Aid de Camp. Our destination is yet unknown,
though I begin to suspect it is not for Gibraltar. The expenses of my journey,
and those which I must still unavoidably incur, so greatly exceed my
expectations, that I must absolutely request you to double my credit on Mr.
Harrison, or my situation may be infinitely distressing. I entreat you to write
immediately, or it will be too late. I am your Excellence's most obedient
humble servant,

LEWIS LITTLEPAGE.

No. 17. TO MR JAY.
Cadiz, July 6, 1785. DEAR SIR,
OUR destination is still unknown; Guichen this morning arrived here with
eighteen sail of the line; which to me appears a corroborating proof that
Minorca or Gibraltar, is the object; though most politicians suppose it to be
America. The combined fleets at present consist of fifty-three sail of the
line; among which are seven of three decks; every thing is preparing with the
greatest expedition for our departure: The regiment of America, commanded by
the Marquis de Penafiel yesterday arrived here: The troops in general seem
admirably discipline: and I have the happiness to perceive that my worthy
friend and commander, the Duke, is universally beloved by them: The behavior
of the people here, and of the officers in particular, to me, is polite and
even cordial. My situation is so perfectly changed, that I can scarce believe
myself to be in Spain, after what I experienced at Madrid. Be pleased to
present my compliments to the Chevalier Bourgoine, I hope he will excuse my not
writing to him; as, the last post, I had so violent a return of my quartan,
that my few lines to you were not finished without some extraordinary efforts:
Dr. Craig's remedy, has however, again proved efficacious: (desire Peter to
correct that orthography.) To day I have been engaged till the present moment.

Direct your letters to Mr. Adams, in Augusta county, Virginia; to my Uncle, in
New-Kent: I really know not the address of Mr. Fleming, or Smith; however, you
may easily enclose letters for them to Mr. Adams.

I entreat you to write instantly, in answer to my last, the contents of which
I must again repeat, (lest it should not have reached you.) My request was,
that you would immediately send me a bill for at least 150 Dollars more: You
never intended that I should be distressed, therefore, I am confident, cannot
hesitate to comply.

My most respectful compliments to Mrs. Jay. I shall write to Col. Livingston
the next post. -- Adieu. -- Yours etc. etc.

LEWIS LITTLEPAGE.

No. 18. TO MR. JAY.
Cadiz, July 20, 1781. DEAR SIR,
YOUR omission to answer my letters on so pressing an emergency, I confess
surprises me, and would have been productive of the most distressing
consequences, had not the timely generosity of Mr. Harrison relieved me. My
expenses since my arrival at this place have amounted to near 260 dollars; and
Mr. Harrison has furnished me with 100 for the campaign. It is indeed a
moderate, a very moderate allowance, considering my situation: -- I am obliged
to keep a servant at seven dollars and a half a month; and, when encamped, must
maintain him as well as myself, at my private expense. Should we besent to
America, I shall, too probably, be reduced to a state of dependence on my
companions; how far I may trust even their generosity is dubious.

I am to sail on board a frigate of forty guns, in company with the Marquis of
Branche-forte; who is also an Aid de Camp of the Duke: -- The last battalion of
troops was embarked yesterday: -- I shall go on board this evening: -- Our
destination is still unknown. I have given Mr. Harrison a bill upon you for the
abovementioned sum, perhaps I may be obliged to apply to him for more. I am,
dear Sir, yours, etc.

LEWIS LITTLEPAGE.

No. 19. TO MR. JAY.
Cadiz, 20th July, 1781. SIR,
FINDING the expenses of my voyage likely to exceed my expectations, I have
thought it most prudent to borrow fifty dollar, more from Mr. Harrison,
exclusive of the sum mentioned in the bill.

I have the honor to be, etc. LEWIS LITTLEPAGE.

No. 20. TO MR. JAY.
Mahon, 20th August, 1781. DEAR SIR,
OUR passage to this place has been unusually long: We sailed the 22d ult. from
Cadiz, and arrived here but yesterday. The British are all retired to the
castle of St. Philip, and begin already to be very liberal of their powder.
They consist of about 3,000 men, more or less: Genesis Murray is the commander in
chief, Sir Wm. Draper the second.

I shall expect a letter from you by the gentleman who carries this: He will
probably return immediately.

Yours sincerely, L. LITTLEPAGE.

No. 21. FROM MR. JAY.
St. Ildefenso, 10th Sept. 1781. DEAR SIR,
"Your favor of the 20th August, was sent me from Madrid, by Mr. Verdier, a few
days ago. If the gentleman who brought it from Mahon is here, I shall request
the favor of him to be the bearer of this.

Present my congratulations to the Duke, on the success he has hitherto been
blessed with; and assure him of my best wishes, that he may soon have the honor
of planting the Spanish Standard on the walls of St. Philip.

Your are well spoken of, and I rejoice to hear it. Our affairs in America have
a promising appearance, and there is reason to hope that one vigorous campaign
would give to the associates in the war a peace worth their acceptance.

I wish to hear often from you -- don't forget your friends in America -- write
to them frequently. -- Mrs. Jay presents her compliments to you.

I am, dear sir, etc. JOHN JAY.

Mr. Littlepage.
No. 22. TO MR. JAY.
Mahon, 8th of October, 1781. SIR,
A LETTER which I this day received from Mr. Harrison informs me, to my
inexpressible surprise and concern, that your Excellency has protested my
bills! -- your long silence is no longer a mystery. I mean not to reproach you;
your conduct may not deserve the appellation of ungenerous or cruel; it is,
indeed, unexpected. Permit me, sir, to recall your attention to some
circumstances which both preceded and were subsequent to my engaging in this
unfortunate enterprise.

When I first communicated to you my intention of making this campaign, you
endeavored to dissuaded me from it for two reasons -- "as being contrary to the
designs of my friends, and from personal danger:" For the first I look upon
myself to be responsible: judge whether I ought to have been influenced by the
latter. -- You never objected the expense 'till after I had received the
permission of his Majesty; 'twas then too late! My reputation, my honor, my all
was at stake! -- Why, in the name of humanity, why was not that mentioned, even
hinted in the most distant manner, before? I expostulated with you, warmly
perhaps, I hope not indecently, on that subject, as well as with regard to the
credit you allowed me on Mr. Harrison; that, you restricted to six months pay
for a captain of foot! This, sir, as I afterward informed you, was a fatal
regulation for me: a captain of cavalry in the Spanish service has forty reals
a day, and forage; a volunteer aid de camp, in which capacity I have the honor
to serve, has nothing and pays both for his horse and forage.

As to the 150 dollars on Mr. H. you assured me it was not from suspicions of
my making an improper use of unlimited credit, but to justify you to my
friends, should they disapprove my conduct; that it was by no means your design
I should be distressed; on the contrary, should that happen, I might draw on
you as my exigencies should require. 'Twas, sir, in consequence of this, that I
ventured to draw on Mr. Harrison. I appeal to him whether I expended one penny
unnecessarily.

Your conduct, perhaps, is influenced by apprehensions of loss, as you do not
possess an opulent fortune. -- I ear not, fir; it is true, I have obligations to
some few valuable friends, but they shall never suffer: The generosity of an
affectionate parent and a worthy deceased relation, have left me above
dependence.

You, sir, was the cause of my leaving my friends and country; they confided me
to your protection and support! -- enough! -- their expectations are answered.

I mean not to solicit your farther assistance -- that were meanness indeed!
-- meanness os which I am incapable! -- No, sir! -- except the duplicate of
this which I shall send by the next post, you shall never more be troubled by
your Excellency's most obedient and respectful, etc.

L. LITTLEPAGE.
P. S. If there is any improprieties in this letter, be pleased to excuse them.
I am almost delirious by a violent sever, which has confined me to my bed for
two days. As I shall not return to Madrid, nor make any considerable stay at
Cadiz, I desire you will immediately burn the cabinet of papers which I lest in
your hands.



No. 23. FROM MR. JAY.
Madrid, 26th Oct. 1781. SIR,
I HAVE received your letter of the 8th instant.

I have paid Mr. Harrison the money he advanced to you, as far as my letter of
credit to him in your favor extended. Your bill upon me, drawn without my
consent, for a sum beyond the limits of that credit, I did not accept.

It is true, sir, that I was so far the cause of your leaving your friends, as
my offering to receive you into my family, care, and protection, in case they
should think proper to send you to Europe, might have been inducements. This
offer was disinterested, and in my opinion as generous as my circumstances and
my duty to those who stand in the nearest of all relations to me, would permit.

I then understood that your principal funds consisted in the generosity of a
worthy uncle, and one or two other friends; and I had some reason to suppose,
that the supplies with which they might be willing to furnish you, would, though
equal to your necessary expenses, be nevertheless such, as to require a
constant attention to economy; for I remember, that on speaking with Colonel
Fleming, shortly before I left Philadelphia, about the probability of your
following me, he told me that the difficulty of providing funds for the
purpose, would be the principal obstacle; but this being a matter without my
province, I could only desire him to assure your friends, that in case they
should conclude to send you, they might depend on my taking care of you. Hence
I have constanly thought myself particularly bound, ever since your arrival, to
take care that these funds, so far as the disposition of them might depend upon
me, should be confined to their proper objects, and not diverted to such
foreign ones as might, from time to time, spring up in a warm and youthful
fancy. I neither considered myself, nor did I suppose that you would consider
me, merely in the light of your bancker. -- I expected to receive you under my
direction, as well as protection; and that the expenses, which your friends
might be willing to be at on your account, should be regulated, in a certain
degree, by my judgment, as well as yours.

A moment's reflection ought to convince you, that no selfish considerations
influenced me to undertake this task. You was represented to me as a young
gentleman whose talents and disposition merited better opportunities of
improvement than those you had; and my regard for a rising genius opposed by
difficulties, prompted me to patronize you, though a perfect stranger to me, and
no way connected with any of my family.

With this view it was that my house and patronage were at first offered to
you, and hence it was that I have, from time to time, taken the liberty of
advising you with respect to the books and studies most proper for you, in my
opinion, to read and to pursue. You may remember also, that in a conversation
about your expenses, brought on by Mr. De Francy's letter, I showed you your
uncle's letter to me, remarking it is too great want of particularity on that
head, and expressing my wishes that it had been more explicit; for that as I
was ignorant of the extent of your funds, it was impossible to determine the
proper extent of your expenses, which I thought the more necessary, because, in
my judgment, the plan of your education should be more or less extensive, in
proportion as you might be more or less able to support the expense of it. I
mention these circumstances to remind you, that I early considered myself in
another light than that of your bancker.

When you first mentioned to me your plan of going a volunteer with the Duke de
Crillon, and requested me to speak to him upon the subject, I well remember
that the expense of it became one of the topics of the conversation which then
ensued; and I am surprised you should forget that you urged the cheapness of
the plan as an argument to reconcile me to it. You observed particularly to it,
that if you should be admitted into the Duke's family, you would have scarce
any other expense than that of regimentals; and that it would not only be a
more expeditious and agreeable, but also a less expensive way of learning
Spanish, than that of going to a country village, as Mr. Vaughan had done, and
as you would otherwise be also inclined to do.

In the course of that, and all other conversations which I have ever had with
you or others on the subject of this project, I pointedly disapproved of it;
and though many reasons for my disapprobation were submitted to your
consideration, it seems that all except two have escaped your memory, viz. "as
being contrary to the designs of your friends, and from persona! danger." For
the first, you say, you looked upon yourself to be responsible; and I will add,
that so far as I might be concerned in it, I considered myself as responsible
both to your friends and to my own judgment. -- As to the circumstance of
personal danger, you desire me to judge whether you ought to have been
influenced by it? ^ forbear remarks on the repetition of this question, it
wants explanation, and you will find, that, as well as an answer to it, in the
following paragraph of a letter I wrote you on this subject, the 15th June
last, viz. "I know that you ought, and I advise you steadily to follow wherever
your duty may lead you without being deterred by danger, or evils of any kind
whatever: and were it your duty to go on the proposed expedition, I should
cease to esteem you, if you suffered any personal consideration to restrain
you. You seem to admit that your duty does not require you to take this step --
and I think you will do well to consider how far it will authorize it. -- This
is a delicate subject; and yet the relations you stand in to your country, your
family, and your friends, ought to be well weighted, before you embark in a
measure that may affect each of them. But you know my sentiments on all these
points, having before dwelt minutely on them. All I can do, is to give you my
advice -- this I have done freely and heartily."

The objections you mention are only two of the reasons which I urged against
your project -- They were accompanied with those others which naturally arising
from the subject, must present themselves to all who consider it with
attention. It would be as unnecessary to enumerate them now, as it proved
useless to urge them at first. Besides, the manner in which you refer to my
objections, seems to be more with a view of showing what they were not, than
what they were -- for if I understand you right, you mean to infer from these
two being the sole reasons for my dissent, that the expense of the plan could
not have been one of them, and therefore that I ought either to have afterward
furnished you with as much money as you might have occasion for in the
execution of it, or have told you that I would not supply you with any. --
There is a difference, sir, between advancing no more at all, and advancing as
much as a young gentleman may please to as^ for, beyond the probable extent of
his funds. -- There are also some matters of fact which I wish to recall to your
memory; and that this may be done with less risque of mistake and confusion, it
may not be amiss to consider the whole time in which the business of this
project was in agitation, as coming within (...) periods:

1. The time which passed between your first mentioning it to me, and your
acquainting me with your determination to persist in pursuing it,
notwithstanding my disapprobation. 2. The time which passed between this
determination, and the grant of your request by the court. 3. The time
subsequent to the grant of your request, including your departure for, and
arrival at Cadiz.
During the first of these periods I flattered myself with being able to
convince you, that your project, being ill adapted to your situation, and
little calculated to promote your proper views, ought to be relinquished -- it
was then sufficient only so far to touch upon the matter of expense, as it gave
occasion to general remarks. At that time it had not become reasonable nor
necessary to tell you, I would not advance you any money in case you persisted,
for I could not presume that you would persist against my advice and consent.
Such a threat would have been too harsh and indelicate, to have had a good
effect; and would have been very distant from the manner in which I always had
treated, and always wished to treat you.

On the commencement of the second period, the state of the whole affair was
changed. The moment you ceased to respect my opinion and consent, it became
your business, and ceased to be mine, to provide for the means of executing a
scheme you had resolved to adopt against my approbation. So that if I had
afterward observed the most profound silence respecting the expense, and all
other articles connected with this project, you would have had no sort of right
to complain.

But, sir, although my advice had hitherto been neglected, I again took an
occasion of troubling you with it; for on hearing that the Duke had, on your
application, consented to take you into his family, provided you could obtain
the leave of the court to go, I thought it a good opportunity of calling your
attention to a matter, about which your expectations appeared to be rather too
sanguine, I mean the expense. I advised you, in so many words, immediately to
take such explicit arrangements with the Duke, as that no matters of expense
might be lest unascertained, in case you should obtain the permission in
question. I expected that the propriety of this advice would certainly strike
you; and not doubting but that you would mention to me the result of your
conversation with him on this subject, I suspected it would afford me new
arguments to prevail upon you to desist.

But this advice, however proper, met with no attention: You applied to the
Court for leave to accompany the Duke, and permitted him to set out for Cadiz,
without having said a word to him about the expense you might expect to incur.

Here arose the following question of prudence, viz. Whether it would be best
for me to tell you plainly, that I would not supply you with any money, in case
you should obtain leave to go, and thereby oblige you to abandon, from
necessity, a scheme which you could not be persuaded to relinquish from reason.
--. On considering this question, I saw that the necessity and consequently the
propriety of this step, must depend entirely on the probability of your
obtaining the leave of the Court. A little time and consideration convinced me
that probability was decidedly against your obtaining it: For,

1. You was a protestant, and it was said that no officers of that profession
were to be found in the Spanish service. 2. You was a citizen of North America,
whose independence had not been acknowledged by this court. 3. I had made no
secret of my disapprobation, and in a letter of the 17th June, informed the
minister of state, that I could take no part in your application, the trust
reposed in me by your friends, as well as my prive^te judgment, opposing it. 4.
The Duke himself had told you, he did not believe that your request would be
granted.
The conclusions, deducible from these circumstances, need not be specified --
The language of them made the same impression upon you, that it did upon me ^
and it was not long before we both became persuaded that your application would
prove fruitless, and in all probability die away without further notice.

There not being therefore the least appearance of necessity for the step in
question, it would have been very improper to take it, especially as it would
have unavoidably exci^ea in your breast, sensations and feelings very
destructive to that confidence in my friendly attention, without which I could
expect to be of very little use to you. We had differed in sentiment without
anger; and though the warmth and enth^siasin, inspired by a desire of sharing in
the eclat of a brilliant coup de main, and hurried you too far, yet neither my
opposition on the one hand, nor your pertinacity on the other, had produced
disgust on your part, or crimination on mine. Besides, as ^^^erested motives
had never found a place among those which (...) my conduct toward you, it
would have been imprudent, by a mea^^^ capable of such a construction, to have
given you reason to impute to (...) considerations, an ^^position which
proceeded from the purest principles of ^^^ship and candor.

We were never ^heless mistaken in our conjectures as to the improbability of
your obtaining the permission you ^ollicited, without entering into the reasons
which, it seems, prevailed with the court, I shall only observe, that, very
ur^xpectedly to us both, it was granted.

Here the last period begin. The Duke had gone to Cadiz, and you was to follow
him immediately. You reflected that money would be necessary, and you proposed
to draw bills upon me, as your occasions should require, assuring me that you
would only draw for as much as might be absolutely necessary. -- This
proposition did not appear to me in the most proper light, though I did not tell
you so. You had no money in my hands, nor any pecuniary demands upon me; and
this was at least an unusual way of applying for favors. As this project was
adopted without my approbation, and pursued against my advice, I might with
great justice have refused to furnish any money for its execution. But, sir, I
saw and I felt the unhappy dilemma to which you had imprudently brought
yourself; without money, you could not proceed, and without proceeding your
would suffer disgra^^. I also considered what was due to your friends, whom you
had thus subjected to the disagreeable alternative of either seeing you resign
with an ill grace, or submit to the expense of preventing it. The latter was
more consistent with my own judgment and feelings, and therefore I presu^ed
that they would also prefer (...).

How much you should be allowed, then became a necessary question, as well as a
difficult one; because in determining it, respect was to be had to the
abilities and inclination of your friends, which I could only conjecture; to
your ideas of necessity, which were very vague, and to your proper and
unavoidable expenses which we neither knew, nor had then time to enquire about;
and which would greatly depend on your being admitted, or not, into the Duke's
family. As to your proposition of unlimited credit, I declined it; not from
doubts of the sincerity of your assurances, but because it would in itself have
been improper.

I could easily suppose, that either in the capacity of a
volunteer-gentleman-soldier, or as a volunteer aid de camp to the Duke, you
might spend a great deal of money, and yet spend much less than some others in
the same situation: But I could also suppose that a sum which, measured by
their fortunes, would be very moderate, would, if compared with your funds, be
very extravagant: Their expenses, therefore, could furnish no rule for yours.
Admitting also, for the sake of argument, that this project was capable of
affording you not only much pleasure, but also much advantage; yet ^f the
expense of it exceeded your means to supply, your attention should return, as
soon as possible, to objects more within the limits of your power and
circumstances. Had you followed my advice, and previously ascertained the
expenses incident to the place promised you by the Duke, your way would have
been plain and obvious.

I had several months before written to your uncle to fix the sum beyond which
he would not choose that your expenses should extend, and I purposed immediately
to repeat that request, as his answer would relieve me from the risque of all
differences with you on so delicate a subject in future, I thought it most
prudent to make you such an allowance in the mean time, as I had reason to
think fully adequate to your real wants, though perhaps not to your desires. For
this, however, some ule was necessary, and I could find none better than the
allowances on which the Spanish officers appeared to live decently. I thought
that if you was enabled to live in the style of a Spanish captain of foot,
until the instructions of your uncle should arrive, you would have reason to be
satisfied. I therefore agreed to allow you the same pay, and to advance you the
amount of it for six months. Over and above this, I agreed not only to pay off
your little debts here, which I afterward found to amount to fifty odd hard
dollars, but also to furnish you with money for your expenses between this and
Cadiz, and for regimentals, etc. In short, I gave you at setting out 127 pieces
of eight in hand, and a credit on Mr. Harrison for 150 more, which you
accordingly received on your arrival. I also authorized you, in case you should
be taken prisoner, and not otherwise, to draw upon me for sufficient to relieve
you from the distresses in which such an event might involve you. I acknowledge
that you expostulated with me warmly, though not indecently, on the subject of
this provision, and that you was discontented with it, though in my opinion,
without reason. I thought it was doing as much as, all things considered, could
prudently be done for you. I did not know how far your uncle might either find
it convenient, or be disposed to defray even these expenses, especially
considering the amount of those which he had already incurred on your account;
and I thought it my duty to pay some regard to his convenience, as well as to
yours.

A few days after your arrival at Cadiz, you wrote me the following letter:

"DEAR SIR, Cadiz, 3d Jul, 1781.
"I arrived here on Saturday last, after a very fatiguing and disagreeable
journey. The extreme heat of the weather obliged us to hire a coach. The
General received me with the greatest cordiality, and has even honored me with
the office of aid de camp. Our destination is yet uncertain, though I begin to
suspect it is not for Gibraltar. The expenses of my journey, and those which I
must still unavoidably incur, so greatly exceed my expectations, that I must
absolutely request you to double my credit on Mr. Harrison, or my situation
will be infinitely distressing. I entreat you to write immediately, or it will
be too late.

I am your Excellency's most obedient humble servant,

LEWIS LITTLEPAGE."


This request was afterward repeated almost in the same words, in your letter
of the 6th July, in which you also mention some articles of news, and inform
me, that though your quartan had returned the last post-day, you was then
recovered.

You now complain that these letters were never answered. -- It is true, that
though I have since written to you, viz. on the 10th day of September last, yet I
never id take any notice of these letters.

I have known many gentlemen with ten times your allowance, in daily distress
for want of money; and yet it would not have been proper to indulge them with
more.

You informed me, that unless your allowance was doubled, you might be
infinitely distressed. This I knew to be very possible, but still the
insufficiency of your allowance for your necessary expenses could not thence be
argued. From what could I argue it? You mentioned no facts -- you sent me no
estimate -- you did not assign a single reason for your apprehensions. You
informed me, indeed, that the expenses of your journey, and others unavoidably
to be incurred, greatly exceeded your expectations; but how was I to divine
either the one or the other? or with what propriety could you expect that I
would be guided by your opinion or apprehensions, further than they might
appear to be well founded? -- I would have increased your allowance, if
evidently incompetent; but that incompetency was first to be manifested. The
obvious impropriety of such summary, unexplained applications for money, in
such cases, affords a sufficient answer to them; and I should indeed have ill
answered the expectations of your friends, if I could have given them no better
reasons for advancing you money on their account, than that you had asked for
it.

Your request to double your allowance, being accompanied with no facts or
reasons to show its propriety, I could continue to judge of it only from the
general appearance of things. I considered that you had set out with an ample
supply of clothes, and with money to purchase regimentals, etc. That you had
also been furnished with money for your journey, and thereby enabled to enter
the Duke's family with six months pay of a Captain untouched in your pocket.

I considered that your admission into his family and to his table, had
actually realized those expectations, from which you had before argued the
cheapness of your plan; and that though you might associate with gentlemen of
fortune and expense, yet that, not being equal to them in the one, you ought
not to follow them in the other. I could perceive without any difficulty, that
if you meant to keep pace in expense with many of your companions, your
allowance would prove very inadequate, and I had my fears that this in a
certain degree might be the case; for though you had been at the expense This
included the whole expense for horses to Cadiz.
of an order for posthorses to carry you from hence to Cadiz, yet it seems the
" extreme heat of the weather obliged you and a fellow-traveller to hire a
coach on the way." This, no doubt, was a more agreeable way of going, and yet
(unless made necessary by sickness, which I have not heard was the case) it was
traveling rather like a gentleman who needed not to regard expense, than like
one whose funds did not admit of such indulgences. You may say, perhaps, that
it made no great difference in the expense; if so, it was a slender reason for
increasing your allowance -- and if, on the contrary, it was considerable, it
ought to have been avoided.

Now (...), at this late day, you inform me that you are obliged to find not
only your own horse, but even forage for him. This is undoubtedly a good
argument in favor of increasing your allowance; but surely, sir, you could not
expect that I should be influenced by this circumstance, before it had come to
my knowledge.

Thus, sir, I have, by a full and temperate answer, treated your letter with a
degree of respect, which it would not probably have received from many others.
-- I forbear making any remarks on its improprieties, being persuaded that they
are to be considered, rather as the incautious violences of a generous mind,
revolting against narrow, though necessary restraints, than as the virulent
efforts of a bad disposition, to give unmerited pain. I flatter myself that
some future moment of dispassionate self-examination, and a more impartial
review of my uniform conduct toward you, will yet make room for reflections
and sensations of another kind. My doors, my heart, and my purse, are still as
open to you as ever. I rejoice to hear that you have been left above
dependence, and I advise you to take care that that consideration does not
reduce you to it. In whatever situation you may think proper to place yourself,
my best wishes will still attend you; and I shall be pleased with opportunities
of indulging the inclination I yet have to give you further proofs of the
disinterested regard with which I am, sir,

Your most obedient and very humble servant, JOHN JAY.
P. S. Mess'rs French, of Bordeaux, have as they say, by your orders, sent to
Col Livingston for you, a pair of shoe and knee buckles; but as the price
amounts to between thirty-nine and forty hard dollars, I must decline
interfering further than to give you this information. -- Your orders
respecting your cabinet, shall be executed, as soon as I shall be informed by
you, or otherwise, that you remained of the same mind, after the fit of the
fever in which they were written.



No. 23. TO MR. JAY.
Mahon, 25th of November, 1781. SIR,
Having received no answer to my letter of the 8th ult. I conjecture it must
have miscarried, I have therefore taken the liberty to enclose a duplicate to
the Ambassador of France, for its more certain conveyance.

(Here was inserted a copy of that letter, verbatim -- See No. 22.)

For my own satisfaction, I beg leave to annex the following account of my
expenses, to convince you that I cannot live for nothing. I arrived in this
island the 19th of August; suppose it at present to be only three months. My
servant at 5 reals a day for his wages -- his maintenance during two months as
much, but finding myself cheated, I discarded him and got another for 12
dollars per month, 42 dol. -- A house for two months, at ten dollars per month,
20. -- ^y ^ervant's account for my breakfasts every day, with the tavern
keepers and apothecaries during my illness, 33. -- Furniture for my room, 16.
-- Laundress, 10. -- For a surtout, 11. -- This amounts to 132 dollars. I had
140 at my arrival; other trifling expenses have dissipated the remaining eight!
so that till this morning, when I pawned my pistols for 10 dollars, I had not a
farthing! Is not this, Sir a melancholy situation for an unfortunate being, in
an army of strangers, 3,000 miles from all his friends and connexions? I have
written to Harrison; should he abandon me, I must seek relief from a British
cannon, as the last and most certain remedy. I must own your conduct at first
highly incensed me; but at present, notwithstanding my deplorable situation, I
regard you as an object more worthy of pity than myself! if your motives be
really what I suspect! If not, pardon the suspicion!

Yours, L. LITTLEPAGE.

No. 24. From MR. JAY.
Madrid, 13th December, 1781. SIR,
I HAVE received your letter of the 25th November, containing a copy of yours
of the 8th October ^ast. The interval between those two dates, afforded
sufficient time for reflection, and it would have surprised the less to have
received an apology for, than a duplicate of that letter.

Were you not in the distress you mention, the indecencies which mark both
these letters, would be insuperable obstacles to my further correspondence or
connection between us.

You would do well to recollect that politeness is very consistent with spirit,
and that self-respect may be maintained without doing violence to good manners.

It also appears necessary to remind you, that a right to complain (even
decently) of refusals, must always be preceded by a right to demand.

The last sentence in your letter renders it improper for me to attend further
to your situation, than to offer you a retreat from its distresses.

You may, if you please, resume your former place in my family, till either
inclination or interest may induce you to quit it; my future behavior to you
will be regulated by the opinion which you may give me reason to entertain of
the propriety of your own.

On being informed that this offer is acceptable to you, I will provide for the
expenses of your journey.

I hope your answer will be conceived in terms proper for you to use, and for
me to receive; and that you will not, by a repetition of insults, reduce me to
the necessity of leaving your subsequent letters not only unanswered, but
unopened.

I am, sir, etc. JOHN JAY.

Mr. Lewis Littlepage.
No. 25. TO MR. JAY.
Port Mahon, 7th of December, 1781. SIR,
YOUR letter of the 26th of October reached me yesterday. -- To begin with it
--

That your offers to patronize me were generous and disinterested, I shall ever
acknowledge with gra itude. Can you -- that there was any design in the
acceptance of them to prejudice "you," or the nearest of all relations to you?"
The thought's injurious. -- That an oeconomical attention was to be observed in
the regulation of my expenses, is certain: from this, sir, I flatter myself I
have not deviated. Sent at a very early time of life to France, with letters of
unlimited credit, my constant endeavors were to live with frugality and decency
My worthy uncle had permitted me to spend some months at Paris (consult your
letter from him) a tender regard for his "convenience" induced me to relinquish
it as too expensive a plan. You yourself, sir, have expressed your satisfaction
of my conduct on that head, as well as my expenses in general, till "this
affair."

That my resources are principally from the generosity of an uncle and other
friends, is not altogether fact. I am, sir, a younger son of an honorable
family: the profusion of my father, too certainly left his descendants by his
first marriage in distressed circumstances. At his union with my mother, her
father prudently disposed of her fortune in such a manner that it could only be
inherited by her children: the death of my father entitled her to a third part
of his ^anded property, during life, that she resigned in cons^deration of
possessing a smaller real estate, which she generously settled upon me at her
second marriage; the one half to be sold, and which has actually been sold by
my uncle to defray the expenses of my education; the other half to devolve to
me at the death of herself and husband. Some years past a distant relation died
and left a valuable tract of land of about 10,000 acres, to be divided between
four brothers-in-law any myself: this, Sir! with the land and some slaves which
I shall possess at my mother's decease, will surely enable me to indemnify my
uncle for generously advancing me the necessary sums for my travels, etc. etc.
even "after this affair."

A reliance on the sincerity of your friendship, joined to the remonstrances of
Mr. Adams, prevailed on him to send me to Europe, to your care and "direction,"
provided with no funds but a letter to you -- it is not sufficiently explicit --
you say perhaps so: 'twas intended as request to a friend, not an order on a
"Banker." If he expected that I should only be received into your house, etc.
etc. how in the name of heaven was I to have subsisted? -- think better on it.
I still affirm that you was the cause of my leaving my friends and country:
'till your offers, my uncle never entertained the most distant idea of sending
me to Europe? I never considered you in the light of my "Banker!" Sir! you
wrong both yourself and me by so degrading an appellation -- you have no money
of mine in your hands: -- I was confided solely to your friendship: -- Could my
worthy uncle but know that for some inaccuracy in his letter, I am at this
moment reduced to sell my clothes for subsistence; what would be his feelings?

I find you have mis understood some parts of my letter: in my first
conversation in regard to this expedition, I certainly did mention the expense:
but remember, Sir! you was far from objecting to it: -- I again affirm it! --
you agreed with me, that in all probability the expense would not be
considerable, we were both deceived! -- as a proof be pleased to examine my
letter to you of the 15th of June, where you will find this paragraph:

My present object is the attainment of the Spanish language; the alternative
is to retire to some village, or spend a few months in the army; the latter is
infinitely more plea^ing, less expensive, and more consutent with my future
plans of life.

Neither in your reply, nor in conversation, did you ever seem to think the
expense very important, 'till my permission was obtained.

Our different reasons had not escaped my memory, Sir! I only mentioned the two
alluded to as those of most consequence: I must confess, that as your
acquiescence in my opinion with regard to the expense induced me to persevere
in it beyond a possibility of retracting, I think it afterward became an
obligation upon you to supply me with a sufficiency to go through with it in a
decent manner; there is a difference, Sir, between advancing a competency, or
barely enough to carry a Gentleman to the scene of action, where he must either
starve, or dishonor himself eternally by ignominious retreat. As to the
propriety of your objecting the expense in the first or second period, which
you state, it depended entirely on your own judgment. I remember your desiring
me to come to an explanation with Crillon about it; but here, Sir! some
circumstances have escaped your memory: you may very unjustly accuse me of
neglecting your advice: I waited on him when he informed me that he had
mentioned the affair to Count de Florida Blanca, and very heartily declared his
belief of its being impracticable. -- I communicated it to you, and as you
observe, we very soon agreed that the affair was finished and would die away:
why then do you accuse me of permitting the Duke to set out for Cadiz, without
saving a word to him of expenses which he had dedeclared, and both of us
believed would never be incurred? after our various conversations, and my
letter of the 15th of June, I am surprised to see this sentence in vom letter,
--

"But the warmth and enthusiasm inspired by a desire of sharing the eclat of a
brilliant coup de main hurried you too far." I must refer to the aforesaid
letter, and to some "minute particulars" therein. Remember your own opinion on
that subject -- my situation. Remember my last request, and your promise to
justify me to my friends, to inform them generously of the many unforeseen
delays which impeded my application, and obliged me to incur heavy expense,
viz. the journey to Cadiz, which I flattered myself to have made with the Duke:
was not that letter of the 15th of June written at your own request, to serve
as a proof of those "minute particulars" in defense of both our characters? is
all this so soon forgotten? I find myself described by you as a sharper, basely
endeavoring to de^raud of your money, tied down to the strict limits of your
letter though given under a supposition of its being a competency; my word was
not sufficient to the contrary! what must Harrison think of me? I yesterday had
a letter from him? he declines assisting me any farther! I cannot blame him; I
was wrong to ask it; the prospect of want obliged me! I have deceived him, but
I was deceived myself! I told him that your restricting me to 150 dollars was
from a persuasion that it would be enough; that a proof of its insufficiency
would induce you to extend it; in short gave him every assurance that he would
suffer no inconvenience from it; I believe it, Sir! You suspect me of spending
my money by a ridiculous vanity of being thought equal to men of ten times my
fortune? you ought to have known me better. Sickness, Sir, in fact obliged me
to hire a coach at Cadava, through the extreme heat of the weather, was a very
sufficient reason; perhaps, Sir, you never rode post through Andalusia in the
latter end of June

To return once more to the reasons which induced me to make this Campaign; I
declare upon the honor of a gentleman, that the most prevalent with me was a
firm belief that you were of my This seems advanced with design to persuade Mr.
Jay, that if he had, though undesignedly, misled Mr. Littlepage into such an
opinion, he ought in equity so far to bear the consequences, as to provide for
the expense, incurred by it; this marks some art and invention, but no candor:
he has since admitted the contrary, see remarks at the end of this pamplile^.
opinion with regard to its utility! I mention this because you In his
publication of 4th December, 1783, he says, thus you continued to do (advance
money until I lest your family, certainly against your consent and adviec,
serve as Volunteer in the army of Spain
complain of my not following your advice: it really appeared to me that you
wished me rather to have acted contrary to counsel, which the peculiar delicacy
of your situation with regard to me, obliged you to give; -- placed under your
immediate care and direction, you could never answer to my friends for any
misfortune which may happen to me in the course of a long and bloody siege; had
I undertaken it by your immediae instigation, or even consent. This idea was
confirmed by my conversation with you: -- how often, when I have expatiated on
the advantages which would accrue to me from it, have you answered, "yes! if
you escape with whole bones!" This is an expression of his own; all that Mr.
Jay ever said on the subject, was in the terms and manner mentioned in his
answer to Mr. Littlepage's letter of 15th June, 1781, No.
or some such remark -- one day in particular speaking of the conduct of Mr. --
you observed "that he would be glad to have a handle against you, either by
imputing your opposition to a wrong motive, or else making you from political
reasons act contrary to that your duty obliged you." These political reasons
must either have respected the common cause, yourself, or me -- this needs no
comment.

With regard to my request concerning my cabinet, I desire you would defer it:
-- my design was to have returned immediately to America; but there are
innumerable reasons against it. -- The trenches are actually opened; I have a
dangerous though honorable post, to resign it now would be an eternal imputation
on my character! -- No! I Will sooner sell my last sl^rt, and then starve, or
serve as a common soldier for bread; suppole yourself in my situation, could
you be capable of it?

You reproach me for not sending you an estimate of my expenses; I now do it,
to convince you that what I have expended was barely adequate to my sea! wants.
You furnished me with 127 pieces of eight, which we both judged sufficient for
my expenses to Cadiz, and for regimentals.

See the account.
Reals de Vellon Madrid, A saddle and bridle for the posts, 240 Trifling
accounts at Madrid, 80 Posts to Aranjuez, including the order for horses, 137
Expenses at Aranjuez. 60 Order for the posts to Cadiz. 47 Expenses to Cadiz
with the posts, and coach-hire, which was 25 pistoles, being endiligence, 1450
2030 Our Auberge expenses, with extraordinary gratifications, etc. etc. were
calculated at about 200 Expenses at Port St. Mary's and Cadiz, 60 Having lost
my shoe-buckles, a new pair cost me 200 Add this to 2038, and subtract the
whole from 127 dollars, and there will remain 42 re. de v. Were we not
mistaken?

Here follow my accounts with Harrison.
Borrowed 300 of which I must own I had the weakness to lend to an honest but
unfortunate Irish officer, which is yet unpaid; the remainder was disposed of
in trifling amusements. 400 For a sword, 113 A case of bottles filled with
syrups and refreshments of different kinds, This may appear superfluous, but
considering the season, and my state of health, 'twas no unnecessary provision
for a voyage. 170 Pistols, 301, 10 Saddle and bridle, 211 A campaign bed, dear,
but necessary, 753 Three towels and handkerchiefs, 60 A pair of uniform
holsters, (unavoidable) 246 A sword belt,-and three pair of coarse stockings,
105 Three night shirts, 90 A surrout, 262 A laced uniform hat, 160 A trunk, 40
A paper case, with wafers, 136 Taylor's account for regimentals, viz. a coat
made to turn, with two waist coats and breeches, one for summer, the other
winter; for turning an old coat, and making a coarse pair of breeches and
waistcoat for riding, 1090. 17 Four pair of shoes, 88 A pair of boots, 160
Servant's account for sundries, as spurs, a coarse hat, powder, pomatum, etc.
110 (...) 15 Board, washing, etc. etc. etc. 460 5071.7

You may perhaps suppose some articles extravagant: I might have got a cheaper
bed: true -- but money laid out is such things is never lost. It is certainy
very commodious for an officer, as it answers the purpose of a trunk too, and
can always be sold for nearly it is prime cost. This, with my taylor's bill,
seem the only things of consequence; and believe me, I was as much surprised as
yourself, to find that such trifles could swell an account to such an enormous
sum. You had allowed me an hundred and fifty dollars for the campaign, on a
supposition that the 127 would have been sufficient for my journey and
regimentals, (that is to say equipage); ask yourself, sir, would you have
embarked on an unknown voyage with a less provision? What is there unnecessary?
I "saw too, and s^lt the disagreeable dilemma to which I was reduced" -- The
advantages of being in the Duke's family by no means equalled our expectations:
at Cadiz I experienced none; at Mahor, indeed, the privilege of dining with him
saves something. -- The accounts w^^ch my brother officers gave me of the
unavoidable expenses of a campaign, still added to my distress: I prevailed on
Harrison to advance me 150 doliars besides this account -- 'twas still but my
six months pay! I would not think of going I kn^^ not where, with a less sum!
he did so, and has (...) to think me a viliain! -- That Mr. Jay, is indeed
cruel! you have advan^^^ more money for me on more tris^ing occasions. You now
see my reputation (...); myself (...)rded as a ^^cat and impostor, for taking
up money in your (...), which I (...) you would not repay? But enough! It Is
true, sir, I drew (...) I upon you, "against your consent," but it was because
I had not time to know (...). I did not do (...) of your consent when informed
of my real neces^^^^ (...) of (...) dollars, you thought adequate; when
convinced to (...) I did not (...) but your generosity would have extended it.
You (...) that I did not send you the estimate! you now have them, (...).

To return to my expenses.
Out of the 150 dollars Re. de vel. Furniture for my bed 180 One months wages
to my servant, at 5 reals per day, 150 Having engaged to nourish him, I could
not board him at Mahon for less than 8 reals per day, I agreed to double the
wages, and let him provide for himself, this for two months amounted to 600 I
then discarded him, and hired another for 12 dollars a month, for two months
480 For my horse 400 Washing, firewood, etc. etc. 200

A reason which I could better explain verbally than by letter, prevented me
from going to the Duke's for some time, except when on guard; this with my long
illness, swelled my tavern and apothecary's account, together with my expenses
for breakfasting since my arrival, to 33 dollars. Some necessary movables for
my lodgings cost me 16. I gave 11 for a large surtout, being obliged so be out
in the night and in bad weather, and as the one mentioned in the other account
is rather a genteel riding coat, than a proper shelter from an inclement season.

There, Sir, is exactly the 150 dollars -- I, at present, as already observed,
subsist by the sale of such parts of my equipage as I can best spare; for pride
will not let me beg.

Should this estimate so far satisfy you, as to induce you to incommode
yourself farther on my account, I beg, that it may be employed in repaying
Harrison -- I can starve with pleasure rather than suffer a stain on reputation
or honesty; he has but too much reason to think lightly of both, since you have
actually renounced me!

Thus, Mr. Jay! by an accurate and just state of my expenses, I have
endeavored to convince you that I am not the imprudent boy you seem to suppose
me. You also should be cautious of giving unmerited pain; take care how you
insinuate from ignorance of facts, things which may be prejudicial to the one,
whose character in a manner, depends upon your good or ill report of him. I
must own, Sir, your information of having paid my debts is not conveyed in the
most agreeable manner; one would suppose from it that I had contracted debts
without your knowledge, which you afterward found to be of a great amount,
whereas we had really adjusted that together at settling our accounts. -- You
say I was well provided with clothes, true, but not regimental.

With the warmest acknowledgments for your professions of friendship, I have
the honor to be, etc. etc.

LEWIS LITTLEPAGE,
P. S. I paid for a pair of buckles to Messr^. French, the price greatly
exceeds my expectation; if you decline interfering, you know my incapacity.



No. 26. FROM MR. JAY.
Madrid, December 29, 1781. SIR,
AS silence is sometimes liable to be misinterpreted, it is proper that I
should so far reply to your letter of the 7th instant, as to correct some of
the principal errors in it.

I have never thought nor intimated, that my offers to patronize you were
accepted with design to prejudice me, and consequently your remark on that head
is premature.

It is true that I did approve of your not going to Paris, and (as far as I
could judge) "of your expenses in general, till this affair" -- justice demands
this admission -- I am ignorant of your having had unlimited credit in France.

That you came to Europe, destitute of other funds than a letter to me, I did
not know. I expected, on your arrival, and from time to time afterward, to
furnish money for your necessary expenses; but, I also expected, that funds had
been, or would be provided, to reimburse these advances from time to time.

Whether your Uncle had any thoughts of sending you to Europe until after my
offers, is a subject on which I have no other information than your letter. I
know that your Guardian, Mr. Adams, had such thoughts. -- It was from him I
first heard of you, and it was from his account of you, and his signifying a
desire that I should take you with me, under my immediate care, that these
offers were made.

I never considered your Uncle's letter in the light of an order on a Banker
and am at a loss to conceive what should have misled you into such an opinion.
My remark on the want of precision in that letter, arose from his having
omitted to limit your expenses, and having thereby left me exposed to
disagreeable differences with you on that head.

I never did concur with you in opinion as to the expenses which would probably
attend your project; nor did I ever give you reason to think so. I did indeed
agree that if, as you flattered yourself, the Duke should receive you in such a
manner into his family, as to leave you exposed to no other expenses than for
clothes and pocket money, th^^ those expenses would not be considerable; but I
doubted this being the case; I told you so; and in order to reduce the matter
to a certainty, I advi^ed you to ascertain it by speaking fully to the Duke on
the subject. I gave you this advice, immediately on being informed that he had
promised to take you into his family, and not after the delays of the Court and
other circumstances had rendered it improbable that your request for leave to
accompany him, would be granted.

But admitting for a moment, that I really did acquiesce in your opinion of
these expenses, the inferences you attempt to draw from thence are nevertheless
fallacious. -- Suppose that my Nephew now with me, should ask my consent to go
to Peru to learn Spanish, and that I should refuse it, without giving him any
other reason, than that I thought he might learn Spanish full as well at Madrid
as at Peru. -- Suppose further, that he should persist in going. -- Would he
have the least shadow of right to consider me as chargeable with his expenses,
merely because I had not made that an objection to his voyage? surely not.

You refer me for the reasons which induced you to go on this expedition, to
your letter of the 15th of June, and "to some minute particulars therein:" and
also to my opinion on them. I well remember the contents of that letter, but I
know of no other opinion on those minute particulars, considered as reasons for
your project, than what I thus expressed in my answer to that letter, viz.
"That in my opinion you ought not at any rate to let them drive you to such
extremities." But I am still of opinion that you was more strongly urged into
this project^y the imagined brilliancy of it, than by any serious
considerations; although you have doubtless persuaded yourself to think other
wise.

You remind me of your request and a promise on my part to justify you to your
friends. I did not promise to justify you in this affair, to your friends, nor
to any body else. I promised to state the facts fully and heartily to your
friends -- I have done so, in a letter to your Uncle of the 25th of June last;
and that letter will show my regard both for you and for truth.

It is very true, that your letter to me of the 15th of June, was written at my
request, I made that re^uest, because I thought the matters it contains, and
which you had before mentioned to me in conversation, were sufficiently
interesting to be reduced to writing, and the ^uidence of them thereby the
better preserved. I remember this very well, nor was there any thing in that
transaction which I have the ^ast wish either to forget or conceal.

I know nothing of my having described you as a sharper.

You now say, that the most prevalent reason with you to make this campaign,
was a firm belief that I was of your opinion with regard to its utility; "and
that it appeared to you that (...) ^hed you rather to have acted contrary to
the counsel which the pe^ali^^ delicacy of my ^^^ation with regard to you,
obliged me to give." This is an ar^^i^ of intelligent which! never expected to
have received. -- Your wishes seem to have had a very uncommon degree of
influence on your belief.

From the first moment that you mentioned this plan to me, and throughout the
course of every (...) had with your, or others, on the subject of it; I not
only (...) an unwire and indiscreet one, but I uniformly, (...) and pointedly
gave that opinion of it to you (...) them.

In my letter to you of the 19th of June, I (...) opinion in unequivocal terms.
In my letter to the Minister of Start of (...) of June, I (...) told him, thus
"not only the trust reposed in me by your (...) consorting to (...) it was
contract (...) In my letter to the (...), I mentioned that your embarking in
this (...) and approbation." In short, in all my letter and conversations about
this matter, I have ever held the same plain and decided language.

Notwithstanding all this, it seems, that you picked up a contrary idea in some
conversations with me, and you adduce two instances as affording sufficient
reasons for your adopting it.

The first is, that on your expatiating on the advantages which would accrue to
you from this project -- you say I answered "yes, if you escape with whole
bones, or some such remark." -- The matter you appear to allude to might have
been more accurately stated*.

Among the advantages which you thought would result from this project, you
often insisted upon this, viz. -- That by bringing you acquainted with many
genteel people in the army, it would, on your return to Madrid, facilitate your
forming many respectable and agreeable acquaintances. -- It is true I admitted
that this might be the case; -- and I also observed, at the same time, that
supposing it to be an advantage, yet that it was not of sufficient importance
to render it advisable for you to encounter the hazards and inconveniences of
a voyage and expedition whose object was then unknown, and which many
conjectured would be to South America; from whence you might not return in less
than two or three years, if at all.

The second instance you adduce is, that I expressed my apprehensions to you
one day, that a certain Gentleman "would be glad to have a handle against me,
either by imputing my opposition to a wrong motive, or else making me from
political reasons act contrary to what my duty obliged me.

I remember this circumstance, and you have stated it right in substance. But
it seems to me that this circumstance, instead of leading you to conclude and
believe, that I was in favor of your scheme, not only afforded proof of any
opposition to it, but also of my being influenced to that opposition by a sense
of duty, and not by political reasons.

But although I opposed your plan upon the most disinterested principles, yet
as experience had taught me to expect little, fair or friendly, from the
Gentleman in question, I did apprehend that he would endeavor to infuse an
opinion of my doing it from motives of a private or personal nature; and though
I do not remember to have explained this so you, yet I was not without
suspicions, that he would affect to ascribe it to a desire of detaining you as
a private Secretary in the room of Mr. Liningston, who you know had at that
very time, seriously proposed to return to America; or to a disinclination to
make the extraordinary advances of monkey, which the expenses of this project
might demand -- and the fact is, that this certain Gentleman did insinuate ^
you, that I had either reasons for my opposition that these which I had assigned
to you and others. I did further apprehend that this (...) Gentleman would be
(...) see, and to draw me, if possible, into inconsistency of finally
consenting from political reasons, to a measure which I had before declared
that my judgment, as well as my duty to you and your friends, forbid me to
agree to, or countenance. -- For although that Gentleman had at first warmly
opposed your intention of going with the Duke, yet when he found that it became
popular, he professed to be convinced of its utility, and even stimulated you
to persevere in it.

And although that Gentleman had, without any respect to my sentiments, openly
patronized this project, evidently with a view to draw me into the
abovementioned inconsistency, he advised you to solicit my permission, for him
to speak to the Minister of State in favor of your application, pretending that
without my consent, it would not be proper or delicate for him to interfere --
but this snare did not succeed.

That same Gentleman perceiving that the Spaniards, (among whom he had against
his better knowledge, and not for the best purposes, represented you as a young
Gentleman of an opulent fortune) were pleased with your plan of going a
Volunteer in the Spanish service, expatiated much and often on its advantages,
and treated my opposition to it with an air of mystery, calculated to infuse
the same suspicion into others which eh expressed to you, viz. that I had other
reasons for my opposition than those which I assigned to you. -- What these
reasons should be, he never to my knowledge explained, but left you and others
to your own conjectures. Hence the propriety of my conduct upon that occasion,
was drawn into question, as well as discussion. -- I found myself exposed by
this opposition, to illiberal doubts and invidious surmises. -- And the pain of
such a situation naturally afforded inducements to relieve myself from it, by
withdrawing this opposition. These inducements were the political reasons which
I apprehended that this same Gentlemen wished to make me submit to act from,
and be governed by.

I, nevertheless, preferred obeying the obligations of what I thought my duty,
to the temporary conveniences of deviating from it; for I do repeat, and shall
as long as I live declare, that I am not conscious of having ever in thought
approved, or by word or deed led you to think, that I approved of this project.
-- On the contrary, I did constantly, openly and strongly object to it, and
endeavored to dissuade you from it. -- I never harbored in my heart the most
distant wish that you would act contrary to that advice, nor ever gave you the
least shadow of a reason to espouse such an opinion.

Your remark on that passage in my letter which respects your debts you left
unpaid here. is well founded -- that passage is certainly liable to the
construction you me^^on, and justice demands of me to acknowledge, that those
debts were mentioned some by you before your depa^^^re, though the amount of
your taylor's account was not then known, but exceed what you supposed it would
amount to.

I herewith enclose a (...) letter to you of the 13th instant, acknowledging
the receipt of you (...) the 24th ult. -- Reasons similar to those which
rendered ^ improper for me to take particular notice of that letter, constrain
me to pass over in (...) the residue of the (...) now before me. I am, etc.

JOHN JAY.

No. 27. TO MR. JAY.
Port Mahon, January 20, 1782. SIR,
YOURS of the 13th ult. was yesterday delivered to me: in a correspondence
between two persons, where the one is suspected of ungenerous violation of the
duties of friendship; and the other deems himself equally dishonored and ill
treated; the most guarded expressions are too often offensive; it is not
therefore surprising that the warm, undisguised expostulations of the injured
(at least in his own opinion) should be construed into " insult and indecency."
Men of honor, Mr. Jay, have no superiors but benefactors; whilst you thought
^^oper to preserve that sacred character, you had an undoubted right to command
my respect and gratitude in preference to any, even the nearest of my
relations; what was duty in them, in you was friendship.

My situation in your family was as happy as you could render it, but the
malice of a man, too well known to you, embitter'd it, and I though myself
fortunate in an occasion of emerging from obscurity, and obtaining some degree
of knowledge and reputation -- policy, not enthusiasm, influenced me: I foresaw
that your duty as a Guardian, and your tenderness for me as a friend, would
inevitably induce you to oppose so dangerous an enterprise; your other reasons
I had coolly and deliberately weighted in my own mind -- the principal Here he
admits what in other places he denies.
objection was the expense, for which I was entirely dependent on your
generosity, and when I mentioned it to you, it was with a pre-determination to
have receded on the least hint of your thinking it burdensome. I could not
have "complained of a refusal, because it was not then preceded by a right to
demand." -- Your acquiescence, I thought, gave me that right, you confirmed me
in that idea by declaring it to be your intention to furnish me with a
competency; the sum stipulated I found insufficient, and therefore ventured to
borrow in your name the residue: you suspected me of extravagance, but it would
surely have been more consistent with your former friendly conduct toward me,
to have permitted me to make my defense, before you gave so fatal a stab to my
reputation; you might have informed Harrison, that being responsible to my
friends for my conduct, you could not advance so large a sum above what you had
judged sufficient, without being first satisfied with regard to the necessity
of my having expended it -- you might then have demanded an account of it from
me; hu^^ was denied the privilege of the meanest criminal, condemned and
punished unheard! disclaimed by you as a wretch who had abused your generosity,
and was no longer worthy of your confidence or esteem! nay a downright sharper,
who had fraudulently made use of your name to procure money! nor is Harrison
the only witness of my dishonor; I am exposed for so insignificant a trifle as
a pair of buckles! -- Sir! I feel!

Having never before experienced from you the least shadow of unfriendly
treatment, I knew not to what cause to impute a charge so unexpected! --
Avarice is by no means your characterestic; I cannot suspect you of a
premeditated design to ruin me; even supposing me to have been actuated by the
enthusiasm so natural to youth of acquiring military reputation, it was no
ignoble motive, and ought at least to have pleaded for indulgence in the breast
of a friend, such as I esteemed you! My banker, perhaps, would have refused to
assist me beyond the limits of his letter, but I flattered myself that other
considerations would have influenced the man, whom I gloried in acknowledging
my friend and benefactor! The suspicions which occasioned the last sentence in
my letter of the 25th of November were briefly these: That you regarded me as
an unprincipled profligate, who would not scruple to sacrifice his sincerest
friends by involving them in difficulties and distress, to gratify a few idle
and romantic schemes! and that This chasm and the one in the last paragraph
were made by the seal on breaking the wax which covered the words now wanting.
(...) consequence you had abandoned me to want and infamy (...) my delicacy,
my feelings, were wounded, my indignation (...) and perhaps induced me to
remonstrate with too much bitterness; if I have injured you, I am sorry for it;
sorry for having entertained such dishonorable suspicions, not for having
informed you of them; for, believe me, Sir, to a generous mind it is infinitely
more painful to think than to speak ill of another.

Having already disposed of every thing which I could possibly spare, I must at
length have recourse to the generosity of my acquaintances, though a British
bullet would be a far more welcome alternative! Harrison, in compassion, has
offered me 100 dollars more; but any extremity would be more acceptable to me
than farther obligations to one whom I have already too much incommoded.

Remember this paragraph in your letter of 26th October -- "But, Sir, I saw and
felt the disagreeable dilemma to which you had imprudently reduced yourself;
without money you could not proceed, and without proceeding you would suffer
disgrace. I also considered what was due to your friends whom you had thus
subjected to the disagreeable alternative of seeing you resign with an ill
grace, or submitting to the expense of preventing it; the latter was more
consistent with my own judgment and feelings, and therefore I presumed that
they would also prefer it."

I cannot suppose that you mean to insult my misfortune by proposing a
resignation at this dangerous and critical moment, it would at first (...) an
ill grace, it would now be eternal dishonor (...) and feelings." I am, Sir,
your etc.

LEWIS LITTLEPAGE.

No. 28. TO MR. JAY.
Mahon, February 1, 1782. SIR,
I SHALL endeavor to answer your letter of the 29th December, as coolly and
dispassionately as the intruding reflections on my situation will permit.

My credit in France was for my expenses, the regulation of which was left to
my prudence. That I had no funds in Europe but my uncle's letter to you, I have
repeatedly declared, particularly in our conversation about de Francy's affair,
and in settling my little accounts with Col. Livingston, at his return from
Bordeaux. That my uncle will find expedients to reimburse your advances, cannot
be doubted: The express methods I know not, and have often told you so! He did
not explain it to me before my departure, nor have I ever bad the least
intelligence from him since.

Mr. Adams is not my guardian; consequently, whatever plans of educations he
might form for me could only be the wellwishes of a disinterested friend. Your
frequent repetition of the word banker, in your letter of 26th October,
occasioned the observation of which you express surprise. I must still insist
on your concurrence in my opinion with regard to the expense; at least your
extreme delicacy in not objecting it, betrayed me into a belief of your
acquiescences, and that fatal error, by urging me to persevere, has reduced me
to inextricable misery!

Your advice about arrangements with Crillon, was precedent to his promise of
receiving me into his family: He requested me to wait a verbal answer to any
letter, and in the interim mentioned it to the minister; during this interval,
your counsel was given, but the first, and indeed only time I saw him
afterward, he heartily informed me that my request was impracticable; though
should it be granted, he would with pleasure receive me into his household. His
declaration, Sir, crushed my hopes, and not the subsequent delays of the court,
which we both regarded only as little strokes of finesse to let the affair die
away.

Your supposition with regard to your nephew, is not entirely jest; his early
age confines him to objects less aspiring than those which ought to influence
me: -- I am arrived at a period when I ought to think (in the vulgar phrase) of
making my way in the world -- to learn Spanish, was not the only advantage
which allured me to this dangerous enterprise; one amongst many others was to
attain the great object of my voyage to Europe, viz. Of acquiring a degree of
experience and reputation, which might at my return recommend me to my
countrymen, as one not unworthy or incapable of serving them, and I am happy to
find myself, not singular, in my hopes on that head. Your opinion on the
"minute particulars" alluded to, was, that we were both exposed without a
possibility of vindication, to the malicious insinuations of your This epithet
is Mr. Littlepage's. Mr. Jay never thought nor said that he was without the
possibility of a vindication -- this reasoning was also Mr. Littlepage's, and
though Mr. Jay did concur with him in opinion us to the pr^pable consequences
which he might expect from succeeding in this affair, so far as they might
respect the Gentleman alluded to, yet he was also of opinion, that such an
object was not of sufficient importance to render his project advisable, and
he told Mr. Littlepage so plainly.
infernal Secretary; but that "should I succeed in this affair," it would
undoubtedly enable me to retort on him to a degree that might even excite his
envy, as I had before his malevolence: This was no trivial inducement! and to
this end I meant to render subservient the "genteel acquaintances." which I
might form; for believe me, Sir, my expectations with regard to them extended
further than the allurements of a dinner and a ^^^^ulia. The hazards, etc. etc.
Mr. Littlepage seems to take ^^^-natured pleasure in giving a false coloring
to this circumstance. Mr. Jay's letter of 15 June, 1781, sets it in its (...)
and only proper light.
of a campaign ought never to have been objected to a youth, whom you also
deemed an enthusiast! -- You would have despised me had I ceded on those
considerations. Neither of us ever believed the expedition to be for
South-American. I never expected a further justification from you to my
friends, than "to inform them generously of the many unforeseen delays which
had attended my application and obliged me to incur a heavy expense, viz. the
journey to Cadiz; which I flattered myself to have made with Crillon.

I stated your conduct briefly and heartily to my uncle, in my letter to him,
dated the day of my embarkation at Cadiz, in these words: "Mr. Jay's personal
friendship for me induced him to oppose my design as dangerous and unnecessary;
but though unable to assis^^e in procuring permission, he engaged to leave me
at my disposal." Is not this fact, Sir? With regard to the influence of my
wishes over my belief in supposing you to be of my opinion, it is possible, nay
probable! but still I believed it, and was influenced by that belief.

I never suspected your opposition to proceed from any motives but principles
of friendship; on the contrary, political reasons seemed to point out another
line of conduct. Your observations on those reasons I understood in a different
sense. Had I desisted, Carmichael would certainly have had a handle against one
or the the other of us; first, by imputing my conduct to motives of
pusillanimity ^ or secondly, to your influence over me; which on your part be
would have undoubtedly ascribed either to avarice, or your natural aversion to
the Spaniards -- An ingenious thought of this politic Gentleman, and which, I
can venture to assure you, has not a little promoted his system of rendering
you odious at Madrid. On the other hand, the great popularity which my
application had gained, sufficiently proved it to be pleasing; and
consequently, perseverance in it might be of equal utility to Americans in
general, and to myself as an individual. From hence, Sir, I concluded, that you
in secret wished me (...) have acted contrary to advice, which your seuse of
duty obliged you to give.

Permit me now, to add a few interrogatives, The reader will find answers to
all these questions in the preceding letter.
which you will oblige me by answering for our mutual satisfaction. 1st. When I
first communicated to you my design of making this campaign, did you not know
that I neither had, nor could possibly have any means of defraying the expense
but from your generosity? 2d. Did not your delicacy in not objecting the
expense, lead me to believe that pecuniary motives by no means influence? your
opposition? Why then did you withdraw your credit from me? 3d When I informed
you that I had obtained permission to serve in the Spanish army, did you not
promise to furnish me with a sufficiency to support me with decency and credit?
4th. Was not my allowance restricted to "six months" pay for a Captain of foot,
on a supposition that it was sufficient? When found inadequate, did you ever
give me the least reason to doubt, but that you would have increased it? 5th.
Did you not declare that your friendship for me would not permit you to see me
dishonored by a resignation for want of money; could I believe these
professions, corroborated by so many former proofs of friendship, to be
insincere, and did not my reliance on them justify me in borrowing a
sufficiency, in your name, to preserve myself from that dishonor? 6th. Did not
your peremptory refusal to repay what a stranger had generously lent me on
assurances of my credit with you, subject me to invidious surmises? 7th. If
this refusal proceeded only from suspicions of extravagancies in me, ought you
not to have had proofs of the crime before you inflicted the punishment? Why
did you not demand an estimate from me? 8th. Supposing the sum limited to have
been sufficient for the term, viz. "six months," is not that term elapsed? 9th.
In what have you found me extravagant?

The apathy and indifference with which you " pass over in silence" my distress
exceeds all credibility! I have but one resource against starving, but as it is
entirely foreign to the designs of my friends, I cannot embrace it, but as the
ultimate extremity! I therefore demand for the last time, what are your
resolutions with regard to me? What have I to expect further from you? My
situation will not admit of delay, for the sale of my last shirt, would (...)
support me two posts longer. I therefore expect an immediate and final answer.

I have the honor to be, etc. L. LITTLEPAGE.

No. 29. TO MR. JAY.
Mahon, February 4, 1781. SIR,
THE Marquis de la Romana will have the honor of delivering you this letter;
the amiable qualities of that Gentleman induce me to recommend him to your
civilities.

As the British General has this morning demanded terms of capitulation, for
the surrender of St. Philip's, I desire to be immediately favored with your
instructions with regard to my subsequent conduct: Shall I follow Crillon to
Gibraltar, or resign my post and return to Madrid? The first is indeed
infinitely more agreeable to my inclination, and I think, cannot cause any
material difference in the expense, as to return from Minorca to Madrid, either
by the way of Barcelona, Carthagena or Cadiz, will amount nearly to the same as
by Gibraltar, and that place (you know) will only admit of a coup de main,
consequently a few hours will decide it.

You will, doubtless The rest of this paragraph Mr. Jay forbears to publish,
because foreign either to him or Mr. Littlepage, who may nevertheless supply it
if he pleases, for it is not on Mr. Jay's account that he suppresses it.
(...) except a slight contusion, which I yesterday received from the splinter
of a bomb, I have met with no misfortune in the course of our operations. I
have the honor to be, etc.

LEWIS LITTLEPAGE.

No. 30. FROM MR. JAY.
Madrid, February 26, 1781. SIR,
I have this moment received your letters of the 20th January and 1st February.
Had your former ones been equally unexceptionable, you would have been less
distressed, and I less pained. I cannot now reply to these letters at length
for want of time; the best proof of my regard for you is to authorize you to
draw upon me for twenty guineas, payable at sight, which I hereby do. As I mean
immediately to send a copy of this under the Ambassador's cover, and another
enclosed to Mr. Gautier, at Barcelona. I can at present only add, what on
experience you will find to be true, th^^ my friendships are neither capricious
nor interested. I am, Sir, etc.

JOHN JAY.

No. 31. From MR. JAY.
Madrid, March 6, 1782. SIR,
YOUR letter of the 4th ult. which you mention to have committed to the care of
the Marquis de la Romana, was delivered to me yesterday by the messenger of the
post office. I rejoice in the event it announces, and am glad that the
contusion of which you speak was a slight one. My opinion as to the expediency
of your continuing in the army remains unaltered, I advise you to take the
first good, and least expensive opportunity of returning to Madrid: I shall
postpone saying all that is necessary for you to know on this subject till we
meet. In a late letter I desired you to draw upon me for twenty guineas, and I
now repeat it, lest that letter should miscarry. Mr. Livingston ^^gone to
America. Mrs. Jay has a daughter. Present my compliments and congratulations to
the Duke.

I am with regard, etc. JOHN JAY.

Mr. Lewis Littlepage.
No. 32. TO MR. JAY.
Port Mahon, 17th of March, 1782. SIR,
I HAVE had the honor of your letter of the 26th ult. and a duplicate of the
same from Mr. Gautier, at Barcelona. The extremity of my distress had already
reduced me to the severest curse of poverty the necessity of importuning my
friends; to avoid which I had once resolved to enter into the French service,
where an admission would not have exacted an apostasy from my religion, but the
miserable pittance of a French subaltern I found absolutely insufficient for
subsistence; and as the only alternative, instead of supplicating my military
companions, I borrowed one hundred hard dollars from an English merchant, for
which I gave him a bill on Mr. Harrison agreeable to the offer of that truly
generous friend, although nothing but the most poignant distress could have
induced me to accept it. In consequence of your letter, I shall take the
liberty to draw upon you for the sum limited, without incommoding Harrison. I
impatiently expect an answer to my letter of the 5th of February, the army is
ordered immediately to Gibraltar, and it is past a doubt, will seriously attack
that place; for my own part I am still undecided with regard to my future
peregrinations; experience has too well initiated me into the Spanish mode of
besieging, to admit of a belief that Gibraltar will be the work of a day!
(since a coup de main is not their object) a month at least must elapse before
the ^roops here can possibly be embarked. The construction of floating
batteries (the avowed plan of attack) will necessarily require time; in the
interim, instead of going immediately to St. Roque, I have thoughts of making a
short tour to ROME: I may never perhaps find so convenient an occasion; with
regard to the expense it can be but trifling, as I shall perform the whole
voyage by sea: Consider my situation, I live here entirely on my own expense,
having no longer the benefit of the General's table; and believe me it costs
more, merely to exist in this wretched, impoverished theater of war, than I
ever before experienced, even in France; should I proceed to St. Roque before
the Duke, it cannot be lessened, as the same cause renders it expensive there;
on the contrary, an English merchant, who is shortly to go to Leghorn, offers
me a passage in his ship, and even promises to procure me one to Algesiras, in
six weeks time, or whenever I please.

I can be furnished with letters to the first nobility in Rome, particularly
from my worthy friend General Borghesi; these considerations, joined to the
pleasure and instruction which I promise myself from the journey, induce me to
think seriously of it. I could wish to undertake nothing of the kind without
your ap-approbation, but the time will not admit of my waiting for an answer to
this, as, (should I go) I shall probably be at Rome before this can possibly
reach you. Be pleased to present my respects to Mrs. Jay and the family. I have
the honor to be, etc.

L. LITTLEPAGE.

His Excellency John Jay,
Direct your letters to his Excellency the Count de Cifuentes, Governor of
Minorca, who will forward them to me,



No. 33. TO MR. JAY.
Mahon, March 23, 1782. SIR,
AGREEABLE to your Excellency's orders, I have of this date drawn for 1920
reals of Vellon, equal to 20 English Guineas, in favor of Mr. Charles Veale.

In a late letter I informed you that I had thoughts of making a short trip to
Rome, but the prospect of operations commencing immediately at Gibraltar,
induces me to abandon that scheme. I impatiently expect an answer to my letter
of the 1st of February. -- My respects to Mrs. Jay. I have the honor to be,
etc,.

His Excellency John Jay.

LEWIS LITTLEPAGE.

No. 34. TO MR. JAY.
March 25, 1782. SIR,
I HAVE this moment received your letter in answer to mine of the 1st ult. and
am really concerned for Col. Livingston's departure, as I fear It has ^roceeded
from reasons, similar to those which first suggest^d to him the idea, I must
own my military Quixotism is not yet abated; and I could wish to assist at the
Gibraltar business; however, as the General has ordered me a passage in his
ship to Barcelona, I shall from thence proceed to Madrid (with him if possible)
instead of a voyage by sea to Cadiz, agreeable to my first intention.

Your partiality to my abilities, I know, induces you to suppose politics my
proper sphere; inclination, and indeed necessity, points out a military line as
far more eligible. I wish to return to America; the eclat of having served a
campaign in Europe, in a distinguished post, will, I doubt not, procure me at
least a decent commission. I have already been sufficiently burdensome to my
friends; my early age has hitherto obliged me to submit to it: I think myself
now qualified to live independently in the character of a soldier, and in that
only.

My situation is seriously alarming: -- Totally neglected by my guardians in
America, for more than two years past I have subsisted upon money borrowed on
their credit, without even knowing how far it may distress them to repay it. --
Virginia has been the theater of was ever since my departure, and my friends
must certainly have shared in the general calamity -- in how great a degree,
God knows.

I hope to see you, and in the mean time congratulate you upon the birth of
your daughter. Mrs. Jay, I hope, has experienced nothing more than ordinary
inconveniences on the occasion -- present my congratulations to her.

I have the honor, etc.

LEWIS LITTLEPAGE.

The preceding letters are the only ones which passed between Mr. Jay and Mr.
Littlepage, prior to his return from Minorca, which was the middle or toward
the latter end of April.

The reader will perceive from them how necessary it had become for Mr. Jay to
take very explicit and decided arrangements with that gentleman, in order to
leave no possible room for his wishes to direct his belief and opinions in
future.

With this view Mr. Jay represented to him, in a strong point of light, the
disagreable situation in which the silence of his guardian (from whom Mr. Jay
never received any other letter than the one of 20 Nov. 1779) had placed both
Mr. Jay and himself -- That as no remittances had arrived, nor appeared likely
to arrive; and as Mr. Jay was soon to leave Madrid for Paris, he pressed him
strenuously to go to America, from whence, after arranging his affairs, he
might, if he pleased, return to Mr. Jay. -- To this he made many objections,
and among others, the time he should lose by it, and the danger of capture to
which he would be exposed. He warmly solicited Mr. Jay's permission to stay at
Madrid till he could again write to his friends, and receive their answer.
After great solicitation, Mr. Jay yielded to this, and it was concluded, though
not without much altercation as to the time, that he might stay until the first
of March then next.

To prevent all further disputes about the quantum of supplies, Mr. Jay told
him that the amount of them, during that interval, must also be fixed; and
after much conversation on that point, it was at length agreed, that Mr. Jay
should advance him at the rate of fifty guineas a year, Mr. Jay consenting that
he should keep the room he then occupied in his house. As his mind run not a
little on making an excursion to Gibraltar, Mr. Jay, in the most pointed terms,
expressed his disapprobation of it, and told him plainly, that this allowance
should stop from the time he might go on that expedition.

Matters being thus settled, Mr. Littlepage immediately wrote the following
letter to his guardian, which, as a proof of his earnestness in the business,
he showed to Mr. Jay, and gave him a great number of copies to forward from
France, reserving some to send on from Spain.

No. 35. From MR. LITTLEPAGE to Col. BENJAMIN LEWIS.
Madrid, 15th May, 1782. HONORED SIR,
Since my last to you of the 25th ult. Mr. Jay has received a summons to
France, and will in consequence leave Madrid immediately: As no object private
or political, could justify my undertaking so expensive a journey under my
present circumstances, especially considering Mr. Jay's uncertain stay there, I
have resolved with his concurrence to remain here till the month of March next,
when I shall return to America, if your surprising and unaccountable silence
still continues. The hurry and precipitation of my departure from Virginia
sufficiently excused you for not taking at that time explicit and regular
arrangements for the means of my support here; two years and an half have since
elapsed, and nothing further has been determined on that interesting point, nor
have I ever had the least intelligence from you, or any of my friends in
America. What are your intentions or expectations with regard to me? Can you
suppose that I am to subsist forever on advances from Mr. Jay without the
smallest appearance of remittances or reimbursements to him? His situation on
that head is extremely embarrassing, nor is my own less so: by a liberal
allowance he may exceed your ideas of my necessities, and too close
restrictions are painful to us both, and indeed prejudicial to me. Such has
been Mr. Jay's situation ever since my arrival in Europe, continually in hopes
of being relieved by letters from you, and as often disappointed. Delays are
pardonable; but absolute neglect is unjustifiable. Cannot you as least inform
Mr. Jay of the reasons which have hitherto prevented you from making him
remittances, and your future expectations on that head! As to the sum he has
already advanced he declares himself to be by no means pressing for the
re-payment of it: nor does he wish you to distress yourself on that account,
but to take your measures relative to it, in any manner most commodious to
yourself; -- he will advance as my exigencies may require not exceeding fifty
guineas per year, from the time of his departure, till next March, when as I
have before observed, if you do not furnish me with adequate supplies, and him
with proper instructions, I must abandon all the hopes I have formed in the
political line, and return to Virginia Reflect seriously on my situation, and
the consequences which may follow a further delay on so pressing an occasion.
After near three years residence at this Court in the family of an American
Minister with the friendship and assistance of that Minister to recommend me in
America, my political projects cannot surely be deemed chimerical. I am as yet
too young to expect a public employment, a short time will remove that
objection, and in the interim I have the happiest opportunities of instructing
myself in the politics of this country, and Europe in general. The mutual
intere^ts of Spain and America will require that an eternal political
intercourse should exist between the two nations, and as a candidate for an
employment of that kind, I possess incontestible advantages. To elucidate this,
a short review of my past conduct here, may not be unnecessary. On my arrival
at this place, I so and my situation very different from the ideas I had
previously formed of it. The in decision of the Court with respect to America,
strongly influenced the conduct of individuals, which, joined to some more
private reasons, (by no means however proceeding from Mr. Jay rendered all
connection or even intercourse with Spaniards, difficult, and to me really
impossible.

My political pursuits were in consequence greatly impeded, if not absolutely
frustrated, as the first step in that line was to render myself known and
distinguished, and by attracting attention acquire consequence. Eight months
experience too well convinced me of the impracticability of success on my first
plan, and I began to think seriously of abandoning it, when an occasion offered
which I thought meritted attention. Immense preparations were making for an
expedition to be commanded by the Duke de Crillon, and said to be against
Gibraltar or Minorca, Policy suggested to me that some efforts on the occasion
might be of utility in the attainment of my grand object, as it would
inevitably remove the difficulties I had experienced in forming connections
here. Reconsideration but confirmed me in the idea, and in consequence I
demanded the King's permission to attend the Duke de Crillon as a Volunteer.
This step occasioned great speculalation, and effectually answered my purpose
in attracting attention. To the surprise of every body my request was granted,
and I served the campaign in the Mediterranean as Volunteer Aid de Camp to the
Commander in Chief. During the siege of Mahon I assidiously endeavored, both
from real esteem and policy, to recommend myself to the Spaniards, in which I
so happily succeeded, that at my return I found every political obstacle
removed, and nothing now remains but to prosecute my plan under every advantage
that my most sanguine hopes could promise.

Such is my situation and such my views in Europe, which will be all rendered
abortive by a further delay on your part. Consider the consequence; if I do not
receive letters from you by the month of March next, I shall no longer have the
means of subsistence, and must return to you, where I shall be in the same
situation as before my voyage to Europe, at the expense of all this time and
money. What business or profession can I possibly be qualified to pursue in
America? In short, affairs are now brought to a crisis, -- procrastination will
but increase difficulties. -- Take your resolution and inform me of it
immediately, or I must abandon all.

I shall send twelve different copies of this letter to America, directed to
Governor Harrison. There can be no difficulty in transmitting your answer; make
a dozen copies of it, send some to Mr. Robert Livingston, Secretary for foreign
affairs, at Philadelphia, to be sent to Mr. Jay; others to the house of
Harrison, at Alexandria in your state, for their Agent, Mr. Harrison, at Cadiz,
to whom I also request you would remit as soon as possible the 200 dollars
which he generously lent me on an occasion which I have already explained to
you. I am, your dutiful Nephew, etc.

LEWIS LITTLEPAGE.

Benjamin Lewis, Esquire
In the month of May, 1782, Mr. Jay set out with his family on his journey to
Paris. He parted with Mr. Littlepage in a very friendly manner; he promised to
write to Mr. Jay and Mr. Jay to him, and as from his visiting and being well
received by some of the first people, it was probable be might pick up some
useful intelligence, Mr. Jay gave him a cipher.

On Mr. Jay's arrival at Bourdeaux, he received the following letter from Mr.
Littlepage.

No. 36. TO MR. JAY.
Madrid, May 23, 1782. DEAR SIR,
I AM equally surprised and chagrined to find that you have taken no explicit
arrangements with Mr. Carmichael, respecting the payment of my allowance, and
consequently lest me exposed to the disagreeable necessity of borrowing money
on my own credit, for which I can only give an order upon you, at the risque of
a refusal either on his part to supply me, or on yours to refund it. You have
taken no notice of the separate sum, which I repeatedly requested from you to
purchase some necessaries, viz. linen, a suit of cloths, etc. etc. for which
my allowance of 20 dollars per month is by no means sufficient. As the hurry,
etc. of preparing for your journey doubtless caused this inadvertency, I
request that you would immediately rectify it, by a letter to me or to Mr.
Carmichael. Fifty dollars is I think the least that can be advanced on the
occasion, as I have not more than half a dozen shirts tolerably decent, and but
one old suit of regimentals, which has served me for more than twelve months.
My quarters amount is but 60 dollars, and should I appropriate it to clothing
myself I shall absolutely want subsistence. -- This will doubtless reach you at
Bourdeaux, from whence I expect an answer without delay. I have the honor to
be, etc.

L. LITTLEPAGE.

No. 37. FROM MR. JAY.
Bordeaux, 10th June, 1782. DEAR SIR,
MR. Bondfield delivered me your letter of the 23d ult, this morning. When you
recollect that I authorized you to apply to Mr. Carmichael for a quarter part
of your allowance of 50 guineas a year, you will find that there was not much
room for surprise or chagrin at my having omitted to repeat it to him in the
hurry of preparing for my journey. I was persuaded that he would not scruple
your veracity; but would readily pay it, and deduct it from the money he will
receive on the sale of my mules. I cannot conceive why you should fear a
deviation from my word.

As to the sum you wanted to purchase clothes, I really did forget it, and I
am content that he pay you fifty hard dollars for that purpose on my account. I
have not time at present to write to him on the subject, but this letter will
be a sufficient voucher.

You will remember that your future supplies must be drawn from America, and
that the allowances before mentioned will cease after the first day of March
next.

I am, etc. JOHN JAY.

Mr. Lewis Littlepage.
No. 38. TO MR. JAY.
Madrid, 10th June, 1782. SIR,
YOUR professions, and indeed proofs of friendship to me have ever appeared too
disinterested to admit the most distant doubt of their sincerity; I cannot
therefore impute your opposition to my design of continuing in the army, to any
other motive than a real friendly regard to what you think my interest. Your
declaration at our parting, that such a proceeding should by no means be
considered as done by your concurrence, I naturally accounted for upon the
principles on which I ever wish to consider your conduct; but your unexpected
menace to withdraw from me in consequence of it, even the pittance stipulated
for my support in Spain, I must own sensibly touched me; especially as that
resolution was taken at a time, when I had undoubted intelligence of my being
actually nominated for the siege of Gibraltar. My reception at Court was
flattering enough, though my intention of quitting the service occasioned
universal surprise, and some of my most intimate friends, who from their
situations could best be supposed to know the dis-disposition of both the Court
and people, after informing me of the conjectures upon the occasion, heartily
advised me either to leave Spain, or finish in the military line what I had
happily commenced. Infinite considerations induced me to embrace the latter
alternative as most honorable and indeed advantageous.

1st. I was on the list of those nominated for Gibraltar: Retraction on my part
might have been inviduously imputed to personal pusillanimity, or to a
suppuoition but too generally received of my having imprudently brought myself
into disgrace by siding with Crillon's enemies. Neither of which was consistent
with my feelings or policy.

2d. The object which at first induced me to relinquish my military views ^^ to
ger existed, viz. Probably (...) Mr. Livingston as private se^^tats.
The expectation of being employed by you in a political line.

3d. It can make no difference with regard to the expense, and will most
probably entitle me to some honorable distinction, as it is a great addition to
my past services.

4th. What can I promise myself by remaining at Madrid which will be in the
least impeded by it. If he was (...) as a spy at Mad^^d, would he not naturally
have here at lea^^ all^d^d (...) way of obviating that objection to his
quitting Mad^^d^


Urged by these motives on the one hand and the idea of dishonor on the other,
I communicated my resolution of still continuing in His Majesty's service to
Mr. del Campo, who advised me, by way of ceremony, to present a memorial to the
King, which I did, and received his immediate consent. The General means to
employ me again as Aid de Camp, and in consequence orders me to repair
instantly to St. Rocque. I shall set out tomorrow.

Mr. Carmichael has advanced a quarter's allowance, viz. 60 dollars, which is
all that I shall take up from him or any other person on your ^^^cunt, unless
by your further order. He also offers to join with Mr. I Harrison in advancing
whatever my exigences may require. If you really refuse to supply me with even
the moderate allowance agreed upon between us, (for I ask no more) I have no
alternative, but but to throw myself upon their generosity.

With respect to you, Sir, whatever may be your determination, he assured, it
shall never induce me to forget your past savers. I have already been
burdensome to you, too much so; but it was unavoidable. Should you disapprove
my present conduct, at least let there be no indecent crimination between us.
We have lived together in friendship, let us part with decency. Examine
impartially my conduct, and you will find that I am actuated by no motives but
the purest principles of honor; and though I may not meet with approbation, I
can never merit censure. Yours, respectfully,

LEWIS LITTLPAGE.

No. 39. TO MR. JAY.
Cadiz, October 29, 1782. SIR,
HAVING never been honored with an answer to my letter of the 12th of June,
respelling the reasons which induced me to comm^^e in the Spanish army, I
considered myself as abandoned by you, and consi^uently had no means of support
but from the generously proffered assistance of Messis. Harrison and
Carmichael. Nothin^, Sir, but the most urgent necessity could have prevailed
upon to accept of their offers, however friendly and disinterested, and if you
knew the weight of an obligation on a generous mind, even to those in whom
peculiar circumstances render it almost a duty, you would be the less surprised
at my reluctance to solicit relief from you after so many repeated refusals,
and a cold reservedness to which I cannot be insensible This assertion is not
forunded on fact.
. After that warmth of friendship and unlimitted confidence which but lately
existed between us, the world cannot but form inferences infinitely to my
disadvantage at so unexpected a reverse.

Your established character and reputation in the world will never admit a
belief that you could renounce a young man, of whom you had declared yourself
the friend and patron, from no motive but, at worst, an indiscretion natural
enough to the impetuosity of youth; and who could not brook the idea of
subjecting himself to the smallest imputation by refusing an honorable military
post, to which a King had appointed him, unsolicited; that, however, is past,
the campaign is now finished and I am at liberty to act as my own discretion or
your advice (which I once more request) shall determine me.

I had thoughts of making interest with the Count de Artois, who had more than
once expressed an inclination to serve me, to demand letters for me from the
Spanish Court to Congress, but the General having ordered me on board the
combined fleets when they left Gibraltar bay, to give him an accurate account
of their maneuvers. I but yesterday returned here, and find his Highness has
already taken his departure; however, I shall go to camp in a few days, to
demand my conge, and make application to the Ministry, through the medium of the
Duke de Crillon, who I think cannot decently refuse it.

The Prince de Masserano is very desirous of my accompanying him to Paris,
where by the connections I have had the good fortune to form during this
campaign, I have reason to think I could be genteely placed in the French
service: -- of that, however, I think but little. I again request your advice
with regard to my future conduct, and what I have to expect from you: are you
as yet decided with respect to returning to Madrid, or not?

Enclosed I send you a copy of my journal of the maneuvers of the British and
combined fleets, in the action of the 20th, off Cape Spartel. My most
respectful compliments to Mrs. Jay.

I have the honor to be, etc. LEWIS LITTLEPAGE.

His Excellency John Jay.
P. S. Be pleased to enclose your answer to Mr. Harrison.



No. 40. FROM MR. JAY.
Paris, November 18, 1782. SIR,
I HAVE received your letter of the 29th ult. as well as a former one of the
10th June last, but the one you mention to have written on the 12th of June
never came to my hands,

Before we parted, I took the liberty of giving you my best and most sincere
advice. -- I also expressed to you in very explicit, and indeed pointed terms,
my entire dissapprobation of your going on the Gibraltar expedition; and
assured you, that in case you nevertheless went, I would certainly cease to
advance you money. -- Although these considerations did not affect your
conduct, it is both natural and proper that they should influence mine. But as
it is not probable that any thing new can be said on the subject, a
re-discussion of it could answer no good purpose.

I am obliged to you for your relation of the late action between the combined
and British fleets, and am, Sir, etc.

JOHN JAY.

Mr. Lewis Littlepage.
No. 41. TO MR. JAY.
Camp before Gibraltar, December 29, 1782. SIR,
YOUR letter of the 18th of November, was transmitted to me a few days past by
Mr. Harrison.

I cannot but regret that my unhappy circumstances will not permit me to
discharge immediately the debt which I have incurred from your generosity in
the prosecution of designs, which once flattered me with the prospect of a more
pleasing issue: -- I regard your letter as an ultimate refusal on your part to
afford me further assistance, and delicacy in my present situation, as well as
gratitude for what you have already done, prevent me from incommoding you with
reiterated and too probably, vain solicitations.

Since I have nothing to expect from your partiality as a friend: I appeal to
your candor as a man of honor, for my justification! -- I have forfeited your
confidence and protection, but I am mistaken in your character or I shall ever
possess your esteem.

The marquis de la Fayette is arrived at Cadiz, and informed me the other day
by the Count de Crillon, that he is desirous for me to accompany him to
America: I shall in consequence repair immediately to Cadiz, to take explicit
arrangements with him for that purpose.

I have received an official letter from the Count de Florida Blanca, in the
King's name, containing the most flattering acknowledgemments from his Majesty,
for my conduct in his service, with permission to retire from my post of Aid de
Camp. I have only to request you to enclose immediately to Mr. Harrison, a
state of the accounts between us, which be assured shall be remitted to your as
soon as possible.

With the sincerest gratitude, for ^^ many instances of friendship and
generosity, which I have received from you,

I have the honor to be your Excellency's most obedient, etc.

L. LITTLEPAGE.

After the preceding letter there was no correspondence between Mr. Jay and Mr.
Littlepage, until the latter came to Paris the next year. -- Mr. Jay then
desired Mr. Littlepage to come to a final settlement of accounts, and on the
5th of July, 1783. a settlement was made, Mr. Littlepage signed his name to the
account, and under his hand, acknowledged it to be a just and true account: it
was made up of money from time to time advanced, interest whatever being
charged: -- It is as follows,

ACCOUNT of MONEY paid by JOHN JAY, to and for Mr. LEWIS LITTLEPAGE.
Hard Dols. Redevel. To the amount of his bill on Mr. Jay, in favor of Mr. John
Bonfield, dated September 26, 1780, for 2108 Livres Tournois, which at five
Livres for a Mexican Dollar, make 421 12 January 27, 1781. To Cash 30 April 12,
1781, To Cash 8 May 17, 1781, To Cash 72 5 June 24, 1781, To Cash 127 August 6,
1781, To Cash paid his tailor, as per account, and receipt 1034 Reals of
Vellon, or 51 14 To Cash in discharge of Mr. Richard Harrison's bill, in favor
of Augustine Queneau, on John Jay, Aug. 10, 1781, and in which was included for
money advanced to Mr. Littlepage by Mr. Harrison, agreeable to Mr. Jay's letter
of credit to him, in Mr. Littlepage's favor 150 To the amount of his bill on
John Jay, dated March 23, 1782, in favor of Don Carlos Viale for 1720 Reals of
Vellon, being 20 Reals per Dollar 95 10 To Cash paid him by Wm. Carmichael, Esquire
on Mr. Jay's credit 60 1016 1

I acknowledge the above account, amounting to one thousand and sixteen hard or
Mexican dollars, and one real of vellon, to be just and true. --

Witness my hand at Passy, this 6th day of July, 1783. L. LITTLEPAGE.

The first letter which passed between them, after the date of the preceding
one, was the following, viz.

No. 42. TO MR. JAY.
Paris, 16th July, 1783. SIR,
Intending to leave Paris tomorrow morning, on an excursion to Fountainbleau,
to meet the Marquis de la Fayette, I take the liberty to address your
Excellency on the subject of his request, of my being permitted to carry the
Definitive Treaty to Congress. I neither wish nor expect you to sacrifice any
private view of your own to oblige me; but should you be personally
uninterested, I flatter myself you will not refuse your influence in my favor.

As the Marquis will probably be absent for some weeks, I wish to inform him
positively of at least your sentiments on this occasion, as they will greatly
tend to influence my future arrangements.

The Marchioness de la Fayette presents her compliments to your Excellency, and
desires to know your commands for her husband, whom she is to join immediately.

I have the honor to be, etc.

L. LITTLEPAGE.

No. 43. FROM MR. JAY.
MR. JAY presents his compliments to Mr. Littlepage, and would have immediately
answered his letter of yesterday, but he received it from home, and while at
table: As joint measures should always be the result of joint counsels, and as
the nomination of a person to carry the definitive treaty to America is of that
nature, Mr. Jay postpones giving any opinion on that subject, until it shall
come regularly under the consideration of his coleagues and himself.

Mr Jay returns his thanks to the Marchioness for her obliging attention; he
presents her his best wishes for an agreeable journey and safe return; and begs
she will assure the Marquis of his constant esteem and regard.

Passy, 17th July, 1783.
Afterward, to wit, in August 1783, the Hon. Mr. Adams wrote a letter to Dr.
Franklin, and Mr. Jay, proposing Mr. Thaxter, who was his private Secretary, as
a proper person to carry the Dennitive Treaty of Peace to Congress, and
mentioning the reasons why he thought that mark of attention was due to him,
Mr. Adams told Mr. Jay, that Dr. Franklin, on reading it, said, "be had no
objections," and Mr. Jay on being informed of this, and perfectly concurring in
opinion with Mr. Adams relative to Mr. Thaxter, also consented.

On the 1st of September, 1783, Mr. Littlepage waited on Mr. Jay, and told him,
that the matter of his carrying the Treaty to America now rested solely with
him, for that on applying to Dr. Franklin for his note, the Doctor answered,
"he had no predilection for Mr. Adams's Secretary, and if it would do him (Mr.
Littlepage) a pleasure, he should have his vote." Mr. Jay observed that there
must be some mistake in the business, for that Mr. Franklin had told Mr. Adams,
"he had no objections to Mr. Thaxter's being the person," and further added,
that for his own part, he really thought, as Mr. Thaxter had long been in the
diplomatic department, he certainly ought on such an occasion to be preferred
to one who had never been in it. Mr. Littlepage insisted on his having the
^octor's promise, and went away to appearance much disatisfied.

On the 2d September, Mr. Jay received as insolent a letter from. Mr.
Littlepage, as could well be penned; -- it reproached him in very indecent
language, for having told him that Mr. Franklin was for Mr. Thaxter, when on
the contrary, he had promised to vote for him, it charged him with this as a
palpable falsehood; it reproached him in general terms for ill usage; it
asserted that Mr. Jay hadgiven him reason to expect his vote; it contained a
challenge, and among other abusive passages, insinuated that Mr. Jay had
declined bringing him to Paris, merely to leave him as a spy on Mr. Carmichael,
at Madrid.

The same day, and not long after the receipt of this letter, Mr. Adams came
in, and shortly afterward a servant informed Mr. Jay, that Mr. Littlepage
wanted to see him; he was admitted, and desired Mr. Jay to speak with him in
private, to which Mr. Jay replied, that he could have nothing to say, which Mr.
Jay had any objections to his saying before Mr. Adams. Mr. Jay showed Mr. Adams
the letter, and that gentleman gave his opinion of it in very explicit and
proper terms to Mr. Littlepage, adding that he himself had told Mr. Jay, that
Dr. Frank in had no objections to Mr. Thaxter's being appointed, and that the
Doctor had told him so. A conversation then ensued between Mr. Jay and Mr.
Littlepage, relative to the other very exceptionable passages in his letter:
Mr. Jay positively denied the truth of the hardy assertions contained in it,
and with respect to the reasons of his having remained at Madrid, referred him
to his own letter to his uncle, of the 15th of May, 1782, and asked him how he
could reconcile what he now insinuated, with the contents of that letter; -- he
confessed that they did not "run parallel:" after a little further discussion,
he began to appear sensible of the impropriety of his conduct, in short, he
asked Mr. Jay's pardon for what he had written, he desired it might be all
forgotten, and for that purpose, requested Mr. Jay's permission to burn the
letter, which (Mr. Jay consenting to) he then immediately burnt: He then gave
Mr. Jay his hand, and took his leave: Mr. dams was in the room from the time
Mr. Littlepage came into, and some time after, the time Mr. Littlepage want
away; and to the well known candor and integrity of that Honorable Gentleman
Mr. Jay appeals, for the truth and proof of these facts.

In a short time after this, Mr. Jay was well informed, that Mr. Littlepage had
spoken of this transaction, and had said that the dispute was accommodated, on
Mr. Jay's making certain admissions.

From that time forwards, Mr. Jay avoided as much as possible, all manner of
intercourse and correspondence with that young man: Nor does he recollect to
have written to, or received a single line further from him, during the course
of that year, except the following note when in London, and to which he did not
return any answer, viz. --

"Mr. Littlepage presents his most respectful compliments to Mr. Jay, and
requests to be favored with the address of Don Bernardo del Campo, and that of
Mr. Gardoqui, both of whom he supposes his Excellency must have seen."

London, 13th November, 1783.

In the Spring of 1784, Mr. Jay received from Mr. Littlepage the following
letter.

No. 44. TO MR. JAY.
Paris, Rue a' Artois, 16th of March, 1784. SIR,
HAVING in the hurry of closing some letters from London to my uncle,
transmitted the original state of the account between your Excellency and
myself, I must entreat you to take the trouble of making out a summary of the
amount without delay; as it is possible I may be enabled to settle it before
your departure.

I at the same time, take the liberty to observe, that all efforts on my part
for that object, are dictated by myprivate sentiments of delicacy, rather than
any actual obligation upon me, for sums advanced to me during my minority upon
the credit of my Guardian, and which were discontinued as soon as subsequent
circumstances seemed to invalidate his order, and place me in a more immediate
state of personal responsibility.

Be pleased also to inform me what measures you have ulteriorly taken for your
reimbursement in America, and the result of them. I have the honor to be, etc.

His Excellency John Jay.

LEWIS LITTLEPAGE.

No. 45. FROM MR. JAY.
Mr. JAY presents his compliments to Mr. Littlepage, and agreeable to the
request contained in his letter of this day, sends him enclosed a copy of the
account of moneys paid by Mr. Jay to and for Mr. Littlepage, as settled the 6th
of July, 1783; and informs him that Mr. Jay has not taken any measures for his
reimbursement in America.

Chaillot, 16th March, 1784.
(Directed) Mons. Mons. Littlepage, Rue d'Artois, Paris.
These are all the letters which, to Mr. Jay's knowledge and belief, ever
passed between Mr. Jay and him, while in Europe; and he is the more certain of
it, as he made it a rule to preserve, not only all that young man's letters,
but also the drafts of all such as Mr. Jay wrote to him -- not have any since
passed between them, but those lately written and published within these few
weeks last past.

In the spring of 1784, Mr. Carmichael came to Paris, to assist in settling the
public accounts. When that business was finished, and Mr. Jay was just about
setting out for America, he expressed to Mr. Jay the uneasiness he experienced
from the coolness which had unhappily subsisted between them, and wished that
its further continuance might be removed by a free and friendly explanation
between them; they accordingly went into it with great temper, and discussed a
variety of matters, which do not relate to the present subject. Mr. Jay neither
mentioned nor showed to him Mr. Littlepage's letter of 15th June, 1782, nor any
of its contents. In the course of the conferrence, Mr. Carmichael mentioned
him, and intimated that he had good reason to believe that Mr. Littlepage had
played a double game between them; for that after Mr. Jay had left Madrid, he
had taken him into his house, and lent him money; and that he had told him many
things to Mr. Jay's disadvantage, which appeared to him very extraordinary and
improbable; and among others, "that Mr. Jay had left b m at Madrid expressly to
be a spy upon him, (Mr. Carmichael; and had given him a cipher to enable him to
convey his advices more safely and securely." Mr. Jay assured Mr. Carmichael,
that it was a most impudent falsehood, and he did not hessitate to say, that he
really believed it to be so. Had there been no other questions between Mr. Jay
and Mr. Carmichael, but what arose from this young man's double-dealing tricks;
that conference would have ended all their differences, for they both agreed
that no credit was due to his reports. Mr. Jay is convinced that Mr. Carmichael
must well remember these facts, and therefore does not think it necessary to
offer further proofs of them, than an appeal to him. It is remarkable that though
Mr. Littlepage, in his publication of 7 Dec. says, he had 18 letters from Mr.
Carmichael, of which by printed some (...), yet be did not produce a single one
dated after this trans^^^^^, which was (...) or about the 14 May, 1784.



Mr. Jay left Paris in May 1784, and came to America. He afterward heard that
Mr. Littlepage had returned to Virginia, but neither wrote to him, nor received
any letters from either him or his guardian.

A few weeks ago Mr. Littlepage arrived in this city, and wrote Mr. Jay the
following letter, viz.

No. 46. TO MR. JAY.
Maiden-Lane, 18th Nov. 1785. SIR,
I HAD the honor to call at your Excellency's house this evening, to pay you my
respects, and at the same time to inform you that every exertion has been made
on my part to acquit myself of my pecuniary obligations toward you. I am sorry
to add, that accumulated embarrassments prevented me from accomplishing it
before my departure from Virginia, where I only arrived in July last, and am at
present on my return to Europe. I have, however, taken explicit arrangements
with my uncle on that head, and am authorized to make you the most positive
assurances on his part, that your reimbursement shall not be delayed longer
than circumstances render unavoidable.

I have the honor to be, etc. L. LITTLEPAGE.

To this letter Mr. Jay returned no answer, for as it was not accompanied by a
single line from his guardian, he could not determine whether any and what
credit was due to the assurances contained in it.

Some time afterward he accidentally became acquainted with a circumstance
which convinced him, that Mr. Littlepage had more than money enough with him to
discharge Mr. Jay's account; he therefore concluded that Mr. Littlepage's
assurances merited very little attention, but on the contrary, had every
appearance of a design to keep him quiet till the packet sailed. Mr. Jay
therefore, without any previous notice or ceremony, commenced an action against
him. The event justified Mr. Jay's opinion; for directly on being arrested, He
laid down the amount of Mr. Jay's account, and deposited it with Mr. Low, as
security for becoming his bail. He has since employed an attorney to defend the
suit, on the principle that he was under age when he received the money.

The day after his arrest, he sent Mr. Jay the following letter:

No. 47. TO MR. JAY.
New York, Saturday Evening, December 3, 1785. SIR,
THIS addr^^^^ ^owever disagreeable to you, is not I presume, unexpected. Your
conduct (...) no longer mysterious; the catastrophe certainly does honor to the
plot, and however incomprehensible it may ^ppear to the world, is to me no more
than your complicated character had taught me to expect.

Your public station renders it impossible for me to force you to a personal
ecclaircissement, if, as I take for granted, you choose to avoid it: But if you
are conscious of having acted consistent with the principles of honor and
rectitude, you should be the first to demand an investigation.

Should this be your determination, be pleased to inform me, when, and where
you will honor me with an interview. If you refuse, the public shall judge
between us.

LEWIS LITTLEPAGE.

TO John Jay, Esquire.
To this letter Mr. Jay returned no answer.

No. 48. TO R. JAY.
Maiden-Lane, 14th December, 1785. SIR,
BEFORE I proceed to the last extremity, that is, an appeal to the public, be
pleased to inform me whether you choose to enter into a discussion, more
consistent with the character and ideas of a gentleman. You must be convinced
from every preceding circumstance, that I can put but one construction upon
your late extraordinary conduct, which is a premeditated design to injure and
disgrace me. If such was your intention, I certainly am at liberty to justify
myself, and perhaps to retort upon you. I shall be happy to find myself
mistaken, and if you will condescend to explain your conduct, many disagreeable
things may be yet avoided; your answer will be definitive: In the mean time I
have the honor to be, etc.

L. LITTLEPAGE.

ANSWER.
No. 19. From MR. JAY.
SIR,
I HAVE received your letter of yesterday, and as it is as decent as any that
can be expected from you, I prevail upon myself to write a line or two in
answer to it.

Not being conscious of having intentionally committed a single act of
injustice or dishonor in the course of my life, I have nothing to apprehend
from publication. Your threats therefore on that head, operate on my mind, like
dud on a balance. Execute them; publish when and what you please.

As to personal discussion or correspondence with you, I mean and wish to have
none, and your memory cannot be a good one, if it does not suggest to you my
reasons for it.

A premeditated design to injure or disgrace you, is a base design, and
consequently was never mine; I disclaim, deny, and reprobate it. If you wish to
know why I sued you, I will tell you; it was to recover money you honestly owe
me, and for which I am not to be satisfied by your assurances.

I am, etc. JOHN JAY.

He afterward sent Mr. Jay another letter, but he took no notice of it, than
to enclose it in a blank cover, and return it to him, by the serv^^' who
brought it.

After this followed the publications, which the public have already seen in
the newspapers. -- The aforegoing being all the letters which have past between
Mr. Jay and Mr. Lewis Littlepage.

MR. LITTLEPAGE'S ASSERTIONS, respecting his Letter of 15th June, 1781.
"Every minute particular in that letter, respecting my suspicions of Mr.
Carmichael, were especially indicated to me by Mr. Jay, before I left his
appartment to commit them to writing."

See his publication of 7th December, 1785.

"Let the world judge of Mr. Jay's motives in forcing me to write that letter
of 15th June."

See his publication of 7th December, 1785.

"I was at that time sincere in my resentment against that Gentleman, (Mr.
Carmichael) but that enmity I declare in the face of the world had no other
motive than Mr. Jay's representations of his conduct and principles to me,"

See his publication of 7th December, 1785.

REFUTED BY HIMSELF
" Attempts have been, and are dally and hourly made, to irritate and render me
discontented with you, and at the same time to seduce me into pursuits, which
would tend to lessen your good opinion of my honor and morals" --

See his letter of 15th June, 1781.

Are these suspicions? or are they facts? To infuse groundless suspicions into
the mind of an honest man, may be practicable: but to make an honest men
believe that certain facts did happen to him, which did not happen at all; er
to make^n honest man declare facts to be true, which he knew to be false, and
even to sign^^ name in attestation of their verity, is seldom within the power
even of facts and torment.

"After our various conversations, and my letter of 15th June, I am surprised
to see this sentence in your letter, " but the warmth and enthusiasin inspired
by a desire of sharing the eclat of a brilliant coup de main hurried you too
far? I must refer you to the aforesaid letter, and to some minute particulars
therein. -- Was not that letter of the 15th June, written at your own request,
to serve as a proof of those minute particulars" --

See his letter of 7th December, 1781. -- See also Mr. Jay's answer to it of
29th December, 1781, where he says,

"It is very true that your letter to me, of 15th June, was written at my
request. I made that request because I thought the matters it contains, end
which you had before mentioned to me in conversation, were sufficiently
interesting, to (...) reduced to writing, and the evidence of them thereby the
better preserved. I remember this very well; nor was there any thing in that
transaction which I have the leastwish either to forget or conceal."

" My situation in your family was as happy as you could render it; but the
malice of a man too well known to you embittered it."

See his letter of 20th January, 1782.

"Your opinion on the minute particulars alluded to was that we were both
exposed without a possibility of vindication, to the malicious insinuations of
your infernal Secretary.

See his letter of 1st February, 1782.

Why talk of vindication if the facts in question had been of Mr. Jay's
invention, and groundless.

"But that should I succeed in this affair, it would undoubtedly ena^^ence to
retort on him, to a degree that might even excite his envy, as I had before his
malevolence. This was no trivial inducement, and to THIS END, I meant to ^^^der
subservient the genteel acquaintances which I might form."

See his letter of 1st February, 1782.

"I never suspected your opposition to proceed from any motives, but pri^^ ples
of friendship; on the contrary, political reasons seemed to point out anoth^^

MR. LITTLEPAGGE's ASSERTIONS, Respecting his letter of 15th June, 1781.
Mr. LITTLEPAGE's ASSERTIONS as to Mr. Jay's having no right to expect or
demand repayment from him.
"My abrupt departure from Virginia, prevented my Guardian from establishing at
that time any funds for my support in Europe, and only furnished me with a
letter to you requesting and authorizing you to make the necessary advances for
my expenses upon his account."

See his publication of 4th December, 1785.

"I never considered myself as personally responsible to you for the advances
you had made, by order of my Guardian."

See the same publication.

REFUTED BY HIMSELF.
line of conduct." "Had I desisted, Carmichael would certainly have had a
handle against one or the other of us: first, by imputing my conduct to motives
of pusillanimity; or, Secondly, to your influence over me, which on your part,
he would have undoubtedly ascribed either to avarice, to your natural aversion
to the Spaniards -- an ingenious thought of this politic gentleman, and which,
I CAN VENTURE TO ASSURE YOU, has not a little promoted his system of rendering
you odious at Madrid!

See his letter of 1st February, 1782.

Qu. Who dictated and forced Mr. Littlepage to write all these letters? He was
then at Mahon, and surely he will not pretend, or say, that Mr. Jay was with
him there.

"He sails for Bourdeaux, where he will be accommodated by a merchant, and
forwarded to M. Beaumarchais at Paris, and by him or M. Gerard will be sent to
you at Madrid. Those gentlemen are desired to draw upon you for whatever they
may advance to him which be pleased to pay, and it shall be punctually returned
to you.

See Mr. Lewis's letter to Mr. Jay, of 20th November, 1779, the only one he
ever received from that gentleman.

"Your conduct perhaps is influenced by apprehensions of loss, as you know I do
not possess an opulent fortune; FEAR NOT SIR, the generosity of an affectionate
Parent, and a worthy deceased relation has left ME above dependence."

See his letter of 8th October, 1781.

See his account as settled and signed by him, 24th June, 1781, page 14 and the
one afterward settled and signed by him, 6th July, 1783.

Mr. LITTLEPAGE's ASSERTIONS as to Mr. Jay's having no right to expect or
demand repayment from him.
"Upon settling my affairs with him (his guardian) the debt to you was included
in the expense of my education, consequently he is responsible for it, and as
such considers himself: of this I informed you upon my arrival here on the 18th
ult." that letter I received no answer.

See his publication of 4th Dec. 1785.

"Contempt of money is by no means in the catalogue of his negative virtues."

See his letter of 7th December, 1781.

REFUTED BY HIMSEL
"I cannot but regret that my unhappy circumstances will not permit me
immediately to discharge the debt which I have incurred from your generosity,
in the prosecution of your design." I have only to request you to enclose
immediately to Mr. Harrison a state of the account between us, which be assured
shall be remitted to you as soon as possible."

See his letter of 2^th December, 1783.

"Having in the hurry of closing some letters from London to my uncle,
transmitted the original state of the account between your Excellency and
myself; I must entreat you to take the trouble of making out a summary of the
amount without delay, as it is possible I may be enabled to settle it before
your departure."

"I at the same time take the liberty to observe that all efforts on my part,
are dictated by my private sentiment of delicacy, rather than any actual
obligation upon me, etc.

See his letter of 16th March, 1784.

The language of the above letter is, that he would pay the debt, though not
because he believed himself compellable by law.

"I had the honor to call at your Excellency's house this evening to pay you my
respects, and at the same time to inform you that every exertion has been made
on my part, to acquit myself of my pecuniary obligations toward you, etc."

See his letter of 18th November, 1785.

Read that letter; it does not contain one word of such information.

"I declare upon the honor of a gentleman, that it ever was my wish and
intention, to refund his (Mr. Jay's) advances for me, until I thought his
conduct had absolved from every obligation but what the law imposes."

See his publication of 7th December, 1785.

Did be not consider himself respo^sible for the debt, after having repeatedly
declared his intention of pay^ng it: or, are such declarations to be made and
taken back at pleasure, and to mean nothing except merely pro hac vice?

Mr. Jay always considered both Mr. Littlepage and his Guardian as responsible.

"Avarice is by no means your characteristic."

See his letter of 20th January, 1782.

"As to the sum he has already advanced, he declares himself to be by no means
dressing for the repayment of it;" "He will advance as my exigencies may
require, not exceeding fifty guineas per year, from the time of his departure
'till next March."

See his letter to his Guardian, of 5th May, 1782.

MR. LITTLEPAGE's ASSERTIONS, As to his being lo^^, as a Spy at Madrid.
"I arrived at Madrid early in April," be now held forth the most aspiring
objects to my view, etc. Near six weeks elapsed in this manner, "when" "Mr. Jay
was summoned to France."

See his publication of 7th Dec. 1785.

"He then threw off the mask, absolutely refused to take me with him to France,
almost sneered at the ambitious hopes he had before inspired, and remonstrated
indelicately enough, upon the inconveniency of making me further advances, and
then only for the first time advised me to return to America." "The world will
judge of my sensations." "Upon this occasion my opinion has always been that he
acted openly because he did not think me worth deceiving." "Stung to the soul,
I warmly expostulated with him, but he with invisible coolness persisted."
Admit all this to be true, does it show that Mr. Jay wished to keep him as a
spy at Madrid?
"As it really appeared that I must give up every prospect, and renounce every
advantage I had acquired, by returning at that period to America. -- I proposed
to him to consent that I should remain in Spain, until something definitive
took place with respect to the nego^tations about to be commenced."

See his publication 7th Dec. 1785.

"Resuming some time afterward his ordinary style of confidence, he imparted
to me his suspicions of Mr. Carmichael's conduct during his absence, conjured
me to keep a watchful eye over his intrigues against us both, and for the
purpose of our corresponding upon this subject left me a cipher." -- "My
propositions of going to Gibraltar he pointedly opposed;" "his answer was
laconic and decisive, the moment I left Madrid he would withdraw from me, even
the pittance he had stipulalated for my support only in that Capital -- that
declaration whilst it confirmed my growing contempt and detestation of his
character, convinced me that he wished and meant to render my situation very
nearly ignominious with that of a spy. Is this the fast, ingratiating,
persuasive manner, which policy dictates to be observed toward those, of whom
mea wish, and endeavor to make useful and zealous instruments?


See the same publication.

REFUTED BY HIMSELF.
His last letter before his return to Madrid, is dated 25th March, at Mahon,
and the bill he drew on Mr. Jay two days before, was not presented till the
12th April, so that his return to Madrid could not have been early in that
month.

Doctor Franklin's letter summoning Mr. Jay to Paris, is dated 23d April, it
arrived, as appears by an indorsement on it, the 1st of May, so that six weeks
could not have elapsed between that day and the day of Mr. Littlepage's return
in April.

"I wish to return to America; the eclat of having served a campaign in Europe,
in a distinguished post, will I doubt not procure me at least a decent
commission." -- "My situation is seriously alarming, totally neglected by my
Guardians in America for more than two years past."

See his letter of 25th March, 1782.

"Mr. Jay has received a summons to France, and will in consequence leave
Madrid immediately. As no object, public or private, could justify my
undertaking so expensive a journey, especially considering M. Jay's uncertain
stay there, I have resolved with hisconcurrence to remain here UNTIL the month
of March next, when I shall return to America, if your surprising and
unaccountable silence still continues.

See his letter to Col B. Lewis, of 15th May, 1782, which throughout is
irreconcilable with his present assertions.

"Your professions and indeed proofs of friendship to me have ever appeared too
disinterested to admit the most distant doubt of their sincerity. I cannot
therefore impute your opposition to my design of continuing in the army, to any
other motive than real regard to what you think my interest." "With respect to
you, Sir! whatever may be your determination be assured, it shall never induce
me to forget your past favors. I have already been burdensome to you, too much
so, but it was unavoidable."

See his letter of 10th June, 1782, from Madrid, to Mr. jay, in France.

"I again request your advice with respect to my future conduct; and what I
have to expect from you."

See his letter of 29th October, 1782.

Mr. LITTLEPAGE's ASSERTIONS
This he says was in May, read on the opposite page, what he says in June,
(...) following, (...) letters of those dates, to Mr. Jay, who was then in
France.

REFUTED BY HIMSELF.
"I regard your letter as an ultim^ (...) on your part to afford me further
assistance, and delicacy in n y prese^^ ^^uation, as well as gratitude for what
you have already done, prevents me from incommoding you with reiterated, and
too probably vain solicitations." "Sin^^ have nothing to expect from your
partiality as a friend, I appeal to you (...) as a man of honor for my
justification. I have forfeitedyour confidence and protection, but I am
mistaken in your character, or I shallever possess your esteem."

With the sincerest gratitude for the many instances of friendship and
generosity which I have receivea from you. I have the honor to be, etc."

See his letter of 29th December 1782.

CONCLUSION.
SUPPOSE Mr. Jay to be as capable of inventing, as Mr. Littlepage confesses
himself to have been of certifying, false facts; is it probable that Mr. Jay
would have (especially considering his professional knowledge of such subjects)
contrived that letter of 15th June, 1781, so very injudiciously, as that it
should represent his witness to be a person highly incensed against the man
whom his testimony was designed to depreciate? Would he, in such a case, have
invented, and brought into strong light, resentments of his witness against the
adverse party? or would he not rather have given his witness the appearance of
an indifferent person, dispassionately giving evidence merely from regard to
justice and to truth?

If that letter was of Mr. Jay's invention, and written at his instigation, how
did it happen that Mr. Littlepage, so often in the course of his subsequent
letters, written during his absence, should not only refer to it as true, but
also mention additional facts and circumstances against Mr. Carmichael, which
exactly correspond with the motives and conduct imputed by him to that
gentleman in this?

How did it happen that Mr. Littlepage did never, in any of those moments of
chagrin and vexation in which he wrote his several rude and abusive letters to
Mr. Jay, even so much as intimate, that Mr. Jay had made him write and attest
falsehoods?

Is it to be presumed that common sense, if not common honesty, would not have
restrained Mr. Jay from thus rashly putting himself in the power of a person so
inconsiderate, so volatile, and so young?

Had Mr. Jay so committed himself, how is it to be accounted for, that he
should, from first to last, for now near five years, have persevered in one
steadfast, inflexible line of conduct; and by repeatedly crossing and
disappointing Mr. Littlepage's favorite with is and (...), and so net^^s
leaving him to suffer for his rudeness and indelicacy, so (...) stimulate him
to indulge his propensity to pour forth reproaches?

How did it happen, that, if Mr. Littlepage possessed Mr. Jay's confidence in
the degree he pretends, that none of Mr. Jay's letters to him contain the least
mark of it? They say nothing of Mr. Carmichael, but what sprung from the letter
in question: nor any thing of Mr. Livingston, but that he was gone to America
-- not even a hint of his reasons for going, nor of the circumstances inducing
or attending it.

If Mr. Jay had wished to leave Mr. Littlepage at Madrid, to watch Mr.
Carmichael, why did he advise and press him to go to America, as Mr. Littlepage
himself admits? How did it happen that none of their subsequent letter; even
alluded to such a design, or contained even an obscure hint relative to the
execution of it.

If such an explanation as littlepage pretends, really did take place between
him and Mr. Carmichael, whereby he was led toentertain the opinion which he
says he thenceforth entertained of Mr. Jay; how are we to account for his
subsequent letters of 10 June, 29 Oct. 5 and 29 Dec. 1782, in which he
expresses ideas the most opposite that can be to such an opinion? Why did he
afterward solicit Mr. Jay's favor and influence at Paris, by his letter of
16th July 1783, and when Mr. Jay then acted directly contrary to his wishes and
request, why did he ask Mr. Jay's pardon in the presence of Mr. Adams, for the
expressions he used on that occasion?

How did it happen that here in America Mr. Jay should continue to keep him at
a distance, and hold such a conduct toward him, as instead of betraying
apprehension and prudential pliancy, rather invited offense and crimination?

Does all this look as if Mr. Jay was conscious of having put himself in the
power of this young man? Or that Mr. Littlepage could with truth say any thing
injurious to the character which Mr. Jay, from his youth, and for years, spent
under the public eye, and in the public service, has invariably maintained?

In short, after a full investigation of Mr. Littlepage's behavior and
practices, as delineated in his letters and publications, can any other
conclusion be drawn, than that Hic niger est, hune tu Roman caveto.

FINIS.

