MR. HART'S ELECTION SERMON, MAY 11th, 1786.

THE DESCRIPTION OF A GOOD CHARACTER ATTEMPTED AND APPLIED TO THE SUBJECT OF
JURISPRUDENCE AND CIVIL GOVERNMENT.

A DISCOURSE, ADDRESSED TO HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR, AND THE HONORABLE
LEGISLATURE IN THE STATE OF CONNECTICUT, CONVENED AT HARTFORD ON THE GENERAL
ELECTION, MAY 11th, M.DCC.LXXXVI.

BY LEVI HEART, A. M. PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN PRESTON.

But Jehoida waxed old, and was full of days when he died. -- And they buried
him in the City of David, among the Kings: because he had done good in Israel,
both toward God and toward his house. 2 Chronicles. xxiv.15, 16. HARTFORD: PRINTED
BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN.

At a General Assembly of the State of Connecticut, holden at Hartford, on the
second Thursday of May, A. D. 1786.
ORDERED, That Mr. Benjamin Coit, and Col. Jeremiah Halsey, return the Thanks,
of this Assembly to the Reverend LEVI HEART, for his Sermon delivered at the
General Election on the 11th Instant, and request a Copy thereof that it may be
printed.

A true Copy of Record, Examined, by GEORGE WYLLYS, Sec'ry.

An Election SERMON.
ECCLESIASTES, X. 1. Dead flies cause the ointment of the Apothecary to send
forth a stinking savor: so does a little folly him that is in reputation for
wisdom and honor.
IT is hoped that the feelings of none in the assembly will be wounded by the
introduction of this maxim, which may seem unpolished; when it is considered
that it was penned by a person of the first character for discernment: who was
also the chief magistrate of a great kingdom, and under the superintending
influence of the Holy Spirit. King Solomon made choice of the wisdom requisite
for his important station, and God graciously gave him his desire. 1 Kings,
iii.5 -- 12.
From that wisdom, improved by long experience, and directed by supernatural
influence, he was eminently qualified to give proper instruction to persons of
every condition in life: both as it consisted in general maxims, and in the
application of them to particular cases.

THE passage before us contains a general principle, applicable to a variety of
particular characters. It will apply to all who are distinguished for supposed
worth, and respected by mankind on that account: to all who are in stations of
eminence, where their accomplishments are conspicuous, and their faults, if
they have any, are not hidden. These are the possessors of that wisdom and
honor, which is compared to the precious ointment of the apothecary: that good
name which is even more valuable than precious ointment. A little folly,
however, in a character so conspicuous, and exalted, will tarnish its beauty,
and diffuse an ill favor through the sweet perfume. Text and Chap vii.1.


As the maxim in the text is fitted to such an extensive application, to
persons of eminence in the several classes of society, it requires our serious
attention on the present occasion.

A DISCUSSION of the subject is proposed in the following manner.

I. A DESCRIPTION of a reputable character, or good name, will be attempted.

II. THE destructive influence of folly, when mixed with such a character, will
be considered.

III. AN application of the general maxim to particular characters, will
conclude the discourse.

I. A DESCRIPTION of a good name, or reputable character, will be attempted.

THE comparison of a good name, to the precious ointment of the apothecary, is
implied in the text and other sacred passages. Ecclesiastes vii.1. Canticles
i.3.


FROM an institution in the ancient Mosaic writings we learn that an holy
anointing oil was to be made, by a mixture of the most excellent spices, with
the pure oil of the olive tree. With this precious ointment, the priests, the
tabernacle, and its utensils were to be anointed, as a consecration to the
particular service of God. Exodus xxx.22 -- 38.


THIS holy oil which was not to be imitated, or even applied, except for the
purposes, and in the manner specified in the institution, was evidently
designed to represent the excellent nature of true religion, and of the Holy
Spirit, in his sanctifying influences on the hearts of men. -- Those best
accomplishments of the human mind -- as there is, in these, a combination of
the most amiable qualities composing the character of the man of God.

A LIKE mode of expression is used, by the inspired psalmist, to illustrate the
mutual and harmonious affection of brethren, dwelling together in unity -- and
the happy influence of that affection. Psalm cxxxiii.
Finally, the excellent qualities and unequalled glories of the divine Messiah,
are represented under this same metaphor. Psalm xlv.6, 7, 8.


THE idea running through the several representations is, obviously, the same.
A variety of individual objects, excellent in themselves, united and combined,
in such a manner as to constitute one complete object. In which the beauty of
each is, not only preserved, but exhibited, with superior advantage; by its
connection with the rest, in such a manner, as to heighten the perfection of
the whole.

THIS is true with regard to the beauty of all complex objects. It consists in
the due proportion of each part, to the use for which it is designed -- to its
various relations, and to the whole. This will appear by an application of the
observation to objects confessedly beautiful, in the various productions of
nature and art. In these last, we are, sometimes, agreeably entertained and
improved, by viewing the displays of human sagacity. But, in the first, we are
struck with pleasing and devout astonishment, at their inimitable beauty and
grandeur. And, by the perfection discernible in his various works, from the
most simple and minute, to the most complex and magnificent, we are led "to
look through nature, up to nature's God."

THE beautiful, the exact gradations, and proportions, by which they are
constituted and directed, impress the devour philosopher with the deepest
reverence for the Most High, and lead him to acknowledge that "the heavens
declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy works" Psalm
xix.i.
-- and that "in wisdom he has made them all." Psalm civ.24:


BUT we must not indulge in these general reflections, but confine our
attention to that particular species of beauty, which constitute a good
character. Are material and inanimate objects beautiful, intelligent creatures
must be capable of that which is far greater, and more perfect -- in proportion
to the superior nature of the soul. This beauty of the mind, is what renders
man worthy of esteem, and by which he obtains the approbation of the wise and
good.

IT is worthy of notice, that the perfection of the precious ointment, referred
to in the text, consisted in the excellent quality of its several parts, and
their due proportion to each other. In like manner, a good name is the result
of a composition of mental excellencies, fitly proportioned to each other, and
to their object.

HUMAN perfection may be summed up in the excellent qualities of the
understanding, and the heart. All our perceptions and knowledge belong to the
former, and all emotions, affections, and determinations, to the latter. The
beauty of the understanding consists in its suscepiibility of those
perceptions, by which we are furnished with the knowledge requisite to our
place and station: or, in their actual existence. The other essential branch of
human perfection is comprised in affections corresponding to our perceptions:
or, in the qualities of the heart. If these are proportioned, to a proper
knowledge of the objects of perceptions, it forms that amiable and worthy
character, which comports with the nature and dignity of man -- as he is
related to his present and future self, to his fellow creatures and to his
Creator.

THE duly proportioned knowledge of the objects of human perception, may be
styled the natural beauty, or perfection, of man; and the corresponding
affections of the heart, that which is humane, domestic, civil, moral, or
evangelical: according to the qualities or relations of the objects, on which
they terminate. And the opposite to these, are the deformity of the
understanding, and the heart. The beauty, or perfection of the heart, is
evidently of the greatest importance. Without this, the finest accomplishments
of the understanding are of little worth -- Yea when connected with a heart,
altogether deformed, they constitute a character, utterly unworthy. And that
deformity is even increased, in consequence of its connection with superior
knowledge. For, it is the language of reason and revelation that, "to him who
knows to do good, and does it not, to him it is sin."

By suitable exertions of the heart, the perceptions, and knowledge of the
mind, are applied to their proper use, and rational existence is both honorable
and happy. But this can be asserted, with the strictest propriety, of those
affections and exertions only, which are of the moral, or evangelical kind. The
others, which have been mentioned, have obtained the name of virtues, or
perfections, on account of their coincidence with particular objects. A
virtuous husband, friend, citizen or ruler, is denominated from his acting
agreeably to those relations: without any respect to what he is, in regard to
his more exstensive connections. And, it is very supposable, that a person may
be eminent in one, or more, of those particular virtues, and yet be utterly
deformed, or vicious, in respect to his great and important relations, as the
creature of God, a rational and immortal being.

FROM hence it appears that though certain affections may be beautiful, in a
separate view, and as proportioned to particular objects, or relations -- the
character, possessed of them, may be exceedingly deformed, on the whole: in
consequence of an opposition of heart, to its more extensive and important
connections. And those particular attachments, though agreeable in a
subordination to superior affections, serve to heighten the deformity of the
character, in a different connection. As we see men, eminent for some of the
private virtues, often the most inveterate and dangerous enemies to the state:
when they are destitute of public affection, and consider the interest of their
particular connections, and that of the public, in opposition.

IN like manner, a person may be possesed of many of those agreeable qualities,
which are denominated virtues, and yet, through the influence of private
affection, he may be opposed to the honor of his Creator, and the interest of
his fellow creatures. And those very attachments, so agreeable and useful, when
subordinated to public affection may be subservient to that opposition, and
greatly enhance it. But that coincidence of affection, and exertion, to our
great moral objects and relations, which obtains the name of moral virtue, or
perfection in rational beings who have never transgressed, and is evangelical
virtue or holiness in man, as corresponding to the gospel revelation of
salvation. -- That, is truly excellent, both as it is proportional to our most
extensive relations, and involves a proper affection to all particular objects,
considered in themselves, and as subordinate to the whole.

WERE we to apply these general principles to particular characters, the
evidence would appear to be still more decisive. The great law of religion, in
reference to our duty to God, our Creator, is summed up in that reverential and
practical affection, which is proportioned to our utmost ability. In relation
to our fellow men, we are to love our neighbors as ourselves -- their
happiness being of equal importance with our own. For the same reason, the less
good is to give way to the greater, the private to the public, and the interest
of all finite, created beings, should be subordinated to the infinite and
uncreated Original of all. To man, as related to his present, and future self,
it is the voice of reason and revelation -- "Do thyself no harm." He is
directed to seek that happiness, which comports with the dignity and importance
of his existence as a man. -- A happiness consisting in union to his Creator,
and to his fellow creatures.

THUS the great principles of reason, and revelation, form a most beautiful and
harmonious system. And the man, who is practically conformed to them, is
possesed of the excellent qualities constituting that good character, which is
represented by the precious ointment, and is declared to excel it.

IF we consider the christian religion, as a scheme adapted to the case of
lapsed creatures, we shall find a no less beautiful harmony in its several
parts -- to their respective objects, to each other, and to the whole.

THIS divine system is constituted of two great branches. The first, is a
supernatural revelation of the way of pardon and salvation for sinners of
mankind, through the mediation and atonement of Christ; who is "God manifest in
the flesh." An atonement every way suitable to the perfection of God, both as
it exhibits the original excellence of his character and government, and
prepares the way for the fullest manifestation of them, to the rational
creation, in the actual recovery, and salvation, of sinners.

THE other branch, of the christian revelation, contains what man is to believe
and do, in reference to this revelation -- the whole train of christian graces
and exertions, which correspond to his condition as a sinner, to his relations
to God, as Creator, Redeemer, Sanctifier and Judge -- to mankind, and to his
own present and future existence. These, fitly expressed, in a life of
christian holiness, form the character of "the man of God, furnished to every
good work." Each of these is excellent in itself, and as connected with the
rest. And all of them, collectively viewed, and raised to their proper
standard, form the christian for that state of perfection to which he is
redeemed; and prepare him to fill a place in that church of the firstborn, of
which he is a member.

So little cause love the opposers of christianity to reject it, as a scheme
unworthy of God, and repugnant to the dictates of reason and philosophy. It
was, long since, observed by a great master of reason, that "true and deep
philosophy always leads men to a profound admiration of the first cause." It
may be added, that this profound admiration will be abundantly increased by a
proper view of that great first cause, as displayed in the christian
revelation. It is a minute philosophy only which leads men to reject this
divine system.

WE now proceed to the next branch of our subject.

II. To consider the destructive influence of solly, when mixed with a good
name.

THAT we may understand the force and propriety of the comparison implied in
the text, it may be proper to observe, that one essential excellence of the
precious ointment refered to, consisted in its fragrant and reviving smell.
Cant. i.3.
The desructive influence of the dead fly, consisted in its taking away the
sweet savor of the ointment, or in causing it to smell disagreeably. By its
putresaction a poisonous, as well as offensive, quality was also diffused
through the composition. And as this sweet and refreshing ointment, would
become disagreeable, and destructive, by the mixture of the dead fly -- so the
most respectable character may loose its luster, and be covered with disgrace,
by the mixture of folly.

THAT the representation may be more fully understood, it may be farther
observed, that the term folly, as used by this inspired writer, is not
restrained to its primary signification, to denote a destitution of rational
perceptions, or an imbecility of intellect -- Perfons of this description
cannot be supposed to be in reputation for wisdom and honor.

IT will likewise appear, by an examination of the passages where this and
other like terms are used, that they are especially designed to express the
quality and character of those who neglect the proper application of their
intellectual powers, or use them for opposite and destructive ends. In this
sense the term folly is to be understood in the passage before us.

ONCE more, it must be remembered, that the character mentioned, in the text,
is supposed to be eminent. It belongs to such as are "in reputation, for wisdom
and honor." The assertion might be illustrated by an application to particular
instances, of the mixture of folly, in a character otherwise reputable. The
expressions of a bad heart reproach the most exalted station. And, folly is the
reverse of that wisdom which is the honor of a virtuous character, in the
various applications of the expression: some of which have been named already.

A PERSON possessed of, even the best, intellectual accomplishments, but the
reverie of what he ought to be in the several relations of human life, and his
connections in society, is destitute of the whole train of virtues; and his
character sends forth an offensive savor. This will be evident in real life:
it is true of a husband and father, destitute of conjugal and paternal
affection -- a nominal patriot, void of public spirit -- a judge, under the
blinding influence of the love of money -- and a rich man, destitute of
compassion and liberality to the poor. Men, destitute of the virtues suitable
to their particular conditions and relations, and under the influence of the
opposite vices, are the objects of just abhorrence, in proportion to their
opportunity to be useful, to the eminence of their abilities and stations.

THIS truth will be still more obvious by applying it to the great moral
objects, and relations, of man. By a single fault, the most awful ruin is
diffused through the human race. In place of that holy affection, to the Most
High, and to our brethren of mankind, which is suitable to our nature and
relations, and is our highest perfection; selfish propensities have the
dominion in the human heart, and "all men seek their own." This is the general
source of ruin to mankind. From hence, as their proper fountain, proceed, the
private and public quarrels, the cruel wars and slaughters, which have filled
our world -- all the oppressions and persecutions which, under various
pretenses, have spread desolation through the earth. The wide-spreading ruin
has diffused itself through all ages, all nations, and classes of mankind. It
has infected all degrees of society, from the meanest cottages, to the most
magnificent empires.

THE history of past ages, and kingdoms, will attest the truth of these
observations, and general experience will confirm them. This dead fly, with its
malignant infection, enters the retirements of domestic quiet, and disturbs the
sweet enjoyment of its tender friendships; and, in many instances, utterly
destroys them. It even sets a man at variance with himself, and the conflict
usually issues in his falling a prey to this baneful passion. To this must be
traced, suicide itself, that most unnatural of all the crimes of wretched
mortals.

FINALLY, this sets man at opposition to his Maker, and leads him to reject the
proffered grace and salvation of the gospel, procured and offered by the great
Redeemer -- and thus to plunge himself into the most agravated, and remediless
ruin. But for this, how happy were the lot of men! united to their Creator, to
each other, and to themselves; possessed of intellectual and other endowments,
sussicient for the sublimest pursuits and enjoyments, in a reciprocation of
benevolent exertions, and in united reverential love and obedience, to the
fountain of good.

BUT it is time to dismiss this gloomy side of human nature, and of our
subject, and proceed to the concluding branch of it.

III. IN an application, of the general maxim, to particular characters.

THE present joyful anniversary, and this respectable assembly, invite us to
apply the subject to the interesting concerns of juris-prudence and civil
government. The gentlemen of the two houses of Assembly, are the persons
pointed out in the text, elected to their respective places of honor and
reputation, by the unpurchased, unsolicited votes of the freemen of the state.

IN a constitution like our's, nothing but distinguished merit can be a
recommendation to public office. It is those, who are thus chosen, who are in
reputation for wisdom and honor. Happy indeed! if no dead fly be ever found in
this venerable "assembly of wife men." In the present application of the
subject, we have only to show, that each branch of the legislature, and
administration, must be composed of men equal in ability, and rectitude of
disposition, to the importance of their station.

As the object of government is the good of society, it is natural to remark,
that the rulers of a state should have a thorough knowledge of its interests,
on the whole. A superficial reasoner in politics, is a very bad statesman. Such
an one will often pursue some trifling interest of the state, real or
imaginary, to the neglect and hazard of its greatest, and most lasting
emolument.

IF I rightly apprehend the nature of our constitution, the honorable members
of the Upper House of Assembly, beside acting as assistants to his Excellency,
are representatives of the state, at large. To these, in particular, it is
given in charge " that the commonwealth receive no damage." The gentlemen of
the Lower House, stand in much the same relation to their respective
corporations, as the honorable council, to the whole state. In legislation and
government, the interest of each corporation is to be regarded individually,
and as connected with that of the state -- in such a manner as to constitute a
common good, in which each town and, as far as possible, each individual, shall
find it to be his interest to unite. This common good of the state, must also
be pursued in a manner coinciding with the interest of the confederacy at large.

THE members of the House of Representatives ought to have a good acquaintance,
at least, with the respective interests of their own corporations, and to know
how to promote them by the wisest means, in consistence with the common good of
the state. The honorable members of the Council should have a still more exact
and extensive knowledge of the public interest, in its several branches, as
they are guardians to the whole state -- and should know how to secure and
promote its welfare, so as to produce the greatest quantity of good, to each
branch, and to the whole. And, as shall most exactly coincide with the interest
of the United States -- and bear a friendly aspect to the good of society, and
mankind, at large.

IT is the part of the accomplished legislator to investigate the best interest
of each class of society, and rise, by just gradations, in his plans and
system, from parts to the whole; till he fix a common good, comprising the
welfare of his subjects, as a body, and this, in consistence with the interest
of mankind. Such may the legislature of Connecticut be, and adopt the wisest
plans to promote its true interest, and to advance the present and future
happiness and glory of the United States; as a consederate republic, acting on
the great theater of the world, ranking with other nations, and having, in
various respects, a common interest with them; and, involving the happiness, or
misery, of the many unborn millions who are to succeed us; and fill our
extensive territory with, flourishing settlements: whose it will be to complete
the glorious fabric of liberty and equal government, founded by the wisdom of
our venerable senators, and cemented by the blood of our sons and brothers.

SUCH, and so great, are the events connected with the present day. It is even
an era pregnant with the fate of a world! Where then, it will be asked, is the
wisdom, not more than human, which is equal to the importance of legislation
and government, in founding this rising empire? In this, however, as in other
branches of practical knowledge, though the highest degree of perfection can
not be obtained, the man who would deserve to be in reputation for wisdom and
honor, must climb the lofty steep of knowledge, in his profession, with
unabating assiduity, and approach, as near as possible, to the unattainable
height.

THE other accomplishment of the good legislator, and which renders him worthy
of the highest respect, is exertion for the public interest, proportionate to
his abilities. Without this, the greatest skill in juris-prudence and civil
government, will be vain. Indeed, knowledge, however necessary, derives its
importance from its connection with exertions, for the good of society. And,
unconnected with a disposition to such exertions, in a ruler, it may produce
consequences -- fatal to the state. The public man must be like the excellent
Centurion, who had the testimony of the Jews that he loved their nation. -- Or,
like the celebrated Emperor who, when a single day had pa^^ed without any
particular instance of benificent exertion, lamented saying, "I have lost a
day."

WHO can sufficiently revere the venerable patriot, whose life is devoted to
the service of his country, and of mankind? -- From determination of the human
mind, which is universal, this character has been the admiration of all
nations, and classes of men. "Blessed art thou, O land, when thy king is the
son of nobles, and thy princes eat in due season, for strength, and not for
drunkennefs." Ecclesiastcs x.17.
Here is full scope for the collected wisdom and virtue of our venerable
Assembly! And, with what inviting savor will those ever honored names be
perpetuated to posterity, through all generations, whole wisdom and virtue,
whether in the council or in the field, have fixed the basis, for the future
greatness of this empire of freedom!

AMONG these, and at their head, we behold, with thankful praise to the great
Preserver, safe from the perils of the war, "The Hero who redeemed our land!"
-- From the midst of ten thousand dangers, restored to the bosom of peace, and
domestic felicity -- Above the wish for other honors than those which his
distinguished virtue has secured. -- Happy in the safety of his country, like
the parent clasping his dear child, just snatched from the jaws of death.

WHAT is all tinseled greatness of haughty monarchy, compared with the meek
majesty, the sweet and dignified serenity of that heroic breastsoftened with
the most tender sentiments of humanity! conscious of his own successsul
efforts, and of the grateful, the affectionate, acknowledgements of the nation,
which he was born to save. How much better is the name he has obtained than
that of sons and daughters! Present and future generations will glory in the
relation, and lisping infancy will be fond to call him father.

SUCH are the sweet rewards of distinguished merit. -- May those which are far
greater and more lasting attend the illustrious WASHINGTON. -- May he be the
care of heaven, the highly favored subject of the King of Kings. -- May he
grow old in conscious peace with God, and the sweet sensibility of christian
consolation. Long may he bless mankind, and honor the Redeemer; till, matured
with age and piety, and satisfied with this life -- sweetly, and without a
parting groan, he shall drop what was mortal, and ascend to glory.

SUCH are thy charms, O virtuous philanthropy! -- May the venerable assembly of
the wise men of Connecticut, feel thy sweetness, and diffuse thy luster!

THE subject opens an extended field, for useful and entertaining reflections,
which will readily occur to the feeling mind, and shall not, therefore, be
particularly named. It remains that the discourse be concluded with respectful
addresses to the characters in the Assembly, distinguished by reputation for
wisdom and honor.

DUTY, and inclination, require that our first acknowledgement be paid to the
Chief Magistrate of the State --

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR EXCELLENCY,

I CONGRATULATE my fellow subject and myself on, the preservation of your
important life, to this joyful anniversary. -- If to be in reputation for
wisdom and honor be a felicity -- If to have received the testimonies of your
country's high respect, for a long course of succeeding years -- If to be
called, by the public voice, to various, constant and important services --
gradually ascending in the scale of honor and usefulnes, and to be finally
placed in the chair of government -- It to be placed in it, in the evening of
life, and in a tempestuous season, when superior wisdom and virtue was most
sensibly requisite, to guide the state. -- And, if to have been successful in
administration -- If any, or all of these, are agreeable reflections, your
Excellency will partake with your affectionate people, in the joys of this day.

You are happy, Sir, in the independence and prosperity of your country, and in
a review of your own large share in the troubles, and success, of the important
revolution. May I not add -- It is no trisling honor to stand on the list of
same, and exist in the historic page, as the first Magistrate of Connecticut.
-- On the same column with that distinguished catalogue of worthies, who have
filled the chair -- down, from the venerable first Winthrop, to his Excellency,
Governor Trumbull. The following list of venerable names who have presided in
Connecticut, from the first institution of government, will not be ungrateful
to those who review, with thankful pleasure, the divine goodness to the State
-- in the distinguished accomplishments of those who have ruled over it.

A voluntary government was instituted in January 1639. The Honorable Me^^'rs
Hopkins and Haynes presided, alternately, from that time till 1652. And the
latter was Governor till 1658. He was succceded by the Honorable Mr. Winthrop,
who, in 1661, was agent for the Colony at the Court of King Charles the second,
and obtained the Charter -- From that time the accession of Governors will
appear by the following table.

Governor Winthrop, 1662 Governor Law, 1742 Governor Leet, 1672 Governor
Wolcott, 1751 Governor Treat, 1680 Governor Fitch, 1754 Governor Winthrop, 1696
Governor Pi^kin, 1766 Governor Saltonstall, 1707 Governor Trumbull, 1769
Governor Talcott, 1724 Governor Griswold, 1784
-- Who, after having conducted us through the dangers and distresses of the
war, with great honor to himself, and usefulness to the public, preferred an
honorable quietus, from public service, that he might be at leisure to improve
his acquaintance with that world, where the honors conferred by mortals fade
away, but the man who has faithfully "served his generation" shall receive an
unfading crown of immortal glory.

ALAS! that such a treasure of wisdom and virtue is removed from our world! too
soon, by far too soon for us, and for mankind. But, for himself, the most
proper season; his hoary head being crowned with glory, as a man of letters, a
statesman and a christian. Blessed be 'the Father of Spirits', that
notwithstanding the breach occasioned by his death, we are still happy in a
train of worthy characters, possessed of like accomplishments, who catched his
mantle as it fell, and whose patriot virtues will bless mankind. This great man
was called from our world on the 17th of August 1785, aged 74. A more
particular account of his life and character is omitted here, as the public is
already possessed of it in an excellent Discourse, at his Funeral, by the Rev.
Mr. ELY, of Lebanon.


YOUR Excellency will pardon this momentary digression, on account of the
solemn and weighty occasion. -- I have only to add, that, great as your honor
and felicity are, in the respects which have been named, were this all, you
could not be pronounced happy on the whole. Blessed be God, your prospects are
not bounded by time, but open into immortality. -- That, while your Excellency
is treading the downward steep of life, you can look back on its several
stages, devoted to God and spent in his service, and in doing good to men --
and look forward with calm serenity, and joyful confidence, in the great
Redeemer, to an admission into the presence of his glory with exceeding joy.

IT is our heart's desire and prayer to God for your Excellency, that you may
be supported under the weight of public cares, and declining years; that you
may continue to be blessed, and to bless mankind; that the christian consolation
may be your joy; that, in some future period, being old and full of days, you
may be honorably interred -- your country's tears mingling with those of your
own family, and bedewing your venerable hearse. And that you may receive a
distinguished portion among the redeemed, through Chrift Jesus.

THE subject now invites the attention of his Honor the Lieutenant Governor,
the honourable-Council, and House of Representatives.

GENTLEMEN,

THROUGH the good hand of our God upon us, in the peace of 1783, our freedom
and independence are recognized, by the British court. -- We rank among other
nations. -- Have an immense territory, extending through a variety of climates.
-- A wide field is opened for the cultivation of the arts of peace -- An
opportunity for perfecting and perpetuating the most happy constitution of
government, in the federal union. And, by the divine blessing on proper civil
and military discipline, we shall be secure from the attacks, or, at least,
from the ravages of an enemy.

WHAT remains then, but that we take the cup of salvation, and call on God --
thankfully accept his inestimable blessings, and improve them -- to be happy
ourselves, and to leave the invaluable inheritance to posterity? To this we
have motives the most numerous and weighty, but above all, we owe it to that
omnipotent goodness -- that God of grace, "who rules in the kingdoms of men,
and gives them to whomsoever he pleases," and who has caused his tender
mercy to triumph over all our unworthiness

THAT we may enjoy the proffered blessings, much is yet to be done. -- The
various and complicated interests of the state are to be fixed and secured. --
The energy of government, enseebled by the revolution, and other causes is to
be restored -- the principles of the union improved, and confirmed -- the
public credit established -- and the whole system of the finances placed on a
wise and respectable footing.

AMONG the many subjects which will engage the attention of the legislature the
following deserve particular attention. That, in the weighty subject of
legislation, whatever statutes may be requisite, should be founded on
principles of private and public justice and utility, combining, as far as
possible, the interest of individuals with that of the public. -- Laws should
be plain, simple, and but few: -- Would rulers wish to govern well, they will
not attempt to govern too much.

YOUR honors will not be unmindful of the vast importance of the executive
branch. In particular, that your Judges are men of the first character, for
wisdom, and unbiassed rectitude of heart -- well acquainted with the laws of
the state, and with the principles and spirit of law in general. And, who are
exemplary for those virtues, which give energy to their determinations.

As the same course of external conduct, which flows from a heart animated by
the spirit of true religion -- and, as such, is evangelical obedience -- is, in
many respects, essential to the well being of society: -- In this last view it
is the proper object of civil government. While, therefore, it is remembered
that Christ's kingdom "is not of this world," and as fuch "calls no man
mailer," it is proper to observe that the manners of the people must be formed
by education and government. Admitting that an exact determination of the
boundaries between the rights of conscience, and of the magistrate may be
difficult, in some cases -- the most important and practical principles, on
this subject, are extremely plain; and are admitted by the most enlightened, of
every denomination, as essential to good order and happiness in society. Your
honors, sensible of the importance of the general principle, will apply it in
your wisdom for the good of this people.

AMOMG the many vices, which tend to the ruin of individuals and society,
perhaps none are more fatal than those of needless lawsuits, and the
intemperate use of strong drinks. The expense of these destructive practices is
the least of their evils; but even this is not inconsiderable. It would be easy
to show, were it needful, that the useless consumption of time end money, in
these social vices, far exceeds the whole cost of supporting civil government,
and the public worship of God. But were this all, it would be comparatively,
trifling. -- What is of, almost infinitely, greater importance is the
destruction of virtue and good manners; which is hereby effected, in
individuals, in families, and the public. "Who has woe? Who has sorrow? Who
has contention? Who has babbling? Who has wounds without cause? Who has
redness of eyes? -- They who tarry long at the wine: they who go to seek much
wine." -- At the last it biteth like a serpent and stingeth like an adder."
Proverbs, xxiii. 29 -- 32.


YOUR honors will be happy if you can save this people from that gulf of
ruin. We rejoice that our rulers so generally remember the excellent maxim,
which king Lemuel received from his mother. "It is not for kings, O Lemuel, it
is not for kings, to drink wine, nor for princes strong drink: left they drink
and forget the law, and pervert the judgment of any of the afflicted.
Proverbs, xxxi. 4, 5.


THE interest of education, and literature in general, are humbly recommended
to this honorable Assembly. The University in the state, under the auspices of
a gentleman whose praise is far extended in the religious and literary world --
flourishing in numbers, in literature and reputation -- is, however, exposed to
many inconveniences; especially from the want of proper edifices to contain
the students under the eye of the executive authority, and funds to support
some additional professorships. The paternal attention of this venerable
Assembly, is requested to that important institution; where so many of us have
received our education: in which we have a common interest, and where we wish
that our sons may be united as a band of brothers, in treading the delightful
paths of science, and forming for public usefulness -- when we shall sleep in
the dust of death.

YOUR honors are no strangers to the present alarming state of public credit,
and the pressing necessity for the adoption of decisive measures to restore it.
That our foreign and domestic creditors must be satisfied is not problematical
-- it is certain. Our national character is at stake, with all the invaluable
blessings of freedom and independence. In vain have these been purchased, at
such an expense of blood and treasure, unless our national credit be supported.

THIS is a subject no less important than difficult. It is easy to foresee what
will not succeed, but hard to determine what will. An attempt to remedy the
evil by a new emission of paper currency would, no doubt, come under the former
description, and be making bad worse. Our public securities, of every
denomination, are of this kind, possessed of all the recommending qualities
which could attend a new paper currency, destitute of a fund for its
redemption. But, like the thin ears, and lean kine, in the dream of Egypt's
king, they have already devoured the fat and full ears of gold and silver with
which our country abounded at the peace in 1783 -- and they are nothing better
but are, continental money excepted, such as were never seen in all the land of
America for badness.

THIS, however, is not the fault of any class of men, whether rulers or
subjects, but of the times. It is the result of a combination of circumstances
attending the late revolution, in connection with the imperfection common to
man. How to remedy the evil is the question. -- The collected wisdom of this
Assembly, and of the united Republic, will be strenuously, and, we trust,
successfully, employed in devising means to restore our credit, as a state and
nation. -- These, it is not the province of the speaker to suggest: but it is
easy to obeserve, that our resources are not inconsiderable, Beside our
unlocated lands, a future revenue of immense value, the fruits of a well
directed industry and economy. -- Our advantage for shipbuilding, for trade,
and, especially, for the fishery. -- With other sources of private and public
wealth may be directed in such a manner as to fix, and perpetuate, the public
credit.

YOUR honors would be happy if you could devise some better expedient, than
has yet been adopted, for the gradual, but total abolition of slavery; and, in
the mean time, protect the friendless Africans among us from abuse, on the one
hand, and, on the other, secure society from injury by improper and ill-timed
manumissions.

DURING the first stages of the late war, amidst the terrors of impending
slavery on ourselves and posterity -- much was said!, and something done, in
favor of the blacks. But the measures, then adopted, are evidently inadequate,
and attended with consequences unfriendly to society, and to them. In each of
these views, the subject calls for public attention: but, immediate danger
being past, it engages little notice. -- And, not a few of the citizens of the
United States are returning, "like the dog to his vomit," to that dreadful
infraction of the law of nature and of God, the practice of stealing their
brethren of the human race, and selling them. While many British subjects and
some of the first dignitaries of their established church, are pleading the
cause of those friendless and oppressed strangers, with a nobleness of
sentiment and ardour of zeal, which do honor to their profession and to
humanity. Beside many other publications, the reader is desired to consult, a
pamphlet entitled, "The case of our fellow creatures, the oppressed Africans,
respectfully recommended to the serious confideration of the Legislature of
Great Britain, by the people called Quakers." And, the Bishop of Chester's
Sermon before the Society for the propagation of the gospel in foreign parts,
at their anniversary meeting in February, 1783, published by order of the
society. As the members of that society are numerous and respectable, the
publication of the Sermon is no small indication of the humane sentiments which
are prevailing in Great Britain, on this subject.


COULD your honors do any thing effectual, however the interested and
unfeeling might oppose, humanity would approve, with the most friendly ardour.
The lovers of truth and goodness would assist you with their prayers. The
blessing of many, ready to perish, would come on you. Heaven would approve, and
the good favor of your excellent name would be diffused through all
generations.

THAT I be not further tedious, may the spirit of wisdom guide the present
session of the legislature. May you do much service for your country, and
return home, with that deserved reputation for wisdom and honor which is far
better than the most precious ointment.

THE venerable Clergy will now be pleased to suffer the affectionate address.

MUCH RESPECTED FATHERS AND BRETHREN,

THOUGH we have no share in legislation and government, a large field is open,
in which we are to diffuse the sweet perfume of that most fragrant composition,
the christian religion, which we are to preach to others, and practice
ourselves. Nothing is more obvious than that the spirit and institutions of the
gospel bear a friendfy aspect to society and government. And that, in such a
manner, as is true of no other religious system: -- for no other, teaches its
votaries to place their felicity in the public good, and to think and act on
the extended scale of the most perfect general happiness. But christianity not
only teaches, but inspires its subjects with this truly noble liberality of
sentiment and affection. It expands the heart of each individual to embrace the
good of all, and to rest ultimately, in the perfection of the divine glory, and
of the felicity of God's kingdom. And, surely, a heart thus dilated with public
affection, can not fail to exert itself for the good of society.

WE are to teach our people "the whole council of God," as it respects
doctrinal, experimental, and practical christianity. -- But let it suffice, on
the present occasion, to observe, that we muft "put them in mind to be subject
to principalities and powers, to obey magistrates, to be ready to every good
work, to speak evil of no man, to be no brawlers, showing all meekness to all
men." Titus iii.1, 2.


BY instruction and example, we are to show them the way to exhibit the amiable
beauties of pure christianity, in the exertions of well directed benevolence
and public spirit, and a becoming discharge of all the relative duties. From
us, they should learn the sweet pleasure of domestic virtue and religion, in
all its branches. And how good and pleasant it is for brethren to dwell
together in unity. Society is constituted of families, and from them, it
receives its complexion. -- In this way let us teach our people to reverence
the laws, the rulers, and judges of the state. And, above all, to reverence our
great Creator and Redeemer, and imitate his goodness -- to be fathers to the
poor -- the friends of strangers -- to wipe the tear from the orphan's eye --
and cause the widow's heart to sing for joy.

SOLICITOUS that the people of our charge, may be ready to every good work, and
wise to salvation -- we shall not only teach them by word and example, but bear
them on our hearts at the throne of grace; and, we shall not be unmindful of
each other, and the churches of God. May I not add that, while we pray the Lord
of the harvest to send forth laborers into the harvest, we should be of one
mind among ourselves as to the introduction of probationers, and the settlement
of pastors -- that they are workmen who need not to be ashamed -- persons
eminent for piety, literature, and all ministerial accomplishments. The
faithful minister wishes to live in his successors, in the evangelical work. --
May we have this animating prospect.

BLESSED be God that to us, is this grace given to preach among our fellow
sinners, the unsearchable riches of Christ. Happy, indeed, if we obtain mercy
to be faithful and successful! -- Thus shall the precious ointment of pure
christianity, exhibited in our doctrines and our lives, diffuse a most
delicious perfume, and be "a sweet ^avor of Christ unto God" -- sweeten our way
through the labors and trials of life -- not forsake us in the solemn hour of
death, and render our joys pure and complete in a better world, when we meet
each other, and those of our dear flocks, who have profited by our ministry.

THE least of you all felicitates you, and himself on the great mercy of having
received part of this ministry. -- He heartily wishes you the divine presence,
and abundant success, together with increasing harmony in all the branches of
christian truth, "till we all come in the unity of the faith and knowledge of
the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ," Ephesians iv.13.


FINALLY, all who are present this day are invited to "take the cup of
salvation and call on God" -- with thankful praise for all his mercies to us,
and to our fathers, and wisely to improve them by a practical compliance with
the duties of their relations to society, to mankind, and to themselves.

ABOVE all, let us receive the cup of gospel salvation, presented through the
great Redeemer -- by a hearty compliance with all the institutions of
christianity. Then shall the sweet perfume of "the anointing from above"
diffuse its reviving influence through every breast, and we shall know, in some
degree on earth, "how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell
together in unity" -- And this happifying knowledge will be perfected in the
world of perpetual harmony: -- where all the redeemed from among men shall join
in receiving the cup of salvation, and in saying, "thanks be to God for his
unspeakable gift."

THE END.

