THE DOCTRINE OF "Laying on of Hands," EXAMINED and VINDICATED.

BY THE REV. DAVID JONES, A. M.

In meekness instructing these that oppose themselves; if God peradventure will
give them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth,

2 Timothy ii. 25. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED by FRANCIS BAILEY, at YORICK'S-HEAD, in
Market-Street. M.DCC.LXXXVI.

THE DOCTRINE, etc.
THE subject to be considered is the Doctrine of Laying on of Hands, as
exhibited in the xxxi chapter of our Confession of Faith; part of which we will
transcribe, viz. We believe that Laying on of Hands, with prayer, upon baptized
believers, as such, is an ordinance of Christ, and ought to be submitted unto
by all such persons, that are admitted to partake of the Lord's Supper; and
that the end of this ordinance is not for the extraordinary gifts of the
Spirit, but for a farther reception of the Holy Spirit of promise; or for the
addition of the graces of the Spirit and the influences thereof, to confirm,
strengthen, and comfort them in Christ Jesus; it being ratified and established
by the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit in the primitive times, etc.

It is granted, that an article of faith embraced by a church does not make it
truth in itself; but we must conceive that it contains the meaning in which the
church receive the Scripture on that subject. It must therefore argue a degree
of precipitance in associated members belonging to independent churches, to
resolve that to be a matter of indifference, which, at the same time, stands
exhibited to the world, as an anticle of their faith. By this example, a future
association might resolve another article away as no bar of communion, till, at
last, it would be impossible to know what is the faith and practice of a
regular Baptist church.

It is with great reluctance we appear in vindication of one of our articles of
faith; but the persevering imprudence of some of our young ministering brethren,
renders it necessary to investigate the subject, and either explode it, or
maintain it with that zeal which becomes the disciples of Christ. If it cannot
be supported by scripture, let us drop it; if it can, let us unanimously
practice it: for all other expedients will be only healing the hurt of the
daughter of Zion slightly, crying Peace, peace, when there is none.

The article under consideration contains the following propositions, viz.

I. That the regular Baptist churches belonging to the Philadelphian
Association believe that laying on of hands on baptized believers, as such, is
an ordinance instituted by Jesus Christ. II. That none ought to be admitted to
receive the Lord's Supper, without submission to the same. III. That it was not
instituted, nor ever used to confer the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Spirit.
IV. That the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, which did sometimes attend it,
afford an argument to prove it an ordinance of Jesus Christ. V. That one end of
this holy institution was to comfort, confirm, and strengthen true believers,
by additional measures and gifts of the Holy Spirit.
These five propositions contain the principal points to be investigated on
this subject, and if these appear, by fair scriptural arguments, we hope to see
once more unity of faith in our churches. It is wished that the reader would
endeavor to remove prejudices for or against the institution, that the point
may be examined impartially, comparing spiritual things with spiritual.

After our blessed Lord rose from the dead, he was seen by the apostles sorty
days, conversing with them, and instructing them in the things pertaining to
the kingdom of God, Acts i. 3. What he taught them, we must learn from their
doctrine and practice. We know it was his positive command, to teach all
nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost;
teaching them to observe all things whatsoever he had commanded them.

If we find the apostles, by their example, teaching the Laying on of Hands on
baptized believers, as such, then we must conclude, that our redeemer taught
them so to do; consequently, we need not be surprised to find the institution
called the Doctrine of Christ, because he taught it to the apostles himself.

We are now naturally led to read the Acts of the Apostles, where we find
examples to bear witness to the ordinance. The first is recorded in Acts viii.
14 -- 17. As we shall have occasion frequently to refer to this passage, we
will now transcribe it, viz. Now when the apostles which were at Jerusalem,
beard that Samaria bad received the word of God, they sent unto them Peter and
John. Who when they were come down, prayed for them that they might receive the
Holy Ghost. (For as yet he was fallen upon none of them: only they were
baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.) Then laid they their bands on them,
and they received the Holy Ghost.

The reader will please to observe, who the persons were, on whom the apostles
laid their hands; and the plain reading will show that they were the men and
women, who believed and were baptized by Philip.

A man must be strangely infatuated with his own fancy, who would presume to
assert that the apostles laid hands only on some persons at Samaria, who were
thereby ordained as officers, when the word them plainly refers to the men and
women, who believed and were baptized.

We proceed to consider the example of the apostle Paul, Acts xix. 1, -- 6. To
assist the reader's memory, we will transcribe the verses, viz. Paul having
passed through the upper coasts, came to Ephesus: and finding certain
disciples, he said unto them, have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye
believed? And they said unto him, we have not so much as heard whether there be
any Holy Ghost. And he said unto them, unto what then were ye baptized? and
they said, unto John's baptism. Then said Paul, John verily baptized with the
baptism of repentance, saying unto the people, that they should believe on him,
who should come after him, that is, on Christ Jesus. When they heard this, they
were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. And when Paul had laid his hands
upon them, the Holy Ghost came on them; and they spoke with tongues, and
prophesied, and all the men were about twelve.

Here we have a plain history of facts, viz. Paul met some disciples at Ephesus
-- he asked them whether they had received the Holy Spirit. -- They appeared
strangers to the subject. -- Paul knowing that the Holy Ghost, in the capacity
of a comforter, was promised to all gospel believers, and that they were
baptized in the name of the Holy Ghost, as well as in the name of the Father
and Son; asks them unto what were they baptized? they told him, unto John's
baptism. -- Paul explains that, and points out what John taught respecting him,
who was to come after him, that is, Christ. -- When these disciples heard the
matter explained, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus. Then Paul
proceeds, and Laid his Hands on them, as the next ordinance following baptism;
and, no doubt, he then constituted them into a church. -- Lastly, the Holy
Ghost came on them, not only in the gifts and graces belonging to gospel
believers; but also the extraordinary gifts attended this holy institution at
this time, though it was not the apostles design in Laying his Hands upon them,
which we hope to prove, when we come to consider that head. Neither can we
suppose, that he ordained them all officers, for their circumstances could not
require it. -- We know what our opponents say on this passage, but we beg the
reader to suspend his judgment till he hears what may be said.

We will now follow the apostle to his Epistle to the Hebrews, chap. vi. 1, 2.
Therefore leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto
perfection; not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works, and
of faith toward God, of the doctrine of baptisms, and of Laying on of Hands,
and of resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment.

All the old fathers and divines, which I have seen, agree that this text
proves the Laying on of Hands on believers, as such, to be instituted by Christ
himself; and therefore it is mentioned with the important christian doctrines,
or doctrine of Christ, who is the head of the church, and lawgiver of his
people.

Such evidence of this truth appeared at the reformation, that the church of
England retained the ordinance, under the name of confirmation; but a very
learned divine in England, would persuade us that the passage refers to the old
dispensation, and therefore the Laying on of Hands refers to the priests laying
on their hands on the sacrifices. As we are forbid to call any man father or
master in religion, we must beg leave to see with our own eyes, and dissent
from him, and believe great and good men are but men, and what is hid sometimes
from the wise and prudent, is revealed to babes. Though we would pay the greatest
regard to the doctor's judgment, yet it is so ordered that no one man should
excel in all things.

Finding some of my brethren reasoning on the subject agreeable to the doctor's
exposition; it induced me to read the Epistle twice over; but instead of being
convinced of my mistake, it established me in the firm belief that the
sentiment was a groundless fancy, probably generated by Rabinical notions, of
which he only too much abounds.

We will give our reasons why we believe the passage does not refer to the
Mosaical dispensation. (1.) There is no mention made in all the epistle,
concerning the priests laying their hands on the sacrifice; nor any thing
plainly referring to that practice. -- (2.) The Mosaical rites are in no part
of scripture called the doctrines of Christ; but gospel truths are called so;
therefore comparing spiritual things with spiritual, we must conclude the
apostle means the doctrines of the New Testament, by the doctrines of Christ.
Let us attend to what the apostle John says, in his second epistle and 9th
verse. Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the doctrines of Christ,
has not God: he that abides in the doctrine of Christ, has both the Father
and the Son. Other texts might be quoted to the same purpose; but we dismiss
the passage for the present, though we shall have occasion to consider it again.
And we come to the Second proposition.

II. Which was, That none should be admitted to receive the Lord's Supper
without submission to this ordinance.

Before we investigate the subject, it is necessary to premise a few
particulars relative to the Lord's supper, and a gospel church.

1. We conceive the Lord's supper to be a church ordinance. Preaching the
gospel and baptism cannot be properly called church ordinances, because they
necessarily precede the very existence of a church. The Lord's supper was first
celebrated by our Redeemer among his apostles, and where no church exists, it
cannot be properly administered, because there can be no discipline without
confederation; it follows, therefore, if a thousand believers met together,
they could not orderly administer the Lord's supper, before they entered into
confederation, or a voluntary compact, by which they take on them the laws of
Christ, and engage submission to his authority on earth. I am not to be
understood that they should always meet in the same place; no, this is left to
their discretion, they may break bread from house to house.

2. Though we read not in what manner the apostles constituted a church of
Christ, yet we read of many churches, and some formality or voluntary act, must
have made them such.

We proceed now to investigate the proposition; and from every circumstance, it
seems very probable, that Peter and John were sent to Samaria for the very
purpose of constituting them into a gospel church. We find Barnabas sent to
Antioch on a similar occasion, and immediately we read of a church there, with
whom he and Paul assembled.

One end of Laying on of Hands might be to devote them to God as an house to
dwell in, and as the Lord's building, they prayed for them that they might
receive the Holy Ghost as a comforter, and be filled with his precious gifts
and graces, to enable them to bear witness for Christ, to confirm and
strengthen them to grow up to the fullness of the stature of a man in Christ
Jesus. The same may be said of the twelve men, whom Paul baptized at Ephesus,
Acts xix. for we conclude the holy apostle taught them to observe all things
commanded by Christ; he therefore devotes them to the Lord by Laying his Hands
on them; but with no view, that they should thereby receive the extraordinary
gifts of the Holy Ghost, for this would be taking the office of the Spirit on
himself, for it is the Spirit that distributes the gifts severally as he will.
We will illustrate this point, when we come to speak on that head.

If we grant there was a church constituted at Samaria, and another at Ephesus,
in which the Lord's Supper was administered, then we must conclude, Laying on
of Hands preceded the reception of the same.

Before we proceed further on the subject, we would give some reasons, why we
believe that Laying on of Hands was used, as an external act in devoting a
person or persons to God and his service. The scriptures show it was an ancient
custom, under the legal dispensation; and though now it is a gospel ordinance, we
may learn some things relative to it, by observing on what occasions it was
formerly used. It was the external act, by which the Levites were devoted to
God and his service. Numbers viii. 10. And thou shall bring the Levites before
the Lord, and the children of Israel shall put their hands upon the Levites.
Verse 14. Thus shall thou separate the Levites from among the children of
Israel: and the Levites shall be mine. The third and fourth chap. of Leviticus
prove that it was a fixed statute in offering all sacrifices for sin: whoever
brought an animal to a priest to be offered a sacrifice, he laid his hands on
it, thereby, not only transferring his sin figuratively, but also devoting it
to God; and this setting of the creature apart for a holy use, is called
sanctifying it, as it was wholly given to God. It was used formerly on some
other occasions, not necessary to mention at present. We are now considering it
as a New Testament institution, and see, by a parity of reasoning, one thing
taught by it is, when hands are laid on baptized believers, as such, that the
person, like the Levites, is devoted to God and his service; he is a living
sacrifice, separated from the services of sin, as the temple of the Holy Ghost
to dwell in, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, holy and acceptable to God,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Much has been said about the ordination of officers in the church; but taking
the Laying on of Hands in this point of view, we see it means no more than an
external act, by which the person is publicly devoted to God in that office,
and as this precedes his authority to administer other holy ordinances, so on
baptized believers, as such, it precedes their admittance to the Lord's supper.
It would be as regular, to allow a person to baptize, etc. before ordination,
as to admit any to the Lord's supper before submission to Laying on of Hands.

The objections, which arise against the one, will certainly militate against
the other, equally strong, if impartially examined. Before we pass from this
proposition, we will make some further remarks on Heb. vi. 1, 2.

Here you see six articles mentioned of the christian faith, and they are
called the principles of the doctrine of Christ, which implies they mean
something embraced, professed and performed in the beginning of a christian
life. 2. They are called foundation principles, "not laying again the
foundation." Some reasons have been already assigned, why we cannot believe
this passage refers to the priests Laying their Hands on the sacrifices; but
the groundlessness of the conjecture, will more fully appear, by making some
remarks on these principles. Let us consider them as they stand --

The words seem to be figurative, referring to a mechanic, who first lays a
foundation, and proceeds to finish the building; or in other words, brings it
to perfection, "Not laying again the foundation." Whatever may be the true
meaning of these six principles, we see, they are called a foundation.

We cannot suppose them to be the foundation of our salvation, for Christ is
that, and other foundation, in that point of view, can on man lay; we shall
therefore conclude them to be the foundation or beginning of the christian
life. In this sense, let us consider them distinctly. 1. Repentance from dead
works, is a phrase agreeing to New Testament language; here we are represented
to be dead in trespasses and sins, and our works, in that state, bring forth
fruit unto death. No man truly sets out in a new or christian life, while he
willingly retains one sin. A right eye must be plucked out, for we cannot serve
God and mammon. The love of sin in the heart, must be removed; and it is truly
so, when that precious word is accomplished, viz. A new heart will I give you,
and a new spirit will I put within you, Ezekiel. xxxvi. 26. Moreover, repentance
from dead works is never repeated, because the soul that is made alive in
Christ, never falls into a state of death. Repentance, as a backslider or
sinful child, may be often repeated, but repentance from dead works remains as
a foundation, or beginning to live in newness of life.

2. "Faith toward God," though on some accounts it might be applied to the legal
dispensation, yet it is much plainer to the mind of God revealed in the gospel,
where we are so often called upon to believe the testimony or record given of
his son. It is represented by our Lord as the principal work pleasing to God.
This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom he has sent, John vi. 29.
and the apostle John says, This is his commandment, that ye should believe on
the name of his son Jesus Christ, 1 John iii. 23. The same apostle represents
all who have not this faith toward God, as practically making him a liar, 1
John v. 10. Faith toward God includes in it, a firm belief of the whole
revelation, which he has made; and, in particular, credit of the record which
he has given of his Son. This faith is the beginning of a gospel life, in
which we live a life of faith on the Son of God.

3. The doctrine of baptisms stands agreeable to the gospel order, in which
repentance and faith precede it. Baptism is a beginning, foundation principle
of newness of life, and therefore is never repeated, because we are once dead
with Christ -- once buried with him in baptism -- once raised up to walk in
newness of life.

Baptism is here in the plural number, because more things than one is meant by
it. Not only immersion in water and the extraordinary effusions of the Spirit;
but persecutions and sufferings for Christ's sake. Our blessed Lord taught us,
that if any man would come after him, he must deny himself and take up his
cross and follow him. And in another place, he says, In the world, ye shall
have tribulation. The apostle Paul taught the same doctrine, when he said, That
we must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God.

The 4th principle is Laying on of Hands. This is performed at our first
embracing christianity, and, as it is never repeated, it is therefore a
beginning of a new life. We are once made partakers of the Holy Ghost as a
comforter, and once devoted to God as his temple to dwell in. If a person is
ordained to an office in the church, it is repeated as an external act devoting
the person to God in that office; hence we read of Timothy first having the
hands of Paul laid on him, as a believer, and afterward, the hands of the
presbytery were laid on him, when he was ordained an officer in the church.

In respect to the two remaining principles, it is scarcely necessary to
observe, that they stand in the very language of the New Testament; and it
requires a wisdom, which is not from above, to apply the words to the Old
Testament; though it is acknowledged the doctrine is contained therein, but the
apostle in this epistle has not treated of such passages in the Old Testament
as refer to the subject. Whoever reads the New Testament, must be convinced,
that the resurrection of the dead, and eternal judgment, are subjects
frequently insisted on in a very peculiar manner. We shall just observe, that
we are baptized in hopes of the resurrection from the dead, and we wait for the
coming of Christ to judge the world, when he will change our vile body, that it
may be fashioned like unto his glorious body.

From what was been said, we hope it does appear, that this passage in the
Hebrews refers to the New Testament dispensation; and if so, it follows, that
when the Hebrews were constituted into a church, they submitted to this holy
ordinance, as the external ministration of the Spirit; and by which, they were
devoted as an habitation for God to dwell in. And if, at the first constitution
of the church, it was used, it follows, that when any join the church, they
ought to follow the example set before them.

III. We come now to consider the Third proposition, which was, That Laying on
of Hands was not instituted, nor ever used, to confer the extraordinary gifts
of the holy Spirit.

Why any person should conclude that the extraodinary gifts of the Spirit, was
the end of the institution, we know not, except they argue that as these gifts
attended the administration, they were therefore the end. The absurdity of this
way of reasoning will appear, before we dismiss the subject. Had this been the
end, we might reasonably expect, that the apostles would have given some
intimation of the same; but as there is none on record, we infer, it was not
the design.

We will examine the passages, where it is supposed the apostles used it to
confer the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit; and if it appears, that it was
not their design in the administration of this ordinance, then we hope, the
point will be given up, and we shall truly unite in the apostles practice.

We will review the verses already transcribed, viz. Acts viii. 14 -- 17. and
we find the matters of fact are the following, 1. Peter and John were sent from
Jerusalem to Samaria. 2. When they came, they prayed for them that they might
receive the Holy Ghost. 3. They laid their hands on them, and they received the
Holy Ghost. Not one word of the extraordinary gifts, "They received the Holy
Ghost." The scripture does not say, that the apostles even prayed for any
particular gift, ordinary, or extraordinary; but that they might receive the
Holy Ghost HIMSELF. Observe that, verse 15. If it is thought, by receiving the
Holy Ghost, the extraordinary gifts are meant, and none have them gifts now, it
follows, that none have the Spirit now, which is positively contrary to the
promise of Christ, who says, the comforter shall abide with us ever, John xiv.
16. Now, if we are not obliged to believe that by receiving the Holy Ghost, the
extraordinary gifts are meant, then nothing is proved against us from this
passage.

Not one word is said about speaking with tongues, or working miracles; and if
these effects had followed, it would not prove it was the design of the act,
but an attendant of it, for the ratification of the same, as will appear
hereafter. We will not dispute but the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit
attended the administration of the ordinance; but these gifts were distributed,
when, where, and in what manner, the Holy Ghost himself willed. These gifts are
in his hands, and not in the hands of man, or subject to his will. Moreover, if
hands were laid on persons to confer the extraordinary gifts, then we would
ask, was this always the end? If it is answered in the affirmative, then it
follows, that the ordinance should not be used now, at the ordination of
ministers, because formerly a gift attended it, 1 Timothy iv. 14.

We have no reason to believe that the extraordinary gifts always attended,
this ordinance in the apostles days, because, had this been the case, there
could have been no room for this question. Do all speak with tongues? 1 Cor.
xii. 30. We would recommend to our reader to open his Bible, and read to the
12th verse of this chapter, and he will plainly see that all the gifts were in
the hands of the Spirit, and distributed according to his own will.

The proceedings of Peter and John at Samaria agree to this doctrine, when they
prayed for them that they might receive the Holy Ghost. And here an important
question arises, viz. Whether the apostles meant the extraordinary gifts of the
Holy Ghost? or whether they meant the receiving the Holy Ghost, in his office
as the comforter and spirit of consolation? In the latter sense, he is promised
to dwell in his people, to the end of the world, and this meaning we prefer;
because the extraordinary gifts are not promised to all true believers in
Christ, consequently, the the apostles could not pray for them in faith; but
the Holy Spirit, as a comforter, is a legacy promised to all that truly
believe, to the end of the world; therefore in this capacity they prayed for
him. And I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another comforter, that
he may abide with you forever; even the Spirit of truth, John xiv. 16, 17.
Moreover, the apostles were sent to Samaria for the comfort of true believers,
but the extraordinary gifts were for a sign to them that believe not,
consequently not prayed for in this place. This way of reasoning agrees with
peter's conduct, when his hearers asked what shall we do? His answer was,
Repent, and be baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the
remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. For the
promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even
as many as the Lord our God shall call, Acts ii. 37 -- 39. This promise must be
fulfilled to all, whom the Lord our God shall call; but the extraordinary gifts
are not conferred on any, in our days, and never were conferred on all in the
apostles days, consequently, the Holy Ghost in his office as a comforter, must
be meant.

It is granted that the extraordinary gifts did attend the administration of
this ordinance, Acts xix. 6. But this does not prove that Paul laid his hands
on them for that end. And this will appear by making some remarks on the
passage. 1. Paul finds disciples at Ephesus, and asks them, Have ye received
the Holy Ghost, since ye believed? where note, the very question implies that
the Holy Ghost is the common privilege of all the children of God, and is
enjoyed, in a greater or lesser measure, by every true believer; but the
extraordinary gifts were never either promised or enjoyed by every saint,
therefore could not be meant by the apostle. 2. The question shows, that
agreeable to the apostle's meaning, every believer receives the Spirit after
believing, and not before, which must mean receiving him in his office as a
comforter. Hence we read, After ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy
Spirit of promise. 3. If the extraordinary gifts had been meant, it would have
been as natural for the apostle to have asked, "Do ye speak with tongues, or
work miracles?" Nay, the extraordinary gifts were so visible, that he might
have seen them without asking. 4. He speaks of the Holy Ghost as that which all
might expect, who truly believed and were baptized in the name of the trinity,
Unto what then were ye baptized? They told him, it was unto John's baptism.
Paul explains the nature of that, and of baptism after Christ's ascension,
which would lead him to speak of the Spirit as a promised comforter. When they
were instructed, he baptized them in the name of the Lord Jesus; and then
proceeds according to gospel order, and Lays his Hands on them, and the Holy
Ghost came on them; and they spoke with tongues and prophesied. From no
circumstance can we infer, that Paul laid his hands on them, to confer the
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit.

It is true, that here the extraordinary gifts attended and followed the Laying
on of Hands, and so did they attend and follow preaching, praying and meeting;
will any one say, this was the end of these divine institutions? By no means,
the gifts of God are bestowed when and where he pleases. We are in hopes, that
we have proved to a demonstration, and full satisfaction of all, who wish to
know the mind of the Lord, that hands were laid on none with any view of
conferring the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit; but, on the other hand, the
apostles used this holy institution as the external act, by which the Holy
Ghost was given to true believers, in the character and capacity of a
comforter, or a spirit of consolation. And although God has not confined
himself to any means, yet he has confined us in our waiting on him; and this
is called instituted worship. This point might be further illustrated, but we
come to the Fourth proposition, which was

IV. That the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Spirit, which at first attended
the Laying on of Hands, afford an argument to prove the continuance of the
ordinance.

The glorious gospel contained mysteries so far transcending the human
understanding, that God was graciously pleased to attend its first
promulgation, with such marks of his majesty and power, that every objection
might be silenced, and the opponents remain without excuse. It could never be
supposed, that the supreme would impose on his creatures, by such exertions of
his divinity as were displayed, by raising the dead, restoring sight to the
blind, casting out devils, curing complaints of body without medicines,
speaking with tougues never learned, foretelling exactly future events. When
these things attended the gospel, they were certain proofs that it was of God;
hence the apostle tells us, that God confirmed the gospel, with signs and
wonders, and diverse miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own
will, Heb. ii. 4.

By reading the scriptures, we see, in what manner God confirmed his own
institutions, by the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit; yet this is never used
as an argument against the continuance of other ordinances; and why it is
advanced against the Laying on of Hands, we know not, excepting it is the case,
that we are only too great strangers to the Spirit, in the capacity of a
comforter. To illustrate the proposition a little more, we will consider a few
passages of scripture; and the first we would present is Acts ii. 1 -- 4.

Here we read of no other duty performed only assembling together in one place,
when the extraordinary gifts were distributed. -- Shall we reason from hence,
because these gifts do not attend our assembling together now, therefore, it is
no duty? or shall we not say, it was thereby confirmed as a duty? 2. When Peter
and John prayed, the place where they were assembled was shaken; and they were
all filled with the Holy Ghost, Acts iv. 31. But such power and gifts of the
Spirit do not now attend praying, shall we therefore pray no more? has it
ceased to be a duty? 3. When Peter preached at the house of Cornelius, the Holy
Ghost fell on all his hearers, and they spoke with tongues, Acts x. 44 -- 46.
But no such gifts now attend preaching, must it therefore cease? If our
brethren reason consistently and are right, assembling, preaching, and praying
are no longer to be performed, because the extraordinary gifts do not attend
them.

Perhaps some will object, that this was not the end proposed in the examples
produced. We grant it is the truth; and constantly affirm, that the
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit was not the end of Laying on of Hands in the
instances produced; and therefore the extraordinary gifts are an equally
forcible argument for the continuance of it. Why do our brethren lay hands on
ministers at their ordination? There was a gift attended Timothy's ordination,
1 Timothy iv. 14. but none attends it now, must it therefore be performed no more?
By no means, because, almost all the divine institutions were at first
confirmed by signs and wonders, and diverse gifts of the Holy Ghost. Therefore,
while meeting, preaching, praying and ordination continue in the church, we
must conclude, from similar reasoning, that Laying on of Hands should likewise
continue, being confirmed by the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit.

V. We come now to the last proposition, which was, That one end of this holy
ordinance was to comfort, confirm and strengthen true believers, by additional
measures and gifts of the Holy Ghost.

From what has been already said, the reader will see, that we consider the
Holy Spirit in different points of view, bearing different appellations
according to his work and relation to us. The Spirit of God does regenerate us,
and therefore we are said to be born of the Spirit, John iii. 6. In this
spiritual birth, he does not act in the capacity of a comforter; but as a
spirit of sanctification and holiness. This necessarily precedes his operations
as a comforter. Perhaps, one reason of difficulties in the mind of some, may be
for want of this distinction, respecting the Spirit of God; yet it is necessary
to be preserved, or we cannot understand what is meant by the Spirit's coming
after the ascension of Christ, and not before.

We are not to think, that God has bound himself to any ordinance or duty, in
such a manner, that when one is performed by us, the other must be performed by
him; he still remains a sovereign, and may work, when, where, and in what
manner he pleases, yet he has ordained in what manner we are to wait on him.
And we are encouraged, by his gracious promise, that they who wait on him,
shall renew their strength, Isaiah xl. 31. Our attendance on all the divine
institutions, is waiting on the Lord, and though we do not feel our strength
renewed, yet it is our duty to wait on him in his own appointments.

The Holy Ghost, as a teacher and comforter, is promised by Christ, to all true
believers under the gospel dispensation, John xiv. 15, 16, 26. In this
capacity, we receive him. In this capacity, we may expect him in Laying on of
Hands. In this capacity, we believe, he shall remain with his people to the end
of the world; for in this capacity they need him, seeing that no man can call
Jesus Lord, but by the Holy Ghost. The apostles were born of God long before
Christ's ascension, yet they received not the Spirit, in his work and office as
a comforter, till the day of Pentecost.

We presume no considerate christian will say, that they received only the
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, when the promise contained what is
incomparably more excellent, even the Spirit of God himself in his office as a
comforter. In this capacity, he increases every grace implanted in us as a
Spirit of holiness, till we grow up to the fullness of the stature of a man in
Christ Jesus.

It is said of the Ephesians, after that they believed, they were sealed with
that holy Spirit of promise, Ephesians. i. 13. mark the expression, "after you
believed," etc. not before. The Holy Ghost as a Spirit of sanctification works
faith in us, and implants every grace in our hearts: these graces are increased
in us afterward, by the power of the Holy Ghost, hence we are said to grow in
grace. Where he begins a good work, he carries it on to perfection, in the use
of all the means appointed by the head of the church; hence it is, that we wait
on the Lord in the ordinance of Laying on of Hands, as well as others, for our
growth of grace and joy in the Holy Ghost.

Perhaps some may think, they have as much of the Spirit as those, who submit
to the Laying on of Hands, and therefore it is not necessary. Whoever reasons
after this manner, speaks not like a servant of the Lord, but rather assumes to
be his master, who would dictate unto him. If any would choose to show their
faith by disobedience, we think it best to show our faith by obedience. Peter's
hearers received the baptism of the Holy Ghost, nevertheless they were baptized
in the name of the Lord, and by the express command of Peter.

Some people despise baptism and the Lord's supper, under pretense that they
have all that is meant by those outward things; shall we conclude, that they
speak as christians? or must we not conclude that their language and conduct is
unbecoming the gospel of Christ? because he has appointed all his ordinances
for our growth in grace. The apostle enumerates the graces implanted in the
soul, when it is born of God, which are these, viz. Love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, and temperance, Gal. v.
22, 23. Now the holy Spirit as our comforter increases these graces, till we
come to the fullness of the stature of a man in Christ Jesus. Verily, there is
nothing more wanted in all our churches, than greater measures of the holy
Spirit.

Here is cause of lamentation, that any disturbance has been made, by the
imprudent conduct of some of our brethren in the ministry. We are afraid they
have not considered the consequences of their conduct, for we are thereby in
great danger of confusion in our churches, which will soon end in a separation.
The blame must lie at their door, who admit members into the church without
Laying on of Hands, for we are bound in conscence to keep the ordinances as we
received them; and are obliged to withdraw from every brother, who walks
disorderly. I shall conclude with a short address to the churches.

Dearly beloved in the Lord,
"YE have now considered the arguments for the continuance of this holy
ordinance. Whether they appear of force to you or not, they have confirmed me
abundantly. By investigating the subject, the objections against the
institution appear groundless, and have had their rise chiefly from not
considering the holy Spirit in his office as a comforter. The apostle exhorts
us to content earnestly for the faith once delivered to the saints, and to be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment, keeping
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. Beware of innovations. -- Mark
them who cause divisions contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned. Study
discipline. No article of faith should be left to vote either in a church, or
an association, for by following this example every truth may be voted away.
Some dispute the doctrine of predestination and election; was it left to vote,
it would be excluded from our Confession of Faith, provided the majority were
Arminians. Let the word of Christ dwell richly in you, and pray for greater
measures of the holy Spirit; for it is the Spirit that can lead you into all
truth, and seal you to the day of redemption.

"We hope the subject has been so explained, that ye see plainly the apostles
used the Laying on of Hands, on believers, as such, and that it never was
performed with any view of conferring the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit;
these were distributed, when and where it pleased the holy Spirit, but no
ordinance was instituted for that purpose. Sometimes, they attended meeting,
preaching, and praying, and sometimes, they did not, even in the apostles days.
No argument, worthy of notice, can be advanced from such distributions of the
Spirit. One thing is certain, which is this, that once it was in practice, and
none can be sure, it should cease. Why should the peace of Zion be disturbed
for an uncertainty? If it ceases to be adminiftered on believers, as such, you
see, by similar reasoning, it should not be used in the ordination of
ministers; therefore if any practice the one, and refuse the other, we must
accuse them of inconsistency and partiality. Finally, beloved brethren, ye see
your situation, ye are the temple of the Holy Ghost. Grieve not the holy
Spirit, whereby ye are sealed to the day of redemption. Defile not the temple
of the holy Spirit. Pray that your ministers may be filled with the Spirit, to
speak the word with clearness and boldness, and that ye yourselves may hear in
the Spirit. The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and the
communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all. Amen."


FINIS.

