ROBINSON CRUSOE.


TRAVELS OF Robinson Crusoe.

WRITTEN BY HIMSELF.

WORCESTER (MASSACHUSETTS) PRINTED BY ISAIAH THOMAS, AND SOLD AT HIS
BOOK-STORE, MDCCLXXXVI:

Where may be had a Variety of little Books for Children.

TRAVELS, etc.
WITH permission, reader, I will relate to you the particulars of my life, and
as but few persons, I fancy, ever experienced more difficulties, it will
probably be in my power to entertain you.

I was born in the year 1632, at York; My father Mr. Crusoe, having acquired a
very considerable fortune as a merchant, chose that City to spend the residue
of his life comfortably in; but alas, how imperfect is worldly happiness! when
we fancy ourselves at the very eve of possession, up starts an unexpected
something which embitters the whole; for good soul, he had, with the highest
reputation to himself, surmounted all the difficulties in trade. Happy to see
me growing up promisingly, when on a sudden over all was spread the most horrid
gloominess; he discovered my resolution of going to sea. One morning he called
me into his chamber, and with tears in his eyes, expostulated with me very
freely on the subject, "What can possess thee, my child, said he, for wishing
to leave thy native Kingdom, depend on it, travel where you will, by land or by
water, never will you put foot into any country where the blessings of life are
more generously disposed among all ranks of people, and their lives and
liberties more preserved; or into a climate more adapted to thy constitution,
than is enjoyed in the very country you live (...) happily in, and which you
now ack^d to me you have resolved upon (...) If the advice of a father, said
he, (...) our opinion worth following, by all means banish from your mind such
a foolish scheme; you must be laughed at for it by the whole world, as a lad
wanting capacity; nay, yourself must confess the idea preposterous; such a
resolution is madness in you, which possibly might be prudence in another, lad,
for instance, was you the son of a poor man, and had got into bad company
wherein your character had suffered, in that instance the resolution of going
into strange countries, with the intent of retrieving your character and
fortune would be commendable; but as you are by my industry, placed above the
probability of want, and I am convinced you are as much respected by your
acquaintance as ever boy was, what can possess thee to think of leaving such
happiness; and take my word, child, if you persist in the resolution, It will
bring on you many an aching heart," which words I had too much reason to
remember: However I was obstinate, and the first ship that sailed from Hull
carried me to London. I was then about nineteen years of age, and being in
company with some captains, I said in conversation, it was my desire to see the
World; one of them answered he would take me with him, passage free, if I chose
to go his voyage, which was to Guinea, I readily accepted this offer, and in
about seven days the ship sailed. We had very boisterous weather from the time
we left the Downs, and at last was taken prisoner by ^ Moorish Rover, who
carried us into Sallee; the cruelty I experienced in this country made me
resolve to attempt an escape the first opportunity, but it was full three years
before I had the least chance of effecting it. About that time, our governor
coming into the cells one morning, said, he wanted some fish for a grand
entertainment, and if either of the European slaves understood the art of
fishing, he should have the liberty of going with the negro and his boy, in a
pinnace; now, as it was always my favorite diversion, I answered, if he would
suffer me to go, I had no doubt of bringing home double the quantity of fish he
wanted. He consented, and while the negro and his lad were getting the boat
ready, I was busy in carrying in provision, thinking this no bad opportunity
for me to escape. The boat was presently got ready, away we sailed, and at the
distance of two leagues from the shore, the old Negro prepared to fish, and
stooping over the side of the pinnace to place the net properly, I suddenly
took hold of his legs and threw him headlong into the sea; then taking up one
of the muskets (which were always kept loaded in the boat) I levelled it at his
head, and vowed, that unless he immediately turned round and swam toward the
shore, (for he was attempting to get into the boat again) I would blow his
brains out, and as he was an excellent swimmer, I knew it was in his power to
reach it. The Negro finding me resolute, turned toward the shore, and
immediately I turned to the boy who was steering the boat, and told him, that
if he would obey my orders, he should fare as I did, which he agreed to, and we
now stood out to sea. As there was a very brisk wind, I presently found myself
out of the Emperor of Morocco's dominions. Next day as the boat was sailing
under the shore of some Country I was a stranger to, of a sudden we heard a
dreadful howling near us; I must confess I was much frightened, but more so on
seeing a monstrous beast dash himself into the water, and swim toward us; when
he was within about ten yards of the boat I levelled my gun at his head and
fired, which must I think very near have killed him, as he was a considerable
time in returning to the shore.

The Negro boy advised me to turn the boat and follow him, but as we had so
providentially escaped being devoured, I thought it not proper to run into more
danger than was necessary, so I ordered him to keep his course, and directly
loaded my gun again, for there was plenty of ammunition in the boat: We now
felt the want of nothing but fresh water, and that article we were horridly
distressed for. I was exceedingly pleased with the lad, for he cheerfully
offered to go on shore with a great pitcher, and try to find some, but by no
means would I suffer that until we had made the boat fast, and I was ready to
go along with my two guns; we traveled full a mile up the country, and at last
were fortunate enough to meet with an excellent spring; we were filling the
pitcher, when on a sudden, the lad cried, see, Massa, see, I turned round, and
at about fifty yards distance, under a tree, sat the greatest Lion my eyes ever
beheld, just on the point of darting at us; my guns I had laid on the grass,
but instantly snatching up the nearest, fired, and sound I had wounded him. It
was lucky I had two guns with me, else I had never lived to have related these
strange adventures, for, instead of the Lion's running away, after I wounded
him, he jumped from the tree, in the greatest anger, toward us, and I had but
just time to level the second gun which dispatched him.



I was very thankful to God for my wonderful escape, and having found what we
went on shore for, proceeded to make the utmost haste to the boat. We sailed
along until at length we met with a Portuguese ship, which took us on board.
The Captain bought the boat and the boy of me, and landed me at the Brasils,
where I hired a plantation and lived comfortably for some time, but was again
tempted to go to sea, in a ship bound for the Guinea trade. We kept sailing on,
quite ignorant where going to, until the most dreadful storm surrounded us,
surely, which ever man beheld; in a few minutes the sky turned black as night,
though half an hour before the sun told me it was noon, the sea rolled
mountains high, every instant we expected to be our last, one moment we were
lifted on the top of a wave five times higher than St. PAUL'S, and the next
plunged as low. At last we got out the boat, exhausted with fatigue, several
were washed overboard and lost. I was too much agitated to admit a single
thought respecting them, for in a few minutes afterward the boat went to the
bottom. The first thing I recollect, was lying on the shore, and seeing the
water roll toward me and taking me about a mile into the sea; another wave
would bring me on shore, and leave me there a minute or two; then another took
me out to sea again; in this manner was I suspended between life and death,
until a very large wave, driving into shore, carried me so far on the sands,
that the next did not touch me, and the storm abating, there was I left, until
by degrees I recovered the use of my reason, and the first act, I applied it
to, was to thank God my life was saved, in a case wherein there was some
minutes before scarce any room to hope. When the storm abated, I saw the wreck
of the ship at a distance, and swam to it, and brought off a dog, which was the
only thing alive on board, two guns, and many necessaries.

Though I had so wonderfully escaped the dangers of the ocean, I now had the
fear of wild beasts before me, a proof this life is intended only as a life of
trouble, for I am fully persuaded, none living, let their fortunes, friends,
healths, etc, be ever so extensive and valuable, can truly assert they are now
perfectly happy.

When I had recovered strength to rise, I walked into the country, and had got
about three miles from the sea, without seeing any thing but goats, hares, and
an immense number of wild fowls, when reaching a very high hill, I there had
the opportunity of viewing the country. I found it to be an island about ten
miles long, five broad, and very woody; an hundred gloomy ideas presented
themselves at this instant, I began to fancy Providence preserved me from the
dangers of the water, only to torture me with a more cruel and tedious death;
but this reflection I was angry at, so I jumped from the ground, and with a
thought full of industry, said God has done such wonderful kindnesses for me,
it is infamous and ungrateful in me to complain; here are fowls, goats, and
hares in abundance, and it is strange if I cannot hunt for food; all I have to
pray for, is, that it is not inhabited by wild creatures who will devour me,
which thank God, was not the case.

No human creature but myself was on the island, or any offensive animal to
molest me. On this island I lived fifteen years, subsisting the whole time on
milk, (for I had caught some young goats, and brought them up tame) and what
fowls I took in the woods, by laying springs and traps in the night. One day,
about noon, going into the woods after some of my bird traps, I thought I
should have sunk to the ground, through fear, every joint of me trembled at the
sight, it was the print of a man's foot. Good God! O! what did I see, I was
confident it was not the mark of my own, for besides it being a deal larger, I
had not been in that part for a month, and that print was quite fresh. I ran
like lightning to my home, which was a kind of cave, overgrown with trees, and
threw myself down on a parcel of dry leaves, which for some years, had served
me as a bed, there I lay three days and nights, without a morsel of food or
sleep, so distressed was I at discovering there was on the island, more human
creatures than myself, who, I feared, would murder me; hunger at last obliged
me to look for food, and surely never poor creature ventured out of his hiding
place so fearfully, as I did out of my cave.

I was terrified at every leaf that moved, but having no further reason to
fancy my fears well-grounded, I concluded the mark was from my own foot, so was
tolerably easy; but soon afterward I was thoroughly convinced of the contrary,
for ranging through the woods, as was my usual custom, for food, I discovered
one day five canoes full of savages, within half a league of the shore, and
making to it as fast as they possibly could. I secreted myself near enough to
discover what they were about, and found the canoes landed all the Indians, but
two of them were chained together, who cried piteously; they presently made a
large fire, cut the throat of one of the two, broiled his flesh on the fire,
and eat it; never did I behold a sight which filled me with horror equal to
this, however, shocked as I was, prudence kept me quiet. When they had eat as
much of the poor creature as they chose, they were preparing to dispatch the
other, but just as they had unbound him, and going to give the finishing
stroke, by the greatest agility I ever beheld, he slipped under their arms, and
run into the woods; he made toward the place where I lay concealed, and on
that account I was alarmed for my own safety; three of the savages I saw follow
him, and as I knew nothing but a stout resistance on my part could be of
service, I took care to have my guns loaded and in order to receive them;
presently the savage who was to have been roasted, came running quite out of
breath, he was ready to die at the sight of me, thinking that he had only run
from one danger to another, so endeavored to avoid me but that I prevented; he
then fell on the ground, and taking hold of one of my feet, put his head on the
earth and my foot upon it, which I considered as a token of his wish to be my
servant, it turned out so, and a more faithful, diligent fellow never lived;
his pursuers soon gave him up, and returned to their own country.



Every day I had been on the island I made a notch in a piece of wood, to act
as my almanac, by that means I was informed, even in this melancholy island,
which was the Sabbath, and most part of that day, on my knees, I spent in
prayer. This wooden almanac now told me it was Friday the savages came, so
having no other name at hand, I christened my new servant FRIDAY. I soon taught
him to understand me, and as he was a very industrious fellow, I now lived with
less trouble than before I had him, for he easily killed game enough for us
both. In this state five years passed without having another visit from the
Barbarians; at that time we discovered several canoes making toward our shore,
Friday said he was sure they were on the same business again, so I ordered him
to fetch my two guns with ammunition from the cave, and said, "now Friday will
you stand by me and help to prevent those horrid savages from accomplishing
their cruel purpose;" he quickly answered, " Yes indeed, Masser, yes, indeed,
Masser, me will, me will." As I knew the man to be honest, I could depend upon
him, so I resolved to do all in my power to prevent the scene they were going
to exhibit. When Friday returned, the savages had got out of their canoes, so I
found no time was to be lost; away we ran, each having a loaded gun, and placed
ourselves behind a very large tree, entirely unseen, and at the distance of
about fifty yards; five prisoners were chained, and eight savages pulling them
out of the canoes, and placing them in a row. I saw the fire kindling, "now
said I, Friday, do your best and support me," and then rushed upon them with
the courage and strength of lions; in less than five minutes six of the
wretches lay dead upon the sands, and the other two leaping into the sea, no
doubt, were drowned. I then turned to the five poor souls who stood trembling,
and expecting me to serve them as I had the others; but presently I convinced
them of my friendship. I now thought poor Friday was really distracted, until I
learned his joy was occasioned by the sight of his father, who was one of the
five we happily saved,

The other four were Spaniards, all prisoners, taken in war a few days before,
by the savage nation, and their practice was to eat all those who fell into
their hands.

We were now seven in number, and very fortunately an English merchant ship,
homeward bound, was by contrary winds drove near our island; we made a large
fire in the woods one night to convince the crew of the ship the island was
inhabited; next morning twenty sailors came on shore well armed, we soon
convinced them of our friendship, and treated them with the best the island
produced; in return they generously took us on board to Liverpool, from thence
I went to York, but was greatly shocked at the news I received; my rambling
disposition, I found had brought my dear father and mother to their graves;
they both died soon after I left Hull.

I cannot express the agony it now causes in me; I consider myself entirely as
the author of their deaths and though property sufficient is left for me to
live like a gentleman, I cannot have peace to enjoy it; and at this moment I
really believe myself the most miserable object living, and heartily I repent
giving way to the restless disposition which made me leave my parents, as from
that hour I date all the subsequent misfortunes of my life.

Now as many of my readers, from a wild inclination of their own, or from the
advice of bad children, may wish to ramble from one country to another, they
may rest assured by me, that it will only bring them into distress; for every
word of my father's advice, when he called me into his chamber, I fatally found
strictly to be true.

Note. -- If you learn this Book well, and are good, you can buy a larger and
more complete History of Mr. Crusoe, at your friend the Bookseller's, in
WORCESTER, near the COURTHOUSE.

Of taking our PARENTS ADVICE.
The boy who counsel does despise,
And will not listen to the wise,
But stubbornly pursues his will,
May run his nose against a mill.


AS Wat Wilful a very naughty boy, who would never take his parents advice, was
playing by a windmill, his father called to him, " Wat! come away, sirrah, or
the mill will beat you in pieces." Wilful, however, did not regard his father,
but kept running about, until at last he got into the way of the mill and was
thrown with great violence into the muddy pond, where you now see him lie. Here
the rogue roared to some purpose, and the people who stood by laughed at him.
How came you there? says one. Oh! the mill tossed me in, says Wat. Why did not
you do as your father bid you, and have played further from the mill? says the
man; lie there, sirrah, and learn to behave better. So no body would help him
out. At last the poor old father came, and taking up the g^^^less rouge, wiped
the mud off his face, and laid a good stick upon his back, that he might
remember for the future, that it was his duty and his interest to take his
parents advice.




A DIALOGUE between a little good Boy and Girl, which if rightly attended to,
will show them how they may be wiser than the rest of their school-fellows.
Miss. HOW is Time divided?


Master. Into Years, Months, Weeks, Days, Hours, and Minutes.


Mi. How many Months are there in a Year?


Ma. Twelve.


Mi. What are their Names?


Ma. January, February, March, April, May, June, July, August, September,
October, November, December.


Mi. Repeat the Verses which tell us how many Days there are in each Month.


Ma. Thirty Days has September, April, June, and November; February has
twenty-eight alone, And all the rest have thirty-one.


Mi. How many Weeks are there in a Month?


Ma. Four.


Mi. How many Days in a Week?


Ma. Seven.


Mi. What are their Names?


Ma. Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday.


Mi. How many Hours are there in a Day?


Ma. Twenty-four.


Mi. How many Minutes in an Hour?


Ma. Sixty.


Mi. Very well, tell me how numbers are made.


Ma. By Units, Tens, Hundreds, Thousands, and Millions.


Mi. What is an Unit?


Ma. It is One.


Mi. How many is Ten?


Ma. It is ten Times one.


Mi. How many is a Hundred?


Ma. Ten Times Ten.


Mi. How many is a Thousand?


Ma. Ten Hundred.


Mi. How many is a Million?


Ma. Ten Hundred Thousand, or a Thousand Thousands.


'T was in this ship, which sailed from Hull,
That Crusoe did embark;
Which did him vex, and much perplex,
And broke his parents heart.





