CONSIDERATIONS ON THE PROPOSED REMOVAL OF THE SEAT of GOVERNMENT, ADDRESSED TO
THE CITIZENS OF MARYLAND, BY ARISTIDES.

ANNAPOLIS: PRINTED BY FREDERICK GREEN, PRINTED TO THE STATE.

Considerations, etc.
SOME time ago Aristides addressed you on a motion which had been made in the
house of delegates for a removal of the seat of government; he was instantly
attacked by a pair of writers, whose chief aim seems to have been to depreciate
his character. There is, however, a third, who expresses a regard for decency,
who premises that he will behave like a gentleman, and examine the reasons of
Aristides with candor and moderation; it is to him only that Aristides thinks
proper to reply.

In the Farmer's second paragraph, he seems to have forgotten the promise he
had just before made; he taxes Aristides with sinister ambitious views, and
with feeling a malignant pleasure in the prospect of preventing a great public
good. Let us then examine this matter, as he says, with the "critical eyes of
unerring truth."

From whom flowed the proposition to the general assembly? Who are the men that
clamor for the measure? The community at large, feeling no inconvenience, were
content that things should remain as they are, and, without the suggestions of
the Farmer and his coadjutors, would not have probably thought of a change. The
citizens of Annapolis were opposed to their own destruction; no shadow of
argument had been offered to demonstrate, that by quietly giving up their
interests, they would have a merit in sacrificing to the public good.
Notwithstanding all this, the Farmer, for their conduct on this occasion,
reproaches them for yielding to the "never failing influence of private
interest." No practice is more common with mankind, than that of condemning in
their neighbors the faults most conspicuous in themselves; it arises from the
vain expectation of deceiving the world. But the Farmer's intelligent readers
must have anticipated me in the remark.

Has the Farmer then, by his first publication, given a satisfactory answer to
the reasons of Aristides respecting the power of the legislature? He has chosen
for his publication that paper which has the most general circulation, the
editor of which had refused a place to Aristides; he sometimes quotes part of a
sentence from Aristides, but it is impossible for his readers, from his state,
to comprehend what was the reasoning of Aristides. It is on these
considerations that Aristides adopts this mode of publication, in which he will
recapitulate some of his former observations, and add such remarks as have
since occurred on a more mature deliberation.

The 9th article of the declaration of rights directs, that a place for the
meeting of the legislature ought to be fixed, the most convenient to the
members thereof, and to the depository of the public records; and the
legislature ought not to be convened, or held, at any other place, but from
evident necessity. The 61st and last clause of the constitution and form of
government, directs the first legislature to meet at Annapolis, on Monday the
tenth of February 1777. I contend, that from the true construction of that
article and this clause, taken together, Annapolis is the place fixed for the
meeting of the legislature; and that a diligent attention to every other part
of the declaration and constitution, which has any relation to the subject,
will evince my position.

If the convention did not mean, by these two parts, to fix the legislature at
Annapolis, it is extremely probable that the 61st clause would have gone
further, and directed the legislature "then and there to appoint a place where
it shall be convened in future;" or, "then and there to appoint a place where
it shall be held during the war, after which a place shall be fixed, agreeably
to the 9th article of the declaration."

The surest way of finding the true construction of a law, admitting of two
constructions, is to examine the consequences of each, and this construction is
to be made, from examining and comparing all the different parts. The
declaration and the form of government I consider as making one law, or which
is the same thing, as consisting of a variety of laws, all having relation to
each other, and made by one body of men, at one meeting.

I first (...), What possible inconvenience or incongruity can flow from my
construction? Can it be conceived, that an injury can result to the community
by continuing the seat of a government at a place where it has so long been
held, until two general assemblies shall concur in an act for its removal? It
may indeed be urged, that a wise, politic assembly, may sometimes pass an act
tending greatly to the public good, and their immediate successors may be so
blind, or so perverse, as to withold their concurrence; be it so; suppose
then the seat of government removed by this single wise, politic assembly, May
not their unworthy successors, by another single act, undo what they have done?
And, if that should be the case, would it not be infinitely better that the
thing never had been done?

In support of my construction, I maintained, that the convention, in the
declaration of rights, laid down rules and maxims for their own government,
whilst afterward they should be framing the constitution, as well as for the
government of all future legislatures, whilst they should be framing laws; and
that part of the 61st clause of the one was made in obedience to the 9th
article of the other. To this I am told, that it would be absurd for a body of
men to prescribe rules for their own government. If so, then almost every body
of men, who have assembled upon any great and extraordinary occasion, to enter
into resolutions which were to have the force of laws, have acted absurdly; for
it has been an universal practice with such assemblies, in the first place, to
lay down certain principles, agreeably to which their after resolves were to be
framed. Advert only to the proceedings of the congress and of your late
committees, and to the proceedings of the late popular meetings in Ireland. The
declaration of rights contains a variety of such principles, rules and maxims,
that were manifestly intended for the direction of the convention in framing
the constitution, to which that declaration is a species of preamble. The 5th
article asserts, that elections ought to be frequent; the constitution
accordingly directs the election of delegates to be annual, etc. The 6th
article maintains, that the legislative, executive, and judicial powers of
government, ought to be for ever separate and distinct from each other; this
two is amply provided for by the constitution. Again, the 31st article
maintains, that a long continuance in the first-executive departments of power
and trust is dangerous to liberty; accordingly, the constitution directs the
governor and council to be annually elected, and does not permit any man to act
as governor more than three years out of seven.

These instances must certainly establish my principle, that the declaration
was intended as a guide to the convention in forming the government, as well as
to all future legislatures in framing laws. To me the convention appears to
have acted in this respect, as in almost every other, like sage and enlightened
lawgivers; and it would be extraordinary indeed, if the important direction
contained in the 9th article of rights should have been neglected by the
convention, when they must have known it to be impossible (as I shall hereafter
show,) for any succeeding legislature to put it into execution.

Some persons affect to consider this 61st clause, as no part of the
constitution. This is pleasant enough! If I attempt to prove, by serious
argument, that which is evident in itself, I may perhaps induce a belief, that
there was some color for the suggestion. It is indeed unlucky, that the 61st
clause was not placed immediately after those other clauses which respect the
legislature, as the title which it claims to be considered as a part of the
constitution, would have then been clear and indefeasible.

Say they, the first meeting of the legislature, under that provision, was only
for a particular purpose; it was merely to introduce the new government, by
appointing an executive, and by filling the other offices. If we admit this,
and if the convention, by this 61st clause, did not intend to fix the place of
holding the legislature, after that first meeting the constitution remained
almost as defective as it was before, because no place was yet appointed for
holding the first legislature, to be elected agreeably to the antecedent parts
of the constitution.

Such would be one consequence of the construction of the Farmer, and his
associates; attend to another, agreeably to these antecedent parts of the
constitution, there could be no election of the s^^ate until the third Monday
in September 1781, of course, there could be no meeting of the constitutional
legislature until the first Monday in November in that year, and yet the house
of delegates was to be chosen five times before that period, on the first
Monday in October in the years 1777, 1778, 1779, 1780, and 1781; in the four
first years then, the delegates were to be chosen to no purpose whatever; in
the fifth year, indeed, they might meet the senate, if they would know where to
find them. If the convention which was framing, as they thought, a complete
form of government, could appoint the first constitutional meeting of the
legislature at a period five years distant, and could leave the place of their
first meeting to be ascertained by tacit and common consent, they must have
committed an oversight which no individual of common sense could have possibly
been guilty of.

I agree, nay, I strenuously maintain, that the 61st clause was intended to
give life to the new government, and that the constitution was a dead letter
without it. How is this done by my opponents construction? Why the people are
to meet for the purpose of choosing a special assembly, which is to meet on a
special day to do a particular thing, viz. to appoint all the officers of the
government, which government may then go on; advert again, I beseech you, to
the consequences which I have just pointed out, and say, whether a
construction, which involves such consequences, can possibly be right.

I appeal now to those, who without prejudice or prepossession, will
attentively peruse the whole system of government, whether the following be not
the plain and obvious meaning of the convention, in the 61st clause of the
constitution.

We have already, by the 15th clause, directed the electors of the senate to
meet on the 3d Monday in September 1781; and we have directed the people to
choose their immediate representatives annually, on the first Monday in
October; now, as the third Monday in September 1781 is distant almost five
years, it is necessary for us to make a further provision, for giving life to
that system which we have contrived with so much care and attention; we have
likewise, hitherto, omitted to fix the place of holding the legislature, which
the legislature to succeed us cannot do, as all their acts are liable to be
immediately after repealed, either by themselves or their successors; we
therefore conclude, by directing the people to choose (...) of the senate on
the 25th of November next, who are to meet at Annapolis on the 9th of December
next, to elect the senate; and by directing the people in each (...), to choose
their delegates on the 18th of the same month. The assembly, so chosen, is to
meet at Annapolis on Monday the 10th of February next, and then, or at some
future session, one principle part of their business must be to appoint the
executive, and all the other officers of government, for the first time. We
thus direct the first appointment of the legislature, for which it is plain,
from the 15th clause, that we had reserved ourselves until this last clause, we
fix the place of their meeting; and it is thus we complete our great and
arduous undertaking.

I repeat again and again, the new government could not have been introduced
without appointing the place for the general meeting of the legislature; this
61st clause is as much a part of the constitution as if it had been placed in
the center, and the constitution having once appointed a place for holding the
legislature, it becomes fixed at that place in the manner intended by the 9th
article of rights. It is indeed of importance to the Farmer to prove this 61st
clause to be no part of the constitution, and that it makes no permanent
provision, because the seat of government may then be removed without the
odious formality prescribed for abolishing or altering any part of the
declaration, and the form of government; but, accustomed as I am to confident
assertions at the bar, this proposition has more amazed me than any thing I
ever yet have heard.

Is this 61st clause no part of the constitution, because it prescribes the
mode in which the new government is to commence? Or is it no part, because
without it the government never could commence? I beseech you, my countrymen,
to reflect seriously what could have been done without it; you might have
assembled on the first Monday in October 1777, to choose your delegates, but
that would have been fruitless, because they could enact no law without the
senate, and the electors of that branch were not to be assembled until the 3d
Monday in September 1781. Well, the year 1781 at last arrives, and both
branches are elected; but where shall they meet, no place being named by the
constitution? It is extremely probable a majority will repair to Annapolis,
under the expectation of there meeting their fellow members. By what authority
are they to sit there? It is proposed to assemble and make an ordinance for the
purpose; to this it is replied, the 9th article of rights requires the place
for holding the legislature to be fixed; this article, like every other, must
have the force of a law, and is not to be abolished but by two acts of
assembly; What is the sense of it? It is, that no act of assembly shall be
binding unless made at a place fixed for our meeting; we are mer^ly the
creatures of the constitution, and must act agreeably to its injunctions. But
this constitution, which has so long deferred our first meeting, has enjoined a
thing which its own neglect has rendered impossible. The best thing we can do,
is to go back to our constituents, and advise them to appoint another
convention, either to complete this form of government, or to frame an entire
new system. Says a third, I accede to your construction of the 9th article, it
contains a provision which appears founded in policy, and dictated by
experience, but I cannot join in your inference; I rather conclude, that as
Annapolis was always the seat of the proprietary government; as it contains
every public building requisite for the government; as every convention has met
at that place; as this very article, and the subsequent constitution, was
framed there; as this place seems to have been regarded with a favorable eye
by the 37th article, which secures it in all its rights, privileges and
benefits; those circumstances induce me to thi^^ from a fair and comprehensive
construction of the whole, that Annapolis must have been considered, by the
founders of the constitution, as the place fixed for the meeting of the
legislature. I acknowledge, continues he, from the 15th clause of that
constitution it would appear, that the framers did not think the place as yet
fixed, or at least, that they considered the point not yet absolutely settled,
because, they say the electors shall meet at Annapolis, or such o^^er place as
shall be appointed for convening the legislature. It appears from that very
clause, that they did not perform every thing they intended; they surely could
not have intended the house of delegates to be elected four times before the
senate. However, as it is, we must make the best of it; and it is better to
give such a construction as will support, than such a one as must set aside,
the constitution under which we have here assembled to act.

In such a manner would the members of the first constitutional assembly have
probably debated, had the 61st clause never been framed, and had it been
possible for the people of Maryland to have remained without government, and
without administration of law, during the whole of the memorable interval
between the 11th of November 1776, when the last convention was dissolved, and
the first Monday in November 1781, on which day the first meeting of the
senate, according the 15th clause, was to take place.

But my antagonists may ask, Why make these unnecessary suppositions? Although
the provision, which you call the 61st clause, be no part of the constitution,
it was a necessary measure of the convention, to give motion to the government
they had just fabricated. This exposition will not serve their turn, because,
if this provision were no part of the constitution, it was absolutely void, for
it gives the first appointment of the officers of government to the
legislature, and the constitution had just before conferred that power on the
executive only.

Attend now to the Farmer, he alleges the meeting of the legislature under this
61st clause, to have been special, for a special purpose, and to do a
particular piece of business; that the intention of it has long been fulfilled;
that its operation now ceases to exist; that it does not expressly, or by
implication, enjoin the legislature to meet at Annapoli^, at any time
thereafter; that the meeting was not on the day prescribed by the constitution
for its annual meeting. From all this I infer his opinion, that the
legislature, at that meeting, could only appoint the executive, and other
officers of government; that when this particular piece of business was
dispatched, this special assembly ought to have been dissolved, and, of course,
that no place could have been appointed by that general assembly for the
meeting of the constitutional general assembly.

Let it be recorded on your minds, and suffer me to repeat once more, this
constitutional general assembly could not have met before the first Monday in
November 1781, because, independent of this 61st clause, the first meeting
prescribed for the electors of the senate, was to take place on the 3d Monday
in September 1781; according then to his exposition of this 61st clause, the
general assembly was to choose a governor and his council; For how long? For
the residue of the year, says the clause. They were likewise to fill, in the
first instance, all the offices in the disposition of the governor and council;
For how long? Some of them, says the antecedent constitution, are of annual
appointment, but the judges are to hold their offices during good behavior.
Let us see then how all this will work, and what is the consequence of the
Farmer's exposition. The special assembly is dissolved. The constitutional
general assembly cannot meet, as I have before inculcated, until November 1781.
The governor and council drop off at the end of the year, which is the second
Monday for the governor, and the second Tuesday for the council, in November
1777; all officers of annual appointment, must likewise cease to act about the
same time. Well then, Who are left to administer the public affairs? In such a
case, it would indeed be a "fine thing to be a judge," because there would
perhaps be a necessity for the judges to exercise, not only the judicial, but
the legislative and executive powers of government. Such would be the blessed
consequences of construing the 61st clause as no part of the constitution, and
of limiting the power of that special assembly to the appointment of the
officers of government. I think myself then most clearly warranted in denying,
that the constitution, without the clause, would have been a "perfect code of
constitutional jurisprudence;" and yet, with the Farmer's exposition, this
clause made the matter hardly a jot the better.

As few of my readers can have an opportunity of perusing the constitution, I
will give them so much of the 61st clause as it is necessary they should see
for the purpose of forming a judgment on this point. Here are the words: 61.
That to introduce the new government, an election be held for the electors of
the senate on Monday the twenty-fifth of November in this present year, and
that the electors of the senate meet at Annapolis on Monday the ninth of
December in this present year, and there choose senators; and that an election
be held on Wednesday the eighteenth of December, for delegates to serve in
general assembly, and for sheriffs; and that the said elections be made by such
persons, in the same manner, and under the same qualifications, as such
elections are herein before directed to be made, at the periodical times before
mentioned; the returns of all which first elections shall be made to the
council of safety for the time being; and the general assembly shall meet at
A^napolis on Monday the tenth of February next, and shall, in their then
session, or in such future session, as they shall think proper, choose a
governor and council for the residue of the year, in manner before directed;
and for filling, in the first instance only, all the offices in the disposition
of the governor with the advice of the council; the house of delegates may also
propose to the senate a list of all officers in the appointment of the governor
with the advice of the council, etc. etc.

It may not be unworthy of remark, that in the proceedings of the convention,
each clause or section of the constitution is numbered, and this is numbered
among the rest, so that not Aristides only, but the convention itself, has
deemed this a clause of the constitution, and not merely an after provision.
The convention having gone through the whole, paragraph by paragraph, declared
the whole, at one time, to be the constitution and form of government. How
contemptible then is the assertion, that this very necessary clause is no part
of the constitution!

The Farmer observes, that the legislature has, from time to time, been held at
Annapolis for the convenience of the buildings, by common consent, without the
legislature having, by any act, determined that spot for its permanent
residence. Would not any person, unacquainted with the history of our
transactions, supposed this first special assembly was actually dissolved,
after appointing the officers of government? That no other meeting of a
legislature took place, until the time appointed for the constitutional
meeting, which I have before shown could not, agreeably to the Farmer's
construction of this clause, have taken place until the first Monday in
November 1781? And that, at this first constitutional meeting, the members
assembled, by tacit consent, at Annapolis?

Very different from all this is the truth. This special legislature, elected
for a particular purpose under this special provision, which is called no part
of the constitution, did not confine themselves to that particular piece of
business; they considered themselves constitutionally chosen; that the power of
the senate was to continue until that meeting of the electors which is
prescribed by the 15th section; and that the house of delegates was to continue
until the first Monday of October in the following year, when another election
was to take place, under the constitution. Accordingly, they not only performed
this particular piece of business, but they actually sat near three months;
and, if I be not egregiously mistaken, the Farmer assisted at their
deliberations. In that length of time they passed a variety of laws, some of
which are still in force. They adjourned until some day in the following June,
without naming a place; they met at the time appointed at Annapolis, and passed
other laws, and then adjourned until some time in September, when their meeting
was prevented by an invasion of the enemy. The same senate met the house of
delegates, constitutionally elected, on the first Monday in October 1777, 1778,
1779, and 1780, and no person has ever presumed to arraign them for having
usurped an authority. In all that time the general assembly never thought of
appointing the place of their own meeting, and for this plain reason; I
presume, that they conceived the place fixed, and reasoned on the declaration
and form of government just as I do. The declaration says, the place of our
meeting must be fixed; the constitution then appoints a place where the
legislature shall meet. No part of either can be altered, but by the joint act
of two assemblies. If then the convention in one part says, the place ought to
be fixed, in another appoints the place where the first legislature is to meet,
and in a third says, that all its provisions must stand for a law until they
shall be repealed by two successive general assemblies, there can ^e no
rational construction, but that the legislature mus^ meet at this place, until
two assemblies shall concur in appointing another. As to the exception in the
latter part of the 9th article of the declaration, nobody has yet contended,
that it means any thing more, than that the legislature may appoint a
particular meeting at some other place, when evident necessity shall at any
time require it.

As the Farmer seems constituted, by common consent, the leading advocate for
Baltimore-town, I shall patiently examine every one of his reasons; I shall not
contine myself to his precise words, let it suffice that I preserve his meaning.

In the first place, he cannot allow the direction of the 9th article to be
given to the (...), because it would be no more than directing themselves. I
have already (...) a variety of instances, where provi^ons in the (...) have
been manifestly made in pursuance of the principles ^^d down in the
decla^ation. Instead of being contrary to common sense, it is a prudent part
for a man to p^escribe rules to himself; for want of this, we too often see men
endowed with a competent share of natural abilities, who blast their own
reputations, dissipate their fortunes, and live to no worthy purpose under
Heaven.

But, says the Farmer, the place must be convenient to the members; those who
are to use the convenience are the only competent judges of it; besides,
convenience depends on after events and circumstances not permanent. What!
Could not the convention judge of the convenience of a place to assemble at and
enact laws, when it was itself a legislature of the most exalted kind? The
members of that convention certainly were as good judges of that, as the
members of any legislature can be of the place which will be most convenient to
its successors; indeed, neither the convention, nor any future legislature,
could determine that any place whatever would always remain the ^^st convenient
for men to repair to, and the best calculated, on every account, for the
transaction of public affairs, and therefore the seat of government may, at any
time, be removed by the joint act of two general assemblies. The Farmer thinks
this 9th article of rights only declaratory; by this we are to suppose that it
means nothing, or is to stand for nothing, and at any time may be dispensed
with at the pleasure of the legislature; our constitution, however, that sacred
palladium of our rights, that strong barrier against the encroachments of
power, expressly ordains, that no part of the declaration shall be altered by a
single legislature; by this is effectually provided, that the declaration of
rights shall remain as a law, and that it shall limit the power of the
legislature, which without it might indeed be called omnipotent. The senate,
and the representatives of the people, derive their power merely from that
constitution, and they are delegated to pass laws in conformity to it; whenever
they violate it, by their acts, they betray their trust, and if it were not for
the check which is provided by securing the independence of judges, in every
instance of an infringement of the declaration or form of government, the whole
government would revert to the people. This would be fatal doctrine indeed! As
I do not doubt that attempts will hereafter be made to violate the constitution
by the arbitrary acts of a single legislature, I conceive it a fortunate
circumstance, that the constitution, without containing explicit terms, has
been so well understood. The power of the judges to reject any acts that, in
their opinion, may be repugnant to any part of the declaration or form of
government, has been asserted on a great variety of occasions, and has never
yet been disputed, except by a single writer of Baltimore-town. According to
his ideas, it seems, the general assembly is the only judge of those parts
which respect itself; and, if it thinks proper to disregard both, its acts must
nevertheless be admitted as laws. Such an extravagant opinion could never have
entered the head of a rational man. What! Are the men who are to be bound by a
law, the properest to decide on the law? If that be substantial doctrine, it
was in vain for the respectable founders of our constitution to bestow such
labor and attention on a work calculated to insure the safety and happiness of
their constituents! It was in vain to expect every part of that work to stand
until two assemblies should concur to overthrow it! But a more rational
construction has hitherto generally prevailed, and it would be a waste of time
to demonstrate, that the judges may reject unconstitutional acts, and that, by
so doing, they have a countroul over the legislature, which in other respects
has a control over them. This control of the judges does not make them
legislators, it only enables them to restrain the proper legislature within its
proper limits, and such a control is infinitely preferable to that of the
people at large, which could not be exerted without a dissolution of the bonds
of government.

It may here be proper likewise to remark, that by accusing all persons who
would dare to execute any unconstitutional acts, that grand juries would evince
their importance.

As the judges then are indispensably obliged to reject all acts passed in an
unconstitutional manner, and as many important things may be transacted under
those acts before they shall be declared void; as all this may throw our
affairs into confusion, and may bring ruin on individuals, it would surely be
prudent for the legislature, before it adopts the Farmer's proposition, to be
satisfied, that by removing to Baltimore-town, without publishing their act
three months before a new election, and having that act ratified by a new
assembly, it will not violate the constitution. For this reason Aristides
advised them previously to consult the judges, not that he meant himself to
give a judicial opinion. The Farmer expresses a great respect for the judges,
but thinks it would be ridiculous to require their opinion on this occasion,
because the point is involved in no more difficulty than the question whether
one house can adjourn without the other. I shall make no comment on the very
extraordinary treatment which the Farmer thinks fit to give Aristides; the
proper remark on such an occasion cannot fail of suggesting itself to the
reader.

It has been asserted, that Aristides was not sincere in his construction. He
disdains the imputation. He never did, and never will, endeavor to impress an
opinion not entertained by himself. He offers reasons which the Farmer promises
to examine, but which the Farmer does not even analize. His opinion is
confirmed by two of the most eminent council at the bar; indeed, by almost
every lawyer with whom he converses. I cannot, however, be persuaded, that the
Farmer's confident assertions have proceeded altogether from a thorough
conviction. In this I am clear, that a thorough conviction could not induce any
man to decline a reference in which there can be no impropriety, inconvenience
or danger. In what a state shall we be, if a single assembly shall undertake to
remove the seat of government, and if the acts passed by them at Baltimore-town
shall be hereafter declared null and void! Those who examine the subject merely
on the principles of public good, will allow the advice of Aristides to be
wholesome; but those who would stir Heaven and earth to bring about a removal
of the government, will be at all events for rejecting it. Let anarchy and
confusion prevail; let even the state itself be thrown into a convulsion; let
ruin attend every man who may act under those unconstitutional mandates; let us
involve the legislative and the judicial departments in a dispute; the smaller
number must soon yield to the representatives of the people; but if even these
few men should have firmness to resist lawless acts, no matter, provided we
succeed in this our darling undertaking. I cannot, however, believe the Farmer
capable of thus reasoning within himself; and I am inclined (...) think, his
supercilious behavior proceeds merely from the want of due reflection, and a
proper understanding of the constitution and the rules of construction.

We shall however be told, I doubt not, that it would degrade the sovereign
power to await the approbation of a few men, before it shall dare to act. But
let it be remembered, that these few men have the power to restrain it within
the constitutional limits. We shall be told too, that there are men in the
legislature, equal in legal abilities to the judges. Be it so; but these men
have only each one vote in deciding the question; they are not under
obligations, equal to those of the judges; and it is the opinion of the judges
only, which is ultimately to decide.

I return now to my argument. That the convention, by appointing the first
legislature to meet at Annapolis, intended to fix that place for the meeting of
the legislature, would to me be sufficiently clear, from this consideration.
They knew that the place could not be fixed by any succeeding legislature;
because any act of one session may be abrogated by the next. The word "fixed"
is a most significant term; and, supposing my position to be right, I admire
the wisdom and foresight of the convention, in preventing artful men, on an
occasion so interesting to the public, from taking advantage of a critical
season, of temporary sits of disgust in wavering capricious minds, of
disseminating tales, which cannot be refuted until it be too late; in
preventing men, I say, from doing that in a hurry, which ought never to be done
but upon the maturest deliberation. The convention must have been impressed
with an idea of the propriety of fixing the seat of government, even on account
of giving some stability to the real property of the place, where it may happen
to be. It would be an unhappy thing, indeed, for the citizens of any capital,
if, at every meeting of the legislature, they are to run the hazard of being
instantly deprived of their property; if their minds are to be thus agitated,
if they are to be thus filled with doubts and alarms, and if all spirit of
enterprise, is thus to be effectually checked. I will explain what I mean by
spirit of enterprise, as it seems that unlucky expression in my first address
ha^ been more commented on, in Baltimore-town, than all the rest of the
publication. It was evident, I did not mean to extol "the beloved city" for its
enterprise in commerce. My meaning was, that a proposal of removing from it the
seat of government, for a time, puts all business at a stand. Should a man be
about to build, he must, in prudence, await the event; if his building has
already been commenced, he must suspend the work; if two men are treating about
the sale of a house, either the treaty must be broken off, or one party will
gain an advantage; a vacant house must remain unoccupied. And when, at last,
the question is determined in favor of Annapolis, the apprehension of what may
take place at the next session, cannot fail to affect the value of its houses
and lots, and to obstruct all further growth and improvement. These are serious
evils, and the men who feel them are entitled to as much consideration, as if
they inhabited a town of extent, popula^^^n and enterprise, equal to that of
the ancient city of Tire. To me there cannot be a more decisive proof of an
illiberal soul, than the sport which has been recently made with the anxieties
of the Annapolitans. I appeal even to the sober and respectable part of
Baltimore-town, whether my construction does not place matters on the proper
footing. That the seat of government may be removed in the way prescribed for
altering any part of the declaration of rights, or form of government, no
rational being ever could deny. But if it can be removed by a more compendious
method, no man who regards the plain well known import of words, could affirm,
that it can be said to be fixed. And, as at any rate it may be removed by the
joint act of two general assemblies, it cannot with propriety be called
"immovable." My construction, therefore, I conceive, is not only the most
rational, but the most convenient. It affords a security against whim and
caprice; it may prevent a variety of evils; and it allows a safe remedy,
whenever circumstances shall render the further holding of the legislature at
the fixed place a public grievance.

The destruction of a capital town is surely a measure which no body of men
should have it in their power hastily to adopt; and, happily, our constitution
has taken care to prevent the legislature from proceeding with haste in almost
every thing that very materially affects our rights and interests. When two
general assemblies, after a mature deliberation, shall concur in any measure,
it is more than probable that the measure will be right; and, if it be
probable, that two general assemblies will concur in the proposed act for
removing the seat of government, the citizens of Annapolis will be able to
foresee, and, in some measure, to prepare for the event, of which the Farmer,
with such confidence and exultation, undertakes to give them warning. And after
losing the seat of government in this way, they will, perhaps, renounce the
fond idea of regaining it, at a future session.

But the Farmer may perhaps say, admitting it might have been good policy for
the convention to have fixed the seat of government at Annapolis, or any where
else, if words be suffered to retain their meaning, this power has been
conferred by the constitution on the future legislature. Observe, says he in
his first address, the electors of the senate are to meet at such other place
as the legislature shall appoint. The opinion I entertain of the Farmer's
integrity, will not permit me, one moment, to suppose him guilty of a wilful
misquotation. Such words are found no where in the constitution, and had its
framers really intended to confer this power on the legislature, it is
astonishing that they never did it by plain and positive terms. Although in
several places they speak of the place to be appointed for holding the
legislature, they no where have said, this appointment shall be in the
legislature; and yet they often speak of things to be done by a future
legislature. These considerations are sufficient to evince, that they intended
themselves to fix the place for the meeting of the legislature.

The words of the 15th clause are these, That the said electors of the senate
shall meet at the city of Annapolis, or such other place as shall be appointed
for convening the legislature, on the third Monday in September 1781, and on
the same day in every fifth year for ever thereafter. I was fully apprized of
this clause, but did not esteem it material for either side. I now find it of
importance to my argument. Observe, say I, this 15th section is antecedent to
the 61st; no section before this gives the least hint where the seat of
government shall be; this section does not declare by whom the appointment
shall be made, it directs a meeting of the electors at a period five years
distant from its own date; and the 61st clause afterward appoints a meeting of
the electors at Annapolis, at a very near period, and a meeting of the
legislature likewise at Annapolis. Does not all this "most forcibly inculcate
and impress on every unprejudiced mind," that the convention, at the time of
framing the 15th clause, intended to do that, which neither in that, nor in any
other part, they have directed the legislature to do; that by giving directions
for a meeting of the electors five years distant, they reserved themselves for
giving directions as to the first meeting of the electors, until they should
come to the last clause, which was to introduce the government; that this
clause was absolutely necessary; that, without it the constitution was not a
"perfect code;" that, without it, the fixing of the place for holding the
legislature, which they had before asserted to be necessary, has not been, and
never can be done; finally, that, if he, who made the notable discovery of the
61st clause being no part of the constitution, can support his opinion, he
deserves from Baltimore-town much credit for his ingenuity.

The Farmer has derived an argument from the 56th section of the form of
government, of which he gives such an extract, as he thought suited his own
purpose, That the general court shall sit for transacting business at such
prices as the future legislature of this state shall direct and appoint. Now,
says he, the 9th article of the declaration requires the legislature to be held
at a place most convenient to the depository of the public records, and the
records of the general court are part thereof. From all this he infers, that
had the framers of the constitution intended to fix the place of holding the
legislature, they would have likewise fixed the place of holding the supreme
courts of justice.

I dislike all partial quotations or abstracts of sentences and clauses;
because the reader is entitled to form his judgment of the whole, upon a view
of the whole; and because, the discarding of a single word which at first view
may not appear material, on an attentive examination may exhibit a very
different complexion. The words of the 56th clause we these. That the same
court be hereafter called and known by the name of the general court; which
court shall sit on the western and eastern shores, for transacting and
determining the business of the respective shores, at su^^ times and places, as
the future legislature of this state shall direct and appoint.

The convention, we may suppose, found a difficulty in choosing a place for the
court on the eastern shore, and had not themselves yet fixed a place for
holding the legislature. It was merely on this account, I presume, that they
gave the appointment of a place on each shore to the future legislature. They
would not make distinctions between the shores; for, had they appointed a place
for the western shore, the court would have been fixed there; whereas no future
legislature could fix the place for the eastern shore. I now ask, if the
convention intended that a future legislature should fix the place of holding
the legislature, why it did not say so in explicit terms, such as they have
made use of with respect to the general court? Had indeed this 56th section
said, the general court for the western shore shall be held at the place
hereafter to be appointed by the legislature for its own meeting, it would have
precluded all argument in support of my position.

The fact is. The constitution no where expressly directs the supreme courts of
justice, and the legislature, to be held at the same place; and hence it became
necessary for the legislature, by a particular act, to direct where these
courts shall be held. But if it be clear, that the convention intended the
legislature and the general court to be held at the same place, and any
argument can be drawn from the opinion of the first legislature, composed in a
great measure of those who had been members of the last convention, the act for
appointing the place for holding these courts is highly worthy of attention.
That act was passed at the first meeting of the legislature, which the Farmer
maintains, was held only for a special purpose. And if their construction and
the Farmer's be the same, that the supreme courts of justice and the
legislature are directed by the constitution to be held at the same place, they
have, by implication, given a most decided opinion in favor of Aristides; for
they have ordained, that the court of appeals, and the general court for the
western shore, shall be for ever held at Annapolis. By so doing, they must have
thought Annapolis already fixed for the holding of the legislature, or they
would, at the same time, have passed an act for the purpose.

If they conceived Annapolis appointed by the 61st clause for their first
meeting only, no body of men ever acted so strange a part; for they passed no
act for appointing the the place where the legislature should be held in
future; no bill was framed for the purpose in either house, no message on the
subject was sent by either house, and, at the end of the journal of each house,
is an adjournment to an early day, without naming the place. From all this
arises an implication, strong as the most positive words, that this assembly
considered the seat of government to have been fixed by the constitution.

It is a settled rule of construction, that the sense of a ^aw must be
collected from the words alone, where those carry any meaning consistent with
the general intent of the law. The question is, what did the convention mean by
saying the legislature shall meet at Annapolis on the tenth of February text?
Does it mean thereby to fix the general place of meeting? I say yes, because
that is consistent with the intention clearly expressed in the 9th article of
the declaration, and because that article could not otherwise have the force of
a law.

Says the Farmer, "that article is only declaratory." I reply, that article, as
well as every other article in the declaration of rights, is by the
constitution made a law, irrevocable, except by the joint act of two general
assemblies.

All the articles of the declaration are, I confess, declaratory, and there
needs no Farmer to tell us that. But what constitutes them laws is, that no act
of a single assembly, repugnant to the rules, maxims and principles, which they
contain, shall have the force of a law. Well then, the next assembly passes an
act for removing the seat of government to Baltimore-town. I maintain, that it
is repugnant to the 9th article of rights, which says the place for holding the
legislature ought to be fixed. The proper mode for the assembly to proceed by,
in removing the seat of government, would be, to pass an act for repealing that
article, and to submit it to the consideration of the people three months
before a new election. And if that act be confirmed by the succeeding assembly,
then may an act pass for removing the seat of government. Or, the act itself
for removing the seat of government, as it would amount to a repeal of the 9th
article, might be published for the consideration of the people.

But had the 61st section of the constitution never been passed by the
convention, and had the assembly been constantly held at Annapolis, without the
direction of the constitution, or any assembly which has since been held,
inasmuch as the 9th article says the place ought to be fixed, I might even in
such a case safely maintain, that the uniform practice and usage of the
assembly has fixed the seat of government at Annapolis; and that it cannot be
removed, unless in one of the ways which I have pointed out.

But suppose that the 9th article of rights had never been inserted, I think,
even in such a case, it might well be maintained, that a single legislature
could not appoint Baltimore for the place of meeting, because the last section
of the constitution has appointed Annapolis the place for holding the
legislature. That section directs the first legislature to meet at Annapolis on
a certain day, and prescribes a particular piece of business which it is to do
at that, or at some future session. Does this look as if the convention
intended it to be a special legislature, appointed to do one special act and no
other, and that a future legislature might meet wherever they might happen or
might agree to assemble? But I have already pointed out the consequences of
considering the first legislature in that light; and I dare say even the Farmer
will be convinced, that the first legislature did right in proceeding to every
other act of legislation. Well then, the first legislature chosen under the
constitution, is by that constitution directed to meet at Annapolis. It is
doing no violence to the rules of construction, and it is agreeable to common
sense, to maintain, that the constitution intended the future meetings of that
legislature should be there, that all future legislatures should meet there,
and that no legislature can be held at any other place before that implied
direction of the constitution be repealed in the manner which the constitution
prescribes.

It is another rule of construction, that every word in a law, if possible,
must be construed so as to convey a meaning. But, without my construction, the
word "fixed," in the 9th article, has no meaning at all. It is totally
discarded, and then the clause stands thus, that a place for the meeting of the
legislature ought to be the most convenient, etc. And then, if it were not for
the 61st clause, the legislature might move about as it pleased, always taking
care, nevertheless, to carry with it the public records, and to pitch on a
place most convenient to the members.

When the meaning of the lawmakers, after a careful consideration of every
part, still remains a doubt, a recourse to the history of the times is said to
be proper. An honorable member of the present senate, who was a delegate to
the last convention, has declared, he would most strenuously have opposed the
fixing of the seat of government, had he discovered such an intent in the
convention. Another honorable member of the same body, who likewise had a
share in fabricating the constitution, has assured me, that had he conceived
the seat of government not to be fixed by the constitution as it stands, he
would have insisted for more explicit terms. I greatly respect both these
honorable gentlemen, and I mention their different ideas, to show how little
satisfaction could be obtained by an appeal to the founders of the
constitution. Should this point be ever brought before a court of justice,
these gentlemen, I am persuaded, would never be interrogated by the judges.

I shall conclude my argument on the constitution with one more observation,
and with a brief recapitulation of what I have before said. Admitting the seat
of government not to be fixed in the manner I contend, it may be removed to
Baltimore-town without even the formality of an act. By message the two houses
may agree to adjourn to meet at that place. At the next session they may in the
same manner adjourn back to Annapolis. If the convention did not mean
themselves to fix the seat of government, they must have seen that the 9th
article of rights was entirely useless; because the act of any future
legislature for that purpose, in whatever terms it might be expressed, could
not prevent their successors, or even themselves, from removing it in the very
next session. But the convention intended no part of their work to be useless.
They intended the 9th article to have some effect; and every article is to
remain a law, until it be repealed by two successive assemblies. But that
article has no operation, unless it has by itself fixed the seat of government;
or unless the constitution has appointed a place which answers its description;
or unless the place for the meeting of the legislature be fixed by uniform
practice and usage. The constitution appoints Annapolis for the meeting of the
first legislature, and that place, in every respect, answers the description of
the 9th article. By appointing that meeting, it meant to ascertain the place at
which the legislature should always meet, unless on evident necessity, when it
might adjourn, for one meeting only, to some other place. The provision, in the
latter part of the 9th article, for cases of evident necessity, was peculiarly
adapted to the time when the constitution was framed, when an invasion of the
enemy might every moment be expected. My construction places every thing on a
proper footing, and grati^es every part of the declaration of rights, and the
form of government; and the conduct of every legislature since the convention
evinces, that they have made the same construction with myself.

Thinking as Aristides does on this important point, under a firm persuation
that the constitution has fixed the seat of government at Annapolis, and
fearing that the legislature might do an act which would involve the state in
anarchy and confusion, he conceived his duty as a citizen, obliged him to
declare his opinion, although not called upon in a judicial way. He may perhaps
have acted an imprudent part. He may have hazarded some part of that reputation
which he has been constantly and gradually acquiring. But considerations like
these shall never deter him from his duty. If he cannot maintain the good
opinion of men, without acting in conformity to their views, he must console
himself with the purity of his motives. In his judicial character he never can
receive, as a law, any act of the general assembly, which may be repugnant to
his sense of the constitution, unless he be first overruled by his associates,
or by a superior tribunal. At the same time, he is satisfied that his
associates will deem binding no acts, which the legislature can be induced to
pass, in direct violation of the constitution. And he has that opinion of their
firmness and integrity, that as guardians of the sacred palladium of our
rights, he is persuaded they will ever stand up against the encroachments and
usurpation of any body of men whatever.

The Farmer cannot be so far blinded, by having his eyes continually fixed on
this favorite object, as to deny the control of the judges. I demand of him
then, what would be the result, should a single legislature attempt to pass the
proposed act into a law, and should the judges adopt the construction of
Aristides, and reject all their acts passed at Baltimore-town?

In spite then of the Farmer's confidence, I do not imagine the succeeding
legislature, for the sake of gratifying the eager wishes of Baltimore-town,
will do an act which may hazard a revolution of the government. Should they be
of opinion, that a removal of the seat of government is a measure which the
public good absolutely demands, they will act in one of the following ways.
They will pass an act, and publish it three months before a new election. Or
they will demand of the whole judicial body, whether a single legislature has
the power to remove the seat of government; and if the decision of the judges
shall be in the affirmative, the legislature will then pass a common act, or a
resolve, for meeting at Baltimore-town.

It will naturally be supposed, that I consider this point of singular
importance. I indeed view it in that light. For, if two assemblies must concur,
before the removal of the government can be effected, there will be little
danger of surprise, or finesse. The citizens of Annapolis can never be greatly
disturbed, until the first of these assemblies shall have passed the act; and a
few defeats cannot fail to damp the ardour of its adversaries. In the mean
time, it may advance to that degree of improvement of which it is yet capable;
and it may attain the very little it wants, of exactly answering the
description, which a disinterested enlightened politician would give of a
capital best suited to a republic, like that of Maryland.

Its adversaries will endeavor to impress an idea, that should a single
legislature, by its arbitrary fiat, transfer the seat of government, the judges
would be compelled, from necessity, to give all the acts of the legislature,
whether constitutional or not, the stamp of their authority. Be assured that
this is a vain idea. But in the first place, where is the inducement for the
members of the legislature to violate their own solemn oaths? Where is the
propriety of precipitating this very important measure, when the preparatory
steps, recommended by Aristides, even if they may constitutionally be dispensed
with, would be attended with so little delay, and when these steps would remove
every ground of complaint?

Had the declaration of rights, and the form of government, been both silent on
this head, it would, notwithstanding, be sound policy to adopt no weighty
measure that does not require haste, without using the method prescribed by the
constitution for the alteration of any part of itself.

There are two parts of that constitution which will excite the admiration of
your latest posterity. The first is the refined mode of electing a senate. The
other is the salutary provision for preventing hasty innovations, and the
premature adoption of all momentous measures. May you always possess a due
sense of its value, and may it protect the rights and secure the happiness of
you and your posterity, till time shall be no more.

I PROCEED to examine the consequences which will flow from a removal of the
seat of government, supposing it effected in a constitutional way. The Farmer
represents, that this measure will render an essential service to the citizens
of Annapolis, by curing them of their dependent ways, and by compelling them to
adopt the habits of industry. His want of candor, or rather his want of
reflection, will appear on the slightest attention to their real situation.

Annapolis, we may conjecture, had a beginning like most other towns within the
state. A tavern, or a blacksmith's shop, may have first been erected on the
spot, and occasioned some little resort. A few tradesmen then, of different
kinds, needing occasionally the assistance of each other, and thinking it a
likely place to gain employment, may have chosen it for a stand. It might then
tempt a merchant or two to establish a store, and thus, by degrees, a small
village may have been formed. We know from record and tradition, that in a
short time its advantages induced the former government there to fix its seat,
and to procure for it a charter of incorporation from the British throne.
Annapolis then, compared to cotemporary towns, soon became a flourishing place.
The officers of government found it convenient to settle there. These men, with
the concourse of people at stated periods, encouraged a competent number of
tradesmen and mechanics to fix at a place where there was a certain prospect of
employment. Hence it is that a considerable number of houses had there been
erected. But let it be remembered, although it was thought well situated for
commerce, that commerce never thrived at Annapolis, after it became the seat of
government. The consideration of its being the residence of insolent great men,
and the apprehension of being entirely over-shadowed, deterred many plain,
independent, enterprising men, from settling there; and it must be obvious,
that the residence of the government has been unfavourable to it as a
commercial town.

This was the state of Annapolis at the commencement of the contest with
Great Britain. In the course of the war, it (...), in a ^reat measure,
abandoned. But all dangers being past, and the seat of both governments having
always rem^^^ed there, it has at this time rather more inhabitants than it had
before the revolution. A very great majority of these depend not on government
immediately for supplies. Their sole dependence is the property they have
already acquired, and the further successful prosecution of their different
trades and professions. The men whom a connection with government has occasioned
to reside at the capital; the men whom periodical meetings of the general
assembly and superior courts, or the public offices and records, attract to
Annapolis; all these, I say, at present afford employment to its private
citizens. Some of these citizens have labored with success, and scraped
together wherewithal to build or purchase a habitation. Others, more
successful, have acquired a number of tenements, which they lease. Scarcely a
single house is now standing, that was not built on account of its being the
residence of government. Well then. A law passes for transferring the seat of
government to another place. What is the certain consequence? The immediate
dependents on government, having nothing to detain them at Annapolic, repair to
the new capital. There is now nothing left to occasion, at any time, a
concourse of people at the old capital. The merchants, tradesmen and mechanics,
must abandon it, to seek employment elsewhere. They have once more to begin the
world, and for that purpose, they too will perhaps follow the government,
provided they have a sufficient (...) of remaining strength, and provided the
severity of the blow has not deprived them altogether of courage and hope.
Those dwellings, on which the owners may have ^^^austed the whole fruits of
their toil, are left to moulder for want of tenants; and those more wealthy
citizens, who have expended their substance in erecting tenements for rent,
must sustain a heavier loss than they might suffer from an earthquake, a
deluge, a bombardment, or the incursion of the most barbarous piratical enemy.
It were in vain for Annapolic, at this time, to expect an indemnification from
commerce, for that has long since centred with its aspiring neighbor. What is
there then to prevent it from exhibiting, in a few years, gloomy piles of
ruins? And what is there to prevent it from becoming a sad monument of that
policy, which, however beneficial it shall have proved to another town, was
fatal to a great number of honest meritorious citizens.

Is not this, my countrymen, a probable state of consequences? Does it at all
resemble the Farmer's? Can you possibly suppose, that almost every man in
Annapolis is immediately fed by the public, and that the only consequence of
the removal of the government would be the laying him under the necessity of
laboring, like his neighbors, for a subsistence? The truth is, that the small
proportion of the citizens who depend immediately on the treasury for supplies,
would the least of all be injured by the measure, since they would not by the
removal be deprived of their employments.

The citizens of Annapolis are, notwithstanding, under some obligation to the
Farmer. He purposes to convert the stadt-house into a college, which he thinks,
may alone falsify the " prophetic mournful prediction" of Aristidas. But you
surely must remark, how poor a compensation this would be for the loss of the
government. A college can have little influence on the value of private
buildings, because the students from the country are to board in the college
buildings. It would afford little custom to shopkeepers and tradesmen, because
the young gentlemen at school will be supplied with most necessaries, at those
seasons when they shall visit their parents. In short, the college would detain
and support few indeed of the inhabitants.

But wherefore the institution of a seminary of learning, renders it expedient
or more proper to remove the seat of government from Annapolis, does not yet
clearly appear. Should this seminary be actually perfected, contrary to the
well grounded apprehensions of Aristides; should youths be sent thither from
all parts to which its fame shall reach; there will be a singular advantage to
them, and of course to the community, in permitting the seat of government to
remain where it is.

That you want men of abilities to conduct your affairs, is a sad and
acknowledged truth!

The preamble of the act for founding this college, proposes an advantage to
the state in training up and perpetuating a succession of able and honest men
for performing the various offices and duties of life. The art of government,
that most noble, most useful, most difficult of all sciences, may be studied
with peculiar advantage at a capital like Annapolis. Observation and experience
may be here combined with theory; and example, in this, as well as in every
thing else, is infinitely superior to the sagest precepts. Besides, that man
has a deplorable idea of education, who does not comprehend in it both manners
and a knowledge of the world. The Farmer does not presume to deny, that
Annapolis is the seat of elegance, propriety, and resmement of manners,
although he sneers at these advantages, as if there were nothing solid,
substantial or praiseworthy, independent of wealth. He was not aware of the
extent of his concessions. Nothing forms manners as well as example, and
Annapolis affords the best patterns in the state. There is nothing more
advantageous in a republic, where every person must depend on himself for
advancement, than a knowledge of the world; and, to acquire this knowledge,
there is nothing more proper than to attend public assemblies where order and
decency are invariably preserved. At the numerous public assemblies in
Annapolis, good order is ever maintained. Annapolis, on account of its size and
population, is precisely the place for a college. It is not so large as that
every student may not be known to the inhabitants; and it is not so small but
that the whole body of students may be always overawed from breaking forth into
riots. But remove the seat of government, and Annapolis, in a little time, will
lose every advantage, and with respect to forming the manners of youth, or
teaching them a proper knowledge of mankind, would be little superior to the
remotest corner of the state. The college would lose that singular advantage of
having visitors on the spot capable of superintending its masters and
professors. These visitors, at present, may be assisted by others, who
occasionally come thither on public and private business; and the idea of
excelling in the eyes of these men, will be a strong incentive to the students.
But after a removal of the government, it will be difficult at any time to
procure a meeting of visitors, and when met, they will not remain long enough
to inspect the affairs of the college, to concert proper regulations, to
discover and reform abuses. In short, when Annapolis shall become an obscure
and decayed village, the college, instead of possessing the highest reputation,
will in all probability be one of the last seminaries to which a judicious man
will choose to send his son.

A young man, with a thorough knowledge of all that is taught in the schools,
who has acquired neither manners nor some tincture of the knowledge of mankind,
is scarcely more fit to advance himself in the world, than if he were just
brought from the nursery. He has those things yet to learn which are seldom
well acquired after early manhood. His Latin, Greek, mathematics, etc. without
these, are mere learned lumber, and may rather disqualify him from making that
figure which the fond imagination of a parent may have so often pictured. I
need not enlarge on a subject which has been so often handled by men of
superior talents. Experience too has given men proper ideas. And you
particularly, my countrymen, who are interested in making Saint John's college
the theater of education, must join me in opinion, that the establishment of it
at the capital, so far from operating as an argument for a removal of the
government, affords a most persuasive reason against it.

It has yielded me much secret amusement, to contemplate the zeal of some
gentlemen for fixing the college at Annapolis. I must think, that for once they
have tripped in their politics. At the same time, I cannot but lament the
opposition which is made to immediately setting on foot the buildings. I can
account for it but in one way. Your representatives are to be addressed to the
following effect.

By the removal of the seat of government, the public will incur not one
farthings expense, as the town and county of Baltimore will generously
undertake to erect noble and spacious buildings, which they will present to the
government. On the contrary, you will observe, that by these means the public
may be a gainer. The stadt-house will serve admirably for a college, and by
transferring it to the visitors, the public may be exonerated from the payment
of some part of the L.1750 0 0 which it is now obliged annually to contribute.

Here too, I trust, is a lost hope. A majority of the visitors, acting like
visitors and men of sense, would never think of converting the stadt-house into
a college, as its situation, independent of any other circumstance, makes it
extremely unfit for the purpose, and as their funds are too ample, to permit
them, for the sake of a little saving, to choose an improper spot. But surely
neither you, nor your representatives, can be influenced by the prospect of a
little saving Those who calculate on a saving to the state, would do well to
consider the loss which the revenue would sustain by sinking the value of the
real property in Annapolis. Suppose this to be at present worth L.75000, and
that by a removal of the government it will be reduced to L.25000, there would
be a loss to the annual revenue of the state of about L.500.
in a matter of such vast importance, as the removal of the seat of government.
I will, on this head, suggest another thing to your consideration;
Baltimore-town may make large promises, it may enter into extensive
engagements, and, I doubt not, it means perfectly fair; but without wishing to
irritate its inhabitants, I cannot help entertaining doubts as to its exact and
punctual performance. At any rate, if the government must be removed, for the
sake of common sense let it remain until these same buildings shall be prepared
for its reception. I am sufficiently skilled in politics to be satisfied, that
these buildings will never be completed at the expense of a single town and
county. Let them once obtain their wishes, and they will discover, how mean a
thing it were for the state to impose burdens on a part for the good of the
whole; and one of the first things in which Baltimore-town will exert its
influence in the legislature, will be to release itself from an unreasonable
engagement. Nay, I make no doubt, that for the money disbursed in the
beginning, it will have even the address to procure a compensation.

That the proposed measure will be attended with the happy effects of extending
commerce, increasing the value of your lands, and preserving an equilibrium
with the powerful neighboring states, is with great solemnity predicted by the
Farmer. As his predictions are not upon a footing with those of the ancient
prophets, it was incumbent on him to show, that these things must unavoidably
take place from mere natural causes. The question between him and Aristides is
not simply, whether it were beneficial for the state to improve its commerce
and agriculture, and thereby to augment the value of its lands. God forbid that
Aristides should be opposed to the prosperity of his country! God forbid that a
mere local attachment, the prejudice of long residence, or even his private
friendships, should make him oppose the means of establishing that prosperity.
He is persuaded, that this state may yet considerably increase its riches,
without entailing on itself the evils concomitant to excessive wealth; and he
wishes to increase its riches to that precise point, beyond which they cannot
be extended, without destroying those virtues, and that simplicity and purity
of manners, which are essential to the existence of a genuine republic.

Aristides does not deal in generals. They may well serve to deceive and
mislead, but they are of little use in a faithful inquiry after truth. It is
from a patient attention to details, that right information is to be acquired.
A habit of calculation too, which he did not suppose would be thought
ridiculous by the advocate of a commercial town, is of excellent use to detect
fallacy, and to prevent us from being the dupes of an over heated imagination.
Let us then consider calmly, what would be the consequences to Baltimore-town,
and to the state at large, of acceding to the measure proposed, supposing that
the influence of Baltimore-town would not govern the state.

On such an event, Baltimore-town would gain a part of the present citizens of
Annapolis, some employed by government, and others compelled to repair thither,
for the purpose of carrying on their trades and professions. It would likewise
attract a greater number than Annapolis does, of those men, whose principal use
and employment is that of spending money. Assembly-men, jurors, witnesses,
suitors, and others attending the public bodies, and offices, would then lay
out in Baltimore-town, the money which at present they spend at Annapolis, and
perhaps something more. Of consequence, the demand for goods would be
increased, and a greater quantity of country produce would there find a market.
Thus it is that commerce would be promoted. That is, there would be more buying
and selling at a particular spot.

No man of candor and reflection can in^^r, from Aristides' first address,
that he is an enemy of Baltimore-town. With pleasure he has contemplated its
rapid growth, and sincerely he wishes it to increase so far as is consistent
with its own, and the welfare of the state. But it will acquire no real
substantial advantage, if it retains not the spirit, the virtues, and the
manners, which first enabled it to rise. If Aristides resided in a distant
corner of the state, if he had never seen "the beloved city," and if the good
of Baltimore-town were his governing principle, he would oppose the measure on
which the minds of its inhabitants appear so violently bent. When a large,
wealthy, and populous town, which has risen solely by the enterprise,
industry, and frugality of its inhabitants, becomes the capital of a free
government, immediately the idle and luxurious, those versed in the arts of
luxury and dissipation, the various ministers of vice, are drawn thither, as if
it were by instinct. Is it possible that a great change of manners will not be
the result? All this discourages from settling there the men who might be of
real utility to the place; such men choosing rather a place which is yet in its
infancy, and of the prosperity of which, together with their own, they may lay
the foundation. Let not a plain sober inhabitant of Baltimore-town, after the
government shall have been removed, expect to live in the style to which he has
ever before been accustomed. Although he may be able to preserve himself from
contagion, it is extremely probable that his family will not view things in the
same light with himself; and yet, without their concurrence, his rational plan
cannot be observed. Can he bear the idea of acting like a tyrant, and doing a
perpetual violence to their innocent inclinations? Can he even himself endure
to be so far surpassed, and to live in a style inferior to that of his
neighbors, with whom he has hitherto lived on strict terms of intimacy and
equality? Can he bear that his former habits and manners shall be despised?
These things must undoubtedly occasion him great vexation. Suppose him then to
glide easily down with the torrent. Suppose that before the removal, his annual
income was L.500; that by this event it is increased to L.600, and that in
consequence of the event, his income will scarcely defray his current expenses.
I suppose nothing but what is extremely likely to happen. Is it not probable
then, that the inhabitants of Baltimore-town in general, with respect to mere
profit, will be in a worse situation than they were before? But the men of real
sense and virtue, when they shall observe the general perversion of morals,
vice triumphant, and every thing public and private exposed to sale, will
regret the event, as one of the most fatal that could have happened to
themselves, their families, and their fellow-citizens.

Aristides received his education in the capital of a neighboring state. As at
that time it was the metropolis of a province dependent on Great Britain, as
the government of it was in the hands of men belonging to a sect of religious
enthusiasts, who did every possible thing for the discouragement of vice, it
was exempt from almost all the usual vices of capital towns. But mark the
change. Upon the breaking out of the war, it became the seat of congress, the
resort of gay military men, and of all idle and curious travelers from the
neighboring states, and from the old world. It became too the residence of
foreign ministers. Aristides visited it just before the departure of congress,
and instantly perceived the alteration. He discovered many outward signs of
increased wealth. In every house which he entered, he saw costly splendid
furniture. A vast number of magnificent carriages rolled along the streets; and
the habits of the people corresponded with the affected gaiety of their faces.
He was astonished at the manners of his former acquaintance. Many tales of
domestic grief were related to him; and he was told of families, who, with
incomes increased, were hastening to their ruin. He was so struck with all he
observed and heard, that he was alarmed at the coming of congress to his native
state, and to the spot of his residence. Happily it remained but a short time,
and the peculiar inclemency of the season whilst it staid, prevented that
concourse, and that dissipation, which might have turned the heads, and
perverted the hearts of his fellow-citizens. But it remained long enough to
teach them, that the influx of wealth which congress occasioned, would not
indemnify them for the increase of their general expenses, and the fatal change
of their manners. And yet the residence of congress would have occasioned
wealth, in some degree, to flow from every quarter into the state. I wish to
impress on your minds, that an addition of money does not always make one
actually the richer. Perhaps it may be concluded, that from having in some
manner or other imbibed a set of old fashioned notions, I am, at all events,
against enriching the state. I do not insist, that this state would not, by
becoming the permanent residence of congress, have derived more real good than
evil. I leave it as a doubtful point, not necessary at this time to be settled.
I have endeavored to demonstrate, that the removal of the government, although
it might carry money with it, would not be really beneficial even to
Baltimor^-town. And it is my purpose to show presently, that it would not, in
any sense, add to the riches of the state.

Athough Aristides flatters himself that he possesses the true spirit of a
republican, he does not consider modern republics on the same footing with
those of ancient Greece. In these days, the strength and security of every
government must depend in a great measure on the flourishing state of its
trade. In war particularly, the richest states, or those rather whose
governments can command the largest sums, will in general have the advantage.
But let us not, because we may have occasionally skimmed a few pages of
history, be so fond of quoting parallels and examples. Let us first learn a
little to distinguish. Is the state of Maryland, which is no more than one
member of thirteen which compose the great republic of North America, is this
petty dependent state to be viewed in the same light with a great independent
separate state, surrounded by the powerful empires and kingdoms of Europe? With
respect to these, the Farmer's last address contains many judicious, pertinent
observations, the application of which is left to the reader. I am enabled to
conjecture the meaning by what I have frequently heard of the politics of "the
beloved town." It is there, as I have been told, pretty generally maintained,
that we ought to have but one port; or if even the law should not directly
confine importation and exportation to a single port, that it ought,
nevertheless, to be brought about by political regulations, or in other words,
by indirect means. If this be found doctrine, and if it be consonant to your
wishes, that no foreign goods should be imported unless into Baltimore-town,
and that Baltimore-town should be the sole mart for your produce, and if this
would promote the prosperity of the state in an eminent degree, then ought not
the proposed measure to be longer delayed than is absolutely necessary.

It will be difficult, I conceive, to persuade you, that we may not have
several commercial towns. I mean, towns where your produce may be purchased for
exportation, and to which goods may be imported immediately from abroad. It
will be difficult to persuade you, that by having several such towns, the sum
total of the value of your lands throughout the state will not be greater, than
if you had but one It may be demanded, why is the price of wheat greater at
Philadelphia than Maryland? I answer, that until very lately, that town had the
advantage of us by the number of mills in its vicinity; and, for the purpose of
converting wheat into flour, there was a demand for almost any quantity. To
prove that the superiority of price was not owing to the size of Philadelphia,
or to the commerce of Pennsylvania being confined to that place, it must be
remarked, that wheat was ever as high at Brandywine, as at Philadelphia.
. George-town, I have the most sanguine expectations, will become a place of
considerable trade. The act respecting the clearing of the Patowmack, excited
jealous apprehensions in Baltimore-town, and a remembrance of that ought to
excite similar apprehensions in you. Havre-de-Grace, from the advantages of its
situation, is, by many persons, expected to shoot up with a rapidity, equal to
the late growth of Baltimore-town. But the narrow selfish policy of this, like
that of every other great town, supposes the prosperity of other places
incompatible with its own, and would gladly crush them, either in infancy, or
old age. Nothing but the want of a few enterprising men, and a little good
policy in the legislature, and discernment in the people, can prevent a town of
considerable importance from erecting ^^self on the eastern shore. But, if the
seat of government (...) removed to Baltimore-town, the merchants of that
place, (...) suspect, will prevent, if possible, a single vessel from loading
(...) unloading at any other place within the state, unless un^^er their
direction. This would they do for your sakes, ^^y beloved countrymen, to raise
the value of your lands, and to preserve your equilibrium with your powerful
neighbors!

But let commerce be generally diffused, or let it be confined to a single
spot, it will be impossible for the prices of your produce ever to exceed a
certain point, as these prices must be regulated by the demand in other
countries. And let Baltimore-town grow to any size which the proprietors of
vacant lots may wish, it is impossible these prices, on an average, can exceed
that degree which will admit of some profit to the merchant, upon the
exportation of the commodities. If there be only one market to which you can or
would choose to send them, is there not great danger that this market will, at
times be over stocked? In such a case, your commodities must be either sold at
an under rate, or be stored for a more convenient season. I ask, whether
something of this kind has not been by some of you already experienced I have
been informed, when the demand for a certain article was confined to a single
town, a common buyer was once appointed for all the merchants who wanted that
article. It appeared then, that nobody wanted it but himself; and as there was
no competition of purchasers, the sellers, in a great measure, were at his
mercy. This circumstance deserves a place in your memory.
. I dare aver, that some of the gentlemen who urge a removal of the government,
and whose views extend to the beneficial consequences of that removal, do not
wish to enrich the land-holders at the expense of the mercantile interest. And
yet they would inflame your imaginations, by general vague assertions and
promises, and would persuade you, that the measures which self-love impels them
to promote, are dictated only by a regard to public good.

Without the least pretense to inspiration, I shall, in my turn, deliver a
prediction. When the seat of government shall be removed to Baltimore-town,
there will soon be an end to all fairness and freedom of legislative debate. It
is a sad truth, that in our days, whatever specious pretenses may be made to
public spirit, private interest is almost the universal principle. With my
whole heart I subscribe to the Farmer's culogium on his beloved merchants. It
is for merchants in general, that of all orders of men, I entertain the highest
opinion. But these particular merchants must excuse me if I think, that like
other merchants, and other men, they will exert themselves to bring about those
measures which will tend most to the advancement of their own supposed welfare,
and the aggrandisement of their town. I deem not so meanly of country members,
as to suppose them capable of being bribed by elegant fare, old Madeira, or
even a good round sum of money. But I know full well the efficacy of polite
attentions, and infinuating address, more especially when infidious motives are
not even suspected. No class of men in the universe are so apt as merchants to
unite in a common cause. No other men pursue their objects with so much
perseverance, steadiness and consistency. The Farmer, I think, gives you
plainly to understand the great motive for accomplishing the first grand
undertaking. It is, says he, that the legislature may take the inhabitants of
Baltimore-town under its immediate protection. That is, my friends, that the
legislature may pass no law which they shall not dictate; ^nasmuch as the value
of lands is to depend on the encouragements given to commerce, and they are the
best judges of commercial regulations.

At Annapolis, an undue influence has never been com^^ained of. The reason is,
that at Annapolis there is no ^e powerful order of men to combine for ruling
the ^ate. At Baltimore the case is different, and if ever it ob^ins the seat of
government, you will find, that upon the ^rival of your representatives at the
opening of every session, ^riguing, crafty, designing men, will practice upon
them ^se arts, which seldom fail of success with the unsuspecting (...)
inexperienced, and which have great power even over (...) most experienced and
intelligent, with whom, upon oc^on, other methods may be taken. (That I may not
in^ently offend, I declare solemnly, once for all, that when ^eak of
Baltimore-town, its inhabitants or merchants, I ^ry my views beyond the present
set of inhabitants, of ^^m, I am convinced, very, very few have penetrated
in^ll the consequences which would flow from the measure.) thing is more
probable, than that a majority of the house delegates will be frequently gained
by those arts, to pass ^s under the plausible pretext of general good, when the
^antage of the capital alone, or of a junto of its inhabi^s, will be the real
object. I will suppose the select men ^o compose the senate, to be superior to
such arts, to have ^etration to view matters as they are, and resolution to
^h-hold their assents. This is supposing a great deal, be^se Baltimore-town,
with its spirit of enterprise, will al^ays endeavor to procure a suitable
election of the senate, (...) ^e electors are to meet at that place. But,
supposing (...) I have already done, I presume, that in such a case,
notwithstanding the profound ^eneration in which the senate is at present held
by the respectable merchants of Baltimore-town, the persons concerned will not
quietly acquiesce in the opinions of perhaps only half a dozen men, that every
peaceable method will be taken to gain a majority in that branch, and that if
these few men persist in opposing the wishes of a powerful party, and contrary
to the wishes also of the more numerous branch of the legislature, their office
will become odious, i^^some and dangerous, and it will require more real
patriotism than is to be found in any fifteen men among^ us, to execute it
agreeably to the intentions of the constitution. The most exalted species of
patriotism is that which impels a man to serve his country, by doing things
which are repugnant to the s^ntiments and wishes of his deluded countrymen. And
this species is rarely the production of modern times. In short, the senate
will, in a little time, lose all its dignity and authority, it will no longer
serve as a check or counterpoise to the other branch; the constitution will be
no longer preserved; and no man is able to say what government shall next
prevail. Should the mere forms of the present be permitted to subsist, as I
doubt not they will, be assured, that no government is more arbitrary than that
in which, by corruption and intrigue, a few ambitious men conduct every thing
under the specious forms of freedom.

I have spoken of the mischiefs to be apprehended from the intrigues and
over-bearing influence of the leading men. There would be hardly less to be
apprehended from the populace. Permit me here to transcribe a part of my first
address. No man of reflection can expect, in a large town, that the
deliberations of the legislature, without an army to protect it, can be
perfectly free. Let us suppose a matter agitated in the assembly, which rouses
the passions of a mob, and about which popular clamours have been excited. Let
us suppose such a case as the late religious bill, (whether that bill was
beneficial o^ not, makes no difference in the argument;) can any man suppose,
the house of delegates could, on such an occasion, have been at liberty to
decide, contrary to the opinion out of doors? But in such a place as
Baltimore-town, the consequence and power of the senate, consisting only of
fifteen members, and those not the immediate representatives of the people,
obnoxious on account of superior wealth, and perhaps obnoxious too even for
their superior talents and virtue I here speak on a supposition of the senate
being composed, as it heretofore has been, of proper men. When the election of
the senate is to be held at Baltimore-town, I conceive that it will not be
composed from the first class of men, considered with respect to either
character, fortune or talents; and that such men only will be elected who can
submit to be the tools of a party.
; the consequence and power of this branch of the legislature, so necessary to
moderate at times the intemperate zeal, and to correct the hasty proceedings,
of the other, would be totally annihilated. The congress, notwithstanding its
doors were shut, at length deemed it necessary, for the purpose of free
deliberation; to quit Philadelphia. It had experienced likewise the mischiefs
resulting from the perpetual intrigues and cabals of a capital town The city of
Philadelphia is said, in many cases, to have influenced the determinations of
congress, against their own better judgment. I say nothing of its stopping at a
very critical time, the emissions of paper, because it has been disputed
whether that measure was proper or not. When general How landed at the Head of
Elk, his purpose appeared to be to penetrate to Philadelphia. The intrigues of
the principal men in that city, and the clamours of the rest, occasioned the
battle of Brandywine. The army of general Washington was greatly inferior to
that of the enemy; but to save Philadelphia all hazards must be run. We were
accordingly defeated; and had general How been disposed to push his
advantages, our affairs might, in all probability, have been irretrievably
ruined. In South Carolina too, from the influence of its capital, an army was
hazarded and lost. Th^s^ things have been related to me, and if true, they
afford us a most instructive lesson, and might be sufficient to put every state
in the union on its guard against the dangerous infiuence of all large towns.
.

If congress, conducting the affairs only of the union, having nothing to do
with the internal government of Pennsylvania, and keeping, as far as it could
its deliberations secret from the word, found it expedient, for the reasons I
have suggested, to remove from Philadelphia; surely a body of men; whose
deliberations are public, cannot expect a freedom of debate in a large town, on
matters interesting to its inhabitants. I have mentioned the case of congress,
as recent, striking and familiar. Many other cases might be produced to the
same purpose, etc. etc.

To show that in large and free capitals the open deliberations of a
legislature are liable to interruption from the populace, I barely mentioned
the cities of London and Dublin. I suppose the inhabitants of Baltimore to be
neither more orderly, nor more seditious, than those of other large free
trading towns. It must be admitted, that all these are, more or less, subject
to parties, seditions and tumults. I smile at the suggestion of a mob being
always to be overawed and suppressed by the respectable body of merchants. The
time will come, when perhaps some of these respectable merchants may deem mobs
very proper political engines. There will ever be found in great cities, men
(no matter to what order they belong) who by courting and humouring the people,
will render them subservient to their purposes; and these demagogues, by the
weight of the people, will endeavor to break down every constitutional barrier
opposed to the aggrandisement of their own power.

Why does the Farmer so repeatedly wrest the meaning of Aristides? Why does he
imagine, I esteem it a fatal policy to permit London to be the metropolis of
Great Britain? For the monarch of an independent nation, I am satisfied that it
is a sound policy to bring much force within a narrow compass; and for the king
of England to remove his court, and, to establish the seat of his government in
a small town, would be directly to seek his own destruction. I assent to all
the Farmer has advanced in his paragraph respecting that nation, and the
republic of Venice. But he ought to reflect, that, in each of these
governments, the deliberations of the legislature are protected by armed
guards, continually maintained, and not unfrequently called into action.

His doctrine of concentration can apply only to evince the propriety of
drawing together the strength and riches of the United States, provided we
could think it necessary to sacrifice everything to the protection of congress,
our sovereign power To be convinced of the dangerous error of such a policy,
let us advert to the condition of the United States of the Netherlands. These
states were once as free as the United States of America: Their government, for
a long time past, has been either an arbitrary aristocracy, a disguised
monarchy, or a contention for the mastery between these two. Holland, with its
great commercial (...) of Amsterdam, first forged chains for the rest, and is
itself enslaved.

The Swiss canton^, on the other hand, have no large town to control the
councils of their states, and to sacrifice the general good to its
aggrandisement. The Swiss cantons, therefore, still ^^^less their freedom.


. This might be agreeable doctrine to the state, or rather to the town; in
which congress shall fix its permanent residence; but not one of the other
states would be easily convinced of its propriety. "What have we to do," might
they not say, with this kind of policy? We have, thanks be to providence,
little to apprehend from invasions. But if we had, we are situated differently
from the nations in Europe. We have neither emperor nor king, nor a permanent
hereditary body of nobles, to lord it over us, and to make every thing
subservient to their own safety and greatness.

The congress itself must be against that policy, because it has determined,
over and over again, never to choose a large town for the place of its
permanent residence. Does not every man in Baltimore-town remember this? And
can he possibly forget all the fine things that have been said about an
American Hague?

To talk then about concentrating the riches and strength of the United States,
would be deviating from former principles. But to talk of concentrating the
riches and force of the state of Maryland, which is only one, and that by no
means the wealthiest and most powerful of the thirteen, is really childish in
the extreme. Are we to act upon the principle that the union is to be
dissolved, and that every state must shift for itself? Even on that event, in
what would consist the advantage of this plan of concentration? Is it meant,
that whenever this state shall be at war with Pennsylvania or Virginia, and our
country shall be overrun, we shall still preserve our liberties and
independence, by having drawn together every thing at Baltimore? Does the
Farmer reflect on the difference between an island and a continent? But I wish
not to wade beyond my depth, or to enter into useless disquisitions. On a
dissolution of the confederacy, this state, in spite of the exqui^te scheme of
concentration, will soon find itself obliged to unite with one or both of its
neighbors. As it i^ far too small to be a separate independent state, either
it must do this, or in one of those contests which never fail to take place
between neighboring independent nations, not united by common interests or
common danger, it will fall a prey to Pennsylvania or Virginia, or its
territory will be divided between the two. Let the legislature do what it will
for the aggrandisement of a single town, and let my apprehensions of the ill
consequences of the great preliminary measure be ever so groundless, it is
impossible, from the nature of things, that this town will be ever a match for
Philadelphia. It is perhaps to be expected, that in time it will be eclipsed
even by Alexandria. And I think it not improbable, unless its good habits be
perserved, that the commerce of Baltimore-town has already been at its b^st.

However be that as it may, I conceive it the true policy of the state, taking
not only the present, but future times into consideration, to lend an aiding
hand to every rising town. It ought, in a particular manner, to cherish all
such as have any natural advantages. It seems ordained by providence that we
should have several trading towns; and it would be an insult to that
providence, to contemn the blessings, which it has dealt forth with a liberal
hand. In our situation, the policy of a plurality of trading towns is
beneficial, on a variety of accounts. It is by these, if by any thing, that
Maryland as a separate independent nation, would be able to preserve its
equilibrium with the neighboring governments. Suppose we have three towns,
consisting each of 15,000 inhabitants, these, on one account at least, must be
more advantageous than one town of 45,000, as three towns would raise the value
of lands in three neighbourhoods. But luxury, that bane of all genuine
republics, that insidious deadly so to freedom, could never attain so great a
height in any of the three, as it would most assuredly do in the one. Besides,
many of you would have a choice of markets. And, if a rival hip could take
place amongst them, it would operate to thy advantage of all, by stimulating
the industry and enterprise of the merchants and mechanics, and by affording
excitements to the farmers and planters. It would be thus that commerce would
indeed be promoted, and the value of your lands indeed improved. It is not by
paving the way for the principal inhabitants of a single town to acquire
immense estates, and by these estates, together with the influence they shall
acquire in the legislature, to lord it over the land, that we shall best
provide for our own happiness, and that of our latest posterity.

That the merchants of this single town are desirous of engrossing the whole
commerce of the state, is, I think, but too evident. The main public reason
which they assign for giving them the seat of government, is the necessity of
improving commerce, and of concentrating our powers of exertion. Now this
argument surely applies to the suppression of all other trading towns; and if
they can by any means bring about the projected removal, I think you must
perceive the great advantage they will have for compassing any other measure
which they may set their hearts upon. When I am calculating their weight and
influence in the legislature, convened amongst them, I should never think of
stating proportions as the Farmer would have me. And he must think very meanly
of his countrymen if he imagines they cannot detect the fallacy of his rule!
Does any man suppose, that "as two are to thirty-six," so will the interest of
Baltimore-town be to the landed interest? If indeed the question could be
plainly put, shall the interest of Baltimore-town, or the landed interest be
preferred? I make no doubt, it would be determined by a vast majority in favor
of the latter! Baltimore-town will take care never to contend openly against
the landed interest, and it will take care also to gain over or to deceive,
those who ought to espouse the interest of the land-holders.

He has not assigned the true causes of the flourishing condition of
Pennsylvania. That condition is not owing to the government having confined
commerce to a single spot. Nature had provided for that, by affording only a
single navigable river. Pennsylvania owes its prosperity to the establishment
of perfect religious freedom, to the other wise regulations of its illustrious
founder, to the discouragements which have been constantly given to slavery,
and to the wise policy and admirable manners of the quakers, under the former
government. But that the condition of our country people is far preferable to
the condition of the country people of Pennsylvania, is evident to him who has
traveled through or sojourned in each state, and who is not blinded by
prejudice and prepossession. The reason is plain. The whole country of
Pennsylvania is, at this time, under a kind of vassalage to the metropolis.
Every thing depends upon their great town, and it is well known, and greatly
lamented, that Philadelphia governs the whole state. It is true, as I have
before said, that Pennsylvania is more powerful than Maryland. Its territory is
vastly more extensive; and, on account of the size and bustle of its capical,
and i^ bank paper, it has at this moment the appearance of enjoying a greater
degree of prosperity than Maryland. Supposing even, that this appearance is not
deceitful, for Maryland to confine its commerce to a single town, because
nature has done it in a neighboring state, would be running blindfold into a
renunciation of those blessings for which we are the envy of the intelligent
persons in every part of that very state, except the capital.

If a town can be erected somewhere in Talbot county, and the inhabitants of
the eastern shore can there find a ready market, it will surely be more
advantageous for them to carry thither their commodities, and with them procure
the merchandise they want, than to be obliged to go a long tedious voyage to
the town of Baltimore. Perhaps indeed, the eastern shore might, by means of
some beneficial regulations, have two or three considerable trading towns.
George-town is nearer than Baltimore is to some parts of the upper counties; of
course, it is more convenient to the inhabitants of those parts by land. But,
if the obstructions in the Patowmack can be removed so as to afford a water
carriage, it would be wicked in the extreme to labor for the destruction of
George-town. If the trade down the Susquehanna shall become considerable, and a
market may be had at Havre-de-Grace, surely you would not compel the people to
convey their commodities, by a dangerous navigation, to Baltimore-town.

There are great advantages to a state in having considerable trading towns.
Its own citizens may, at one of these towns, dispose immediately of the produce
they shall carry to market; and a merchant may there, if he pleases,
immediately dispose of a whole cargo at wholesale, load his vessel with
dispatch, and in a little time send her back to sea. As in these towns there is
generally a competition amongst purchasers, the prices of your commodities
cannot fail to be as high as can possibly be afforded by the merchant who
exports them; and as too there is a competition amongst the sellers of imported
merchandise, you cannot fail to procure it as cheap as it can be sold without
ruin to the shopkeepers. For one trading town, Baltimore is already
sufficiently large; and the growth and commerce of that place has been of great
service to the state; but it is not yet large enough to prevent its merchants
from taking advantage of you by artful combinations, provided we have but one
trading town. The true policy of our government, would prompt it to confine
commerce to just as many spots as the real convenience of all its citizens
would require. There is indeed a great seeming advantage for every man to have
a port almost at his own door, as the carriage to market is thereby saved; but
then the price is much less, and the sale more uncertain, than if he were
obliged to carry his commodities some little distance from home. A judicious
port law is the only thing wanting to render this state, in a little time, the
most flourishing and prosperous state, in proportion to its size, in the union.
But having a port at every man's door is one extreme, and having only one port
is another. A wise politician might soon discover the proper medium. Were three
or four ports established on this and as many on the eastern shore, and were
all merchant vessels prohibited from leading or unloading any where else, we
should therein soon sind our account, every one, or a competent number of these
places, would, in a little time, afford the advantages I have mentioned; you
would enjoy the benefit of a competition between these places, and there would
be no danger of your suffering from combinations and monopolies.

Against a scheme like this, I fear the prejudices of my countrymen, and the
mistaken notions of private interest, will raise insuperable bars; but I
flatter myself, that these prejudices will nevertheless produce some good. They
must, I think, prevent the inhabitants of Baltimore-town from succeeding in
their present undertaking, provided only you have penetration to foresee all
the consequences of the projected removal.

I think that I not only foresee these consequences, but can perceive plainly
the views and expectations of some of these inhabitants. They expect, I
presume, by the legislature "taking them under its immediate protection," to
pr^^ure, in a fair way, acts of such a nature, that almost all, if not the
whole, produce of the state, shall be finally collected at Baltimore, or at
least pass through the hands of its merchants; that all imported goods shall be
unloaded at that town; and that the vessels which bring them shall there take
in their loads, except perhaps a few tobacco ships, which shall, nevertheless,
be under their direction. Petty towns there may be in the different parts of
the state; but these must contain no capital merchants. They shall contain
shopkeepers, tributary to Baltimore; and these shopkeepers shall not presume to
load or unload a single ship: If all this can be effected by a removal of the
government, the town of Baltimore will indeed be a most important place. But
can you, reflecting on all I have advanced, and using too your own reflections
and observations, can you, I say, perceive, that all this will tend to the
general happiness and prosperity to the state? Can you suppose it will raise
the value of your lands at a distance from the capital? Can you suppose it will
raise the prices of your commodities beyond what they may attain without this
^^azing agrandisement of Baltimore-town? Can you expect, by purchasing
commodities from shopkeepers, or by going yourselves to the fountain head, that
you will procure them cheaper than you do at present under present
circumstances? Can you suppose that this will increase the strength of Maryland
more than by having a variety of trading towns, or that it will give a greater
weight in the union?

I have endeavored to demonstrate, (and I trust to your satisfaction,) that if
Baltimore does not become the favorite, or in other words, the director of the
legislature, the commerce of that town will not in the end be promoted by a
removal of the government, notwithstanding that at first more goods will be
there sold, more country produce there purchased, its houses better filled, and
more tenements erected. You must, I think, be satisfied, that your own welfare,
and the strength and dignity of the state, do not depend on the completion of
the measures against which I have warned you. Ta^e it either way, that
Baltimore-town will, or will not, govern the state, and no public reason under
Heaven appears for presenting it with the seat of government.

Her advocates may tell you that I have slandered her; that her inhabitants
have no intention, by law, to engress commerce. But the consequences of a
remov^l do not at all depend upon the present views, wishes or intentions, of
the present inhabitants. These may alter with a change of circumstances, and
even the set of inhabitants, either with or without a removal of the
government, will be materially changed in the course of a very few years. But
in the name of common sense, what is it they do mean? If at any time they can
hit upon a scheme for the advancement of the public good, or if they want any
local regulations that are just and consistent with the public welfare, what is
there to prevent them from laying their plans before the legislature at
Annapolis? The mischief is, that every thing must there undergo a full and fair
discussion. The assembly has been ever prone to indulge them in every thing
that has had the least appearance of propriety; the assembly to have done
otherwise must have been wicked and blind; and every one readily allows, that
they are, on all accounts, entitled to the greatest attention and respect. If,
notwithstanding this, they cannot be contented until they get under the
immediate protection of the legislature, and yet do not mean to govern the
state, I can assign to them no other motives but these. They must have in
contemplation some matter of mere private interest, and hence they become
advocates for their town. Or they must conceive, that by merely enjoying the
seat of government, without having any influence in the legislature, their town
will be benefited; and they may think too, that the commerce of the state will
be improved. In both these I have endeavored to demonstrate they would be
deceived. Or their mere pride cannot support the idea of a town, so far
inferior to theirs, being the metropolis, bearing all the honors of
government, and compelling them at times to attend public bodies. But in this
matter you are all concerned. And you ought surely to keep the seat of
government where you may be certain that your representatives cannot be exposed
to the arts of cunning, intriguing, interes^ed men; where you may be certain
that the legislature may quietly and freely debate; where a mob cannot be
raised to disturb or intimidate them; where the good of the whole will probably
be equally consulted; where the influence of a part may not prevail against the
rest; where powerful combinations may not be entered into against your freedom
and rights; where the senate may retain its constitutional importance; where
the genuine substance, and not the mere form^ only, of your constitution may be
preserved. Let me entreat you again and again, to reflect even on this point,
whether you ought to consign to destruction a great number of your innocent
fellow-citizens, and at the same time hazard the loss of many great and sure
advantages, without the certain prospect of some mighty good, that may amply
compensate for every thing we can possibly lose.

By fixing the seat of government at a large commercial town, you put your
liberties to the hazard, as much as a single state in the union of thirteen
free states can possibly do. True policy does not require us to confine
commerce to a single spot; and you are greatly interested in the growth of
other towns. The value of your lands will not increase in the same proportion
as the size and trade of a single town. The value of all your lands may be
augmented by the growth of a number of other towns. The liberal instruction of
the rising generation will be best carried on at a small capital, distinguished
by the refinement of its manners, purity of morals, and universal good order;
and the liberties of your posterity depend on maintaining a succession of
honest and able men. There is no use whatever to a state like ours, in
concentrating our riches and strength; but by so doing you may run the risk of
combinations against your liberties. In all great towns there is a fatal
tendency to luxury and dissipation, and of course to a degeneracy of manners;
but these evils will be much greater in a large town, when it becomes the
capital of a state. The native soil of every species of corruption is an
extensive metropolis. The seat of government, merely as such, is not favorable
to the commerce of a town; but as it cannot fail to give any large town an
undue influence in all public councils, the fixing of the seat of government at
Baltimore, and the adoption of the politics of that town, will probably do an
irreperable injury to the community at large. And all these are but a part of
the arguments which will naturally suggest themselves to every man of plain
common sense, who will apply himself to a cool and dispassionate deliberation
on this grand and interesting subject.

The Farmer does not hesitate to assert, that no evils have resulted to
New York, or Massachusetts, from holding the seats of their governments in
their great commercial towns; and that from those towns they have derived great
federal importance. That they have actually experienced the evil^ against which
I am guarding you, I am too little acquainted with their proceedings positively
to assert I think proper here to insert a paragraph from a paper called the
Massachusetts Spy, published weekly at Worcester. The date is the 16th of March
1786. It was handed to me after I had finished this address.

On Monday last week, a motion was made in the honorable house of
representatives, to remove the general court out of Boston. The motion was
seconded, and Thursday last was assigned for the consideration of this
important matter. It has long been complained of, that large and populous
scaports are improper places for the deliberations of a legislature. Besides
the necessary noise and hurry of business in a large commercial town, many
members of the legislature are thought to be under an undue influence. Congress
viewed matters in this light, and to prevent the evils resulting therefrom,
wisely came to the determination of building a federal city.

From this it would appear, that the evils have already been felt. What will be
the result of the debate will in a little time appear. But that very influence
which is complained of, may prevent a redress of the evil: and I much question,
whether the legislature at Boston will be at liberty to debate this very
important point.


. That in a little time they must feel them, I am as well convinced as I can
possibly be of any event which is yet in the womb of time. Of Philadelphia I
know a little more; and might safely refer you to a history of that state for
an illustration of almost every part of my argument. That state, indeed, to the
regret of almost all its worthy citizens, has only one branch of the
legislature. But say, whether you conceive it possible, amidst the distractions
of that government, which have proceeded from the violence of party spirit in
their great commercial capital, that a senate could have even subsisted until
the arrival of their first great constitutional period for electing a council
of censors.

Some of the inhabitants of Baltimore-town have set up a kind of claim to the
seat of government, and they found it on the amount of their public taxes.

If a thing, merely in the gift of government, were contended for between the
town of Baltimore and the city of Annapolis, the legislature might determine on
the same principle which actuated the judges in the famous contest for the
armor of Achilles; or they might perhaps decide with propriety in favor of
the town, on account of its great superiority of numbers. But if a decision in
its favor would injure the community, this single town would be bound to give
up to the state, on the same principle that Annapolis would be bound to yield
to it. The payment of taxes, however, confers no other right, either on an
individual or a town, than a right to the equal protection of government;
which, as it is milituted for the benefit of all the persons composing society,
should, if possible, be administered so as to injure none, and to consult the
welfare of all.

That Annapolis has so long been possessed of the seat of government, the
Farmer considers as an argument for the removal. He call^^ of the principle of
^^tation. He should con^ide, on that principle, that other towns may hereafter
put in a claim. However, as on this head he has indulged himself with some
jocose expressions* I can scarcely consider him in (...) in the argument, and
therefore I do not think It worth while to expose the folly of the principle,
when applied to the ^eat of government.

(...) possession is, in itself a strong argument against dispossession. There
is re^ding in Annapolis scarcely one free men, woman, or child, that would not
suffer by a removal of the government. In Baltimore-town, a few rich men, to
whose real happiness an accession of wealth cannot be essential, (...) this
measure, obtain a considerable augmentation of property. The re^due of its
inhabitant, whatever they may be (...) the contrary, are in reality interested
against it. At any rate, a very considerable majority of them cannot be greatly
interested in support of the measure. At least they have not, in the smallest
degree, their livelihoods depending on the event. Say even that they would be
considerably enriched, and that the community is in no way interested. Would
you, on account merely of doing good to your fellow-citizens, prefer the giving
to a great number of men that, which they never have possessed, that which,
'till very lately, they never looked for, and that, which is by no means
necessary to their happiness? Would you, I say, prefer doing this, to the
letting a small number of men retain that which they ever have held, to which
no others have a superior right, which cannot be divided, and which is almost
essential to their existence? Whether it is better to let a single man retain
an estate, just competent to his support, or to take it, and distribute it
amongst half a dozen men, who before were as rich as himself? The question will
not admit a dispute; and you must at once perceive the vast difference between
withholding from a man that which he never had, and the depriving him of what
he has always had. Examine the subject in every point of view, the more you
reflect, the better you will be convinced, that Baltimore-town ought not, in
this instance, to be gratified. I will not go so far as others have done. I
will not say, the attempt for its wickedness, is without a parallel. But I must
say, that never yet have I heard of any thing more ungenerous. To view it in
its naked deformity is, indeed, almost sufficient to impress one with horror!

The only arguments in favor of the proposition, which remain to be discussed,
are directed to your representatives in their private capacities, and it is
your business to take care that these arguments shall not influence them to
sacrifice your interest to what they may conceive to be their own private
advantage.

It is said that at Baltimore-town the members of the assembly may transact
their private business, whilst they are managing the affairs of government.
This consideration is pressed home to their feelings, as individuals. But
surely you cannot be benefited, by having their attention diverted from the
public business. Would any pr^^ent man employ, for the management of a (...),
which requires the utmost diligence and attention, a person, who at the same
time, is carrying on a business much more interesting to him than that of his
employers? I acknowledge, that in general the private business of the members
may soon be dispatched. But their staunch friends at election will expect their
little affairs to be managed likewise. It is not improbable, that your
representatives will even solicit agencies and commissions, and will esteem
their seats of value, on account of being maintained by the public, whilst they
shall be devoting their talents and attention to private concerns. Does not
every man know, that to execute properly the duties of a legislator, the
closest application, the most intense study, and an entire exemption from all
other business, is absolutely necessary? We are told indeed, that few members
are distinguished, even at Annapolis, by their application to the business of
the session; and that they consume a great portion of their time in
unprofitable amusements. This I shall not dispute; but let them, at any time,
have private business to transact, and I am afraid, that instead of devoting to
it their hours of amusement, they will rather employ those hours which belong
strictly to the public. There is a danger too of having their minds occupied by
this private business, even whilst they shall be within the public walls.

From a gentleman who has called the 9th article of the declaration of rights
only declaratory, I did not expect an argument derived from that article. But
it seems, that whenever it suits the purpose of Baltimore-town, this article
may serve as a guide to the legislature. The article says, that the place for
the meeting of the legislature must be most convenient to the members. He has
mistaken the plain and obvious sense of the article. The place is not to be the
most convenient for them in their private characters, to conduct their private
affairs. In these the public is not interested; but on the contrary, it is
interested, as I have before said, in letting them have little opportunity of
transacting their private affairs, whilst they ought to be engaged in its
service. The article means a place the most central, the most convenient for
them to repair to, and the best suited to them in their public characters, as
members of the legislature. Let us then examine which place is better adapted
to the business of the legislature. In Baltimore-town the members may be
occupied by private business. In Annapolis, it is presumable, they will have
little business, except that upon which they shall be sent, the weighty
business of securing the happiness of their constituents. I will not say that
Baltimore-town, with all its numerous buildings, cannot afford proper
accommodations, because I doubt not, in the beginning, that great efforts would
be made to render the place agreeable. I maintain, that in Annapolis the
members may always procure, at a reasonable rate, even elegant fare,
comfortable lodgings, and quiet apartments, remote from all that noise and
bustle of business, which is altogether inconsistent with calm thought and
sober deliberation.

That Annapolis is more central, and more convenient for a majority of the
state to repair to, you must all know. By your constitution, the annual meeting
of the legislature takes place in November, and it rarely ends before January.
At that time, as I am informed, the town of Baltimore is generally inaccessible
by water, and therefore the gentlemen of the eastern shore, to return home,
might be under the necessity of heading the bay, or coming down by land to
Annapolis. At what other season can they so conveniently leave their homes as
at the end of autumn? Say that you will change the constitution, and let the
annual meeting be in summer, (for it cannot be in the spring,) the heat, the
dust, and the apprehension, if not the real danger, of contagion, will soon
induce an opinion, that it were better to attend at the present stated period
at Annapolis.

There is a set of men, the pretended friends to Annapolis, but in effect its
most dangerous foes. These men affect candor and disinterestedness. They yield
to the force of the reasons against the measure, but then they argue in this
way. The removal is an event which the ordinary course of affairs must
inevitably bring about. The citizens of Annapolis can prevent it only a few
seasons longer; the delay will afford them very little benefit; and, until it
takes place, they must remain in an uneasy state of su^pense. It were better
then for them to yield at once to inevitable necessity, and to let Baltimore
enjoy those advantages which must attend the seat of government.

Suppose a man to address you gravely in the following terms.

My beloved friends,
In the course of a few revolving suns ye all must die. From the creation of
the world unto this present day, there is no record or tradition that death has
spared any man more than a thousand years. For numerous ages past, how few have
reached the short sum of threescore years and ten! Were it not better then for
ye at once to die, than to linger out a frail feverish existence, continually
harraffed by the dread of that which no earthly means can prevent?

Would this harrangue induce a single man to lay violent hands upon himself?
Would it prevent him in his sickness from using the means of recovery? There
is, however, a capital distinction between the two cases. Death we all know to
be inevitable. The removal of the seat of government I am so far from thinking
unavoidable, that I never yet could see the great cause which Annapolis had to
fear. In a few years, I am persuaded, the matter will be totally out of the
question; for in these few years you will be able to profit from the experience
of your sister states; and you will discern your true interests too well to
afford Baltimore-town the least room for hope.

That the greatest towns throughout the world are, for the most part, capitals,
I cannot deny; but this consideration affords no argument for Baltimore-town.
Most of the governments in the world are arbitrary, and for the security of
such, large capitals are absolutely necessary. Whenever therefore, in one of
these governments, whether it be a despotism, a monarchy, or an aristocracy, a
town increases so far as to overtop the capital, it is good policy for the
sovereign power immediately to change the place of its residence There is
perhaps no instance of a large metropolis in a government entirely free. There
is, in every great town, (...) fatal a tendency to corruption, that a
government there can hardly fail of becoming arbitrary. For us then to change
our capital, because in most other governments their largest towns are
capitals, would be acting contrary to the dictates of common sense and
experience. In a word, so long as your liberties shall be dear to your hearts,
and so long as ye shall be able to understand your true interests, you will
permit the government to remain where there is nothing to endanger them.

I DOUBT not, my countrymen, that before the next general election, you will be
strongly solicited for your instructions, and I apprehend, from the industry,
perseverance and influence, of Baltimore-town, that most of the solicitations
will be in its favor. I could invoke Heaven to witness, that in writing this
address I have the sincerest wishes to promote your happiness. And all the
return I ask from you, is to weigh well the arguments I have used, to carry
them with you to all public meetings in your respective counties, and to all
upon every man who shall solicit your countenance to the proposed measure, to
give them a full, clear, and sati^^actory answer.

As the election of a senate is at hand, attempts may likewise be made to
instr^ct the electors. You surely must remark, how imprope^ it would be to
instruct men who are to choose upon oath. It is the evident intention of the
constitution, that these men shall always be at perfect liberty to exercise
their own judgments. If not, wherein is the use of that refined mode of
election? It were much better for the people at once to elect the senate, than
to choose electors who are bound to obey their instructions. It would in^eed be
a prostitution of language to call them electors, if instead of naming their
own choice, they are only to utter the opinion of others.

Permit me now, my countrymen, to remark, that although I do not question your
right of dictating to your delegates, you ought to exercise that right in a
very sparing manner. Perhaps instructions have never yet been fairly obtained.
I will inform you what alone I conceive to be fair instructions, and such as
your representatives may be bound to obey. If at a public meeting, of which
general notice has been given, any matter shall be freely discussed, and
instructions respecting it be produced, and read to the people there
assei^bled, approved, and signed by a majority of the voters in the county, and
by their directions presented to their delegates, the^ ought the^r delegates
either to pursue those instructions, or to resign their seats.

But when busy artful men, who are not even residents of the county, shall go
about soliciting the people, one after another, to subscribe their
instructions; and when the people have never heard a discussion of the subject;
and when even a majority has not signed them; instructions like these cannot,
and ought not, on any principle whatever, to be binding. It is notorious, that
instructions like these may be obtained for almost any purpose whatever.
Sometimes indeed, your representatives take a fancy that they are instructed,
when they have not even a writing to show; when they have not conversed on the
subject with a tenth part of their constituents; and when perhaps the subject
has not in their county been even generally talked of. The truth is, these men
have not a proper sense of their own dignity, and they suffer themselves to be
dictated to by a few bustling noisy men, without whose assistance they are
apprehensive they cannot maintain their seats.

It is rarely that the people of a county can have a fair comprehen^ive view of
a subject to be discussed in the general assembly. Indeed it is seldom at a
popular meeting that both ^^des of a question are permitted to be stated and
exammed. Besides, the representatives of each county are, at the same time,
representatives of the state, and bound to consult the good of the whole. For
all these weighty and most substantial reasons, I would advise you to give your
instructions in those cases only where your rights and liberties may be
endangered. In a case like the present, when every e^^ine will be put in motion
to carry a most pernicious measure, and when too there is a danger that your
representatives may be swayed by personal motives; it is in cases like this,
that you may, without the least scruple, interfere.

But I do not urge you, my countrymen, even on this occasion, to bind your
delegates by instructions. I have ever observed, that the men fondest of
procuring them, are those who are fearful of being borne down by superior
reason. You will be told, that the friends of Annapolis, at the last session,
would not consent to refer to the people the proposition for a removal. It is
true that a motion was made for leave to bring in a bill for removing the seat
of government. This motion being both seconded and opposed, a day was assigned
for the debate. On that day, after a fair and dispassionate discussion, and
when every member was at perfect liberty to vote his opinion, the motion was
rejected by 35 against 18. A second motion was then made, for leave to bring in
the same bill, to be published under the direction of the house for your
consideration. This motion too was rejected almost without a debate. It was the
publication of this bill, by order of the house of delegates, that the Farmer
thinks would have been "a reasonable expedient for collecting your sense." It
would have been indulging the friends of Baltimore-town in a manner, of which,
in this state, there never was, and never ought to be, an example; and a small
minority had not the least color of right to expect it. You must indeed have
despised the conduct of your representatives, had they published for your
consideration, a bill which, after deliberation, they would not suffer to be
brought into their house.

It has been generally believed, that a majority of the gentlemen composing the
present senate, was opposed to the measure. Of course, one great object may be
(if I may use the expression) to pack a senate; and for that purpose it will be
expedient, in the first instance, to pack their electors. You will remember,
however, that the senate to be chosen in September next, is to last five years,
and in that time an improper senate might subvert the constitution. The
convention were so fully impresse ^^ith an idea of the necessity of having the
best characters for that elevated station, that they invented the most
admirable mode of election which has ever been known in the universe, and for
any single purpose to defeat their salutary provision, would be a disgrace to
the people of Maryland. I wish not to be understood, that any person who shall
vote for a removal of the government would be unworthy of a seat in the senate.
I have no such contracted narrow way of thinking. My position is, that such men
only ought to be elected, who possess the most cultivated minds, the most
independent spirits, the greates^ love of country, the most inflexible
integrity, and the greatest dignity of character. As few men, indeed, possess
all these requisites of a perfect senator, the electors should discard no man
of whose worth we have had ample experience. I would dismiss no man merely
because he is an advocate for the removal, and I would not elect even a plain,
honest, ignorant man, merely because he is a staunch friend to Annapolis. Let
the electors examine the merits of our present senators, without any regard to
their sentiments on any one particular question. Let the opinion of the
electors on the present question be what it may, they cannot suppose every
thing depends on carrying the measure. I conceive, that if an cl^^^or wishes to
fix the government at Baltimore, he ought to red^^ble his care in electing a
good senate, because the qualifications of a senator, who will on all occasions
perform his duty in that town, must be rare indeed.

I beseech you, my beloved countrymen, to be exceedingly circumspect in your
choice of electors, and attempt not to lay them under any injunction whatever,
except that of examining the conduct of each memner of the present senate, and
of making very particular inquiries concerning all those who shall be preposed
as objects of their choice, As to the general proceedings of the senate, from
the commencement of the government, the whole state bears ample testimony of
their worth; and I know not the man in the present body, whose conduct, on the
whole, has not merited your approbation. However, it is the duty of your
electors to make the strictest scrutiny, and let them not think of dismissing
any gentleman, until they shall be certain of finding a more worthy successor.

It may be expected, that Aristides will not conclude, without making some
personal retort upon his adversaries; but he will not imitate them in a
practice which he contemns. He (...) enter^^ns not the least resentment, and
the only revenge which he wishes to take, is to subdue them by sup^r^^r reason.
As indeed he was conscious, that neither his moral or political character was
in any part vulnerable, he thought himself secure from personal reflections;
but it seems that his indigence is a matter of reproach. If the narrowne^ss of
his fortune were imputable to folly or vice, the rep^^of, although imm^terial
to the question, might indeed have been just. But when under a necessitous
dependence on a government, which has repeatedly, and perhaps from (...) it
says, he has maintained a character (...) by meanness o^ dishonor; when he
has even been (...) by the manly independence of his spirit; the repr^^ch, if
it recoils not on his adversary, was at least truly preposterous.

It is not Aris^^^^^ alone, that the advocates of Baltimore have (...) to (...)
in your edimation. They would (...), and they speak as if all the ci^^^ens of
Annapolis were upon it. Gladly would they revive the prejudices formerly
entertained on account of the overweening arrogance of a few powerful men. They
tell you, she receives more from the public than she contributes. In what
manner can they support the assertion? Will they charge it with the salaries
paid to a few civil officers? Or, if these salaries be properly chargeable to
the city, will they pretend that they are more than an adequate compensation
for services? They remark that Annapolis has no place of Divine worship. Would
they infer that she has no religion? Or will they contend that any other place
excels her in virtue and morality? Are they ignorant, that the old church was
taken down just before the war, for the purpose of crecting a new one on the
spot? And that ever since, the members of the church of England, who constitute
almost the whole of the citizens, have constantly had Divine worship, and have
handsomely supported their minister? Many untoward circumstances have concurred
in hitherto preventing the new building; but be it known to her enemies, as
well as to her friends, that Annapolis is about to wipe away the disgrace, and
to erect a place of worship on a ^oble and elegant plan.

I doubt not, that to many of you I have appeared exceedingly proli^. I have
indeed in some places been guilty of repetition; but I wish to be as plain and
inve^igible as pos^^^^^, and I have placed things in a variety of lights, that
I might have the better chance of making a^^^m^ression, and of being perfectly
understood by you all.

Permit me now to conclude with the concluding words of my former address.

On generous and noble minds, the following considerations cannot fail to make
an impression.

In spite of prejudice and detraction, Annapolis is, and ever has been, the
seat of elegance, propriety, and refine^^^^ of manners. Harmony and friend^^
in, for the most pa^^, prevail amongst its citizens. It is here that ex^^^ples
of benevolen^^ and ^^^^iotism are shown. No tude (...) have ever disturbed the
deliberations of any public body under the present government; and the
moderation with which they behave on (...) ^^^^sion, assord^ a (...)
presumption, (...) there may alway^ be a perfect freedom of debate. It was here
that the late opposition to Great Britain began in the southern states: and the
example exhibited by this little city, contributed greatly to kindle the dame
far and wide, and to confirm and re-assure her wavering friends. These things
will history record. This city (...) known, and held in repute, by our allies.
To the leg^^lature, and to the state at large, it will reflect a la^^^g
disgrace, if without more powerful reasons than have yet been suggested, a law
should be passed, the consequen^^s of which, in less than half a century, will
reduce this town to a heap of ruins.

ANNAPOLIS, March 17, 1786. ARISTIDES.


