AN ELECTION SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE THE GENERAL COURT, OF NEW HAMPSHIRE, AT
CONCORD, JUNE 8, 1786.

By SAMUEL HAVEN, D. D. Pastor of the South Church in PORTSMOUTH.

When the righteous are in authority the people rejoice; but when the wicked
bear rule the people mourn. KING SOLOMON. For them that honor me I will honor,
and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed. JEHOVAH. PORTSMOUTH:
PRINTED BY JOHN MELCHER.

M,DCC,LXXXVI

STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE. In the HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES, June 20th, 1786.
VOTED, that Mr. SPARHAWK, Col. TOPPAN and Doctor PRESTON* with such of the
Hon. SENATE as they may join, be a commit to wait upon the Rev. Dr. HAVEN,
and present him with the thanks of the GENERAL-COURT, for his performance at
CONCORD, and request of him a copy of the discourse delivered on the Eighth of
June current, in order to have it printed.

Sent up for CONCURRENCE, JOHN SPARHAWK, Speaker P. T.
In SENATE, the same day READ and CONCURRED, Mr. WENTWORTH and Mr. ATKINSON
joined. JOSEPH PEARSON, Secretary.

A true Copy, Attest, JOSEPH PEARSON, Secretary.

AN ELECTION SERMON.
INTRODUCTION.
WE are assembled on this joyful anniversay of our public liberty: -- liberty
obtained at the expense of much blood and treasure; with decency becoming a
christian state, we now appear in this sacred place, first to pay our religious
acknowledgements to the SUPREME RULER, and to collect some instruction from the
oracles of truth: that special providence which prevents the worthy reverend
brother The Rev. Dr. Langdon, of Hampton-Falls, confined with a broken bone,
but a short time before the general election in this State.
appointed to have led in the public devotions of this day, and a very late
call on me to stand in his place, from his Excellency the PRESIDENT and the
honorable COUNCIL, must be my apology for the following hasty composition.

LET this honorable COURT then, and this respectable ASSEMBLY permit me to
expect their kind candor, while I attempt a few important thoughts on this
great occasion, suggested by the words of our LORD, recorded in the gospel
according to

MATTHEW, xxiv. -- 45, 46, 47, ver. Who then is a faithful and wise servant,
whom his Lord has made ruler over his household, to give them meat in due
season? blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he comes, shall find so
doing: Verily I say unto you he shall make him ruler over all his goods.
MY RESPECTED HEARERS,
AMONG the many metaphors used in sacred scripture, expressive of the duty and
subjection we owe to God our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ; that of a
servant is perhaps the most frequent. It is used with the highest propriety;
for it is just in its self, and adapted to convey ideas of the highest
importance to us. For he who made us, he who provides for us, supporting both
soul and body in all their noble powers and organs, has surely an unlimitted
right to our services. He, who has redeemed us unto God with his own most
precious blood, that we might be to him a peculiar people, zealous of good
works, has the highest claims upon us, and may justly expect we should glorify
him in our bodies and in our souls which are the Lords. In a word, he may
justly expect, that, in our respective stations and characters, we should yield
all ready obedience and subjection to him, who has laid down his precious life
for us.

AND indeed, my friends, the true servants of Jesus Christ glory in their
character: they esteem it their highest dignity, that they are now no longer
servants and slaves, to the prince of the power of this world; nor to their own
vile lusts: but that the blessed son of God has made them free: though other
Lords have had dominion over them, yet henceforth they will make mention only
of his name.

SERVANTS must do their masters work, and keep ever in view, as their rule and
guide his commands and will: they must do their work with cheerfulness, -- with
singleness of heart, -- and good fidelity; though their master may appoint to
some more work, to others less, according to their several abilities; yet all
have something on their hands by his appointment of importance to be done. Nor
does the subordination of laborers, or that of their work, at all prevent
their holding one common title, under their great Lord: they are all his
servants, and blessed be his name, if they are faithful, however they may rank
among themselves, they shall all in the last day, receive a most gracious
reward from their divine master, in the presence of attending angels, and an
assembled world.

THE servant mentioned in the text, seems to have been one greatly honored with
peculiar talents and entrustments; he is made ruler over his masters household,
his character and post are applicable, with some special propriety, to
Magistrates and Ministers.

MAGISTRATES are appointed, by the wise and good providence of heaven, to rule
among men, in subordination to, and in immitation of him, "who himself rules
the world in righteousness, and judges the people with equity." The holy
Apostle Paul accordingly roundly asserts, that the powers that be, are ordained
of God. They are, in this sense even under the present dispensation, the Lord's
anointed, appointed by him ministers of God for good. They have in their
exalted stations, the solemn oath and charge of God imposed upon them, to
regard supremely his honor, to promote the great end of their delegated power,
and the public good. They are commanded to be just, to fear God, to hate
coveteousness, and ever to bear in mind that God is with them in the judgment.

THESE are his honored servants in the State, -- the earthly political
household of the Lord: they are appointed to do his work, to promote the
happiness of the Commonwealth, which is the great end of all political
government; -- to give to every one his meat in due season, and advance, to
their utmost, the great designs of God's moral government in the world: Happy
are these his honored servants, whom when their Lord comes, he shall find so
doing: Verily I say unto you, he shall make them rulers over all his goods;
their stations shall be marked with distinguished honor in the world of supreme
glory.

MINISTERS must consider themselves under the character of servants in the
church of the living God: their work is spiritual, their charge is great, and
their account will be most solemn. By the great head of the church they are
made rulers in his spiritual household, which is the church of the living God;
they are appointed to this office, not to Lord it over men's faith, or
consciences; but to be helpers of their joy; and to give to every one his
portion of meat in due season.

GREAT wisdom and faithfulness are necessary in ministers, in order to their
acquiting themselves to God and their own consciences: though as ministers of
that kingdom of their blessed Lord, which is not of this world, they are not to
interfere with matters of government, nor assume lordly titles over their
fellow subjects; yet it must be allowed, they have a most important depositum
committed to them; they have an arduous work on their hands; they have been
charged in the presence of God and the holy angels, to watch for souls as those
who must give account; they are urged to be found faithful in the household of
God, by innumerable motives of the highest moment; one only might be thought
sufficient; they are the servants of men's souls for Christ's sake.

BUT, my respected hearers, while we have pointed out magistrates and ministers
as especially designed in the sacred passage, we are considering, let none of
this assembly consider themselves as wholly disinterested in the subject in
hand; for persons of every age, rank and character have something entrusted
them by the great Lord of the household; they have some talents to improve for
the well-being of the State to which they belong; the honor of Christ and the
edification of the church.

WE have all the proper work of time assigned us, in whatever posts we are
placed. There is something to be done, for ourselves and society. -- Something
in our power to effect, either by our heads, our hearts, or our hands. We must
all be diligent in business, and fervent in spirit, serving the Lord. I say
again, time, and all its important concernments, are talents entrusted us by
the great Lord of all; -- and woe unto us, if by indolence, or attention to
other things, things comparatively of no importance, we wrap these talents up
in a napkin, and leave them unimproved.

BUT give me leave to consider, a little more distinctly, the character of wise
and faithful servants, as it is concisely drawn by our Lord in the text.

IT must be supposed then, that they know the duties of their particular
stations; and what talents, are entrusted them for their improvement.

ONE, who is wholly ignorant of his Lord's will; who either cannot, or will not
understand the duties, of his particular station; or in what way he ought to
serve God and man, cannot be numbered among, either the wise, or the faithful
servants. The good servants, therefore of our Lord Jesus Christ, will not fail
to enquire with diligence, after their master's will; and carefully consider
what are the duties, which especially belong to that department, he has
assigned them: Their language, from time to time, will be, like that of Saul,
in his way to Demascus, Lord, what would thou have me to do?

THE servant in the text, is called a wise servant, not only because it is our
highest wisdom to be faithful; but because he was prudent, being well
instructed in all the duties of his station.

AGAIN, wise servants, will keep in their proper spheres.

THEY will not intermeddle with things which lie out of their line, or above
their capacity. Wherein God has called them, therein they will abide with God.
They will diligently attend upon the business of their own proper stations;
they will consider what are the talents entrusted them; and be concerned to
improve those they have, not those they have not.

THE want of this kind of wisdom, has introduced, both into the church and
state, great disorders. Hence have proceeded those violent attacks, on that
order of priesthood, which God himself, established in the Jewish economy:
Hence the story of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram; as you will see at large in Number.
XVI, a^ the beginning. Hence also that unhappy king Uzziah, who thurst himself
into the priest's office, and was struck, by the hand of the Lord, with the
plague of leprosy, for his profane presumption: You will read the account of
this memorable event in 2d Chron. XXVI. chap.

NOR has the christian church been free from the sad effects of the same
spirit. Many have run before they were sent: and those who kn^w not what are
the first principles of the oracles of God, have imagined they were quite equal
to the most arduous undertaking; -- that they could stop the mouth of
gainsayers, and rightly divide the word of truth, giving to every one, his
portion in due season.

BUT the State has been as much infested, with this proud and self-advancing
spirit, as the church. While modesty, with great abilities, has been contented
in her humble station; though in the truth of facts, one of the highest
recommendations to public trust; the self-confident assurance, of some
ignorant, overbearing persons, either by the brass in their face, or the gold
in their purse, have pushed themselves into places, which they could neither
fill with dignity, nor resign without humiliating regret. Hence, the wise king
Solomon, long since observed a sore evil under the sun, namely, servants on
horseback, and princes walking by their side.

AGAIN, faithful servants, are supposed to be well acquainted, with the ends
and purposes, to which their talents and entrustments, must be applied. The
glory of the great Lord of all, and the happiness of mankind, command their
highest attention. They know that God is glorified, when the great purposes of
his moral government, are answered; these center in the happiness of mankind.
For "the Father of Being is the Father of mercies, a principle of boundless
active love; and though infinitely various in execution, his design is one, his
own glory, or which is evidently the same thing, the happiness of his
creatures, is the center in which all the lines of his government unite. Every
thing takes place in the universal system, according as it tends to the
accomplishment of this great parental purpose." The duties, therefore of the
second table, or what we owe to our fellow servants, will be eyed with great
attention. The religion of our Divine Master, is most kind and beneficent: The
gospel itself is a manifestation of divine love, directed to it is proper
object, -- the salvation of a ruined world. Every attentive person, must
observe, that it is well adapted to promote, civil and social happiness: For,
it inriches the heart with every virtue, which tends to adorn human nature, and
to increase the common stock of social happiness. "It forms the wise and
prudent parent, -- the amiable child, -- the affectionate brother, -- the
generous friend; but above all, the judicious, upright and consistent
magistrate; who rises superior, not only to views of personal interest; but
what is often more expressive of true greatness, the prejudice of party, and
the blind impulse of passion; who with the knowledge and government of his own
heart, is unmoved by the froward humors of the world around him; and whether
they frown or flatter, he remains fixed in his purpose, of promoting their
happiness." -- Thus faithful servants, influenced by the principles of our holy
religion, will ardently desire, and assiduously endeavor to promote the
well-being of all around them; especially of those who are committed to their
care in their character of magistrates or ministers. The servant in the text,
gave the household, their meat in due season: It was his fidelity in this branch
of his character, his Lord emphasised, and remarked with so much kind respect.

BE assured, my respected friends, faithful servants are not only acquainted
with the duties of their respective stations; and know the ends which should
command their highest attention; but they are constantly and conscienciously
concerned to discharge these duties, and to answer the end of their
appointment, to such particular stations, in the economy of God's moral
government.

ARE they rulers? They will rule in the fear of God; devoting themselves to his
honor, by whom kings reign, and princes decree justice: they will imitate in
some happy measure, though alas! infinitely short of the great original, the
wisdom, -- the justice, -- faithfulness and mercy of the Supreme Ruler, all
which glorious perfections shine with resplendent luster, in his moral
government of the world.

ARE they ministers of the gospel? it is their great concern to obtain mercy of
the Lord to be found faithful. They give themselves wholly to their proper
work; warning every man -- and teaching every man in all wisdom that they may
present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.

ARE they parents or masters? they are conscienciously concerned to walk in
their houses with a perfect heart. They behave with kindness, gentleness, and
fidelity toward those committed to their care and government: -- They endeavor
to teach them by precepts, and their own examples, the true fear of the Lord.
Consider them in any, -- in all the dear social connexions of life, you will
see them kind and courteous, tender hearted and pitiful; endeavoring to
exhibit themselves a pattern to others, in the full exercise, of all the social
virtues and graces of the gospel.

To sum up all in few words; they, who are wise and faithful servants, employ
all their abilities, and improve all their opportunities, in their respective
stations, for the glory of God, and the welfare of mankind. Their time, --
their health, -- their dignities, -- their substance, -- the gifts and graces
of the gospel, -- and all their advantages, of either doing good to others; or
of obtaining essential benefit to themselves: all these are consecrated and
devoted, to the honor of their great Master, by a careful, and faithful
improvement of them.

BUT it is more than time, my worthy hearers, that the subject should be
particularly addressed to the honorable Court, whose presence has called me to
speak, from this sacred place. May I be permitted, with humble assurance, to
address this honorable Court as a collective body of christian Magistrates,
assembled, with fixed purpose of heart to promote the honor of the great
Messiah, and the best interest of this commonwealth?

UNDER this most respectable character, I will hope to consid^^ every one of
this much respected body. For, Heaven forbid, that this State, in her infancy,
should so far forget her own constitution, that grand palladium of all her
liberties, as to suffer infidels and deists to fasten their falcon hands on the
reins of government; or give a place, in their legislative, judicial, or
executive body to any one, who does not hold himself amenable at the tribunal
of him who has a name written on his vesture and on his thigh, King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords.

Honored Gentlemen, YOUR dignity, -- your duty, -- and the most powerful
motives to fidelity have been imperfectly hinted in the didactic part of our
subject. It is presumed you have listened with an attentive ear, to a subject,
in which your public characters so deeply interest you. You have, I trust,
already made the application of the practical part to your own hearts.

YOU are called, by the suffrage of free citizens, to be rulers over God's
household: And thus for the voice of the people may, undoubtedly, be considered
as the voice of God. Yea, the great master of the household himself styles you
Gods. I said ye are Gods; but ye shall die like men. Your stations are
honorable, as they are important: And while you faithfully discharge the
duties, belonging to your several departments, you have just claims of honor
and obedience on us, -- on this whole commonwealth.

IF, according to your original designation, you are indeed the ministers of
God for good; if you are wise and faithful, always seeking the peace of God's
people; if you give to the household their meat in due season, by a just and
wise legislation, and by a faithful and energetic execution of good laws; then
duty, love and gratitude oblige us, to pay you high honor and respect. Yea, it
is in the code of gospel precepts, enjoined us, not only to fear God, but to
honor such civil rulers, we are commanded to submit ourselves to every
ordinance of man for the Lord's sake; and we ought, by the same divine
authority, to render custom, (or tribute,) to whom custom, fear to whom fear,
and honor to whom honor is due. Every citizen therefore, who deserves the
protection of the laws, so far from casting any reproach on your character; or
weakening your hands, by calumniating insinuations, will show you every mark of
dutiful respect; and endeavor to strengthen your hands, in the discharge of
the duties of your public character.

YOUR duty, and your dignity go hand in hand: They are essentially connected
together. The rule and measure is plainly drawn, -- drawn by your own hands, in
the constitution of this State, from which you have solemnly sworn you will not
deviate. This you will therefore, carefully study in all its branches. You will
consider it of great importance, to know, these statutes and ordinances, that
you might not transgress: You will recollect that, for this end, the princes of
God's ancient people, were divinely enjoined, to write out, with their own
hands, the Mosaic constitution.

GIVE me leave, to remind you, that it is the constitution, and constitutional
laws, to which the people have pledged their fidelity and obedience; and not to
any body of men, however otherwise respectable. The moment therefore, you
should presume to raise yourselves, in political importance, above the
constitution, you would forfeit your political dignity; and stand upon the same
ground, with the lowest voters in the state. Did I say, upon the same ground? I
correct myself: For such voters are supposed to be free, from every charge, of
public infidelity: But you would be liable to be called upon, to answer for
your unfaithfulness, at the tribunal of an injured people.

DETERMINED to make this your main guide; you will exert your combined efforts,
fully to discharge, that public confidence your fellow citizens, have reposed
in you. And surely, you cannot fail to recollect, that the wise and faithful
servant, whom his Lord made ruler over all his household, gave them their meat
in due season: This was the principal part of his duty! this he faithfully
discharged. When you consider therefore, yourselves appointed by the same Lord,
through the voice of the people, to be rulers over this part of his household;
and that the very end of this appointment, is, that you might have it in your
power, to give every member his portion of meat in due season; -- this
consideration, will surely annihilate every low motive; -- every species of
party spirit, and selfish views: For these would be likely to draw off your
attention, from the public emolument, and fix it on your own families, or near
connexions. You will reprobate, with the highest indignation, the idea of
desecrating the important depositum committed to you, to the unworthy purposes,
of feeding yourselves only, and not the whole household.

THUS united, and in earnest to promote the public welfare of every part of
this State, you will immediately find important business crowding from every
quarter, on your heads, -- your hearts, your hands: For, the present suffering
circumstances of the household, call aloud for your immediate care.

BUT modest propriety, and a full conviction of my own inability, to lead you
through the laberinth of public labors, forbid my making any attempt of the
kind.

ONLY, let me observe, the scarcity of a circulating medium; -- the low State
of our national credit, and commerce; -- the poor multiplying in all our towns;
-- inattention to the natural sources of our wealth; -- viz. agriculture;
manufactures: well regulated commerce; and especially that oeconomical
prudence, which is essential to the public prosperity of every people; these
are subjects, which call aloud for the united wisdom and energy of this
honorable court.

A revision of such acts, as have been supposed, inconsistent with the
constitution: -- The appointment of proper persons, to represent you in
Congress, persons, possessed of talents adapted to serve in that very important
station, and adorned with such a christian character, as you would wish to have
exhibited, as a sample of your own christian morality, before other christian
nations; -- together with the appointment to other offices in the State as
there may be a call for them; -- as also means to reward such as are faithful,
without distressing the people; -- these undoubtedly are objects, worthy the
notice and careful attention, of this respected court.

THE scarcity of men of literary abilities, and the importance in which the
rising generation, are justly held, by all the wise in every nation, especially
in infant Sates, will surely turn your paternal eyes on our youth. You will
wish to have their young minds, cultivated under the skilful hand of able and
religious instructors; -- such as are capable, at least, of teaching them the
rudiments of our own language; and instructing them, by their own examples, in
the principles of christian morality. If there are good laws already enacted on
this subject, it is presumed you will endeavor to give more energy to such, as
have hitherto, utterly failed of answering their salutary design.

IN a word, your watchful and compasionate eyes will pervade every part of the
household: Your hearts will feel for all: And your hands of justice, -- truth --
and goodness will be employed for all. And blessed are ye, if when your great
Lord calls you from your present distinguished stations, either by death, or in
any other way, you shall be found so doing.

HIS mouth shall bless you, who has all power of blessing in his hands: And
whom he blesses, is blessed indeed. You shall have peace in your own
consciences: the peace of God, which passes all understanding, shall keep your
hearts and minds, through Christ Jesus: Heavens blessings shall be implored
upon you, by all the wise and good: You shall be blessed with more wisdom and
grace; and perhaps, with further intrustments: For, to him who thus has, thus
faithfully improves what he has, we may justly expect more shall be given:
Your fellow citizens shall bless you: Yea, children yet unborn, shall have your
names transmitted them, with high honor.

BUT above all, your Lord and master in Heaven shall bless you* and pronounce,
in the great day of his appearing, that happy euge on you: Well done, good and
faithful servants, ye have been faithful in a few things, I will make you
rulers over many things; enter ye into the joy of your Lord.

To conclude; let this whole assembly be impressed with a deep sense, of the
infinite importance of fidelity in their respective ranks. God's eye is ever
fixed on us all: As there are none above his control, so there are none below
his notice: We shall all stand together, before the bar of Christ, there --
solemn thought! there to render up our respective accounts, of the various
talents entrusted us; and to be judged according to the deeds done in the body.
Then all these distinctions shall be laid aside: Then there will be neither
honorable nor base, in any other sense, than as we shall in that important
hour, be pronounced either faithful, or unfaithful, righteous or wicked.

THEN, all rule and authority, shall be put down: For Christ the great Messiah,
shall reign, till all things are put under his feet. O, therefore, let us now
kiss the son, lest he be angry with us, and we perish in that day; blessed are
all they that put their trust in him

AMEN.

