AN ORATION, TO COMMEMORATE THE INDEPENDENCE OF THE UNITED STATES OF
NORTH AMERICA.

Delivered at the REFORMED CALVINIST CHURCH, in PHILADELPHIA, July 4th, 1786,
AND PUBLISHED at the REQUEST of the PENNSYLVANIA SOCIETY OF THE CINCINNATI.

BY MAJOR W. JACKSON.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED by ELEAZER OSWALD, at the COFFEE-HOUSE.

M,DCC,LXXXVI.

To ROBERT MORRIS, Esquire, late Superintendant of the Finances of the United
States, and an Honorary Member of the Society of the Cincinnati.
SIR,
THE respect which the Society of the Cincinnati have discovered for your
public character inassociating you to their institution, and the affectionate
regard which is known to actuate many of its members toward you, in a private
relation, are among the motives which induce me to offer you the dedication of
a performance, which their partiality has brought into public view.

As there is no person to whom a review of the revolution may with greater
propriety be presented, than to a gentleman, whose eminent services, in every
stage of the war, have justly secured for him the most exalted estimation of
his country: So, sir, there is no one within my knowledge, to whose candor and
friendship I would rather recommend the following production for justice and
patronage, than to yourself.

A stranger to every species of adulation, it is with confident integrity I
tell the world, that this is not the language of servile flattery, but the
Sincere acknowledgment of one who considers himself highly honored by your
friendship, and who will always be solicitous to merit the continuance of a
connection, which is at once his pleasure and his boast.

I am, Sir, with respectful affection and esteem, your most obedient servant,
W. JACKSON.
Philadelphia, July 8, 1786.
ORATION, etc.
IMPRESSED with a grateful sense of the flattering distinction, which an
election to the duty of this day has conferred, and desirous of doing justice
to the favorable opinions of my present friends, and former Fellow Soldiers, I
have ventured to accept the hazardous appointment of this honorable station:
But when I reflect on the opinions which may possibly have been formed -- when
I consider my own inequality to meet the discernment of this respectable
audience, or to answer expectations which the magnitude of my subject may have
suggested. -- I confess that my presumption has transgressed the limits of
prudence; and I solicit your candor and indulgence to what might otherwise be
considered an excess of dutiful indiscretion.

REVOLVING seasons have returned the anniversary of that auspicious day, which
hailed our country independent, and gave freedom to a world.

To commemorate this vast event -- to trace its progress, and mark its
confirmation -- to observe its influence, and to offer a general anticipation
of its consequences, form the interesting objects of our present purpose. --

PAYING the pious tribute of our gratitude and adoration to the Great Disposer
of Human Events, and imploring his continued care and protection over our
infant republic, we pass, with pleasing comprehension, to contemplate the
agency of his almighty will and power.

As it is far from being our wish, I trust it will not be considered our
intention (in reciting the causes and occurrences of our late momentous
struggle) to revive past enmities, or to awaken animosities, which respect for
our national character, and the maxims of our faith, should alike dispose us
forever to forget and to forgive.

IT is wisdom to obliterate offenses, when their effects have ceased; and it is
the dictate of justice to dismiss the remembrance of an injury, which
reparation has amply atoned.

OUR recapitulation of the contest, though but a frail record of their merits,
is due in gratitude to the memory of those heroes, who were Martyrs in the
cause of freedom. -- The remarks on the sufferings of our country, are intended
to impress the value of that object for which they were sustained; and the
deeds of her distinguished citizens are brought forward with no other view,
than as being the best incentives to public virtue. -- Here then the acrimony
of revenge, and the servility of adulation, are both disclaimed, as utterly
unconnected with those generous principles, which prompted and achieved our
glorious revolution.

At a period 1763.
when wisdom, valor, and commercial consequence had raised the British empire
to pre-eminence over the rest of Europe -- when contending kingdoms confessed
her superiority, and yielded to her power -- when her provincial progeny aided
her efforts, and shared in her success -- when maternal tenderness should have
met the advance of filial affection, and cherished an equal endearment. -- In
this moment of pride and delusion, forgetful of her recent acknowledgments, and
insensible to past obligation, she puts off the benignity of the parent, and
assumes the arrogance of a despot.

ANXIOUS only to support the splendour of her court, and the convenience of her
rulers, she extends a tyranny to the extremities of her empire; and, to promote
the sordid views of pensioners and place-men, she departs from her national
characteristics of generosity and honor.

A SYSTEM of unconditional slavery toward her colonies is adopted --
commercial restrictions are imposed, and unconstitutional taxes attempted to be
levied -- distinctions, unworthy of a great nation, and subversive of human
equality, are endeavored to be drawn by this unwise and haughty people.

THE humble petitions of her oppressed children, are dismissed with contempt,
and their dutiful remonstrances rejected with threats and scorn. -- The
mandates of despotism are issued for military execution, and no alternative
proffered but the dagger or the rod.

Thus compelled to commit our equitable claims to the decision of arms, and to
the event of a contest, rendered still more doubtful by the unprovided state of
our magazines, and the defenseless situation of our country, It is the GLORY of
America that she balanced not, when freedom or slavery became the alternative,
to take the field against a nation of established military character, powerful
in resources, and the then acknowledged sovereign of the sea.

THE love of Liberty outweighed the horrors of war, and death, in its defense,
was esteemed an eligible retreat from national servitude. Neither the immediate
sufferings of the camp, nor the darkened prospect of protracted war, could damp
that ardor which fed the hopes of freedom, nor lessen the sense of those wrongs
that urged an irrevocable separation from our unnatural foe. But, anterior to
this ultimate determination, all other means had failed, and the patience of
oppressed humanity been long exhausted -- relentless hostility had raged
throughout our country, and every aggravation of embittered warfare, been
indiscriminately inflicted.

A LIBATION of patriotic blood had been poured to liberty on the plains of
Lexington. -- The virtuous Warren and his brave associates had bled at the
altar of honor and their country on Bunker's-Hill. -- The flames of Charlestown
had illumined the glory of that day -- and every circumstance of compulsion and
resistance at once characterised the vindictive measures of Britain, and the
inflexible firmness of her patriotic opponents -- As the prelude to an
obstinate and bloody war, too frequently stained in its progress with wanton
cruelty -- We here survey a scene brilliant as the brightest fancy can form,
and interesting as every feeling of humanity can render it: -- A scene which
should impress indelible respect and veneration for the memory of those gallant
men who upheld the claims of freedom, and maintained the rights of humankind:
-- Untrained heroes, who resigned not the trust conferred by their country but
with life, nor until repeated repulse had convinced their outnumbering
assailants, that the dream of unresisted oppression vanished at Bunker's-Hill.

THUS were the dark designs of despotism disclosed, and the desolating sword of
war unsheathed to support them.

AT this awful crisis of national calamity the genius of wisdom descends to
direct the councils of America, and the shield of liberty is entrusted to the
illustrious WASHINGTON; -- distinguished amidst the delegated virtue and
firmness of her chosen sons, he is elected to lead her armies, and conduct her
last appeal. -- Propitious appointment! and productive of every blessing, which
the fondest expectation of anxious freedom could have hoped from the choice: --
Far from declining the arduous task which his merits had assigned him, he
sacrifices every private consideration to an exalted sense of public duty,
quits the pleasures of retirement without a personal regret, and resigns, with
cheerfulness, the enjoyments of affluence and domestic felicity, to encounter
fatigue and danger in the cause of his country -- affording to the world an
unparalelled example of every virtue which should adorn the hero 10, or
distinguish the friend of humanity, and transmitting to posterity a fame which
shall survive the ruins of time, and the revolutions of empire.

THE generous flame is communicated, and pervades the continent. An ardor of
public spirit, which Rome in the purest period of her commonwealth, would have
boasted, is disfused through every class of citizens, and a new trait of
character is disclosed in the warm affections of whole countries to each other
-- affections which, it is devoutly to be wished, a just sense of social
happiness and national safety may long continue to cherish and preserve, as the
most certain means to secure domestic tranquillity and foreign respect.

THE nature of the contest now required, and the principle of self
preservation, sanctioned the operations of offensive war. -- The British troops
in Boston were besieged, -- and an army, led by the gallant Montgomery, marched
into Canada -- not to plunder and undistinguished slaughter -- but to
authorized invasion, and retaliation approved by the rules of war. Observant of
humanity he spares the vanquished; and, moved alike by compassion and policy,
he protects the unresisting. Victory, for a season, flatters the fond hopes of
his admiring country; and fortune, obedient to his merit, attends the progress
of his arms: But, alas! in the very moment, when success seemed to promise the
completion of his reward, relentless fate arrests his glorious career, and he
is numbered with the illustrious dead. His faithful followers, deprived of
their beloved leader, reduced in number, and exposed, without equipment, to the
rigor of an inclement season, are obliged to abandon their hard-earned
conquests; and, after sustaining, with unexampled firmness, every hardship
attendant on war, retire reluctant from superior force.

HERE, CARLETON, as the distinguished contrast of thy fellow-leaders, receive
an acknowledgment from one, who, no longer an enemy, but an admirer, is happy
in a public occasion of declaring thy conduct, whether dictated by prudence or
humanity, to have been highly honorable and magnanimous. -- It is the pride of
gratitude to praise an enemy -- it is the boast of human nature to merit the
encomium.

HAVING thus traced out the leading features of war, we must beg leave to
observe, that the limits assigned to our relation admit not a particular
recital of its varied progress. It is not permitted us to indulge in a minute
review of the wisdom and firmness of those councils, which planned the
happiness and freedom of America; or to contemplate in detail the conduct and
gallantry of those heroes, who maintained the strenuous struggle, and
established her claims to independence.

IT will be the pleasing province of history to render particular justice to
their merits, and the grateful voice of posterity will be employed to pronounce
the panegyric of their virtues -- The delighted muse shall dwell with rapture
on the relation of their worth; and science, supported by truth, shall
perpetuate the remembrance of their actions, and immortalize their fame.

BE it our humble endeavor, in a general and summary retrospect of that period,
which will form the most splendid portion of history, to excite an emulation of
the virtues, which then prevailed, and to restore the practice of them.

WE have already remarked on the origin and progress of the contest, to the
time when resistance succeeded remonstrance, and the rights of defense took
place of petition -- we have conducted our dignified commander in chief to the
head of his armies, and we have noticed an unsuccessful attempt to accelerate
the restoration of peace by an invasion of Canada -- Returning to a more
important scene of warfare, we find that, in the blockade of Boston, the
deficits of discipline and military skill are supplied by bravery and
perseverance. -- The veterans of Europe, compelled to confess their influence,
seek safety in retreat, and quit indignant freedom's guarded shore.

THE system of subjugation is changed, and calculating, with an arrogant
confidence, on the facility, with which the weaker and less populous parts of
the continent might be assailed, invasion directs her course to the westward,
-- and, strengthened by the mercenary bands of Brunswick and Hesse, the hopes
of tyranny are raised to certain conquest, and unconditional submission. But
failing to intimidate by a mere display of power, or the menace of immense
armaments, recourse is had to an insidious policy -- insult is added to injury,
in proclamations of proffered pardon to a people, against whom every outrage of
hostility had been practiced. Baffled in this base attempt to awe the timid, or
to impose on the unwary, the resentments of disappointed ambition are kindled
into rage -- the sword is resumed, and the devastations of war are destined to
effect what threats and cunning had failed to accomplish: But the fortitude of
America is found every way correspondent with her claims to political justice
-- undismayed by disaster, as unelated by victory, -- she sustains defeat
without despondency, and supports success with moderation -- The one serves but
to embolden -- the other was never used to sanctify oppression.

ACCOMMODATION being thus at an end, and the hopes of peace, on honorable
terms, entirely removed -- it deeply interested the safety and honor of
America, to deliberate with temper, and to determine with firmness.

SUCCEEDING ages shall admire with astonishment, while they review with
veneration, the MAGNANIMOUS DECISION of that EVENTFUL DAY, when an illustrious
assembly of patriotic chiefs preferred an appeal to Heaven, and hurled defiance
to a tyrants throne -- when, devoted to the public weal, they rose superior to
the threats of power, and hailed THEIR COUNTRY FREE! -- And whether the CAUSE,
the CIRCUMSTANCES, or the CONSEQUENCE of this stupendous act are considered, it
will command to latest time the honor and the homage of a wondering world --
Coercive in its cause, chequered in its circumstances, yet completely happy in
its consequence -- It is impossible to reconsider all its scenes, without the
mingled emotions of indignant freedom, philosophic wonder, and religious
gratitude.

SUCH was the separation of an empire, whose extent of territory, and energy of
power, vied with the strength and limits of imperial Rome.

THUS freed from the fetters of dependence, and ranked among the powers of the
earth, America presents a theater of glory to the brave and the virtuous of all
nations -- and afford, to philosophy a new subject of contemplation and
applause -- for, although war, which has conquest for its object, must ever excite
the regret and reprehension of the good and just -- yet resistance, when
consequent on oppression, will engage even the wish of religion in its behalf;
and the prayer of the pious will be preferred for its success.

A CONSONANCE with this sentiment distinguished the conduct of many friends of
that very respectable persuasion, which constitutes so large a part of our
religious society -- Departing from the strictness of that opinion, which is
opposed to all warfare, they considered themselves not only authorized, but
called on, to protect their property and freedom, at every hazard -- and to
repel the invaders of their country by the interposition of human means --
others, equally impressed with the value of the object, for which we contended,
but swayed by the scruples of belief -- though they declined the duties of the
field, were not wanting in the exercise of every attention, which might
alleviate the misfortunes of their country, or soothe the sorrows of such as
suffered in her cause.

GLORY and spoil are the ordinary inducements to war -- but here more powerful
motives prevailed, and urged our citizens to arms. The hearth and the altar (to
use the language of the ancients) were invaded, and it became the indispensible
duty of all, who loved the one, or venerated the other, to defend them.

WITH such incentives to action, and such cause of perseverance, was the
contest renewed, and continued during the alternate success of seven years
warfare. -- The exigencies of the state demanded the best exertions of its
citizens; and to their immortal honor will it be recorded, that those exertions
were made with every sacrifice of safety and convenience.

THE summer and autumn of 1776 (if we except the glorious repulse of the
British marine, at Sullivan's-island, by the gallant Moultrie, and some less
advantages) were passed in an unsuccessful defense: For, notwithstanding the
masterly movements, and skilful retreats of the American Fabius, his force was
insufficient to stem the torrent of success, and his resources unequal to
maintain the positions, which he had so ably chosen.

As the winter approached the enlistments of the troops expired, and the
strength of the army was impaired.

THE gloom of adversity darkened, and the firmest friend of freedom felt its
influence -- But still there were those who despaired not of the commonwealth
-- and such were their noble efforts, as to restore the confidence of her
councils, and the vigor of her arms.

WHILE the love of liberty shall continue to designate the generous and the
just -- or deeds of heroism to animate the brave -- the victory of Trenton will
be regarded as the rescue of freedom -- and the surprirze at Princeton be
related as the masterpiece of war. It was there the tide of conquest turned,
and the lower of invasion brightened into hope -- it was there that freedom
nerved the naked arm which struck oppression to the ground, and heroic virtue,
in the garb of wretchedness, wrested the tyrant's standard from the hireling's
hand -- and it was there that Pennsylvania proclaimed, by deeds of worth, the
deservings of her sons, and her sacred regard to that faith, which she had
pledged to maintain the confederated empire.

REJOICE, ye Pennsylvanians, in the rich reflection -- and relate it to your
children, as the most powerful incentive to virtue -- bid them repeat it to
their sons as the great eulogium of their ancestors, and the best boast of an
illustrious offspring.

A JOYFUL confidence succeeds to hopeless amazement, and the grateful plaudit
of America salutes the return of success -- her fears are transferred to her
invaders, whose cares are now confined to their own immediate safety, and whose
anxieties are rather those of security than conquest -- But, as the season
advances, their alarm subsides -- and, improving the advantages of their naval
superiority, they wage a war of plunder and predatory descent -- defenseless
villages become the objects of military exploit, and merciless marauders,
conducted by a Dunmore, or a Tryon, are suffered to sacrifice the honors of
humanity, and to disgrace the duties of civilization.

A MORE important scheme of conquest is projected, and, assisted by a powerful
marine, the hostile armies of Britain are wafted to the shores of the Chesapeak
-- thence, pursuing their inroad, they advance to the Brandywine, where zeal
and bravery are forced to yield to discipline and numbers -- and the sword of
injustice is, for a season, permitted to prevail.

As it was here that his career of glory commenced, my audience will indulge,
with peculiar pleasure, the tribute of praise and grateful affection, which is
due to that most excellent friend, citizen, and fellow-soldier, the Mrquis de
la Fayette -- to whose generous exertions and ardent attachment America is
indebted for numerous benefits, and whose ennobled mind is, at this moment,
exercised in the practice of every virtue which may promote her happiness.

RECEIVE, illustrious chief, the most sincere acknowledgments of an obliged
country, and be persuaded that, while patriotism and private worth shall be
held objects of imitation and applause, thy virtues will be venerated, and the
relation of thy merits be continued the delightful theme of distant posterity.

MISGUIDED by a momentary belief, the British chiefs are led to imagine their
purpose accomplished in the reduction of our capital -- nor, until the din of
arms disturbs the delusion, do they perceive that they have only changed their
situation, and secured a winter's cantonment.

THE hopes of America were now placed beyond the event of a battle, and her
darings were no longer controuled by defeat. -- The defense of the Delaware
will long remain a monument of political firmness, and military intrepidity --
and the relation of Germantown shall incite to enterprise and deeds of active
valor -- Nor is this scene of the war the only subject of her glory -- a
similar spirit actuates the extremes of the continent, and the call of freedom
is every where obeyed with zeal and alacrity.

THE success of the British arms in Canada, had been followed by an irruption
so formidable as to alarm the boldest, and to threaten the most dangerous
consequences to our cause -- But, in this moment of discomfiture and defeat,
when the silken slaves of luxury would have yielded to their fears, and sunk
under the apprehensions of their danger, the hardy sons of New England crowded
to the standard of resistance -- and, assisted by their gallant friends of the
south, oppose, with success, an half armed yeomanry to the bravest legions of
Europe. Their confidence is strengthened by difficulty -- and, from supporting
a doubtful defense, they are enabled to direct the storm of war against their
invaders -- partial inroads are repelled, and plundering detachments captured
-- The cruel hatchet is turned upon its merciless master, and his more
barbarous companions of the war -- and, although heartfelt injuries gave a
rage to resentment, which required all the powers of reason and reflection to
compose, yet to the lasting honor of humanity will it be remembered, that the
deeply grieved American urged no retaliation -- nor, when continued conflict
and determined superiority, had reduced the brave Burgoyne and his army to
surrender, did the generous Gates insist on a single condition, which a
vanquished enemy might not receive with honor. -- To enhance this magnanimous
conduct, be it also remembered, that in the very moment, when the feelings of a
foe were spared, the torch of vindictive fury was brandished by a British chief
-- and defenseless villages were reduced to ashes to sat his savage thirst of
vengeance. General Vaughan, who burnt Esopus, and retired with the
precipitation of a (...), on an intimation of chastisement from General Gates.


IT was not my intention to have noticed the conduct of this incendiary -- but
to have passed him, as we must many others, in silent abhorrence -- although,
as the character of an individual, it stands contrasted by another, and the
feelings of generous humanity are so far relieved.

WE have now reached that period of the war, which gave sanction to our
pretensions as a free people -- and, perhaps, contributed to determine the
avowed friendship of that monarch, the magnanimity and moderation of whose
councils have rendered him the umpire of nations -- for, it is most consistent
with propriety to presume that, until we had, in a sufficient degree,
discovered a disposition and ability to support ourselves, justice to his
kingdom forbad an alliance, which must involve a bloody and expensive war: but
when it was announced that an army of ten thousand, the best appointed troops
of Europe, led by the bravest and most experienced officers, had, after every
effort of skill and bravery, been compelled to surrender prisoners of war, the
gloom, which obscured our independence, was removed, and conviction of our
worth, as a nation, was established throughout the world.

HERE then let us render our acknowledgments, where they are so well deserved
-- and, if to gratulate the meritorious Gates in that hour of conquest, which
dispelled the darkest cloud of invasion -- or, by anticipation, to sympathise
with him in the moment of military uncertainty, which not even his talents
could avert, shall incline to gratitude and generous sentiment, let us indulge
the delightful emotion, and do justice to the finest feelings of the soul.

CONNECTED, on terms of entire equality, by a close and well observed alliance,
America beheld her cause espoused by the most powerful potentate of Europe
(Louis the Just) whose strict attention to his royal engagements became the
guarantee of her independence -- whose generous assistance abridged the term of
her probation, and greatly contributed to secure the completion of her claims.

ARMAMENTS arrive to our assistance, and the most conspicuous characters of
France are solicitous to share in our dangers -- her treasures are opened to
our relief, and the bravest of her warriors bleed in our behalf. -- GENEROUS
and GALLANT NATION! long may the remembrance of thy friendship remain graven in
the hearts of a grateful people -- and bonds of endeared amity be strengthened
between us!

AN attempt was now made to detach us from our august ally -- and insidious
negotiation, on terms of dependence, was proposed -- but, as incompatible with
our national honor, it was nobly rejected; and war, with all its horrors, was
preferred to unjust and inglorious treaty.

ALARMED for their safety, the British army abandon our metropolis, and are
happy in regaining a station where, secured from sudden assault, they may
mediate at leisure less honorable warfare, and execute the purposes of rapine
with impunity.

THE assertors of their country's liberty, led by their illustrious chief,
march from the scene of their worth and sufferings at Valley-Forge, to watch
over her safety -- and, after an ardent endeavor to establish her tranquillity
at Monmouth, they prepare to encounter farther trials of toil and danger in her
cause.

THE reserve of the enemy, which had changed the contest from daring activity,
to observation and a war of posts, did not relax the duties of the field --
which, under the direction of that firm friend and most excellent officer, the
Baron de Steuben, were improved into exact discipline, and military perfection
-- distinguished proofs of which were soon afforded, in the reduction of two
garrisons, where such instances of intrepidity, and skill were exhibited, as
will ever endear the names of Stony-Point stormed by General Wayne -- and
Paules-Hook taken by Col. H. Lee.
Wayne and Lee, to the soldier of his country, and the votary of military
science.

THE southern states, during this period, although occasionally oppressed by
marine descent, and savage incursion, had not, since the attempt on Charleston,
been threatened with serious invasion.

BUT the restraints which were now imposed on the British army to the
northward, induced a renewal of the war in that part of the continent, where,
notwithstanding the advantages derived to the enemy, from their naval force,
and a decided superiority of troops, such was the generous temper of the people
as to set every evil at defiance in the defense of their principles --
indigence and exile were preferred to wealth and dependence -- and the dangers
of the field to inglorious safety. -- The human character has at no time shone
with more resplendent luster, than in the generous sacrifices, which were here
made to the maintenance of public faith and private honor.

THE reduction of their capital and the loss of their property served but to
strengthen those engagements which bound the Georgian to his country -- and the
rigors of captivity were endured without regret. The Carolinian beheld the
transition from affluence to poverty, as an assurance of his freedom, and
gloried in the change.

THE active operations of the war were now transferred to the south, and there
continued to rage until its close.

TO recover the possessions, which had been wrested from us, the most generous
assistance was afforded by our allies -- and the richest blood of France was
shed to support our cause.

WHILE gratitude is deemed a virtue, and heroism is honored with applause, the
brave D'Estaing, and his gallant companions will command the respect, and enjoy
the warmest affections of our country.

THE force of the British arms being now directed to the subjugation of the
southern states -- a powerful armament, conducted by their commander in chief,
was destined to reduce the capital of South Carolina, at this time regarded as
the mart of that country -- and the deposit of our military stores -- Their
sudden approach denied an opportunity of removing the magazines, or providing
for the security of our marine -- and in the event of a siege, which became the
only alternative, the brave garrison, after a most distinguished defense, were
borne down by an irresistible superiority.

The career of success was long uninterrupted, and the sufferings of the
country grievous beyond description.

IT was then that the martial GREEN arrived to rule the tide of war -- Far
from supposing a fatality in human affairs, he employs the virtues of conduct
and resolution to retrieve the ills of adversity -- and relies on no
expectation for relief, but the resources of his genius, and the active
exertions of his mind.

NOBLY seconded by an army, whose ardor increases with difficulty, and to whom
danger is an object of choice, he becomes the sword of his country, and the
keen avenger of her wrongs -- repulse does not remove the dread which he
inspires, and he is alike formidable on the eve of defeat, as in the morn of
conquest -- The budding laurel of Guildford blossomed at Eutaw.

IT was in this hard fought field for fame and freedom, that the most brilliant
seats of military prowess were displayed -- Equalled in valor, and surpassed
in skill, the British chief beheld the talents of his antagonist with
astonishment, and the firmness of his troops with alarm -- conscious that his
success had heretofore been supported by a first impression, he saw with sorrow
that impression effaced -- and a confidence created, which GREEN alone could
inspire.

ANTICIPATING the event of farther contest, he seeks to shun so formidable a
foe -- and, hastening to join his friends in Virginia, he leaves the country,
which he had ravaged, to be recovered, and restored to tranquillity by the
Camillus of America.

THE Briton meets a second Opponent in the gallant la Fayette, whose skill and
bravery requires his vigilance, and commands his respect -- a superior army is
awed into defense, and the country protected until that glorious period, which
confirmed our freedom and closed the calamities of war.

ARRIVED at the last scene of our military drama, we are now to contemplate the
generous conduct of the allied armies toward each other, and their brilliant
behavior as brothers of the war.

LED by the great CAPTAIN of his country, and supported by the powerful marine
of France, they bend their course of conquest to the south; and, having reached
the object of their emulation, they commence in concert the investment of that
army, whose reduction completes the business of war, and affixes the seal of
certainty to our country's peace.

WITH the relation of this great event, the deeds of DE GRASS, ROCHAMBEAU, and
their admired associates will descend to posterity the brightest themes of
freedom's grateful praise.

To thee ROCHAMBEAU, and to urbanity like thine, was it reserved to reconcile
even the errors of mistaken prejudice -- and, by a transcendent conduct, to
conciliate the esteem and admiration of an affectionate and applauding people.

General Lincoln was second in command of the army, which reduced Burgoyne --
commanded in the southern department, when Charleston was taken -- and was the
officer appointed to receive the British troops, when the army under Lord
Cornwallis surrendered.
HERE, LINCOLN, my much respected friend, it was thy peculiar happiness to
revive the laurels of Saratoga -- and to relieve the feelings of a foe in the
generous sympathy of soldier-like compassion.

AND now had the temple of Janus been closed -- and the ravages of war have
ceased -- but that fate held the price of liberty insufficient until the life
of LAURENS was required to complete the purchase. -- Contributions of every
virtue had been liberally furnished, and the most illustrious victims had bled
at the altar of freedom -- but one was yet demanded, whose abundant worth might
afford an ample sacrifice, and become the closing equivalent of a nation's
happiness and peace.

LEAVING his laurelled companions at York-Town, he hastens to mingle in the
dangers of the southern war -- and is there doomed, after having thrice bled
for his country, to complete his glorious career.

ENDOWED with a greatness of soul, superior to the views of interest -- and
insensible to danger -- the freedom of his country engaged his first
solicitude, and the public safety was his dearest concern -- Nor was his love
of liberty bounded by national regards, or controuled by the cruel rigors of
established custom. -- The unhappy Helot, who dared to raise his thoughts from
thraldom, and sighed to be free, was pressed to his bosom, as deserving of his
friendship, and had no other price exacted for his liberation, than a conduct
worthy the state to which he aspired -- The desponding African beheld a brother
in the youth, whom he had been taught to regard as a task-master -- and he
found the assertor of his rights in the very man whom he had been led to
consider as the lord of his existence.

Colonel Laurens, as an acknowledgement of their worth, manumitted several
slaves, for their gallent behavior in the defense of Charleston.
YES, GLORIOUS SPIRIT! these eyes have witnessed the embrace, which emancipated
the bondsman, and rewarded the valor of the slave -- They have seen thee
confer the honors of humanity, and bestow the blessings of freedom on the
brave, but wretched, dependent who had not hoped for more than a slight
approbation of his service. -- Dismissing the adventitious distinctions of
rank, and softening the pride of superior station, it was thine to raise the
drooping soldier from his sufferings, and to bid the impoverished veteran hope
for happier days -- it was thine to relieve their immediate wants, and to
provide for their future necessities.

IN thee, much loved, lamented LAURENS, thy country has lost her firmest
patriot, and her bravest soldier -- thy kindred their dearest relative --
society its worthiest member -- and sorrowing friendship his chosen associate,
and surest reliance.

SUCH were the dangers we have passed, and such the sufferings we have endured
-- Yet if INDEPENDENCE established, RELIGION, in all its opinions tolerated --
SCIENCE diffused -- COMMERCE extended -- AGRICULTURE improved -- and an ASYLUM
opened to those oppressed, and the industrious of all countries are to be
considered as objects of estimation -- Our dangers have not been unrewarded,
and our sufferings have received an ample compensation.

HOW far our national character shall be established on the basis of virtue --
and our public credit be supported with honor, will depend upon ourselves, and
can only be chargeable upon our own neglect if unattained. -- With great
deference, I beg leave to offer an opinion, which suggests (as the first
requisite to render us a respectable and happy people) the indispensible
necessity of strengthening the confidence in our continental councils, and
increasing the energy of our foederal government -- for to attempt the repair
of its feeble constitution, or to change the confederated system altogether,
must soon become an unavoidable alternative.

It is no less the blessing than the boast of America, that the very arm, which
bore aloft her banner, and her shield, should now be turned to tillage,
commerce, and the useful arts -- Thrice happy country! whose sons are at once
thy citizens and soldiers -- lasting shall be thy liberties, which are so
secured, and tranquil thy domain while thus protected -- Prosperous in peace,
as renowned in war, approved confidence shall inspire respect for thy rulers,
while the grateful affections of an obliged and happy people shall richly
reward their public toil -- Nor, amidst the undisturbed enjoyment of property
and freedom, can thy VETERANS be forgotten -- The war-worn soldiers cares shall
all be soothed, and blessed in the prospect of his offspring's happiness he shall
lose the recollection of his own misfortunes; unless when indulging the tribute
of a generous tear to the much loved memory of his gallant friends -- and, even
then, while he dwells with rapturous regret on the remembrance of their
matchless worth, his gloom shall brighten at the heartfelt thought, which
paints their glory and immortal fame -- The GRIEFS OF FRIENDSHIP shall find
consolation, and PATERNAL ANGUISH itself meet a solace in the freedom and
felicity of millions thus confirmed -- No trace of time shall shade the luster
of that splendid scene, where freedom flourished and oppression fell.

THE historic page to latest ages shall transmit a faithful record of those
glorious deeds, which swell COLUMBIA's fame.


