Cool Thoughts on the SUBJECT of the BANK. Addressed to the Honorable the
Representatives of the Freemen of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in General
Assembly.
ALTHOUGH a great deal has been wrote on the subject of the Bank, which has
engrossed much of the politics of the State, and no small share of the
conversation of the town; and although an honorable Gentleman, who is a great
stockholder, and, therefore, very naturally, a great champion for the Bank in
the House of Assembly, has said, that he imagines "sufficient light has been
thrown upon the subject," yet I cannot help thinking that there is still room
to say something upon it, and that without going "the old ground over again."

It would be ungenerous, and unworthy the character of that Gentleman, to
suppose that he entertained a wish to stifle any further enquiry, in order to
bring the Members to an immediate decision upon that subject. But as one of the
writers in favor of the Bank has been candid enough to acknowledge, that "the
directors were engaged in a business in which they had no experience (nothing
of the kind having ever before been practiced in America) and though they acted
with the greatest consideration, care and caution possible; yet all this
notwithstanding, it is hardly supposable but some errors in management must have
been committed." I say, if this has been the case, there is nothing
presumptuous in supposing, that there may be some very worthy and reputable
Members, who are very deserving, and very well qualified to fill the seat which
they hold in that honorable House, who nevertheless may wish for further
information on this subject; their thoughts and attention having been employed
another way.

In what I have to offer on this subject it is not my intention to run out into
a labored panegyric on the utility and importance of Public Credit to a
nation, as some of the writers in favor of the Bank have done; though I am as
well convinced of both as any of them. My reason for declining it is, because
the Bank is a thing that has very little to do with it.

Public Credit entirely depends upon the faith kept by the Government with the
Public, in the strict and punctual discharge of her pecuniary obligations.

The Bank is a private trading company, principally in the hands of four or
five persons; who, it is true, have their own private credit to support, but at
present they have no connection whatsoever with the credit of the Government.

Neither is it my intention to go into an investigation of the powers of
Government and of the Assembly to give or to take away charters of
incorporation, highly lucrative to private individuals; whereby the situation
of Government is given to those individuals, not only without any adequate
consideration, but without any consideration at all.

I purposely omit going into this investigation, because, if I should be able
to prove that one Assembly had not power to repeal a law which a former one had
imprudently passed, this might be proving too much; because it might be made
use of to prove, that a future Assembly had no power to alter what a former one
had repealed.

Setting aside these topics, therefore, I mean to confine myself to a very few
points; and the point I mean chiefly to insist on is to consider, how far the
constitution of the Bank is consistent with the Government and with the present
state of trade and commerce in this country.

This is a subject that has been but lightly if at all touched upon, and in the
pursuit of it I mean to be as candid and as impartial as possible. I shall
carefully avoid all personalities, and as I profess to be of no party, having
the supreme felicity of being friends with all, I shall as carefully avoid all
party distinctions.

And first then, with regard to the question, how far the constitution of the
Bank is consistent with the Government. In order to determine this question, it
is necessary to draw a parallel betwixt them.

The constitution of this country, and of this State in particular, is well
known to be Republican. The Members of the Assembly are chosen annually, by the
freemen thereof, but no member is eligible to serve for more than four years in
seven, nor has any inhabitant, let his property be ever so great, more than one
annual vote.

The directors of the Bank are few in number, only twelve. It is true, they are
chosen annually, but every proprietor has as many votes as he has shares. Hence
a few great stockholders have the power of perpetuating their own election, and
that of their friends. Nor is there any provision made for a change or
succession, by way of rotation. It is not in any respect dependent on
Government. Here, therefore, is not only a monopoly, but an aristocracy, formed
of a most formidable kind, a monopoly which, by the acquisition of the sanction
of Government, will be capable of absorbing all the wealth of the United
States. And, as wealth creates influence, it is impossible to tell how far
their influence may extend. So much for the constitution of the Bank.

Now with regard to the second question, viz. How far the present Bank is
consistent with the present state of trade and commerce in this country, it may
be necessary to take a somewhat wider range, in order to inquire into the state
and condition of other Banks that have been instituted in Europe.

If we look abroad, we find the four most ancient and most considerable Banks
to be those of Amsterdam, Venice, Hamburgh and Genoa. The three first of which
are all in the hands and, consequently, in the interest of their respective
Governments. The Bank of Genoa was an exception. Machiavel, in his history of
Florence, tells us, "that a war with the Venetians occasioned that Government
to borrow great sums of the citizens, for the payment of which they consigned
to them their customs, and incorporated them into a Bank, which had the palace
over the custom-house for their meeting, they had a Council of Hundred, and a
Magistracy or Directors of Eight, and divided their credit into loqui or shares
in stock, and the body thus constituted bore the name of St. George, as the
Government had the name of the Commonalty."

This Commonalty, or Commonwealth, had a further occasion for a loan, and
applied to St. George, then grown rich, and the ablest, if not the only lender,
and for that they mortgaged to it some lands and towns, as they had done the
customs before. What was the consequence?

Machiavel tells us, that most of these towns and lands, (that were in mortgage
to them) formerly subject to the Genoese, submitted to them. The Historian
adds, " And they (St. George) governed and defended them, (the towns and lands)
and every year, by public vote, sent their rectors; and the Commonalty (that is
the Government) of the city was no way concerned." He goes still further,
"Whence," says he, "it came to pass that those citizens have taken away their
love to the Rules of the Commonalty, as a thing usurped and tyrannized, (though
the ancient constitution) and placed it on St. George, as a Rule well and
equally administered."

I should not have said so much had not the Historian in a manner compelled me
to it; but now, since the murder is out, I cannot refrain from giving you his
conclusion, "Whence," says he, "(that is from the Bank's administration) arises
the frequent and easy change of Government, and that sometimes they obey a
citizen, and sometimes a stranger."

I must however do our Bank the justice to say, that she differs widely from
the Bank of St. George at Genoa, and that in almost every instance. When the
monied men in England first solicited an establishment of a Bank by Act of
Parliament, the argument made use of in favor of it, was not only a present
loan, but a great show of future services. But what does the present Bank of
North America offer? Why she institutes no loan in favor of the Government.
She is of a more provident and selfish nature, she is willing to gain all she
can from the sanction of Government, but she is not willing to give her any
assistance in return. On the other hand she endeavors to thwart the operations
of Government as much as she can, and incessantly sets herself up in opposition
to the Government.

But, secondly, Among the Banks I have mentioned, which are in the hands of
their respective Governments and pursue their interest, there are none of them
that issue notes payable in specie to bearer upon demand. And yet, perhaps,
this is the circumstance that recommends the Bank in this city to most people.
What is the reason, they do not issue notes payable in specie? Why, the reason
is, because they have the interest of their country at heart.

The Bank of Amsterdam is one of the oldest as well as one of the most
considerable in Europe, having subsisted now for near two centuries. She
receives coin, but she never pays any. There are indeed cashiers or brokers
always attending who are ever ready to exchange cash for Bank credit; and what
is remarkable, is, that this Bank credit is generally upon an average from
three to five per cent. better than the specie itself. The reason why this Bank
never pays in specie, is, because she knows very well, that if she was to pay
in coin, her country would soon be drained of it. England is the only country
in Europe, and I believe I may say, in the world, where Banks can subsist
issuing notes payable to bearer in specie upon demand. What is the reason of
it, why she is the only country whose trade is so well protected by laws, that
there is never a reflux, but always an influx of wealth, constantly coming into
her. France indeed, following the example of England, has within these few
years instituted a Bank, issuing notes payable upon demand. The Bank I mean, is
the Caisse d'Escompte, or Bank of Paris. What was the consequence? Why, let us
read the following extract of a letter from Paris, bearing date the 27th of
September, 1783.

"The administrators of the Caisse d'Escompte having represented to the King,
that in consequence of the scarcity of cash in their hands, occasioned by the
circumstances of the war, which have prevented the annual and regular
importation of gold and silver, at the same time that specie has been exported,
they, in order to support commerce, and above all that of the city of Paris,
where the scarcity has been particularly felt, have recurred to the resource
which Government allowed them, in authorizing the establishment of the Caisse
d'Escompte -- That their zeal to assist commerce has induced them to discount
such bills of exchange, and good deeds on individuals, as have been presented
to them, and have paid those bills of exchange in cash, or in notes of their
Bank payable to the bearer -- That the confidence of the public in this Bank,
has led them to augment the number of these notes in proportion to the wants of
commerce; but the resource, by which trade has been so greatly benefited and
specie thrown into circulation, being retarded in its effects, the Caisse
d'Escompte will be prevented, for a time, from continuing to the public the
facility of discount, by the impossibility of issuing specie, and even if being
able to give cash for their notes, when they are presented in too great
quantity, unless provision is made by his Majesty." How extremely similar, in
some respects, is the situation of America, with that of France, at the time
alluded to; but further: "It does not appear, however, that any further means
are wanting there until the first of January next, a period, when it is
expected that the circulation of specie will be re-established. They therefore
pray his Majesty's protection. In consequence whereof, the King ordains, that
all the notes of the said Bank shall have circulation till that time in the
city of Paris, and be received in payment as before, and that no prosecutions
shall take place on account of their non-payment at the Bank. At the same time
a severe edict was issued, to prevent the exportation of gold and silver for a
limited time."

Here we see, in a very striking manner, the bad effects of a wrong balance of
trade upon a Bank paying in specie, even in so great a kingdom, as that of
France where specie abounds, even though this wrong balance was but temporary.
But let us proceed --

"On the fourth of that same month a new edict of the King appeared, opening a
loan of twenty-four millions of livres, for which his Majesty offered sixty
thousand tickets of a new lottery, price four hundred livres each, which makes
in all the twenty-four millions wanted. The purchasers of these tickets, in
order to favor the Bank, had the option of paying half the four hundred livres
in notes issued by the Caisse d'Escompte. The lottery was to be drawn during
the space of eight years, and the adventurers were to run no risque, as the
holders of blanks were to be allowed the principal and interest of their
money." Here surely is a most extraordinary instance of Royal interposition in
favor of a Bank. What was the consequence?

Why, notwithstanding all this, so great is the effect of natural causes that
on the first of October following the Bank of Paris, called the Caisse
d'Escompte, stopped payment, which occasioned the utmost consternation and horror
throughout that city.

The fact is, that no Bank issuing notes payable in specie upon demand can hold
their station long in any country where there is a strong balance of trade
against that country, let her be reinforced by Royal Edicts or entrenched in
Charters, or let her do what she will.

The case is plain and obvious -- For supposing that balance against that
country to be a Million of pounds, or a Million of dollars per annum, or what
you will, is it not plain that so much money must be sent out of the country
every year as that balance amounts to, in order to pay that wrong balance?

But, it may be said that money comes into the country every year, as well as
it goes out of it. Well then, let us suppose that Half a Million is imported
annually. Why then the account will stand thus: Half a Million being imported,
and a Million going out, this will just make Half (...) Million of cash of
which the country (...) drained every year.

If only half a Million, therefore, (...) what is imported goes out every (...)
years the country will be drained of two (...) and a half, in ten years of five
Millions, (...) so on.

How then is this demand for cash for exportation to be supplied? Why, surely,
no where so readily as at the Bank; for as the Bank is the common receptacle
for money, and as she issues her notes payable in specie to bearer upon demand,
is it not in the power of every one who gains possession of these notes to go
with them and to demand payment for them at the Bank, and considering how the
Bank is constituted at present, is it in her power to refuse? Surely not, for
the moment she does, that moment she stops payment, and there is an end put to
her operations at once. The Bank therefore facilitates the exportation of
money, but she not only facilitates the exporation of money in general, but
particularly of the best pieces. That this is no idle supposition I myself can
witness, for I have known persons keep accounts with the Bank merely for the
purpose of drawing out the best of the specie. Thus by paying in their own
notes and then drawing for specie, they have selected the best and so paid the
remainder back, and thus after repeated drawings, they have been able to get
possession of all the best pieces, in order to send them abroad.

But it may be said, that when the Bank finds an extraordinary demand of cash
for exportation it is her custom to stop discounts. That is, in hopes that this
demand will cease, after the sailing of a particular vessel, or of a packet for
Europe, she, for the present, puts a stop to her profits as well as her
outgoings, and, in fact, shuts up shop; for as her profit arises from the
discounting of bills, the moment she puts a stop to this, that moment she puts
a stop to the profits of her trade. And yet this is far from being any remedy
for the evil complained of; the demand for cash to send abroad still subsists
and is not supplied, and it only tends to make people, who have occasion for
this money, more artful, by beginning to draw upon the Bank a little earlier. I
shall say nothing of the great advantage that those have, who are concerned in
the Bank, in trading with the Bank's money, which gives them a great advantage
over other traders, in buying lands, in making use of the specie of the Bank
for their own remittances, and in the preferences which they have an
opportunity of giving to their friends; all of which are matters of the
greatest importance. Suffice it to say, that if the prayer of the Bank's
petition was granted, and the charter restored ^^on the footing it was before,
it is impossible, in the nature of things, that it could afford any thing more
than a temporary relief, by creating a temporary confidence: indeed, like the
King of France's edict in favor of the Caisse d'Escompte, it might induce some
to bring their cash to the Bank; but the same cause existing, viz. an
unfavorable balance of trade, and that still operating against her, the same
distress must soon recur, from which she must necessarily find her self
involved in as much difficulty as before.

But this method of stopping discounts appears to me, I confess, a most
extraordinary expedient; and such a one, as in any other country would be
considered as little short of committing an act of bankruptcy. It is
extraordinary, because it is not her interest to do it; and because, upon the
principles upon which she is constituted, it is what she is not justifiable in
doing. Banks are the servants of the public, and their institution is intended
for the facilitating circulation and for the promotion of trade, and the
profits they receive for the discounting of bills are the wages they receive
for performing that office. To refuse therefore to discount good bills,
unexpectedly, and at a time perhaps when they are most wanted, is defeating the
very purpose for which they were instituted. It is a tacit acknowledgment, that
they either want cash, or that they want credit; and it is giving a vital stab
to circulation and trade. When they do this, it demonstrates that the
confidence that was placed in them by their customers was misplaced, and that
they have received wages for performing an office, which, at the time when
their assistance was most wanted, they took the liberty to decline. Hence it is
that we see so many running about the streets with distraction and desperation
in their countenances; and hence it is that so many have been obliged to stop
payment who had reckoned upon having their bills discounted as a sure resource.

But it may be said that the profits of the Bank must be considerable,
notwithstanding their stopping discounts, because they have made large
dividends. Large dividends may be made various ways, by manufacturing their own
paper while the public confidence continues, or even by dividing their capital.
What their profits are, is best known to themselves; but that their profits
could never be so considerable as to afford a dividend of 16 per cent, though
they had made no bad debts, even if they had never stopped discounts, I am
inclined to believe, by comparing it with the dividends that have been made at
different times by the Bank of England.

I have before me a list of the dividends made by the Bank of England, for a
matter of seventy years past, viz. from the year 1715 down to the present time,
by which I learn that she never has, in any one year, divided to her creditors
more than after the rate of 8 per cent. The list is as follows, viz.

From 1715 to 1719 she divided 8 p. ct. per an.

1719 1720 7 1720 for six months 4 1720 1727 6 1727 1729 5 1729 for six months
3 1730 ditto 2 1730 ditto 3 1731 ditto 2 1731 ditto 3 1732 to 1746 5 1746 1752
5 1752 1764 4 1764 1767 5 ladyday 1767 5 at which it still continues.

If the Bank of England therefore, whose business is so much more extensive,
and who has always had an interest allowed her by the Government of at least 3
per cent. upon her stock, besides four thousand pounds a year to defray her
expenses of management, has never been able to divide amongst the proprietors
more than 8 per cent. is it probable, that the profits of the Bank of North
America, in this city, can have enabled her fairly to divide amongst her
creditors after the rate of 16 per cent. especially when we consider, that she
has no interest paid her by the Government upon her stock, nor has she any
other means of defraying her expenses but what arise out of the profits of her
trade.

If this is not a fair inference, I call upon the directors to prove the
contrary, by producing a full and fair account of their property and effects,
and laying them before the public. This, at least, your honorable House, I
think, has a right to expect, before they consent to a renewal of their
charter, and a refusal on their part can be construed into nothing but an
acknowledgement of their guilt.

For my own part, I own, I am somewhat at a loss, to account for their extreme
solicitude upon this head. If they have been acting fairly and honestly, which
I always suppose till it appears to the contrary, where is the great necessity
for a charter? Is it to screen their own private fortunes from being answerable
to the public creditors for debts contracted by the Bank? If it is, let the
proprietors look to it. This, I am sorry to say, has been done in other
countries, and why may it not in this?

After all that has been said, I am far from being an enemy to Banks.

Banks have subsisted for ages in many countries, and have been of the greatest
utility. A Bank, as I before observed, has existed at Venice, another at Genoa,
another at Amsterdam, for a great number of years; but they are all of them
very differently constituted from the Bank in this city. They are suited to the
condition and circumstances of their respective countries. Were the Bank in
this city to continue upon its present plan, issuing notes payable in specie,
for any length of time, it would be the means, by degrees, of transferring all
the coin in the country out of it, and we have no mines to afford an
inexhaustible supply. This the Bank of St. George once did with respect to
Corsica, and were Banks paying in coin established in Spain, Portugal, or any
other country that has a constant balance of trade against her, they would only
help on their ruin a little faster. This had very nearly happened in Scotland
in the year 1764. Such a Bank, it is true, may be a present temporary
convenience and accommodation to the merchant, but it is ruin and destruction
to the country. Had our greatest enemies been the inventors of this device,
they could not have concerted our ruin more effectually, than by recommending
the institution of such a Bank. And is it any wonder, that British merchants
and others should complain most grievously of the abolition of a Bank, through
the instrumentalilty of which they had been enabled to glean away from us all
our money. This is the true reason of our present scarcity of cash, and if the
Bank continues upon its present plan, this scarcity of cash must every day grow
greater. If European countries are ambitious of our trade, let them consent to
a settlement of it upon the only terms upon which it can be carried on, viz. A
free, open and generous exchange of their manufactures for our produce through
such channels as may be found convenient for that purpose. When that is done,
and a favorable balance of trade restored, it will be time enough to institute
Banks, paying in specie. But if we must have a Bank in our present
circumstances, it must be of a different kind. To conclude,

The question, therefore, before the House, in my humble opinion, which I beg
leave to submit to you, is not, Whether the charter ought to be restored to the
Bank, only limiting the time of its duration and the quantum of its stock,
(which I understand is the thing prayed for) but, Whether it ought to subsist
at all under its present form, or whether it ought not to be new modelled, so
as to harmonize with the Government of this country, and with the present state
of trade and commerce.

FINIS.

