AN ADDRESS TO THE Students of Dickinson College, By the Rev. CHARLES NISBET,
D. D. On his Re-election to the Office of PRINCIPAL of said COLLEGE.

CARLISLE: Printed by KLINE and REYNOLDS.

An ADDRESS to the STUDENTS Of DICKINSON COLLEGE.
MY YOUNG FRIENDS,
AFTER despairing even of life, and renouncing all hopes of being useful to
this seminary, it has pleased God to restore me to my former health and office.
I hope it will be unnecessary for me to say any thing to convince you of my
good will to this country, and to this College in particular. If abandoning an
honorable and independent station, and renouncing the society of many valuable
and long tried friends; if my crossing the vast Atlantic, and exposing my life
to the perils of a new climate, are not sufficient to persuade you of my good
wishes, it will be needless to use any words to that purpose.

The troubles and distresses of my family, and the pains I have endured, both
in body and mind since my arrival in this country, I shall cheerfully forget,
if I shall be enabled to be subservient to the conducting of your studies, and
forming your taste and morals, so that you may fulfill the hopes of your
parents, and prove useful citizens to your country.

You are here assembled from various parts, and must have different views and
expectations in life, but I hope you are all agreed in the desire of learning,
and resolve to cultivate the powers of your mind, from a conviction that the
knowledge you may acquire here, will enable you to fill with dignity and
propriety the several stations to which you may be called; and to contribute
your parts to promote the happiness, and to raise the reputation of this new
and rising empire.

It is of the utmost consequence to your progress in learning, that you form
just notions of its dignity, and importance to the public as well as to
yourselves as individuals. It is not to spend your years in idleness and
dissipation, or to acquire a superficial tincture of letters, that you have
been sent hither with so much trouble and expense by your parents. They expect
something more solid and useful in return for their pains and charge on your
account. -- They hope that you will aspire to excellence and distinction in
your studies, and that the honest emulation which a public education produces,
will engage you to an useful and diligent employment of your time here. You are
now in the most pleasant and the most important time of life: your powers are
fresh, and easily susceptible of improvement, and the impressions that you
receive at this time must be of the utmost importance in determining your
future sates and characters. Your present rank as students is honorable. As
candidates for science, fame and consequence, you ought to despise every thing
that is mean and dishonorable, and think your time too precious to be spent in
trifles or vicious pursuits.

A superficial application to learning is so far from being useful, that it is
greatly prejudicial. It fills the mind with confused notions, and sometimes
with unsufferable vanity; it tends to bring learning into disgrace, and leads
the world to form false notions of its tendency and importance. It creates a
contempt and aversion to study, and is apt to communicate its baleful influence
to future generations. It places the student on a level with the forward
smatterer, whose learning is extracted from magazines and reviews, and whose
pertness arises only from his ignorance.

It is true that all are not endowed with equal powers for making progress in
letters, and that different studies are suited to different tempers and
characters: yet diligence, application and constant desire of success, will
carry every man as far as nature intended he should go; and the various
branches of study in which youth are exercised, will point out to every student
what he is best qualified for, and develope the natural bent of his genius, so
as to direct him how to employ himself in future. But without application we
can make no discovery of our talents, and the indolent student must continue a
child for life.

To encourage you to diligence, you ought to consider that you have our
reputation, as well as your own fame and interest, in your hands; and that much
of the happiness and satisfaction of your parents depends on your present
behavior, and the manner in which you employ your time and talents. After a
pretty long life spent in the pursuit of learning, and undergoing so many
dangers and troubles for promoting its increase in this country, I flatter
myself that I have a name to lose; and you would do me a sensible and grievous
injury, if it should be lost by your negligence. With regard to my colleagues,
I need say nothing, as you know their capacity and characters by actual
experience. We all have an equal interest in your progress, as the world will
not believe us to be good for any thing, unless you appear to be profited by
our pains and instructions. Your parents expect that you should return
instructed and improved in the knowledge of men and things, and that you should
be qualified for useful and distinguished stations in life; and you cannot do
justice to them or to us, except by a diligent application to your studies, and
a constant attention to moral duties.

You must be sensible that the greatest pains and diligence on our part will be
quite abortive without your hearty consent and concurrence. To talk to the
deaf, or, which is the same thing, to the thoughtless and inattentive, is
laboring without pleasure and without profit, and must be extremely afflicting
to every sensible and benevolent mind. -- You have it in your power to render
all our labors unsuccessful, and to baffle all our hopes of reputation and
usefulness; but we hope you will not be so ill-natured as to employ your power
for so vile a purpose, especially as it must at the same time involve
yourselves in ignorance, insignificance, guilt and misery.

We would therefore beg, as the greatest favor to ourselves, as well as the
best service you can do to your own character, to the interest of your parents
and the public, that your consent may conspire with our wishes to promote your
best interests: you must see the necessity of such concurrence, and the
mischievous consequences of refusing it. Let us always find in you a readiness
to be instructed, and a desire of excelling in those branches of knowledge in
which you are to be exercised. The habit of attention, and a constant endeavor
to understand and retain the instructions of your teachers, will make your
studies easy and pleasant, as well as profitable to you; and unless you make
your studies your pleasure, your situation as students will be exceedingly
painful and uncomfortable, your attendance will be a burden: you will live the
life of prisoners, constantly displeased with your present situation,
constantly longing for a change, with the dismal consciousness that you are
losing your time, and that your sufferings are entirely without profit to
yourselves or others.

With regard to your behavior to us and to one another, we hope your parents
have taught you the rudiments of good manners, and that you will not disgrace
their instructions and example, by petulance, impertinence or rudeness of any
kind. -- The child who behaves rudely and improperly to others, dishonours his
father's house, and gives others an occasion to believe that he has been
ill-educated, or that his parents have set him a bad example. A haughty and
quarrelsome temper, a proneness to revenge and mischief, are most fatal to the
character and happiness of youth, and afford the most unfavourable prognostic
of their riper years. "Men are but children of a larger growth." Those habits
that are formed, and those propensities that are discovered in youth,
ordinarily prevail through the whole of life. Such students as you are here,
such citizens you will prove to the republic. If you now acquire a love of
order, justice, decency and obliging behavior, you will be the delight of your
parents, and the ornaments and supports of the state; but if you indulge pride
and revenge, if you are prone to quarrel, despise and fight with one another,
what else can be expected from the growth of such habits, but that you should
become the grief of your parents, a disgrace to your masters, and friends, and
the pests and firebrands of every society? Make your choice between these
extremes.

We do not indeed expect from your early years, the coolness, the prudence and
the gravity of advanced age. Such errors as arise from the natural warmth, the
innocent gaiety, and even the levity of youth, may be naturally expected and
easily pardoned: but we hope you will consider that you are no longer children,
that by your admission into this society, and being engaged in the studies and
employments of men, you are considered as subjects of moral government, and
susceptible of the principles of law and order. You have already in a good
measure the command of yourselves, and are capable of discerning and being
conscious when you are in the wrong. With these capacities you may avoid the
follies of childhood, and contract those habits of attention and application
that are proper for your age, and favorable to your progress in your studies.

Idleness and trifling are the bane of youth, both with respect to learning and
morals; these habits prevent progress, excite quarrels, and encourage the
grossest corruption of manners. They are the beginning of vices and of sorrows,
and can not be too much checked and discouraged. Trifling is a perverted
activity which in every event leads to evil, and tends either to meanness or
malice. Let me warn you especially against one vice which is often prevalent
among youth, and indicates or promotes the worst dispositions: we mean the
practice of exciting or tempting one another to evil, and prompting them to
deeds of malice or revenge. -- To sow discord among brethren, to irritate the
corruptions and evil passions of men, is the employment of the devil, and ought
to be held in the utmost abhorrence by all who would be wise or happy.

Magnanimity and dignity of behavior are virtues that ought to be in high
esteem with youth, as they lay the foundations of a good character, and prevent
our age from blushing for the meanness of our early years. But it is of the
greatest consequence to form just notions of these virtues, and to be well
informed wherein real magnanimity consists. It is not in contempt of others, or
proneness to revenge, or being the plague or terror of society. On the contrary
a person of true magnanimity will always be just to the merits of others, and
will reckon nothing so disgraceful as what is unjust, and injurious to the
rights of others; and will be ashamed of every thing that is unworthy of human
nature, or hurtful to the order of society: he will be mild and gentle to
others, and will abstain from injuring them, for his own sake as well as for
theirs. He will not leave it in the power of every one to tempt him to indecent
and passionate behavior, nor disgrace himself because another is injurious;
but despising the ignoble passion of revenge, he will avoid the society of the
wicked, and associate with those who are capable of instructing and pleasing
him by their example, and incapable of tempting him to indecency by injury.

The most effectual antidote against quarrelling and mean behavior, is
diligence and application to your studies: all the vices and miseries of youth
arise uniformly from ignorance and trifling. If you are idle, your lives will
be at once unprofitable and unpleasant. As an additional incitement to
diligence, we would suggest to you the advantages you enjoy as students of this
seminary, and the disadvantages you must labor under from its yet infant
state. Both these ought to incite you to diligence, that you may improve the
one, and surmount or compensate for the other. At present you have leisure, and
opportunity of profiting by books and instructors. But as these can not yet be
afforded you in such number and variety as is to be wished, on this account you
ought to use more diligence to profit by the opportunities you have; and the
fewer these are at present, the more honor will your diligence and success
reflect on yourselves, and on this new society.

If you ever hope to prosper in learning, you will not content yourselves with
reading those parts only of classic authors that are prelected to you by your
masters, and of which you are to give an account to them. By confining
yourselves to these, you effectually disappoint their intentions, and render
their pains useless to yourselves. By making you acquainted with a part, they
intended to make you capable of reading the whole. There is no understanding
the merit, nor profiting by the talents of an author, by consulting extracts or
detached parts; you can not have time to read all that is excellent in them at
school; and I know from experience and observation, that a diligent boy will go
through the whole of any author in a shorter time than the unequal abilities of
a class will get through that part that is taught in public.

Although the rules of grammar and construction are necessary in order to
understand foreign languages, you must not think you have done when you have
made yourselves masters of these. It remains to attend to the sense, the
history, the sentiment, and the beauties of thought and language; to enter into
the scope and spirit of the writer, to discern his excellencies and to detect
his weakness, or that of the times in which he lived. The classics are useful,
not from their being writ in dead languages, or because it costs a great deal
of pains to read them: but they are valuable as models of just thinking,
examples of true taste, and monuments of the wisdom and capacity of ancient
nations, and have been the delight and wonder of many successive generations.

You ought always to remember that real learning does not consist in acquiring
a great many confused and indigested ideas, nor in performing public exercises
with such apparent propriety as to persuade others that you are learned: far
less does it consist in the use of harsh and uncouth terms, which are not
familiar to ordinary understandings, but that it consists in the exercise and
application of the powers of the mind, the improvement of our intuitive as well
as our active faculties, in the knowledge and discerning of truth, and such an
acquaintance with human nature and its excellencies and defects, its
acquisitions and history, as may fit us for the right conduct of life, and for
promoting the happiness of ourselves and others.

In order to profit by reading, meditation and attention must be joined with
it, we must not pass by any thing that we do not understand, or content
ourselves with a single reading of what is useful, excellent or necessary; and
we ought to labor to retain what we have read, because it is only that which
we retain that can be profitable to us in future. Inattentive and desultory
reading is only a more active idleness, and a more decent mode of trifling. It
is better to shut the book as soon as attention fails, than to accustom
ourselves to read without it.

A foolish trusting to public exercises has been the ruin of many students. To
confine ourselves to our prescribed lessons, and our studies to the public
hours, argues a narrow mind, destitute of ambition, and insensible of the
excellence and charms of true learning. Poor and scanty must be the seize
of the pretended student, who seigns attention in public, and is idle and
negligent in private! This is rendering public exercises entirely uselell, and
thwarting the intention of your instructors. As that can be done in public is
to prescribe general rules, to remove difficulties, to caution against errors,
and suggest useful hints and directions; but the main business of learning is
to be compassed only by private study and meditation; and the student who does
not apply his diligence in private, misunderstands the true nature and design
of public instructions. Those parents likewise are greatly mistaken who insist
that their children should be kept to long confinement and attendance, so as to
leave them neither time, spirits or inclination for private study. It is
impossible that any should be made scholars in this manner. Such injunctions
discover a deep ignorance of human nature, as if it were possible to teach boys
against their will, or force them into learning by whipping and imprisonment.
These methods may readily produce a rooted aversion for learning, as it is
certain that they render progress in it utterly unattainable and impracticable;
but they will never make boys in love with study, or ambitious to excel in
knowledge. Even in the lowest classes, the student must prepare his lesson at
home, if he expects to be able to please his master, or keep up with his class;
but such regulations as leave no time for this, deprive the student of
opportunities of profiting, and oblige the master to labor in vain.

As our public library is as yet but indifferently furnished, and could never
supply the necessities of all, and as the procuring a variety of books in a new
country is utterly impossible, you ought to be more diligent in the use of all
the books you can command, especially of such as lead to the knowledge of
others. Without a tolerable acquaintance with literary history, a student can
not prosecute his studies, whatever opportunities and helps he may enjoy. He
must be at a loss where to apply for help, unless he knows what authors have
treated of the subject in which he desires information.

In order to discover the genius and capacity of students, and to suggest
useful hints for conducting their studies and regulating their conduct, I am
convinced that private acquaintance and conversation are of great use. It will
therefore be agreeable to me to receive visits from all of the students, as
often as their studies and mine will permit, and to suggest to them what may be
useful, as well as to resolve their doubts and difficulties, being determined
to act as the private preceptor, as well as the public instructor of every
student, without exception or respect of persons, who comes to this seminary in
quest of useful knowledge.

As concord and order are the soul and strength of every society, and
peculiarly necessary in a seminary for the study of letters, we hope that every
student will reckon it his honor to study these with the greatest care; and to
attain these you ought to reflect how disgraceful it is to disturb society, and
to appear impatient of order and equal society. It will be our part to render
all of you equal justice and encouragement, but it will depend on your conduct
to render our labors pleasant and profitable. Beware of pride, from which
contention comes; abhor injustice and insulting manners, and avoid all
indecent and provoking expressions. Remember that your character as well as
your success in learning, depends on your present behavior, and that if you do
not show yourselves regular, well-bred and peaceable students, there can be
little hope of your becoming useful or estimable citizens of the state.

As your time is your greatest treasure, and may be employed to the best
account, we would earnestly recommend a prudent and thrifty improvement of it.
For this purpose you ought to rise early, and beware of spending too much of it
in unnecessary exercises or childish recreations. You have much to do, and
unless you apply to yout studies betimes, you must be great losers. Besides,
sauntering and idleness are inimical to habits of application; and by
neglecting to study, you may soon become incapable of it. If you would practice
the lesson of Pythagoras, and examine every evening what you have been doing
all day, you will discover the value of time, and the folly of idleness, by
observing how little you have done, in comparison of what you might have done,
which may lead to a better improvement of time for the future.

You ought never to forget that all true learning is subordinate and conducive
to morals and usefulness. It is not in order that you may be admired for your
talents that your parents have bestowed on you benefits of a liberal education.
They expect that you should become virtuous, orderly and useful members of
society, that you should know how to esteem true excellence, to revere truth
and honor, to form yourselves upon the best models, to despise every thing
that is mean and vicious, to delight in promoting the happiness of others, to
be lovers of peace, to form friendship with the virtuous and worthy, to avoid
the society of the wicked, and to merit and command the esteem of the wiser
part of your fellow citizens.

Young people are apt to imagine that they have little to do with religion, and
that it is time enough to think of that in mature life; but this is a grievous
mistake. "Train up a child," says Solomon, "in the way that he should go, and
when he is old, he will not depart from it." Even a child is known by his way,
whether it be pure and whether it be right. Young as you are, you have a
conscience; you are subjects of moral discipline, and susceptible of good or
bad moral characters. You know not whether you may live to mature age, and what
shall become of your souls if you die in an ignorant, thoughtless and
irreligious state? We presume that your parents have taught you to know and
honor the God who made you, to revere his name, and to pray to him daily, for
the pardon of your sins, the purifying of your natures, and final happiness and
salvation through Jesus Christ. We hope you are instructed in the necessity of
holiness and virtue as the only means to fit you for eternal life. It shall be
our endeavor to second the lessons and intentions, as well as to fulfill the
wishes of your parents, so far as is in our power, by suggesting to you as
occasion offers, suitable advices for your moral and religious conduct in life;
and in so doing we are sure of pleasing them by endeavoring to promote your
real happiness. Even wicked and thoughtless parents would be sorry to see their
children growing up in vicious habits; and nothing can exceed the sorrow of
virtuous and christian parents when their children walk not in the ways of God.
Give joy to your parents, and to your masters and friends, by an early
application to religious knowledge and practice; read the word of God with
care, reverence and attention: pray to God for wisdom and spiritual
understanding, and ye shall not ask in vain. Be assured that it is your highest
honor to honor God, to thank him for his benefits, and keep his commandments;
you will be more worthy of the esteem of your neighbors, if you pray to God
morning and evening, if you study to please him, and to keep the sabbath day
holy, to abstain from all mean and vicious conduct. You may assure yourselves
that such a conduct will contribute no less to your progress in learning than
your improvement in virtue. God is the father of our spirits and ought to be
acknowledged and worshipped in that character. He made our souls, with all
their wonderful powers; and their improvement and exercise must depend on his
bounty. The knowledge of the plowman and the mechanic is attributed in
scripture to the teaching of God, and that large and comprehensive knowledge
which distinguished king Solomon, is expressly said to have been the gift of
God. And who else can give it? As in religion, so likewise in learning, though
Paul may plant, and Apollos water, it belongs to God only to give the increase.
You are grossly mistaken if you imagine that a religious life is melancholy or
disagreeable; on the contrary it is the only road to true pleasure and
satisfaction. To have God for your friend, your father and defender, is true
dignity as well as solid peace and confidence. Come, ye children, hearken unto
me: I will teach you the fear of the Lord. What man is he that desires life
and loves many days, that he may see good? keep thy tongue from evil, and thy
lips from speaking guile, depart from evil and do good: seek peace, and pursue
it. The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open to their
cry. The face of God is against them that do evil, to cut off their memory from
the earth. Behold the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart from evil
is understanding.

FINIS. 1786.

