A SERMON DELIVERED IN ST. PAUL's CHURCH, On the 4th of July, 1786.

When the "Form of Prayer and Thanksgiving to Almighty God, for the inestimable
Blessings of religious and civil Liberty," was first used.

BY SAMUEL MAGAW, D. D.

Rector of St. Paul's in Philadelphia, and Vice-Provost of the University of
Pennsylvania.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by YOUNG and M'CULLOCH, the Corner of Chestnut and
Second-streets. M.DCC.LXXX.VI.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY Benjamin Franklin, Esquire. President; And to all the Honorable
Members of the Supreme Executive Council of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
GENTLEMEN,
IT is with deference and esteem sufficient, perhaps, to render even intrusion
excused, that I have presumed to inscribe the following little piece to so very
respectable a body.

THE true spirit of laws, in their principle, as well as operation, and the
spirit of our religion, oppose not, but consociate with, one another. The
teachers of the latter, should ever regard the faithful conservators and
executers of the former, as friends to both, and preeminently the Ministers of
God, and the Benefactors of man.

TO YOU, under Divine Providence, the citizens of this commonwealth immediately
look up for the propitious influence of wise, impartial government. They know,
your object is, their firm possession and enjoyment of freedom, peace, and an
expanded sweet equality. They know, you wish them to excel in virtue, in order
that they may excel in character and happiness.

MAY the history of Pennsylvania, through the ages to come -- be the history of
Patriots, and of an enlightened, undivided, great, and good people!

I am, Gentlemen, Your obedient, and most dutiful servant, Sam. Magaw.
PHILADELPHIA, August 4, 1786.
DEUTERONOMY xxxiii.29. Happy art thou, O Israel: who is like unto thee; O
people saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and who is the sword of thy
excellency!


THESE very words, with one or two beautiful verses preceding them, have been
fixed on, in our church, to introduce the service of the day: a circumstance
engaging me, by predilection, to make them the ground of what I have now to
offer.

No man did ever possess more piety, and real patriotism united, than Moses,
the venerable conductor and lawgiver of the sons of Jacob. From these heroic
principles, he refused the dignities and wealth of Egypt: he chose rather, for
the people's welfare, to take his share in every difficulty and danger they had
to conflict with. For their advancement too in that celestial wisdom which was
to insure their happiness, and to prolong their days within the promised land,
-- "his doctrines incessantly dropped as the rain, his speech distilled as the
kin^ly dew, as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon the
grass." They found in him, an able head, a warm affectionate heart, and an
amazingly powerful hand; for the God of Israel was with him.

IT is not very often that a true hero or patriot is born, or that men are
raised up illustrious for great and good actions in the world. Of the names
that have been sounded loud and high by the breath of same, more have been as
scourges, and a curse to mankind, than any benefit or blessing.

REAL usefulness both in the smaller, and the larger circles of life, depends
chiefly on uprightness of intention, sincerity, and goodness: and it can only
be expected from greatness of ability, when that greatness goes in connection
with goodness. -- Yet, let it be remembered, for the consolation of virtue, and
her support, among whatever order of the people, or classes, she may be found,
that, no labor of love, no act of beneficence, not even the silent breathings
of an honest heart ascending from the loneliest cottage in the land, and
wishing to draw down grace and blessings on the public -- shall ever, in the
sight of heaven, be disregarded or forgotten.

THE chapter before us contains, "the blessing wherewith Moses the man of God
blessed the children of Israel before his death."

HIS ministry and divine legation were soon to close: they had been fulfilled
with distinguished fidelity, and attended with superlative success. The
numerous people of whom he had the charge, had now passed through the tedious
dangers of the wilderness, and were near their entry into the promised land.
The only barrier that remained, was Jordan. Over this, however, he was not to
go himself.

PREPARATORY to the resignation of his high trust, to Joshua his successor; and
his ascent unto the top of Pisgah -- having adjusted every great concern, and
given his last solemn charge to that people whose prosperity was ever near his
heart; he annexes thereunto a parting benediction. This had a respect, not only
to the nation at large, but to every tribe distinctly and particularly
considered.

THE style is, in part, prophetic; descriptive of their several future fortunes
and conditions: the spirit and manner of the whole is exceedingly sublime and
animated.

HE sets out with commemorating that instance of the divine goodness which
concerned the United States of Israel, in general, (being a common blessing to
them all,) the Almighty's revelation of his mind and will to them, and the
manifestation of his continual glorious presence, and condescending providence.
"The Lord came from Sinai and rose up from Seir unto them: he shined forth from
mount Paran, and he came with ten thousands of saints: from his right hand went
a law given them out of the midst of fire." -- "Yea, he loved the people." --
He owned them for his son, and his firstborn; he constituted them a venerable
holy nation; re-established them under his special care, that he might
instruct, and render them eminently happy.

HE forthwith proceeds to notice the preservation of the descendants of REUBEN;
to foretell their prosperous condition, though they were not so considerable in
respect of numbers as some other tribes. "Let Reuben live, and not die; and let
not his men be few."

Simeon does not appear to be expressly mentioned here, inasmuch as [according
to some expositors] that tribe was included in Judah, and "their inheritance"
was blended with the inheritance of Judah: But it seems more probable that
Simeon shares in the benediction of the first mentioned patriarch; and so his
record stands in some ancient copies of this book.

THE pre-eminent felicity of JUDAH is next observed -- "Hear, Lord, the voice
of Judah, and bring him unto his people: let his hands be sufficient for him;
and be thou an help to him from his enemies."

THE designation and privileges of LEVI do next take place. "Let thy Thummim
and thy Urim be with thy holy One." -- Let there be continued in this tribe the
sacred priesthood -- the exalted honor also of consulting heaven, and
receiving divine instruction by the High Priest, in relation to the public
welfare; or, make them upright and faithful, as well as able and discerning in
the fulfillment of their trust. "They shall teach Jacob thy judgments, and
Israel thy law: they shall put incense before thee, and whole burnt offerings
upon thine altar. Bless, Lord, his substance, and accept the work of his hands."

THE next in their order are BENJAMIN, "The beloved of the Lord," dwelling in
safety, and covered with the presence of his glory all the day long; -- JOSEPH
possessing a delightful, fertile country, blessed of the Most High, "for the
precious things of heaven; for the precious things brought forth by the sun and
moon; for the chief things of the ancient mountains;" and for the kindly
produce of the earth, and the fullness thereof; and for the goodness of him that
dwells in the heavens, and revealed himself in glory in the burning bush.

-- THEN follow "the ten thousands of EPHRAIM, and the thousands of MANASSEH
--;" "ZEBULON rejoicing in his going out, and ISSACHAR in his tents" --
inviting the people to the sacred mountain to worship in the house of the Lord
--; GAD in possession of an ample inheritance, and presently enlarging it;
dwelling in much safety, though encompassed with enemies; "coming with the
chiefs of the people -- executing the justice of the Lord, and his judgments
with Israel" --; DAN endowed with the courage of "a young lion, and leaping
from Bashan" --: NAPHTHALI "satisfied with favor, and full with the blessing of
the Lord" --; and, lastly, ASHER, happy in a numerous beautiful offspring;
acceptable to his brethren; nourished with plenty; sustained with power;
embellished with delight; favored with numerous days, and a proportional
increasing strength.

HAVING in this elevated descriptive manner, characterised the state of each
particular tribe; and pronounced in favor of them, distinct peculiar
benedictions, -- he throws into one grand view, their general felicity, by
representing the whole people as distinguished from every other, in having the
most perfect all-glorious Being, for their Father, their Friend, their Savior,
their God; in possessing, under his gracious providence, every thing that could
make them prosper; -- ensured of victory, freedom, plenty, peace. -- "There is
none like unto the God of Jeshurun, who rides upon the heaven in thy help, and
in his excellency on the sky." -- "The eternal God is thy refuge, and
underneath are the everlasting arms: and he shall thrust out the enemy from
before thee, and shall say, Destroy them. -- Israel shall then dwell in safety
alone: the fountain of Jacob shall be upon a land of corn and wine; also his
heaven shall drop down dew." -- Happy art thou, O Israel: who is like unto
thee, O people saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and who is the sword
of thy excellency!

THE considerations I shall now dwell on a little while, deduced particularly
from this last recited passage, are the following --

THAT a nation, or people, counseled, protected, and assisted by the Almighty
God, must undoubtedly be great and happy:

THAT the only way in which a people can secure and perpetuate this heavenly
aid and favor, is in the extensive, general observance of purity and virtue:

THAT to retain a constant, deeply impressed sensibility of the care of
Providence and the smiles of Heaven; and to express this often in the most
public general manner, must have an excellent effect upon the public manners
and conduct. --

THESE matters will directly lead us to what concerns ourselves at this day; --
to review the past -- to attend to the present -- to look forward to the
probable future fortunes of this rising country.

I. THE divine most blessed Being, whose protection and grace shed peace and
goodness around individuals -- does often manifest himself to a people in their
national capacity, as "a crown of glory, and a diadem of beauty." Before him,
indeed, "all nations are, comparatively, as nothing; and they are counted to
him, less than nothing and vanity." Yet does he "humble himself to behold the
things that are on the earth, as well as in the heavens." He, whose knowledge
and superintendence are such, that the very hairs of our head are all numbered;
and even a sparrow falls not to the ground without his order, -- the same great
Arbiter of every event, continually watches over the kingdoms and nations of
the world, either to "build and to plant," and to cause them to prosper; or
else "to pluck up, and to break down, and to throw down, and to destroy, and to
afflict."

THE grand extensive object of his various works and ways, is, the complete
establishment of perfection and happiness. Through the revolution of numerous
periods, this his illustrious work is carrying forward. All the occurrences and
incidents that happen in the world; the several causes whether natural or
moral, with their effects respectively, that any where take place, are no other
than instruments, under his control, for the advancement of his purpose: and,
even where they appear not to the human eye to have that tendency, his
overruling power continually conducts them to it.

THE human species, by the appointment of the Creator, being parcelled into
nations; and constituting, according to situation, times, and circumstances,
distinct states, kingdoms, and communities; whatever is applicable to
individuals, considered as agents in the divine hand, may likewise be applied
to those public bodies, though still in a larger view.

AS to the Almighty's arrangement, and providential allotment of gifts and
qualifications, we may discern a very clear analogy between the state of
individuals, and of nations. In the case of the former, the allotments are
various, and of different degrees; so it is with the latter: And in regard to
both, this maxim will always hold sure, that where much is given, the more (in
point of duty and excellence) will be required.

IT is in a national capacity, and within the districts of civil society, that
men are capable of the greatest good, and have the opportunities of practicing
the most extensive virtues --

Theirs "are the plans of policy and peace,
To live like brothers, and conjunctive all,
Embellish life." --
It is here that humanity, benevolence, charity, can best have their generous
operation: It is here, men learn to live, and also are taught to die, not to
themselves alone. It is here, that God is best seen and adored, the Friend of
individuals -- the guardian God of nations.

NOW, when He in his wise providence, to answer, and, as it were accelerate the
completion of his gracious plans, chooses that this people, or the other, should
eminently grow in power; possess extensive territory; enjoy a happy equality
among themselves; a reasonable well-confirmed freedom; and withal, practice,
and hold up to the world, a religion pure and undefiled; -- the various
circumstances relating to their earlier, or more advanced condition, he watches
over, and manages for good; a spirit of general wisdom, economy, and prudence,
he inspires; defenders of the public weal, able, determined, and faithful, he
raises up and strengthens; events seemingly disastrous, he controuls, and
renders salutary; -- in dangers he encourages them; in conflicts he is their
stay; and in the time of affluence and safety, their joy and their crown.

IN this way did he peculiarly reveal and express his excellencies to Israel of
old; so did he conduct, inform, magnify, and bless the children of "Abraham his
friend," in all things which they waited upon him for; and as long as their
dependence on his sole power and goodness was dutifully shown in ardent piety,
and uniform obedience. -- "Happy art thou, O Israel: who is like unto thee, O
people saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help." --

II. I am led now to this next consideration, That the only way by which a
people can ascertain, and render durable the Divine assistance and blessing,
is, by attending duly to the unfeigned practice of holiness and virtue.

IT is an established maxim in the order of things, and of very high authority,
that, "Righteousness exalts a nation," but "Sin is a people's reproach." --
As naturally as correspondent effects flow from their immediate causes; so does
the happiness, or misery of nations, spring from virtue, or vice. That
behavior in the members of society, which is consonant to truth, regularity,
uprightness, purity, must, unquestionably, give to all their affairs, the
happiest adjustment and disposition; place them on the firmest footing, and
insure to them the most success. Conforming to the rules of charity and
goodness, they cannot but advance each others ease and comfort: maintaining
justice inviolate; adhering to a candid, impartial, disinterested conduct
invariably -- observing temperance, frugality, together with an animated
diligence in all things; especially venerating most sincerely the Supreme Lord
of the social system; they must, with a collected, noble operation, build up,
and render beautiful, the fabric of public happiness.

THE wise and gracious Ruler of the universe, delights in holiness and virtue.
"Whatever he delights in must be happy." A temper, and such manners as
resemble, in some considerable degree, his essential goodness, purity, and
love, is that alone which blesses, and renders glorious an individual; the same
will bless and glorify a number of individuals; -- it is this which makes us
happy, singly considered; it is this which will make us so, collectively.

WE find the safety of states and countries in all ages, running parallel with
the observance which they paid to the Divine Being and his laws. Religion and
piety, even in countries where their true objects were unknown, had, we find, a
propitious influence upon the public concerns: They fixed a restraint upon the
passions of the people; they strengthened and preserved their union; they
heightened their moral sense; increased their ideas of a common interest; gave
them a confidence in the time of dangers; firmness under trials; a modesty and
temperance amidst their successes. The most flourishing periods of ancient
Greece and Rome, were those, in which a regard to the Powers supposed to be
above them, and the practice of their religion, even such as it was, did most
obtain.

IN that land where the true object of religious worship was known; where the
only living God had been pleased to manifest his perfections, and his will, --
the connection between piety and happiness, was eminently conspicuous; the
direct relation subsisting between obedience to the heavenly orders, and the
prosperity of the people, was every where discerned and felt.

YOU cannot be strangers to the great and goodly promises held up to Israel,
grounded on this condition, that they "should hearken diligently unto the voice
of the Lord their God, to observe and to do all his commandments." As citizens
connected with the public -- as members of domestic society -- as venerable
tillers of the ground -- possessors of flocks and herds, and owners of various
property -- as warriors too, called forth at times to guard and defend their
country; -- in every place, in every circumstance; and whatever rank or
character sustaining, they were to be successful and happy. "Blessed shall thou
be in the city, and blessed shall thou be in the field; blessed when thou
come in, and when thou go out. -- The Lord shall cause thine enemies that
rise up against thee, to be smitten before thy face. He shall command the
blessing upon thee in thy storehouses, and in all that thou set thine hand
unto. -- He shall establish thee an holy people unto himself."

NOW these things are for an example and encouragement to all nations which
were to come after; -- meanwhile, the evils threatened, the vexation, rebukes,
and manifold calamities which did ensue, upon the general disobedience and
ingratitude of that people, exhibit an awful warning --

III. A particular yet remaining to be considered, is as follows,

THAT to maintain a constant deeply-impressed sensibility of the ear of
Providence, and the favor of Heaven, in regard to the affairs of nations, as
well as individuals; and to express the fame frequently in the most public
grateful manner, tends to shed the happiest influence upon the public
measures and behavior.

MOST certainly, that God who "is not far from every one of us" -- in whom "we
live, and move, and have our being," we ought in every thing to see,
acknowledge, and adore. -- A prevailing perception of his presence, grace, and
excellences, attended with such manners as that perception invariably produces,
must constitute felicity, wherever it is found. A sense of God, and its
delightful fervent operations, can alone constitute solid peace and pleasure.

THAT which holds true in this matter, with respect to one or another of the
human kind, may be transferred, as applicable to any number: that which can
establish you, or me, in real quiet, serenity, and bliss, and produce as it
were, a paradise regained, in each smaller circle to which we more immediately
belong; can do the same to multitudes --, can constitute the peace, the order,
the prosperity of confederated millions.

IS it not therefore desirable -- is it not indispensably necessary, for the
general welfare, that this divine sense should prevail wide and far? that, at
the least, the major part of every community and state should possess its
fullness, and show its power? -- The more they know of God and his inestimable
favors, the more will they admire and love him; and the higher this admiration
and this love, -- the more uniform, exalted, and pure, the returns will be of
acknowledgment and praise. And it must then follow, that the State will
flourish in proportion.

THE Almighty Patron and Friend of pious individuals -- the God of Abraham, of
Isaac, and of Jacob, was the God of Israel as a nation; and he is at all times
the God and Guardian of every nation and state, that pays a due respect to his
superintending rule and majesty. Causes and effects are entirely at his
command. Every circumstance, and every event, either by its immediate or
ultimate operation, proves subservient, under him, to his divine purposes. It
is He who alone can command a blessing upon the counsels of a people, or
confound their devices; who can strengthen and exalt them; or diminish and
bring them low* who can open the heavens in their beauty, and shower down the
abundance of his treasure; or shut them up in blackness, and send forth the
terrors of his anger. It is He who brings health and plenty smiling through a
land -- or bids the pestilence to cleave to the inhabitants, and famine to
pursue them until they are consumed: It is He who gives them the victory in
battle; or causes them to flee, or fall before their enemies.

IN the seasons of public distress and evil, as it is a people's duty to humble
themselves very deeply, and to exercise most solemn penitence; so, when it does
please the Almighty to crown the public with his benefits, -- a general sense
of gratitude, returns of thankfulness, in some degree proportional, must, in
every view, be decent, becoming, requisite --

"O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness; and declare the
wonders that he does for the children of men! That they would exalt him also in
the congregation of the people; and praise him in the seat of the elders!"

THERE are blessings which speak with a distinguished energy; -- which fill the
soul with new* increasing pleasure, -- which spread diffusively their influence
and effects; adapted also to produce, and justly laying claim to, the devoutest
praise of every member of society. Surely nothing should obstruct, or in any
degree restrain, the spirit of holy praise, the exercise of lively thanksgiving
"unto God even the Father, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ:" especially as
he, whose precious merits give influence to the sighings and the sorrows of a
contrite heart, and render still acceptable every request of the penitent and
holy worshipper, -- renders their thanksgivings also divine, and sits the
lovely sacrifice for presentation before the throne of the excellent glory.

IF then such pious sensibility were cultivated, and kept awake; -- were it
happily to spread abroad, and to become general; and at every proper season to
be expressed in fervent united acts of social worship; the people among whom it
so prevailed, must prosper -- the dispositions susceptible of happiness would
grow upon them --; the temper disqualifying men for it, would decline; -- the
virtues which adorn society would all revive; -- the vices which disgrace it
would languish and die; -- order, tranquillity, and peace would be secured;
freedom would be established; and the truest dignity and glory ascertained.

IN the course of these several considerations, I cannot doubt, my honored
audience, but that you have been making, as we went along, some useful
improvement of them. You could not but perceive the relation which they bear in
sundry respects, to our own circumstances as a people, at the present period.
This indeed I have steadily kept in view, from my first setting out, and
through the whole of what has been suggested. -- To be yet more particular and
express, may have its benefit.

THE special purpose of our assembling now, you are all acquainted with. It is
to recognize the Divine Superintendence in an event perhaps of as extraordinary
magnitude as ever marked the annals of the world. It is, in the spirit of
devotion to the Most High, and of good will toward mankind, to celebrate the
memory of a day, from which our future fortunes are likely to derive a
permanent complexion and establishment: -- a day on which were laid, by the
august Fathers of their country, "the perpetual foundations of peace, liberty,
and safety."

THE morning of this anniversary, now the tenth in the course of revolving
years, since the ever-memorable era, has, with an undiminished joy, poured
its radiance from yonder skies. -- Its blithsome hours waft blessings on their
wings. "The mountains and the hills break forth into singing." A glory shines
around: and the Recording Angel flies to report, and write in heaven -- ANOTHER
YEAR OF FREEDOM TO A WORLD.

AFFECTION for the land we live in, must, at the least, be an innocent passion.
The Amor Patriae, a steady, glowing, disinterested love for one's country,
has, by the wise and good in every age, been held in estimation. This, as
Americans, we cultivate with ardor, in perfect consistency, I trust, with the
genius of the blessed gospel, and undivided from a sacred regard to the rights
of all the kindreds of the earth. We wish, dependent upon none but the God of
nations, to rise and prosper; yet, we wish not this prosperity, -- heaven
forbid! to the disadvantage, much less upon the ruins, of any people.

WHILE we adore and bless the power of the Lord, for the revolution that has
taken place, it is in perfect persuasion, that it will issue in the noblest
consequences; it is, in a consciousness "void of offense" toward the people
from whom we separated; it is, in clear conviction, that the very time was
come, for our assuming a distinct, personal rank in the family of nations; it
is, in the experience, that religious and civil liberty go hand in hand. --

I FEEL no inclination for refinement on a subject of this kind. Conjecture I
would shun, as rather fruitless: and, the possible entertainment of a
speculating fancy, willingly forego. Matters of unquestionable fact, alone, and
the consequences they are likely, in their nature, to draw after them, are to
our purpose.

METHINKS I see (and surely you discern with equal clearness) cause in
abundance, to excite pleasure and exalted expectation; -- though some, I must
confess, for apprehension not so pleasing, and for regret. -- In the
distinguished aid and countenance of heaven, directing public measures,
particularly at the conjuncture which we are looking back to; and in the
conduct, still, of an illustrious few, we find the one: In a deficiency of
measures since, to complete the system of our happiness; and in a too general
want of virtue among the people, we can trace the other. But, I forbear to
bring forward, at this time, any thing that might cloud the hopes we would most
fondly cherish.

FROM the very rise of an arduous contest, -- in what degree the counsels of
America were illuminated from above; what special benediction and success
attended the execution of them, -- it is unnecessary, minutely to describe.

WHETHER we take a retrospective view of the host of dangers that have at times
environed us, yet seasonably were dispelled; -- our weaknesses, that have
improved into strength; -- resources few and inconsiderable, growing into
respectability; -- occurrences disastrous on our side, soon issuing in our
gain; -- successes boasted of as brilliant on the part of our opponents,
quickly terminating in their loss and disappointment; -- and I may add, events
numerous, diversified, shedding a positive renown upon the continental federal
proceedings, as pledges which bespoke the hastening full prosperity of that
great country we inherit; -- in all these circumstances and particulars, it is
obvious beyond a question, that "underneath were the everlasting arms," -- that
the Lord was the shield of our help.

IN connection herewith, and in relation to the same grand objects, and the
Divine Arbiter of all, we place in the list of blessings -- the tranquillity we
enjoyed, even in the midst of war; the plenty that crowned the labors of the
husbandman; the share of commerce flowing to, and from, our several ports; the
means and opportunities of profitable knowledge, especially divine; -- the
amity confirmed, on principles of mutual good, between this country, and some
of the greatest powers of the earth; the valor, perseverance, and fine order
of the soldiery, the judgment, magnanimity, and enterprise of the generals, and
others in command; the temperance and humanity which adorned their victories;
-- the peace definitive that was agreed to, and an undisputed possession of our
liberties and independence. Such are the accumulated facts and occurrences,
dignifying the mighty business we have had in hand.

THE lines having fallen unto us in pleasant places, and our heritage being so
goodly; the preservation and perfection of these blessings, should now be our
leading aim. We can preserve and perfect them, only by revering their Great
Bestower, and practicing the virtues which he has commanded, and delights in.

SENATORS, and GUARDIANS of this rising Republic! Your abilities and nobleness
of mind allow you not to doubt, that the felicity of a country depends on the
virtue of its inhabitants; and the virtue of its inhabitants, on their being
endued with a pure and manly piety. Unless the Divine Being has the hearts of
the people, -- your laws will be considered as ungracious restraints; they will
never sweetly draw, and rationally bind their affections. Unless their
principles be rendered incorrupt, and their morals pure, your very best
contrived systems of policy -- your most approved forms of government -- your
wisest plans of union and confederation, will never insure to the Public,
stability, or happiness. Honor and recommend the religion therefore which
constitutes the people's wisdom and welfare, by making them fear God; this will
give your institutions an hold in their judgments and consciences, that no
other principles can effect. Fix the credit of Christianity among them, and
spread its glory by the luster of Your Examples.

CITIZENS OF THESE STATES! -- You are in possession of an extensive, noble
country. Fertility and beauty vie with each other, in favor of your ease,
accommodation and delight. Freedom, with its train of multiplying benefits, is
here established as your own. Every avenue to national importance, and the
felicity of individuals, is opened wide. -- You will not be unmindful, I trust,
of the mighty Giver of this wonderful prosperity. It is in obeying the God of
your Fathers, that you will find his ancient mercies renewed; and all that have
been lately bestowed, entailed upon you for ever. Your safety, your
righteousness, and unchangeable excellency, will be in a conversation such as
becomes the gospel. Proceed in every thing that is just, and venerable, and
praiseworthy. Go on to love and cherish one another, as members of the same
illustrious Family. Let your Union be indissolvable; and its Bond all the
virtues that can adorn humanity. So will you, and your children's children
after you, "SING WITH GLADNESS FOR JACOB, AND SHOUT AMONG THE CHIEF OF THE
NATIONS." --

FINIS.
Page 12, line 15, for manners read measures.


