DEBATES and PROCEEDINGS OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF PENNSYLVANIA, ON THE
MEMORIALS PRAYING A REPEAL OR SUSPENSION OF THE LAW ANNULLING THE CHARTER OF
THE BANK.

MATTHEW CAREY, EDITOR.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR CAREY AND CO. SEDDON AND PRITCHARD. M.DCC.LXXXVI.

To his EXCELLENCY BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, PRESIDENT of the COMMONWEALTH of
PENNSYLVANIA, L. L. D. etc. etc.
HONORED SIR,
PERMIT me to dedicate to you these primitiae or first fruits of the eloquence
of a commonwealth which your fostering hand has happily conducted from
childhood to maturity.

These debates afford a pleasing prospect that Pennsylvania will, in process of
time, behold her senate adorned with orators not inferior, perhaps, to those
boasts of antiquity -- Demosthenes, Isocrates, Cicero, etc. etc.

Your celebrity as a philosopher -- a statesman -- and (a higher title than
either) a citizen of the world, would receive no addition from the most
elaborate eulogium I could write. I shall forbear, therefore, to tread the
beaten track of dedicators; and shall rest content with uniting my sincere
wishes with those of your admiring and grateful countrymen, that every felicity
which heaven bestows upon the most favored of the human race, may await you
while you abide in this terrestrial habitation -- and that your memory may be
revered and cherished by the friends of science -- of liberty -- and
benevolence, till time shall cease to be.

I am, sir, with due esteem, Your most obedient humble servant, MATTHEW CAREY.
Philadelphia, April 20, 1786.
PREFACE.
IN the following debates, the same arguments frequently occur twice, and, in
some few instances, perhaps a third or fourth time. The editor anticipates a
question which will, doubtless, be asked by most of the readers, viz. Why, in
those cases, he has not rested satisfied with the first statement, and omitted
the others? To this he answers, that when introduced again in the manner above
mentioned, they are mostly considered in a different point of view, and some
new lights thrown upon them. Moreover, the importance of the subject inspired
him with a desire of laying the debates before the public in as ample a manner
as possible. Still further: If he had suppressed any part of the member's
speeches, he would have subjected himself to the charge of partiality, which he
has studiously endeavored to avoid.

It will be remarked, that the answers to some of the arguments, state them
differently from what they appear in the original speeches. This has sometimes
arisen from one member mistaking the meaning of another: sometimes, the fault
lies with the editor.

As to omissions, he must be chargeable with them in various places. He does
not understand short hand, without which it is utterly impossible to keep pace
with a speaker, unless he delivers himself very leisurely. However, he flatters
himself that very few of the material arguments on either side, have escaped
him.

Whatever may be the defects or imperfections of the pamphlet, they will, he
trusts, be readily excused, when it is considered that his chief object has
been to contribute to the information of the public, on a subject of as great
magnitude, perhaps, as any agitated in this state since the revolution.

Philadelphia, April 20, 1786
Debates and Proceedings, etc.
General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
Friday, March 3, 1786, A. M.
A memorial signed by 624 inhabitants of the city and liberties of
Philadelphia, was presented to the chair, and read as follows:

To the honorable the representatives of the freemen of the commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, in general assembly met,

IMPRESSED with a just sense of the inestimable blessing of freedom, and
considering, as we ought, that an impartial administration of justice is the
fundamental principle of the constitution, and that the security of property,
be it little or much, or to whoever it may belong, is one of the chief ends of
government: we conceive it to be our bounden duty to watch over the conduct of
those, whom our free suffrages, as a free people, have entrusted with the
management of public affairs, so as at all times to guard against a remissness
of duty, or a wanton or incautious exercise of power on their part.

Impressed, we say, with these ideas and principles, we are led to state to
this honorable house, a matter, in which, as it appears on the printed minutes
of the late house of assembly, there has not been that proper and impartial
attention paid, which the principles of the constitution and the true end of
government require.

The case we refer to is as follows:

On the 21st of March last, petitions from sundry inhabitants of Chester county
were presented to the house and read. Those petitions began by stating a number
of charges and allegations against the bank of North America, but without
making or offering proof or evidence of their being true; and praying that the
charter of said bank may be repealed.

On the 23d in the morning, two other petitions to the same purport were
presented and read for the first time, and read again for the second time on
the same day: whereupon, on motion made and seconded, they were referred to a
committee to enquire and report thereon.

We conceive it to be an indispensible principle, whenever the property of any
of the citizens of this commonwealth is to be affected by the charges and
allegations of any man or number of men, that the charges and allegations shall
be proved, and that the party so charged and accused shall be heard in its
defense; and that it is a departure from the principles of the constitution,
for the representatives of the people to take any such charges and allegation
as matters of truth, without proof or evidence of their being so; and that for
any house of assembly to proceed thereon, to the injury of the property of any
of our fellow-citizens, without evidence had, and defense heard, is
unconstitutional, and that no law so obtained or passed can be operative,
because it is repugnant to the principles of justice and the constitution.

Your memorialists are deeply concerned to have occasion to observe, (and as
citizens are deeply interested in the observation) that it does not appear,
either from the report of the committee to whom the said petitions, charges,
and allegations were committed, or from any other proceedings of the late house
of assembly, that any enquiry was made, or any proof or evidence had or
produced of the said charges and allegations being true: yet the said house
proceeded to bring in a bill, which has in it the nature of a sentence, on the
supposed truth of the said charges and allegations, instead of enquiring into
and ascertaining them by proof and evidence -- the title of which bill is, An
act to repeal an act of assembly, entitled, An act to incorporate the
subscribers to the bank of North America, etc.

Your memorialists are further concerned to observe, that when the persons
whose property was immediately to be affected by the passing this bill into a
law, applied by petition to be heard in their defense, and, of consequence,
against the said charges and allegations, on the supposed truth of which, the
aforesaid bill was sounded: the said house refused to hear them, thereby
denying them that right which every citizen of this commonwealth is entitled to.

Your memorialists find by the printed minutes of the late house, April 4th,
that when the said bill was called up for a second reading, a motion was made
by mr. Pettit, and seconded by mr. Willing, that the memorial of the president,
directors, and company of the bank of North America, praying to be heard, be
read; and on the question that the prayer of the said memorial be granted, it
was negatived. See April 4th, page 284.

Your memorialists think it right to remark, that those proceedings of the late
house* and of their committee, afford a strong presumption to many good
citizens, that the charges and allegations against the bank are ill founded,
and not true; and that other causes than those which have been assigned, are to
be looked for* as the true causes for the vehement attack on the bank.

Your memorialists further find by the said printed minutes (April 4th, p. 284)
that immediately after the said prayer, "to be heard," was rejected, the house
went into the second reading of the said bill, without any enquiry into the
truth of the charges and allegations aforesaid; and having finished the said
second reading, the bill, as is usual, was ordered to be published for public
consideration.

On this part of the proceedings, your memorialists conceive it their duty, as
well as their right as citizens, to remark --

That the publishing the bill for the public to consider upon, without (the
house) having first investigated the charges and allegations against the bank,
which were the moving causes of the proceedings of the house, and on the
supposed truth of which the said bill was founded, and without hearing the
defense of the parties so charged and alleged against, was bringing the bill
before the public in a very partial and incomplete manner; because it was
leaving the public in the dark as to the truth or existence of the matters on
which their consideration was to be exercised; and withholding from them the
knowledge on which their judgment was to be formed. It was impossible the
public could, by any consideration of theirs, determine or know, whether the
matters charged on the bank were true or false. Consideration has no proper
object to go upon, when applied to charges without evidence, and still less so
when applied to a sentence, without having both the evidence and the defense.
The bill, then ordered to be published, had in it the nature of a sentence, and
nothing can appear to us more inconsistent than the publishing a sentence for
the consideration of the public, and for the purpose of obtaining the
concurrence or opinion of the public thereon, and suppressing the matters on
which that sentence is founded.

Your memorialists are much concerned to find such deviations from, if not
direct violations of, the constitution; and that within so short a time after
the late convention had pointed out defects of a similar nature in the conduct
of former assemblies.

Your memorialists are further induced to observe -- that on the question
itself, respecting the repealing the charter of the bank, they feel themselves
under some uneasy sensations and apprehensions. At any rate, it is breaking the
word and promise of the state, publicly pledged but a short time before -- a
measure, which at first view holds out to the world a faithless disposition in
Pennsylvania, and puts all kind of credit, public and private, on a precarious
footing -- a measure, of which the power to do it may be litigated, because it
may be made a question, whether any law can warrant the doing an unlawful
thing. Therefore the repealing a charter, being a step of the utmost delicacy
and danger, requires to be gone into with the nicest care, and the most
cautious and scrupulous investigation. If any causes can justify such
proceeding, those causes ought to be made visible to the world, or our credit
with the world is wounded, if not ended. For, who will trust a government that
assumes the power of breaking its word, or will trust the individuals of a
country that live under such a government? The paper money of one house may be
voted down by the next; and the engagements of one assembly be superceded by
its successors. It will be of little use to us afterward, to say, that any
number or party of the assembly, were the persons who did it. Those persons may
be returned to the rank of private citizens, or departed the state, when the
mischiefs they shall have occasioned, shall take place.

But your memorialists are distressed to observe, that instead of caution and
investigation, instead of precision and deliberation, they find the business
taken up on the slightest grounds, and conducted with a spirit of haste and
precipitancy extremely ill-suited to the nature and importance of the subject.

Your memorialists find by the printed minutes of the late house, that the
petitions against the bank were read twice in the same day, referred to a
committee to enquire and report thereon, and the report of that committee
delivered in, not the very next day, but the day after, -- That report read a
first and second time, debated and resolved upon, and a second committee
appointed to bring in a bill, and that bill brought in and read, and all this
within the space of six days, viz. from the 23d to the 29th of March; for the
truth of which we refer to the printed minutes of the house.

When we consider the extensive nature of the case, the variety of knowledge
necessary to collect, to form a judgment upon, and the probable danger of such
a proceeding to public and private credit, we must declare upon our own
knowledge and opinion of the nature of the subject, that neither the time, nor
the attention bestowed, was equal to the importance of it.

Your memorialists find, that the late house of assembly having neglected to
enquire into the truth of the charges and allegations against the bank, and yet
taken up these charges and allegations as true, refusing at the same time to
grant the prayer of the proprietors of the bank to be heard in their defense,
published the aforesaid bill, for, what is called, public consideration, and
adjourned soon after to the 23d of August following.

As the said bill, during the recess of the house, was before the public in the
imperfect state we have already mentioned, it was impossible for the public to
form any judgment upon it, because the facts and matters on which they were to
judge, were withheld from them, and therefore the publication of it could not
answer the purposes intended by the constitution: But if any judgment is to be
formed from the general elections which took place soon after the passing this
bill, we may conclude it met with great disapprobation, because so many of the
members who voted for it, have been displaced by their constituents; and we
cannot doubt that as this darksome business comes to be better known, and more
illuminated, and the true interest of Pennsylvania fuller understood, that a
more extensive reprobation will take place; for it is natural that a free
people should abhor the reproach of being a faithless one, and impossible they
should countenance a measure which has the appearance of despotism.

Your memorialists find, that on the meeting of the late house for their last
sitting, on the 23d of August, the president, directors and company of the bank
of North America, renewed their application to the house for a hearing; and
that a petition from eight persons, (signers to the petitions for repealing the
charter of the bank) viz. James Pearson, Robert Smith, William Graham, John
Barker, John Kling, George Leib, Levi Budd, and Frederick Heimberger, was
likewise presented to the house, praying to be heard in support of their
petitions, both which requests were complied with.

Your memorialists find by the minutes of the late house, page 356, that on the
fifth of September, the day appointed by the house for a hearing, the president
of the bank presented himself personally at the bar of the house, and likewise
by counsel; but it does not appear from the said minutes, that any of the
persons who had signed the petitions, charges and allegations against the bank,
appeared personally to support and prove them; neither does it appear that they
produced so much as a single evidence to prove what they had signed to, or
attempted to prove it.

If therefore they have signed to charges and allegations which are not true,
and the house have acted on those charges and allegations as if they were true,
there is a manifest injury committed; and as reparation is due to the injured,
as well as to the injured honor of the state, your memorialists confide that
this hon. house will take such measures as may make the necessary reparation.

The charges and allegations on the part of the petitioners against the bank,
not being attempted to be proved, the bank could only deny them; and we find by
the minutes of the house, that the matter ended in a verbal litigation between
a counsel on each side, instead of going into an investigation and proof of the
charges advanced, on the supposed truth of which the house had acted.

On this part of the business, your memorialists think it necessary to observe,
that the refusing the bank a hearing in the first stage of the business, before
the bill was published for public consideration, and admitting the bank to a
hearing at the very latter part of the session, was precluding the judgment of
the public upon the case, because the publication of the bill, and the time for
public consideration, was passed; and no new matter which any hearing at that
time might produce, could have time or opportunity to be publicly known.

Had the hearing been before the second reading of the bill, and consequently
before it was to be published for public consideration, which was the request
the bank made, the public would then have known, that the petitioners against
the bank had not proved their charges and allegations; and this would have been
matter for the public to have exercised their consideration and judgment upon:
but of this they were precluded by their representatives.

That the charges and allegations against the bank are ill-grounded and not
true* is naturally to be inferred from their not being proved nor attempted to
be proved -- And that the prayer of the petitioners against the bank is founded
on very ill and dangerous principles, subversive of the good of society, and of
the fundamentals of the constitution, and of all true government, is best
inferred from the prayer itself, which we here subjoin:

"Therefore," say the petitioners, in order to restore public confidence and
private security, we pray, that a bill may be brought in, and passed into a
law, for repealing the law for incorporating the bank. -- On which we remark,
that nothing can be more dangerous in principle and practice, and more absurd
and monstrous, than to pray that the government may break its word, in order to
be the better believed and trusted, and violate the confidence already placed
in it, in order that the people may place more: yet such is the exact prayer of
their petition, for the truth of which we appeal to the printed minutes of the
house, and likewise to the petition itself.

These are the subject matters which your memorialists have to lay before your
honorable house; they are concerned there should be any occasion to do it, and
still more concerned there should be so much. The watching over the conduct of
the representatives is the proper duty of the citizens of a free country, and
in presenting this memorial we discharge the duty incumbent on us.

We therefore pray your honorable house, that these matters may be taken into
your most serious consideration, and that either the repealing law may be
repealed, or a bill be brought in, to suspend the operation of it, until your
hon. house can obtain full information on the subject.

And your memorialists, etc. Ordered to lie on the table. N. B. On different
days afterward, sundry similar memorials were presented to the house.



Wednesday, March 15, 1786, A. M.
Read a second time, the memorials praying a repeal or suspension of the law,
annulling the Charter of the bank.

Ordered, that they, together with the petitions against the bank, presented to
the late house of Assembly, be referred to Messrs. Clymer, Robinson, Lilly,
Rittenhouse, and Edgar, to report thereon.

Thursday, March 23, 1786, A. M.
Mr. Clymer, as Chairman of the above Committee, presented to the speaker the
following report:

The Committee to whom were referred the memorials of the citizens of
Philadelphia and other parts, setting forth the irregular and partial conduct
of the late house of Assembly, in repealing the Charter of the bank of
North America, and praying for a restoration thereof, or a suspension of the
repealing act, -- report,

THAT the said memorials containing a statement of proceedings, adduced by the
memorialists in support of their charges against the late house -- your (...)
first had recourse to the printed minutes, and found the statement had been
truly made.

That conceiving it more their duty to state facts than opinions, your
committee, in order to obtain information as to the reality of the complaints
alleged against the bank in certain petitions presented to the late house,
applied to Mr. Whitehill and Mr. Smilie, members of a committee appointed by
that house to enquire therein, and on whose report a bill was brought in to
repeal the said charter; and requested to know what were the enquiries they had
made in consequence: but those gentlemen in answer to a question put to them,
said, they had not called at the bank to make themselves acquainted with the
nature of the transactions there: and your committee inferred generally from
their conversation, that neither they, the said Mr. Whitehill and Mr. Smilie,
nor any of their colleagues, had made any special or occasional enquiry
whatever concerning the bank.

The memorials mentioning the names of eight persons who had stood forth as
supporters of the petitions against the bank, four of them, viz. Messieurs
James Pearson, Robert Smith, William Graham, and Frederick Heimberger,
attending your committee in pursuance of notifications sent to them, they the
said four persons were questioned as to facts relating to the bank consistent
with their own knowledge: but they declined satisfying your committee further
than that they had not been at the bank to gain information.

The president and some of the directors of the bank also attending at the
request of your committee, they affirmed that none of the members of the
committee of the late house, or any of all the petitioners, had ever asked
information at the bank concerning the conduct of that institution, or the
nature of its transactions, though they the said president and directors had at
all times been ready to give such information, and had invited free enquiry.

It will follow from this relation, that the report made to the late house, was
grounded in general notions preconceived, or on the current popular opinions
and speculations, without much consideration being bestowed on the special
subject; and the same may at least be said of the petitions presented against
the bank.

It will follow also that the house did not derive from either members of that
committee, or the said petitioners, those clear lights which would have been
necessary to their deliberations on so difficult and interesting a subject, and
which from the instructions to their committee, they seem to have desired.

Your committee on examining further into the conduct of the late house, in
this transaction, could not but discover, in some instances, a spirit little
suited to the transient and accountable representatives of a free people. In an
early stage of the business, and when only it could have had its use, the bank
was denied a hearing: and when at a later stage, it was yielded to the repeated
instances of its president and directors, the permission was qualified with
this remark, that it must be considered as a matter of favor and not of right.
But the favor became nugatory through the application of a rule of order,
which, obliging the council for the bank to speak before the council for the
petitioners, left him to combat in the dark against possible charges and
conjectural imputations. True it is, he was suffered to make a reply to the
adverse counsel, but within a time so limited by the house, as could scarcely
be sufficient for preparation in any petty cause in the ordinary courts.

Thus confining themselves to facts and to reflections naturally arising from
them, your committee conceive the conduct of the late house, in the instance of
the bank, to be of most dangerous example. In their precipitancy, they broke
through the procrastinating forms of proceeding, which were fixed as fences
against the sudden violences of power. And in their partiality they appear to
have manifested a predetermination to condemn.

Your committee beg leave to remark on some circumstances attending the
memorials presented to this house, which ought to have considerable weight in
their present deliberations. The subscribers to these memorials are so numerous
as to bespeak the general sense of the community. In them are included the most
respectable characters amongst us; men who, from their intercourse and
condition in life, must be supposed best experienced in the effects, good or
bad, produced by the operations of the bank, and from general knowledge most
intelligent in the nature of such institutions.

As the proceedings of the late house in the case of the bank, thus appear with
all the marks of precipitancy, prejudice and partiality, the annulling act has
its foundation deeply laid in injustice, and remains a reproach both to the
government and to the people. But your committee trusting in the wisdom and
probity of the present house, to restore to the state its lost honor, submit
the following resolution:

That a special committee be appointed to prepare and bring in a bill to repeal
an act, entitled, An act to repeal an act of assembly, entitled, An act to
incorporate the subscribers to the bank of North America, also one other act,
entitled, An act for preventing and punishing the counterfeiting of the common
seal, bank bills and bank notes of the president, directors, and company of the
bank of North America, and for other purposes therein mentioned.

GEO. CLYMER. WM. ROBINSON, junr. JOSEPH LILLY.

Read, and ordered to lie on the table.

Ordered that Wednesday next be assigned for the second reading of the above
report.



Wednesday, March 29, 1786, A. M.
AGREEABLY to the order of the day, took up for a second reading, the report of
the committee to whom were referred the memorials praying a repeal or
suspension of the law for annulling the charter of the bank.

Mr. R. Morris having enquired the number of signers to the petitions presented
to the late house of assembly relative to the bank, and to the memorials in
favor of the bank, presented to the present house, they appeared as follow:

Petitions against the bank presented to the late house, signed by 1199 persons.

Petitions in favor of the bank, presented to the late house signed by 608
persons, of whom 516 were of the city of Philadelphia.

Memorials in favor of the bank presented to the present house, signed by 2947
persons.

The report being read,

Mr. Robinson addressed himself to the speaker as follows: In discussing the
present question, two principal considerations arise: first, by what authority
a legislature can dissolve a charter solemnly granted to any institution: and
secondly, the utility or the bad consequences of the particular institution. I
shall not go into both. As a member of the committee who have made the report
before the house, I shall explain the ground of their proceeding, and shall
consider but one of those points; the power to dissolve a charter. The
committee formed their conclusions from a conviction that the legislature has
not that power. To decide this, two questions arise. In what capacity the
legislature acts in granting charters of incorporation? And in what capacity in
taking them away? In granting charters the legislature acts in a ministerial
capacity. In this proposition I am supported by the constitution. The ninth
section of the frame of government states -- that the assembly shall sit on
their own adjournments; prepare bills and enact them into laws; judge of the
elections and qualifications of their own members: they may expel a member, but
not a second time for the same cause; they may administer oaths or affirmations
on the examinations of witnesses; redress grievances; impeach state criminals;
grant charters of incorporation; constitute towns, boroughs, and counties. All
these, differing in themselves, are acts of the legislature. Some are for
preparing general regulations, which extend to all the state; these are laws.
They judge of the qualifications of their own members. Their sentence is not a
law. -- Their granting charters is an act of agency -- in which they have a
power to act for the community, whose agents they are appointed. This is
totally distinct from the power of making laws, and it is a novel doctrine in
Pennsylvania that they can abrogate those charters so solemnly granted. There
is this grand distinction between laws and charters of incorporation granted by
the legislature. -- The first are general rules, which extend to the whole
community -- the second bestow particular privileges upon a certain number of
people. It is unnecessary to dwell long upon this matter, as I propose merely
to trace the ground of the proceedings of the committee. The second question
which offers itself to us, is, in what capacity the legislature acts in taking
away a charter? In this they act judicially. They hear the cause, and determine
on its merits. Now this exceeds their powers. They are not authorized by the
constitution to act in a judicial capacity, but so far as regards the
qualifications of their own members -- and in some few other matters, so as to
preserve themselves from insult -- such as in case of disturbances in the
house; for they could not secure themselves from insult, if they could not take
cognizance of the matter immediately. These are their only judicial powers.
They are not competent to decisions in cases of property. Charters are a
species of property. When they are obtained, they are of value. Their
forfeiture belongs solely to the courts of justice. The constitution says, that
in controversies respecting property, the party shall have a trial by jury. But
the late house stepped between the president and directors of the bank, and
their rights, and deprived them of the legal mode of trial. In this an
essential injury has been done them. The house presumed upon its own power, and
that it must be obeyed -- and upon the weakness of the other party. Let no man
say, that tyranny cannot exist in a large assembly. It may become a many-headed
hydra, as fond of power as individuals. It is not the nature of mankind to give
up what power they possess. They are fond of keeping, and even sometimes of
exceeding it. With even the best intentions, a legislature may go beyond the
proper bounds, and be deceived into an opinion of possessing powers they never
were vested with. In a free government like ours, it is particularly incumbent
on us to prevent the attempts of an exorbitant power. The constitution has set
bounds to the power of the legislature, and said, thus far shall thou go, and
no farther. Unless they break the original and fundamental principles of the
constitution, they cannot pretend to a power of taking away charters. Perhaps
it will be said, with Blackstone, that charters of incorporation may be
forfeited by an act of parliament or of assembly. He holds the power of an act
of parliament to be unbounded. But though this might be his opinion, it does
not follow that it is just: far otherwise. The more easy it is to make it
obeyed, the more caution is necessary to avoid injustice. Most common law
writers before Blackstone appear of a different opinion, by their silence
respecting this method. And even he appears to imply, it was power not right
that did it. The only modes, therefore, by which charters can be vacated, are:
1st. by death of the members of the corporation -- 2dly, by resignation of
right -- and 3dly, by forfeiture in the courts of justice. As to the first,
nothing is necessary to be said. The second is voluntary, and a species of
legal suicide. And the third is the only legal mode in which charters can be
taken away in this country. The principles of our constitution are materially
different from those of the British constitution. -- Here they are clearly
defined. In Great Britain, an act of parliament has all the force of the
constitution. In this country, the different species of power are distributed
to different bodies. If the original principles be broken, by one branch of
government passing beyond the bounds which separate it from the other, liberty
cannot long exist.

What is the manner of enquiry on trials, in the courts of justice? The
evidences are brought, and the parties are present to examine them. Has this
been the case with the bank? Had the parties interested in that institution, an
opportunity to examine the evidence against them? No. Charges were brought, but
no evidence to support them. The charges might be true, or might not. But as
the necessary forms were not observed, it follows that there was a sentence
given without any proof being made. The ninth section of the bill of rights
declares, that a man charged with any crime, shall be heard by himself and
counsel. Yet when the president and directors of the bank requested to be heard
by counsel, in an early stage of the bill, they were refused: and when at
length it was granted, it was declared a matter of favor -- not of right.
True, if the house, when it acts in a legislative capacity, hears counsel, it
may be said to be a matter of favor. But when it assumed the power of acting
in a judicial capacity, it was a matter of indispenble right that the parties
should be heard. The act of assembly relative to the bank, carries with it all
the consequences of an act of attainder -- and awards a sentence, without
hearing whether the charter was forfeited or not. From all these
considerations, it fully appears that the house of assembly had not such
judicial powers as would be competent to decide on the case of the bank: and
even if they had, their proceedings were not conducted with the regularity or
order requisite. These were the inducements on which the committee framed their
report -- and these inducements will, I hope, be sufficient to make the house
agree to it.

Mr. Lollar said, when the gentleman rose, he expected he meant, as one of the
committee, to explain to the house their reasons for making such a report. But
he had not done it to his satisfaction, and therefore he should make a few
observations: one in particular on the report. Had the committee confined
themselves to the memorials, without casting any reflections on the late
assembly, they would have acted much better than they had done. But their
report as it stood, was a declaration of war against the late house, and daring
to the combat all such of its members as were in the present. If he had gone
about to cast reflections, it should have been on the assembly that granted the
charter, not on the assembly that took it away. It was not founded in justice.
But the house which granted it, entertained no idea of its being for a
perpetuity, or of its being out of the power of the assembly to alter or new
model it, as they might see fit. In support of this, mr. Lollar quoted the
minutes of that house, where it appeared that a clause had been introduced as a
rider to the bill, for the purpose of empowering the assembly that should sit
in 1789, to alter or amend the charter, as might be necessary. This was
rejected by 27 to 24, and the express reason assigned for the rejection, was,
that the charter of the bank must necessarily be always within the power of the
house. Mr. Lollar then said, that a law whereby the corporation had an
unlimited succession, was unjust -- and the annulling it highly proper. Thus
matters were brought on the broad bottom of equality. The Charter was moreover
unjust, as the state had got no equivalent for the advantages it had bestowed:
and civilians held that in all contracts, unless there was an equivalent
received for what was given, the bargain or agreement was void in itself, and
incomplete. The only consideration received from the bank, was, that it
facilitated commerce. This in the present situation of the affairs of the
state, was against it: as it was an engine of trade that enabled the merchants
to import more goods than were necessary, or than there was money to pay for.
This was clearly disadvantageous. The learned counsel who had pleaded the cause
of the bank, before the late assembly, had heartily and ingenuously admitted,
that when the balance of trade was against a country, a bank was injurious. Mr.
Lollar then quoted the petitions presented to the late house against the bank,
in these words: the directors of the bank are enabled to give such preferences
in trade, by advances of money to their particular favorites, when most
needed, as to destroy that equality which ought to take place in a commercial
country. He said these words were so plain, it was not necessary to say any
more on that part of the ill consequences resulting from the bank. He did not
mean to speak disrespectfully of the present directors -- any others in their
situation, he believed, would do as they did. He begged the attention of the
house to another matter: under the old government, when there were people in
the management of affairs as wise or perhaps wiser than those since, no idea
had been ever entertained of a bank. Now if it would be a means of keeping the
cash in the country, as had been stated, it was strange it had escaped their
observation. But the best way of promoting the good of this country, that had
ever yet been found out, was by paper money, emitted through the medium of a
loan office. Of this governor Pownal had spoken in the following terms: I will
venture to say, that there never was a wiser or a better measure, never one
better calculated to serve the uses of an increasing country; that there never
was a measure more steadily pursued, or more faithfully executed, for forty
years together, than the Loan-office in Pennsylvania, formed and administered
by the assembly of that province. After all expedients should be tried, that
would be found the only effectual one. He said, that by means of a bank the
European merchants were enabled to procure and carry off money for their goods:
and to fix the payment thereof upon the purchasers in that hasty manner which
the rules of the bank required, the baneful effects of which had been seen and
felt in and about the city. -- Whereas if it were not in existence, they would
be obliged to take produce in exchange for them. He hoped the report would be
rejected. As a free citizen, he felt himself interested in the matter. He
should, in his opinion, betray the trust reposed in him, and act against the
dictates of his conscience, if he voted for it.

Mr. Clymer said, if the gentleman had considered the matter properly, he would
not have thought an explanation requisite of the reasons of the committee,
further than was given in the report. He would find that there was a close
connection between the beginning and end of it. In the first part, it was
stated, that the memorials had set forth the mode of proceeding adopted by the
late house; it was further stated, that the committee having made the necessary
enquiries, had found that the mode of proceeding so set forth, was confirmed by
the minutes of the late house. There was, therefore, no necessity for the
committee to go into a recapitulation of what was so fully stated in the
memorials, which were the ground of their proceedings. The report was
sufficiently long already.

Mr. Fitzsimons. I was not a member of the committee who made the report now
before the house, and esteem myself no further bound to advocate it, than as it
coincides with my own sentiments. I am of opinion, that the committee not only
made a proper report, but paid a proper respect to the trust reposed in them by
this house. They made enquiries into the statement given in the memorials --
and the deductions naturally arising from the result of those enquiries, they
laid before the house. As this question is of the utmost importance, not only
to the interests of the citizens of Pennsylvania, but to the union in general,
I could have wished it confined to a narrow ground, that it might be perfectly
understood. -- The memorials complain that the former house did not proceed
with the deliberation necessary, not only in a case of such consequence as the
present must be acknowledged, but in any case whatever. Whether the bank is
beneficial or injurious, is not the question: but whether the former house had
sufficient evidence to warrant their proceedings. What may be the opinion of
other gentlemen, I do not know. Mine is, that they had not. This is the ground
which I think we ought to confine our debates to. But it has already been
deviated from. To prove that the former house had not the necessary evidence,
we have only to recur to their minutes. By those, it appears that the attack on
the bank originated by a petition from Chester county. This petition stated
what the petitioners thought injurious in the institution of the bank.
Afterward, other petitions of the same tendency were presented. The house, as
in duty bound, referred those petitions to a committee, with directions to
enquire into the allegations they contained, in the following words:

Resolved, That the said petitions be referred to a committee, and that the
committee be instructed to enquire whether the bank established at
Philadelphia, be compatible with the public safety, and that equality which
ought ever to prevail between the individuals of a republic, and to report
thereon.

So far the house did their duty. What was the further progress of this
business? The committee so appointed made report. But did they in that report
state that they had made the enquiry they were directed to make? Did they
submit the circumstances that occurred in their enquiry, to the house? No, they
did not. They therefore made themselves responsible for the consequences: and I
wish their responsibility could be separated from that of the house. Their
report contained no information for the house to deliberate upon: it contained
merely opinions -- and, if we may judge from circumstances, even those opinions
were taken up on trust; for the report is drawn up in the handwriting of a
person not of that committee: and, so far as we can decide from similarity of
handwriting, by the same person who framed the petition from Chester county.
This is the ground of the proceeding of the present house. If, therefore, it
appears that the former house have tried and condemned the president and
directors of the bank unheard, it is incumbent on the present house to abrogate
their proceedings, and do justice to the injured. And that they did so, is now
in proof before us.

As to the justice of the act, if it be introduced in the course of the debate,
I shall endeavor to give my opinion on it. It is a serious thing for a
legislature to deprive a body of people of their rights in any instance; but
very serious, indeed, to deprive them unheard and untried. For the
circumstances of this procedure we need only recur to the memorials -- From
them it will appear that the former house conducted itself with an informality,
not only inconsistent with the principles of this government, but with the
principles of any government that pretends to freedom.

This is not the first charter which has been taken away in this state. The
charter of the college was taken away at a former period. But in that case, it
was pretended that the charter had been forfeited. Even this was not thought
necessary with respect to the bank. If such be the progress of injustice, there
is no telling where it will end. A gentleman has said the statement of the
committee is a declaration of war against members of the late house who have
seats in the present. But if speaking* the truth be a declaration of war, I
hope we shall ever have men in this house possessed of spirit sufficient to
declare war in case of necessity. Had the committee been guilty of mis-stating
the facts, or drawing wrong inferences from them, that would have been
sufficient ground to criminate them: but this is not asserted.

It is not necessary to go into an enquiry whether or no the charter was
granted improperly. That is not pretended in the repealing act. If the former
house had thought that good ground, they would have taken it; as they did not,
their advocates now cannot avail themselves of it.

It has been said that the charter is an estate entailed: this is not the fact.
The property is constantly transferring: and I believe there has been no day
since the establishment of the bank, but the gentlemen who have hazarded this
assertion, might have purchased shares in the stock.

A gentleman who has spoken against the report, has told us, that the counsel
who pleaded in favor of the bank before the late house, conceded that a bank
was unfavourable to a nation when the balance of trade was against her. If the
counsel made that concession, I will venture to assert, he was not warranted in
so doing by his clients: and it will only serve to prove, that a gentleman may
be not only eminent in his profession, but have great general knowledge,
without being able to decide on all questions: for I, who have no pretensions
to that gentleman's knowledge or ability, not only deny the fact, but undertake
to prove that it is not well founded. The report of the committee of the late
house carries a contradiction to this concession on the very face of it. It
says the bank has a tendency to accumulate the wealth of the country in the
hands of the stock-holders. I do not mean in this stage of the business to
detain the house, by going into all the arguments that have been offered for
and against the bank. As I set out upon a narrow ground, I shall so conclude.

My view in rising was to endeavor to confine the arguments to the report of
the committee: but as I presume it will not be adhered to, I reserve to myself
the right of answering what may be offered in debate by the gentleman opposed
to the resolution.

Mr. Smilie. I find myself on this occasion called upon, not only to defend my
country, but to account for my own conduct. And here I beg it may be
considered, that the gentlemen on the other side of this question, feel
interested in it personally. Those gentlemen are to plead for themselves, and
to defend their own cause: whereas we on this side have no private interest to
serve on the occasion. In judging of our conduct, I hope respect will be had to
that consideration.

I shall first make some remarks on the report of the committee, which is now
the subject of our discussion. It is in this report stated, that I told the
committee, (when asked a question relative to the information procured by the
committee of the late house) that I had not been at the bank to procure
information. This I totally deny. I call upon the gentlemen of the committee
for proofs of their assertion.

Mr. Clymer. I rise to affirm the truth of the assertion. Mr. Whitehill, when
called upon, answered with much candor. Mr. Smilie was at first very coy and
restiff. He declared he esteemed himself not bound to answer any of our
questions, and should be prepared to give satisfaction to the house. But having
asked him was he at the bank for information? he, upon my honor, answered,
"No." Mr. Fitzsimons was present. I call upon that gentleman to declare what he
heard.

Mr. Fitzsimons. I am sorry the time of the house should be taken up on so
important an occasion, by so trifling a business. But since I find myself
called upon, I must inform the house, that I was in the committee room on the
day the president and directors of the bank were requested to attend by the
committee. And mr. Smilie being also there, was asked several questions. He
said he could easily answer, but he did not esteem himself bound: he should be
prepared to answer at a proper time. However, being at length asked, had he
been at the bank for information, he declared, No.

Here mr. Smilie called upon messrs. Rittenhouse and Edgar, two members of the
committee, who had been present at the time alluded to, to declare what had
passed. They both said, that he [mr. Smilie] would not answer any questions.

Mr. Clymer called upon mr. Lilly, another member of the committee, whose
declaration was similar to that of mr. Fitzsimons.

Mr. Smilie. This matter cannot be accounted for but on the ground of different
parties. Mr. Rittenhouse and mr. Edgar refused to sign the report.

Mr. Clymer. It was read to those gentlemen: and it was their duty, as members
of the committee, to point out wherein it was erroneous: but this they did not
attempt to do.

Mr. Smilie. Setting aside this point, I shall now proceed to the consideration
of the report. One paragraph of it is in these words:

Your committee, in examining further into the conduct of the late house in
this transaction, could not but discover, in some instances, a spirit little
suited to the transient and accountable representatives of a free people. In an
early stage of the business, and when only it could have had its use, the bank
was denied a hearing: and when, at a later stage, it was yielded to the
repeated instances of its president and directors, the permission was qualified
with this remark, That it must be considered as a matter of favor, and not of
right. But the favor became nugatory, through the application of a rule of
order, which, obliging the counsel for the bank to speak before the counsel for
the petitioners, left him to combat in the dark, against possible charges and
conjectural imputations. True it is, he was suffered to make a reply to the
adverse counsel, but within a time so limited by the house, as could scarcely
be sufficient for preparation in any petty cause in the ordinary courts.

This is one of the most groundless complaints I ever heard, viz. that the
president and directors were not heard in the first instance. It was certainly
in the discretion of the house whether to hear them on the report of the
committee, or on the bill. And I believe it is the practice in England, never
to hear petitions till after the second reading of bills; as, until then, it is
not known what they may prove to be. This bill, of which we hear so much
complaint made, was read the second time in the winter sessions, and then lay
over till the fall, a period of nearly five months -- was not that a sufficient
time for the public to consider on it? Was not counsel then heard against it?
Why then is it asserted that it had not a fair discussion? Some remarks have
been made on the hearing having been granted not as a matter of right: but it
will not be said that the constitution gives any such right to be heard before
the house of assembly.

The report goes on to say: Your committee beg leave to remark on some
circumstances attending the memorials presented to this house, which ought to
have considerable weight in their present deliberations. The subscribers to
these memorials are so numerous as to bespeak the general sense of the
community. In them are included the most respectable characters amongst us;
men, who, from their intercourses and condition in life, must be supposed best
experienced in the effects, good or bad, produced by the operations of the
bank, and from general knowledge, most intelligent in the nature of such
institutions.

What is this great number of subscribers? Two thousand nine hundred and
forty-seven. Can this number be said to speak the general sense of the
community? The institution of the bank is advantageous to many of the
subscribers -- and their power and influence, and I believe the influence and
terrors of the bank, have been exerted to procure subscribers to those
memorials. They were fabricated in this city, prepared, printed, and sent down
to the country. It is well known how easy a matter it is to procure signers in
the country. We had, a few days since, petitions from Lancaster, Bucks, and
Cumberland counties, against the extension of the market-house, procured by the
influence of the persons interested against the measure in this city: this
sufficiently accounts for the number of memorialists. But admitting that no
such means were used, it cannot be said that they speak the general sense of
the community. It is an assertion not founded in fact. The committee, indeed,
saw the numbers were not sufficient, and they tried to make up the deficiency
another way. They inform us, that in them are included the most respectable
characters amongst us. This is holding out an aristocratical idea. An honest
man's the noblest work of God. A democratical government like ours, admits of
no superiority. A virtuous man, be his situation what it may, is respectable.
If we enquire what constitutes the respectability meant in the report, we shall
very probably find it riches. They have more money than their neighbors, and
are therefore more respectable.

The report continues: As the proceedings of the late house, in the case of the
bank, thus appear with all the marks of precipitancy, prejudice and partiality,
the annulling act has its foundation deeply laid in injustice, and remains a
reproach both to the government and to the people.

Let us examine whether this act has its foundation laid in injustice. For this
purpose, it is necessary to consider a little the subject of charters. I would
observe, by the bye, that my worthy friend over the way, (Mr. Robinson) has
been puzzling himself with Blackstone, which must ever be the case with any
person who takes the negative side of the question. And here I will make this
concession, that there are charters so sacred, that they cannot be revoked. But
there is a material distinction between charters -- and the opinions of many
have been very wrong on that head. When once an error is taken up, men go on a
long time in delusion. There are many things which we now consider as absurd,
which were formerly venerated, for want of being properly considered. -- The
doctrine of hereditary right, which is now held odious, was once deemed sacred.
There is a strong reason, why persons from Europe are so highly prejudiced in
favor of charters. In the 12th and 13th centuries, Europe was in the lowest
state of vassalage -- the people were in some measure rooted to the soil, and
sold with it. While affairs were in that situation, the kings and powerful
barons granted charters of incorporation, to towns and cities, thereby
exempting them from the common vassalage of the state, and bestowing on them
particular immunities; thus giving them political existence. These charters
were sacred, because they secured to the persons on whom they were bestowed,
their natural rights and privileges. But there are, sir, charters of a very
different nature. And here it is necessary to fix the point of distinction.
Charters are rendered sacred, not because they are given by the assembly, or by
the parliament -- but by the objects for which they are given. If a charter is
given in a favor of a monopoly, whereby the natural and legal rights of
mankind are invaded, to benefit certain individuals, it would be a dangerous
doctrine to hold that it could not be annulled. All the natural rights of the
people, as far as is consistent with the welfare of mankind, are secured by the
constitution. All charters granting exclusive rights, are a monopoly on the
great charter of mankind. The happiness of the people is the first law.

It has been said, that the charges against the bank have not been properly
proved. But those who recur to the report of the committee of the late house,
will see that proofs were not wanting. A very slight reading of the report may
convince gentlemen that the committee were not appointed to see whether the
president and directors had done their duty. The matter was taken up on a
higher ground. The committee were directed to enquire whether or no the bank
was compatible with the safety and welfare of the state. This, the house, as
guardians of the rights and liberties of the people, had a right to examine
into. Let us suppose for a moment the committee had not made the enquiry -- was
not the house at liberty to consider their report, and as they agreed in
opinion with it, to pass the act recommended in that report? If the house had
not that right, dreadful would be our situation indeed. Let us suppose a house
of assembly so lost to all sense of their duty, and so corrupt, as to give a
charter of monopoly to five men, of all our East India trade -- to five others,
of our trade to Europe -- and to five more, of our trade to the West Indies --
I grant that it is not likely that this will ever happen -- but that is nothing
to the point. -- If one house, I say, is guilty of this mischief, and that the
next that meets, beholding this monster in the face of the constitution, has
not power to give redress, to what purpose are annual elections? Corrupt
chartered boroughs in Great Britain have eaten up the spirit of the
constitution. If the house cannot afford a remedy, the people must have
recourse to the means God and nature have given them for redress. No good man
can wish this to happen. I hope it never will. The right of the house to repeal
charters was debated in the council of censors -- and a member of that body,
now in this house, and in favor of the bank, conceded the point of right in
the legislature to revoke them.

I shall mention a case, which will show that we are not the only people afraid
of banks. In Ireland, in the year 1721, a bank was about to be established. It
was held to be a surprising fine thing -- But after the house of commons had
maturely considered of the matter, they came to the following resolution:
Resolved, that if any member of this house, or commoner of Ireland, shall
presume to solicit, or endeavor to procure any grant, or to get the great seal
put to any charter, for erecting a bank in this kingdom, contrary to the
declared sense and resolution of this house, he shall incur their highest
displeasure, and be deemed to act in contempt of the authority of this house,
and an enemy to his country.

[Here Mr. Smilie read an extract from the journals of the Irish house of
commons, containing their proceedings on the above business, from its first
introduction to its final rejection. He then proceeded as follows:]

If a bank was regarded so dangerous in a country, where there was a
counterbalance to its influence, how much more so must it be here, where there
is no such counterbalance?

The charter of the bank was not taken away for what the president and
directors had done -- they, I believe, acted as innocently as any others would
have done in the same situation. -- But it was taken away from a conviction of
its dangerous tendency. We lately had a proposal to mortgage the revenues of
the state to the bank -- thus to get the state into its tramels.

A word or two with respect to paper money. The paper money of the state cannot
exist with the bank. And the question is not -- whether or no we shall have
paper money -- but who shall emit it -- the bank or the state? If the bank
emits it, it must have the profits. State paper money has been found of the
utmost utility, in former times and lately. Had it not been for the last
emission of it, the state could not have paid the public creditors. There were
no other means; and a number of valuable citizens must have been unpaid their
just demands. Considering the difficulties of government, no hesitation can
remain in any man's mind, respecting the propriety of emitting paper. If the
state is obliged to borrow, she must necessarily pay 6 per cent. -- whereas, if
she emits on loan, she gains 6 per cent, in her favor. All these advantages we
must give up, if we restore that institution.

It is hardly necessary to mention the endeavors used to prevent the emission
of paper money by the committee of merchants. These gentlemen must not take it
amiss if we style them bankers -- as I believe all of them are such. This was
at a time of the greatest distress, when the cries of the public creditors were
heard by every ear.

It has been said in the course of this debate, that the learned counsel in
favor of the bank, conceded, that when the balance of trade is against a
nation, a bank is injurious to it. A gentleman from the city has undertaken to
deny that this is the case. But I believe that he will find it difficult to
disprove it. His assertion controverts the general sense of mankind.

The operations of the bank are prejudicial in a point of view in which I have
not yet considered them. They are a discouragement to agriculture, and to
improvements in the city. From the establishment of the bank, interest rose
from six per cent. to the enormous degree at which we see it at present. Usury
has been coeval with the bank. It was not known here before.

A man finds it much more to his advantage to lodge his cash in the bank, than
to purchase with it lots, lands, or houses. The person who has those, finds it
impossible to procure money at legal interest to improve them, and is therefore
inclined to sell them -- the same reason that inclines him to sell, deters
others from purchasing -- thus the value of lands, houses, etc. is depreciated.

The former house, considering all these things -- considering that the bank
stood in the way of paper money -- considering that a loan-office and it could
not exist together -- considering that it was a bar to the improvement of the
country, and to agriculture, thought themselves fully justified in taking away
the charter. And it is equally our duty to leave matters in their present
situation. The bank has not suffered. The stock-holders have gained enough --
In one year they cleared sixteen and a half per cent. Why should we injure our
country in favor of an institution, incompatible with the public welfare? I
therefore hope the house will agree to let the bank rest where it is, and
support the paper money of the state, from which so many advantages are derived.

On motion, ordered that the further consideration of the report be postponed.

Adjourned.

Thursday, March 30, 1786, A. M.
RESUMED the consideration of the report of the committee to whom were referred
the memorials praying a repeal or suspension of the law annulling the charter
of the bank.

Mr. Clymer. As I had the honor, mr. Speaker, to be a member of the committee
who made the report now under the consideration of the house, I think myself
bound to defend it from some important charges made against it. A gentleman
[mr. Smilie] has given us to understand, that the committee proceeded a wrong
way, when they stated that the committee of the late house should have made
enquiries, which they did not. He seems to say, that the assembly, in the
plenitude of their power, might pass the repealing act without any enquiries --
but this is directly in opposition to the principles laid down by the late
assembly themselves. They expressly directed the committee to make enquiry,
whether the bank was compatible with the welfare of the state. Have this
inquest and presentment been held? No. The act, therefore, in the very preamble
of it, carries a falsehood. What then becomes of the apologist of the
proceedings of the late house? He ascribes to them greater powers than they
pretend to. They said an enquiry was necessary. He says not. The committee
having traced out that no enquiry had been made, and having found the
proceedings of the late house, as well as of their committee, exceptionable,
had a right, as freemen, to pass their judgment on them. I hope we shall always
have men of sufficient spirit, to speak their sentiments freely of the highest
authority in the state. For my own part, I have ever set my face against a
tyrannical abuse of power; and in a protest in 1779, against the proceedings in
the college business, I spoke my sentiments of the then house, of which I was a
member, as freely as I have done in the report before you, of the late house.

I shall examine some of the principles whereon is founded the report of last
year. Among the rest, is this, that the balance of trade is against us, and
that therefore the bank must be injurious. This balance is the metaphysics of
commerce, which few understand, and which serve no other purpose than to
disturb the imagination. In England, Gee and Child wrote much on that subject.
They pretended to demonstrate that the nation would be ruined by certain
branches of trade. But as the nation grew richer and richer by them, nothing
but experience could prove the fallacy of their arguments. It is a point, which
from being so little understood, I cannot suppose made any impression on the
committee themselves; though it had its use in the enumeration, as it swelled
the evils attendant on the institution.

There are two other principles of more solidity laid down in the report: one
is, that the bank may have a pernicious influence -- Banks are the necessary
appendages of a certain degree of commerce. Let us see what are the interests
of commerce, and we shall then know how its influence, where it has any, will
be pointed. It has, then, an evident interest in the general prosperity -- in
the security of property -- and in the toleration of every man to pursue his
own benefit in his own way, provided it be not incompatible with the public
good. These are the objects which commerce and its banks would endeavor to
accomplish, and they are certainly not pernicious. The early immunities and
privileges bestowed on traders in modern Europe, after the extinction of the
Roman empire, were the first seeds of any national liberty which followed. But
a gentleman has produced the example of an entire nation opposed to the
influence of banks -- he has, however, greatly blundered at the application of
this example. The Irish nation, in 1721, and many years after, was greatly
dependent on England, both in its liberties and trade. In this situation, the
establishment of a bank must have been attempted either by the English
ministry, further to distress the trade of the country -- and there fore
opposed by the Irish patriots; -- or attempted by those patriots, to relieve
their trade from English oppression, and therefore opposed by the ministry. But
the gentleman, when he told us this story, should have recollected the oath put
to witnesses in the courts of justice -- not only to tell the truth -- but the
whole truth. He should, therefore, have proceeded a little further, and
informed us, that the Irish nation having, by a successful struggle about the
year 1780, in which they were favored by the American war, thrown off the yoke
of British tyranny, and assumed a situation equal to that of England, they
turned their first thoughts to the establishment of a public bank, as congenial
with their then situation. Whether or no they have established it, I cannot say
positively, having the story only from a newspaper writer, of the gentleman's
own side. But this much is certain, that while Ireland was in a state of
subjection, she rejected the idea of a bank -- but when in our situation, she
regarded it as advantageous. Thus this instance, on which the gentleman has
dwelt with a great air of triumph, proves nothing in his favor.

Another principle laid down in the report of the committee of the late house,
is the incompatibility of the bank and the paper money of government. On this
occasion we have had an eulogium on paper money, from governor Pownal. But let
it be considered that paper money is the offspring of credit and confidence,
which this state was possessed of before the revolution. Under such
circumstances, he spoke highly of its uses: but Pownal would have been both a
knave and a madman to contend for it, when both credit and confidence were
wanting. An argument has been here made use of, that we have emitted paper
money with success. It is true we have made an experiment, and it has not
failed. But let us stop here. I am confident that to attempt another emission
would destroy that already in circulation: and I would remark that it has owed
some of its credit to the false calculations made upon the extent of our
revenue. I hope it will maintain the degree of credit it possesses. There
always have been, and always will be numbers of people in want of money: but if
we go on making it, till every body cries hold, we shall reduce it from being
equal to gold or silver, not to be equal to lead. Several states which have
been wife enough to prohibit paper money among them, have by that means
increased their specie in a great degree.

To conclude: Banks are in general encouraged in all the commercial nations of
Europe. And the more republican a country is -- or at least the greater degree
of liberty it possesses -- the greater is the success of its banks. Why then
shall our puny politicians pretend to oppose their speculations to the
experience of Europe for ages? A public bank affords many advantages. It on
occasion gives aid to government -- and security and convenience to
individuals. Indeed a certain degree of commerce renders a bank so absolutely
necessary, that if this public bank be destroyed, private banks will arise out
of its ruins, 'till the demands of trade are satisfied. These will not be of
such governmental utility, nor afford such private security. If the last house
had this in contemplation, where was their wisdom? -- if not, where was their
foresight?

Mr. Woods spoke in favor of the report.

Mr. Fitzsimons said, he wished the debate had been confined to the report of
the committee: not that he was apprehensive a general discussion would operate
against the resolution recommended in the report: but he wished to take the
statement as made by the committee, and examine whether it was founded or not.
The gentlemen in opposition to it, did not choose to fight the battle upon that
ground.

Here the Speaker declared, that having considered the question as of the
greatest importance, he had been willing to allow the utmost latitude to
gentlemen in the debate.

Mr. Smilie was sorry the speaker's conduct was called in question. There had
been no just cause of complaint. It would have been extremely improper to
confine the members to the report. The question should be taken up on the
broadest ground.

Mr. Fitzsimons declared he had no idea of arraigning the conduct of the
speaker; nor did he mean to control any member in his manner of managing his
arguments on the present question. He had only expressed his own wish that the
debate had been confined within a narrower compass. He then proceeded thus:

I advocate the resolution recommended in the report, and shall continue so to
do, on this principle, that the late house of assembly had not those lights,
nor that information that could warrant their proceedings. This is the proper
subject of debate: but the gentlemen on the other side of the question, know
that it is not their strong ground. They therefore abandon it. Neither a
corporation nor a citizen can be deprived of any rights without being heard:
this is the ground of the resolution now under consideration. But since the
gentlemen have wandered away from this point, I shall endeavor to follow them
on the ground they have taken.

One gentleman set out with requesting the house to consider that the members
on this side of the question are pleading their own cause: and that they are
interested in the institution of the bank. I believe I am the only member in
this house, who have a seat in the direction of the bank. But I submit to the
house whether or no this observation is candid. I hope our votes and our
conduct in this house will not be influenced by any partial interests which we
may have in the institution, but by what, in our opinion and judgment, will
have a tendency to promote the general good. I have had the honor to be one of
the directors of the bank from the first institution of it -- and I take upon
me to say, that in no other situation whatever, could I have been so useful to
my fellow-citizens.

In answer to the charge made against the late house, of their not hearing the
president and directors of the bank on the first application, a gentleman has
told us it was in their discretion whether to hear them or not. The discretion
of the house is not easily defined. But I believe it will be admitted that it
should be bounded by reason. And surely it is not consistent with reason or
justice to condemn people unheard. I contend that the late assembly acted
without either reason or justice.

In the course of this debate, many assertions have been hazarded, without
proofs being brought in support of them. Among the number, is that respecting
the terrors and influence of the bank having been exerted to procure signers to
the memorials presented to this house in favor of that institution. If I were
to affirm the contrary, the gentleman who made the assertion, would find it
extremely difficult to bring any confirmation of it. I think I have good
authority for saying that no such terror or influence was used. The signers in
general are persons above influence or terror -- of independent fortunes and
situations.

The gentleman from Fayette county made a concession, which, I think, will
operate much against him. He acknowledged that the charter of the bank was not
repealed for any injury received from that institution -- but from an
apprehension of what might arise from it. If this be a sufficient ground to
warrant the proceedings of the late house, I do not know what we may in time
proceed to. The gentleman has argued much against granting monopolies. But how
did he learn that the charter of the bank was a monopoly? He has hereby shown
his ignorance, or something worse. -- The charter of that institution did not
preclude any other persons from the establishment of another bank. There was
therefore no monopoly.

Sufficient notice has already been taken of the gentleman's extract from the
journals of the Irish house of commons. I shall, however, just remark, that
there are in Ireland, many banks -- some similar to that in this city -- banks
of discount, and banks of deposit. The little trade that country possesses,
could not be carried on without banks.

Amongst the charges brought against the bank, is the proposal made by a member
of this house to mortgage certain revenues of the state to that corporation.
But as this proposal was made without the knowledge of the president and
directors, no charge can justly lie against them on that account. I must
confess I do not wish to see government attached to that institution. It is
better to keep it for the benefit and promotion of trade and commerce.

The gentlemen who have spoken against the report, seem to think it necessary
to introduce a popular topic, however little connection it has with the subject
under debate. Paper money is spoken of largely. We are told that the paper
money of the state cannot exist with the bank. Before they made this very bold
assertion, they should have known the extent of the emission of bank paper: but
I dare affirm they could not even form a guess at its circulation that would
not expose them. I would hazard the proof of this. So much easier is it to make
assertions, than to produce proofs.

Among the charges against the bank, in the report of last year, is the
interference and threats to reprobate the paper money of the state. This charge
is founded on the memorial of the committee of merchants, presented to the
house while the bill for emitting the paper money was pending. A gentleman has
told us that he believes this committee to be all bankers. To what extent this
may be founded in fact, I cannot immediately determine. But supposing it true,
if, because they hold stock in the bank, they are to be precluded from giving
their opinions on public measures, we are in a strange situation indeed. The
crown of Great Britain sometimes dismisses placemen, when they vote contrary to
the court. But I did not expect to see a tyranny of this kind established in
Pennsylvania.

Another argument I have heard alleged, is, that the officers of the bank were
busy at the late election. If being connected in the bank, were to deprive a
person of the right of canvassing for his friends, I believe no man would wish
to hold a share. No principle can be more destructive to liberty than this.

The gentleman from Fayette county, has expressed surprise that I should differ
in opinion, with respect to the balance of trade, from the learned counsel, who
pleaded in favor of the bank before the late house. I do not make profession of
a very extensive knowledge -- but in matters of trade and commerce, I have had
some experience, and do not usually commit myself without knowing the ground I
stand upon. I should be glad to be informed how the bank can possibly
facilitate the exportation of specie. It lends out money at short periods, at
the end of which it must be repaid, or the borrower forfeits his credit.
Sometimes, through tenderness, the credit is prolonged. -- But how this can be
said to facilitate a drain of specie, is a mystery to me. What must be the
situation of the bank, if that were the consequence of the institution? It must
eventually be drained, and if there were not money in the vaults, there must be
an end of the bank, and a destruction of the charter, and of all persons
concerned. But I assert, that it does not facilitate the export of specie.

The gentleman from Montgomery county (mr. Lollar) has made a curious
observation -- and many such have been made in the discussion of this business:
he has said that the merchant abroad would not so easily procure cash for his
goods, were it not for the bank. That the bank enables a man to pay his just
debts, is a charge I never expected to hear brought against it in a legislative
assembly. It can never be the interest of the state, that her credit should be
lost. The support of it tends to promote the advantage of every person in the
country. Pennsylvania is at present, and has been since its settlement,
indebted to Europe: and that very circumstance, singular as it may appear, has
been highly beneficial. The capitals trusted by the Europeans to people here,
have enabled them to build houses, and to improve the country. Can it then be
proper to destroy that credit? Surely the legislature will never sanction such
a measure.

I shall here mention a circumstance, which would have come in with more
propriety in another part of my discourse. When gentlemen complain of the
scarcity of money, and charge the bank with banishing the specie, they do not
know or consider, that, of the stock of the bank, 360,000 dollars belong to
inhabitants of others of the united states, or of Europe, and have been brought
here merely by means of the bank. So that it clearly appears, that this
institution, which has been so frequently and so unjustly charged with
facilitating a drain of specie, has produced an effect directly the contrary.

The dangerous influence of the bank, is a topic much insisted on. This is a
mere matter of speculation, which it is very difficult to reason upon. The
stock-holders are about three hundred in number: they have different views and
interests, and are of different parties in politics -- it is not likely,
therefore, they can ever join in any single measure. How, then, this
so-much-dreaded influence can operate, it is not easy to conceive. I have
already said that I am the only person in the direction of the bank, who have
the honor to fill a seat in this house: and I should hope that if there were no
such institution, my election might be otherwise accounted for.

Mr. R. Morris. After what has been offered by my colleagues against the report
made by the committee last year, I expected the gentlemen of that committee
would have risen, to vindicate it. But I find the contest is, who shall have
the last word. I shall therefore alter the plan I proposed to follow in this
debate, and endeavor to answer the objections which have been raised against
the bank, before I proceed to the consideration of that report.

The first observation made by the gentleman from Fayette country, was, that we
on this side the question, are pleading the cause of our own interest. This I
consider as an appeal to the feelings of the members, and a kind of
solicitation to pay little regard to what falls from us, as being parties
interested in the decision. This is neither fair nor candid. Every member
should have been left to judge for himself, how far interest might influence
our sentiments. I acknowledge myself interested in the bank as a stockholder.
But I have no more share in the management, than that gentleman himself, unless
when the stockholders are called together. I feel myself interested in the fate
of the bank, from another cause. I had some hand in forming the institution, or
brat, as it has been called by some of its opponents out of doors -- now, so
far as I had a hand in the formation of this brat, I esteem myself bound in
honor to support it. I am induced also to support the report now before the
house, because I have a perfect and thorough conviction, that the institution,
in its operation, far from being injurious to the state, is of service to every
individual in it. It promotes the grandeur of the state -- increases its wealth
-- and adds to its dignity.

If the argument of our being interested in this question, were allowed the
force it was meant to have, the same argument would apply on every question. As
a citizen and a freeman, entitled to all the privileges and immunities which
the laws and the constitution afford, I am, more or less, interested in the
decision of every question that comes before this house. This argument would in
effect apply against every member in the house. But I shall quit this ground.
As a member of this house, I ask and claim attention. If the arguments I shall
make use of, appear to arise from self-interest, they will of course have but
little weight: but, if founded on just and equitable principles, I trust the
members will be influenced by them as they deserve -- and I hope there is no
man in this house so determined against the bank, but that he will alter his
opinions, if sufficient ground appears to warrant the alteration.

In the opening of this business, I objected to reading the memorial from the
president and directors of the bank. It was presented during the last session,
at a time when the parties interested in that institution were solicitous to
have the matter brought before this house. But during the late recess, there
was a meeting of the stockholders, at which it was determined to appeal to the
judicial powers -- and bring to an issue at law, this question -- whether a
charter once given, can be annulled, without a forfeiture being proved? This
being their resolution, it appeared improper to press the business forward in
this house on their part: and it was agreed that it should not be resumed here
at their instance. However, in the mean time, their fellow-citizens took the
matter up; and by their numerous memorials, have put it in the power of the
house, to retrieve the dignity of the legislature, by repealing the late act.
I, for my part, should have no hesitation to risque the question in the courts
of justice. For though some of the judges, in their individual capacity, may
have been opposed to the bank, yet I have too much faith both in their
integrity and in their regard for their law characters, to believe that they
would hazard an unjust decision. Our judges, as judges, are, I trust, upright.

In answering the arguments alleged by the members opposed to the adoption of
the report now before the house, I shall endeavor to follow them as well as I
can. The member from Montgomery county has told us, he regards the terms of the
report, as a declaration of war, and a challenge to all the members of the late
house, who have seats in the present. On this point I must beg leave to differ
from him. The committee of the former house had been instructed to perform
certain duties: the committee of the present house discovered and ascertained
that they did not perform those duties, and charged them accordingly with the
failure. One of the members of the committee of the late house has, in a great
measure, conceded the point, by acknowledging that they did not make the
enquiries enjoined; and in justification he tells us, that the house had a
right to judge for itself. How then can a censure levelled at the committee for
non performance of duty, be construed to extend to those members of that house,
who voted in conformity with their report, believing they had performed what
had been enjoined them? I should think that those members of the former house,
who have seats in the present, by joining in the repeal of the law for taking
away the charter of the bank, if they were led to vote for it by a report not
founded in fact, would act more honorably and consistently, than by persisting
in a defense of that law. If they be convinced that deception has been used,
there can be no dishonor in changing their opinions. It was therefore wrong to
style the report a declaration of war.

The gentleman went further. He said, if he were to pass reflections on the
subject, it should be on that house which granted the charter -- not on that
which repealed it. I have not examined the minutes of the house which granted
it, and therefore cannot tell whether or no he was a member. But I venture to
pronounce, that if he had been, he would have joined in granting it. The
necessities of the country loudly demanded that grant. I presume he would not
pass his censures, but with respect to the term of the charter -- as he appears
to think its objectionable part, is the want of limitation as to time, and the
great extent of capital the corporation is allowed to possess. As to the
limitation of time, he tells us, it was not understood by that house which gave
the charter, that it was to be for a perpetuity. To confirm this, he produces a
clause proposed as a rider, introduced for the express purpose of limiting its
duration, or to put it in the power of a future house to do so. He adds, that
the argument adduced in support of the rejection of that rider, was, that the
charter must necessarily always be within the power of the house. But what is
all this to us? Are we to regulate our conduct by the private opinions of the
members of a former house of assembly? On this subject, I shall further
observe, that they seem to have changed sides, on this question: for the
gentlemen opposed to the bank at that period, were convinced that the house
could not attempt a repeal or alteration of the charter, unless an express
clause was inserted for the purpose.

Among other objections to the charter of the bank, brought by this gentleman,
he alleged that the state had received no consideration for it. But this is an
assertion which cannot be supported. The state received a very ample
consideration. However this is totally out of the question. Are we to make sale
of our charters? Is there any consideration received for the numerous charters
which this house is continually granting, and which employ a great proportion
of our time? If any is received, I should be glad to know who gets the money.
But we are not to set up for sale, characters which the constitution authorizes
us to grant for the good of our country.

The same gentleman further tells us, he has a strong objection to the bank,
because it facilitates commerce. From this I presume he is an enemy to all
commerce, and thinks we would be better without it. I wish the gentleman had
favored us with an explanation of what he meant by facilitating commerce. From
what he has said, I imagine, that explanation would be, that the bank enables
people to bring more goods into this country than they otherwise could do,
which is disadvantageous. As to the theory of commerce, I do not pretend to be
deeply versed in it: but I have had some experience in the practical part, and
therefore I shall go into a short investigation of the state of our trade,
since the peace concluded in 1783. At that period, the people of Europe, whose
attention had been drawn toward us by the arduous struggle we had been engaged
in, conceived the most flattering golden dreams, with respect to this country.
After so long a war, they imagined we could have no manufactures, and that we
were in want of every thing. He that could send here quickest, it was thought,
would the most effectually reap the golden harvest. This occasioned the immense
importation of goods which were poured into this country, from all quarters.
Goods so imported have been sold at such a great loss, that the trade has
undergone a change and regulation from its own nature: and we shall have no
more of those wild adventurers coming amongst us. How the bank facilitated
those gentlemen in the management of their business, I cannot ascertain. When
they sold their goods, they received for them either money or produce. If they
received money, they could certainly ship it off without the assistance of the
bank: and if they received produce, they could have no recourse whatever to the
bank. Perhaps the gentleman means, that if the bank had not afforded the
facility of procuring cash for exportation, they would have been glad to take
produce. But admitting this for argument sake, it would make no difference,
unless he can show that any of our produce has perished for want of being taken
off our hands.

Another charge made against the bank is giving preference to favorites. This
is an extraordinary kind of accusation to be made here. If the stockholders,
indeed, had cause, and were to bring that charge, there might be some propriety
in it. The money in the bank is the property of the stockholders and
depositors, who have confided the management of it to the directors, with a
power to trust whomsoever they shall see fit: and the directors are accountable
for their conduct to the stockholders and depositors only. But setting this
aside, I maintain that the assertion is false. When it was made, it should have
been proved. I now call upon the gentlemen opposed to the bank, to prove the
charge of partiality or favoritism.

Mr. Lollar said the directors were able to give those preferences stated in
the report of last year. He had not meant to charge them with having done so --
but to state how much was in their power in that respect.

Mr. R. Morris. Insinuations are one mode of making charges; and the worst
mode: because it is a very difficult matter to disprove them. But I call on any
man for proof, and I do not hesitate to affirm that none can be brought, I have
so much confidence in the fidelity of the directors.

The gentleman from Montgomery county, has told us that under the old
government, when there were men in the management of affairs as wise as any
since, they had no idea of a bank -- and that they subsisted without it. The
old government had no idea of an alliance with France: but this observation
affords no argument against either the one or the other. However, though the
old government had no idea of a bank, the commercial men of the province had:
and I, as a merchant, laid the foundation of one; and established a credit in
Europe for the purpose. From the execution of this design, I was prevented only
by the revolution. This assertion, therefore, like many others, is unfounded.

Against the bank, governor Pownal's eulogium on paper money and a loan office
is quoted. I agree that the establishment of a loan office, faithfully and
properly conducted, is a wise measure. But are a loan office and a bank
incompatible? No, they are not. A loan office, established on proper
principles, and on a good foundation, would promote and encourage the landed
interest, and operates as much in its favor, as a bank does in favor of
commerce. The landed and commercial interest are as nearly allied here as in
any country whatsoever. If the country gentlemen are willing, I will freely
join in the creation of a capital in hard cash, for the establishment of a loan
office. The interests of the bank can never interfere with theirs.

But with respect to a loan office, it seems to be by many assumed as a
principle, that it cannot be advantageous without paper money. True it is, it
was formerly established by means of a paper emission. But then the government
was in full possession of the confidence of the people: and paper money is the
child of confidence -- and of confidence alone. That confidence has been
destroyed -- and it will require that during a number of years, the sovereign
authority be administered with the most rigid justice, and the most punctual
compliance with all its engagements, before it can be regained.

It has been asserted that this confidence has been regained: and in support of
the assertion, we are told that the late emission of paper has been successful.
But I pledge myself, that if one hundred pounds in specie be sent out of this
house, there may be procured for it, in less than an hour, 105, but in order to
be within bounds, I will say 102, or 103 pounds, in the paper money of the late
emission. This I know to be a fact. Can that, therefore, be said to be money,
which is an article of purchase and speculation?

Here I shall make one observation, though it seems foreign to my subject: but it
has been suggested by the idea of a loan office. I have some share in the
landed interest -- and hold a large quantity of lands within this state -- I am
willing to submit to a tax to be paid in hard money, to establish a fund for
the purpose of lending sums to farmers for the improvement of their lands. A
farthing an acre on all the lands in the state, would soon accumulate into a
solid capital fully adequate.

The member from Fayette county, has made an observation, which involves a kind
of contradiction in it. He asks with a triumphant air, can the 2947
memorialists in favor of the bank, be said to speak the sense of Pennsylvania?
This is very different from the language held forth last year, when 1199
petitioners against the bank, though opposed by 608 in its favor, were said to
speak the sense of the state. Now, if 1199, opposed by 608, can at one time
convey the sense of the community, 2947, without one person opposed, may, by as
fair a construction, be said to convey it at another. I wish the gentleman had
amused himself in looking over the names of the signers; he would have seen,
that to style them respectable, as is done in the report, was not an error. He
has said, this is holding out an aristocratical idea, and that there is no
distinction of characters in Pennsylvania. What! is it insisted that there is
no distinction of character? The respectability of those signers is not, as he
has hinted, confined to property. -- Surely persons possessed of knowledge,
judgment, information, integrity, and having extensive connections, are not to
be classed with persons void of reputation or character -- with criminals who
infringe the laws, etc. etc.: for such we have amongst us: and if any one
doubts it, he has only to cast his eyes to the other side of the state house
yard, toward the prison, and his doubts will be removed.

The same gentleman has given it as his opinion, that the number of signers to
the memorials, were procured by the influence and terrors of the bank. But this
is not founded. In no instance was a business of this kind more fairly
conducted. The greater number of the memorials are conceived in one style and
form -- every member of this house must know that they were published by those
who formed the design, in the different newspapers in the city: so that every
man was able to judge of the contents before he was requested to sign. Does
this savor of undue influence or terror? But what are those terrors? When
money is scarce, and people much in want of it, it is a favor to obtain
discounts. The directors have never refused an enemy of the bank, merely as
such. Where, then, are those terrors? Is it by refusing discounts to those who
would not sign, that those terrors are to be excited. Look at the memorials,
and see who has not signed them. Few entitled to discounts are not there. This
charge of influence and terror, is not warranted by fact.

The gentleman went into a history of charters in the 13th and 14th centuries;
and told us that some charters were sacred, because they secured the natural
rights of mankind: others were not, as being in favor of monopolies. By this,
I suppose he meant to insinuate that the charter of the bank was a monopoly. I
wish, that instead of confining himself to make this charge, he had endeavored
to show how it is a monopoly. If ever there was any room for the charge of
monopoly, it was during the war: because it was then recommended by congress,
that no other bank should be established, the exclusive operations of this
being essentially necessary to the united states.

Whatever weight there might have been in this, during the war, was entirely
done away at the peace. But what is this monopoly? A right in the stockholders
to lend their own money to whom they please. Does this hinder any other body of
men from doing the same? If the rights of property are not of the nature of
those we receive from our creator, yet the security of them is amongst the
great objects of civil society: and if in a government formed for protection of
property, after the bank has been endowed with certain rights, privileges and
immunities, these are not to be sacredly secured, the very end of government is
violated. If there is the difference between charters, stated by the gentleman,
who is to be the judge which are to be held sacred, and which not? The
constitution has given no such power to the legislature: It has, indeed,
authorized it to grant them: but not to take them away. Charters in Great
Britain are granted by the authority of the king, who cannot again resume them
at pleasure. It rests with the courts to determine whether or no they have been
forfeited.

In order to justify the conduct of the late house, the gentleman has supposed
that the legislature were to grant a monopoly to five men, of our trade to
Europe -- to five others, of our trade to the East Indies -- and to a third
five, of our West India trade. But I ask, how can he have recourse to such a
vague and idle supposition, or build any argument on it? If any legislature
dare violate the most undeniable rights of the community in so flagrant a
manner, their acts would be nugatory in themselves. But what rights were
invaded by giving the charter of incorporation to the bank? Any set of men
might apply for an act of incorporation for the same purpose to the
legislature, whose hands were not tied up by the one they had already granted.
When a set of gentlemen, opposed to the present bank, and who thought to
destroy it, lately applied to the house for a charter for another, the
president and corporation of the bank in existence, petitioned against their
request. And very properly they did. If any set of men were to apply to the
legislature for a charter, which I thought injurious to my private interest, I
should, if I had arguments of sufficient weight to offer against it, make an
appeal to the representative body.

The gentleman has asked, to what purpose are our annual elections, if a
succeeding house has not power to correct the errors and misdoings of a former
one? It cannot be denied that they undertake to alter and change the acts of
their predecessors -- and in consequence, we have had more doing and undoing
since the revolution, than ever was known before. This is much to be lamented.
It serves to destroy the confidence of the people in the government. The late
assembly had no necessity -- nor will they ever be justified, for passing the
repealing law. -- This house, I trust, is disposed to render justice to the
injured, by annulling that law. Our constituents have shown their sense of the
late repealing law, by the number of those in favor of it, who have not been
re-elected. Wherever a re-election took place, I am persuaded it arose from
misrepresentations, by which the electors were deceived: and I venture to
pronounce, that, as the utility of the bank comes to be more generally known,
and the subject better understood, every member who voted against it, will be
discarded by his constituents.

The gentleman frequently gives us little scraps from history; and I give him
credit for his reading, which I am always ready to hear, and pay proper
attention to, when it bears any analogy to, or runs parallel with the subject
in debate. He has brought us an extract from the journals of the Irish house of
commons to prove that another people had strong objections to the establishment
of a bank. I wish I were deeper read -- perhaps had there been no revolution, I
should have been so. I have read some history -- but I will not trust my
memory: On this occasion, however, I shall observe, that in 1721, the period in
which the question of a bank was agitated in Ireland, the people of that
country were in a situation very different from that of the people of
Pennsylvania at present. They were under the government of Great Britain, which
held their commerce in trammels. They could hardly pretend to the enjoyment of
liberty. This was, moreover, at a time when the public mind was agitated by
bubbles of government, which were brought forth, and burst in different parts
of Europe. The people, therefore, were afraid of every new scheme. But if the
Irish could have established a bank, and had the management of it themselves,
they would have had no objection. After their late successful struggles for the
recovery of their freedom, I am sure they either have already, or will soon
establish a bank among them. But Ireland is a country which does not boast of
its wealth or commerce. It is a very good country for importing people, linen,
and potatoes from -- but I should not have looked to Ireland to import from
thence commercial establishments or precedents.

The proposal to mortgage the revenues to the bank, has been held up in a very
alarming point of view. But what was the amount of this proposal? Merely that
certain revenues should be appropriated to the payment of the interest of debts
due by the united states to citizens of this state, and that the revenues
devoted to that object should be mortgaged to the bank. What were the terms of
that mortgage? That so long as government continued it, the bank should pay the
interest punctually when due* Is this, then, the terrible proposition, so
fraught with danger to the state? It is, indeed, as strange a construction as
ever I heard. And who was this proposition made by? By me, not by directions of
the bank -- for I had none: not as a stockholder, for I have no authority in
their councils: but as a member of the committee of ways and means; in which
situation it was not only my right, but my duty, to (...) a proposition which I
esteemed so highly advantageous to the state. In that view I made it -- its
fate every body knows -- I am apprehensive that some will have cause to lament
it. But I hope not. From what I have said on this matter, it will clearly
appear, that the proposition was made by an individual, not authorized for the
purpose, and therefore should not injure the bank.

We are told, that the bank and the paper money of the state cannot exist
together. But they do exist together. The bank exists in full credit, although
deprived of the countenance of the legislature: and the gentlemen insist that
the paper money is also in full credit: This assertion, therefore, is
controverted by fact.

The gentleman from Fayette county, appears to be of opinion, that as we have
found the paper money profitable, we should continue to emit it; and asks, how
we could have paid the public creditors last year without the late emission? I
answer they would have been better paid, if the paper money had not been
emitted. It began to issue from the treasury in July last, by payments to the
public creditors: and during the last session of assembly, in October, or
November, nearly the whole of it had found its way back again. The public
creditors received it in payment of their demands -- they paid their debts with
it, or bought what they had occasion for: and it was brought into the treasury
-- not, I presume, as a pledge or present -- but in payment of taxes and
imposts, which, had they been paid in proper time, would have lodged the same
amount there in hard money, at least as early as the paper was emitted, for
payment of the public creditors; and would have prevented the necessity of an
anticipation of those public revenues, which were at the time actually due. The
paper money was emitted at a very great expense. -- The public creditor
received it, and was obliged to pass it at a less rate than its value -- while
the merchant was thereby enabled to pay off his imposts, and the taxable person
his arrears, with less than their amount. How long shall we go on robbing one
part of the community to benefit the other?

The gentleman has spoken of the circulation of the late emission of paper
money. This wants some explanation. The sum emitted was but small -- and has
been paid into the treasury nearly as fast as delivered out. The revenues of
the state are sufficient to ensure the circulation of such a sum. But what
security have we that the next house of assembly will not issue another
emission, and another? The doubts and fears of this, and of tender laws,
destroy the confidence of the public. While these doubts remain in the minds of
the people, the circulation of paper must necessarily be quick, as no one will
risque the keeping it long by him.

Much has been said of the opposition given by the bank to the late emission of
paper money. I acknowledge that I gave it opposition -- but that was before the
law passed. I defy any person to prove I have given it any since. Such has been
the line of conduct pursued by my friends. Regarding it as a measure not
calculated for the public good, we thought it our duty to oppose it, while
there were hopes of preventing it. But afterward, when the bill had passed, we
dropped our opposition: as it is the duty of good citizens to follow, when they
cannot lead.

It has been argued that the bank is prejudicial to agriculture and
improvements; that it has been the cause of the high rate of interest; and that
usury was unknown before its establishment. These are very heavy charges indeed
-- but they are not founded in fact. By what means can the bank injure
agriculture? If discounts are injurious to it, then, indeed, the bank may be
arraigned. But how are discounts injurious to agriculture? I say they are used
on many occasions, for the express purpose of encouraging agriculture, if
affording to those that want to purchase the produce of the country, the means
to make such purchases, when they could not otherwise accomplish them, be an
encouragement. Let us suppose a ship arrives here from the West Indies with a
cargo of rum and sugars, belonging or consigned to some one of our merchants,
who has not an opportunity to dispose of those articles immediately. It is
prejudicial to have the vessel detained -- yet though he has value in his
stores, he cannot procure money to purchase flour, to load her. In this
situation, if there be no bank, there is no redress. This is by no means ideal.
I have frequently experienced it myself. The house with which I was connected,
have often had abundance of goods in their stores and magazines, and been
unable to procure specie to lade their vessels. At this crisis, the bank steps
forward, and if the merchant has evidence of property in his possession, he
procures credit -- purchases produce -- and sends off his vessel. This is the
facility the bank gives to commerce. Without it the farmer and merchant would
be equally distressed: the former would have his wagons waiting in
Market-street, and no sale; while the latter would have abundance of rum,
mahogany, logwood, dry goods, etc. in his stores, none of which, perhaps, the
other would have occasion for. But by means of the bank, the merchant is
enabled to purchase, and the farmer to return home.

The high rate of interest has entirely arisen from the distresses of persons
in want of money, who either had no credit at the bank, or run through what
they had. They were then obliged to make application to usurers, whose enormous
demands rose in proportion to the distresses of their victims. Thus has
interest mounted from to 2 and 5 per cent per month. But did the bank take this
interest? No. Did it encourage those who took it? No. As fast as they became
known, they were refused discounts. Why then charge the institution with what
it has a direct tendency to prevent?

The extraordinary profits of the bank, we are told, not only prevent people
from purchasing houses, lots and lands, but even induce those who have them, to
sell. But surely those extraordinary profits are as much the object of one man
as another -- and if one wants to sell on that account, who will be found to
buy? -- I have, however, authority for saying, that the profits of the bank do
not exceed, on an average, 7 or 8 per cent. per annum, which would never be
sufficient inducement to hold stock, if there were no other consideration.

"The bank," a gentleman has said, "has not suffered by the loss of its
charter. The stockholders," added he, "have already gained enough." To this I
answer, that the bank has suffered in the only way in which the assembly of the
state could injure it. And if this house restore the charter, they will not
restore what the late house took away. It continues to possess, it is true, the
confidence of the citizens of Philadelphia -- and of the neighboring states*
but before the late attack made on it, it possessed the confidence of the
monied men in Europe. This it has in a great measure lost: and this it will
find difficult to regain.

On motion ordered, that the further consideration of the report be postponed.

Adjourned.

Eodem Die, P. M.
RESUMED the consideration of the report of the committee, to whom were
referred the memorials praying a repeal or suspension of the law annulling the
charter of the bank.

Mr. R. Morris. I was in hopes, that after the many arguments made use of on
the part of the bank, some of the gentlemen in opposition, would have risen in
reply: but I see they are determined to reserve themselves for the last blow. I
shall therefore try to provoke an answer, by offering such further arguments as
occur to me, on the subject under our consideration.

The bill, which was enacted into a law, by the late house of assembly,
repealing the charter of the bank, was brought in, in consequence of a report
made by a committee of that house, which had been instructed to enquire and
ascertain, whether the charges made by certain petitioners against the bank,
were true or not. Knowing that this question would come before the house, I was
prepared to ask the members of that committee, whether such enquiry had been
made? and if it had, when and where it was made, and what had been the result?
But the committee of the present house have saved me that trouble; they have
ascertained and stated in the preamble of their report, that no such enquiry
was made. The only member of the committee of the late house who has spoken in
the present debate, has told us, that even supposing the committee had not made
the enquiry, the house might with propriety take up the (...) of their report:
by which he has conceded the point as to any enquiries having been made. -- The
necessary enquiries not having been made, I would ask, how the committee came
by the opinion given in their report, "that the bank is in every view
incompatible with the public safety?"

Here mr. Gray called mr. Morris to order. He declared he was uneasy to hear
the conduct not only of the late house, but of their committee impeached. It
was, in his idea, entirely improper, and not the sit mode of conducting the
business. He was uninterested in the question, so far as it related to their
conduct, having had no hand either in granting or revoking the charter of the
bank but was decidedly of opinion, that if one house undertook to impeach the
conduct of another, it would lead into endless difficulties. There was no other
tribunal established by the constitution, with the powers necessary for that
purpose, than the council of censors. That body would, at a future day,
determine on the conduct of the late house of assembly. The member was
perfectly out of order.

Mr. R. Morris. I have been called to order very improperly and indecently: the
question pending before this house, is, whether or no an act of the former
house shall be repealed? How is it possible to discuss this question, without
speaking of the conduct of that house? Several other members who have gone
before me, have taken the same ground I have proceeded upon, and have arraigned
the conduct of the late house and of their committee -- they were not called to
order: why then am I singled out? Do I not possess the same rights and
privileges as other members? The gentleman has not shown that I was not in
order.

Mr. Smilie said, the gentleman from Philadelphia county [mr. Gray] was
certainly right. The member had been out of order. He added, that he would
venture to say, such a report as that under debate, had never been produced in
any assembly. However, he had no objection to a free and full discussion of the
conduct of the late house, and of their committee -- as, so far from suffering
by it --

Here the Speaker interfered. He said on a question of order, there could not
be any debate allowed. If the gentleman who had called the member from the city
to order, wished to take the sense of the house, he would put the question:
otherwise the member must be permitted to proceed without interruption.

Mr. Gray declining to have the sense of the house taken,

Mr. Morris proceeded thus: Had the committee of the late house been charged
with neglect of duty, with a view of bringing them to trial before this house,
as the gentleman seems to suppose, he would have been right in giving
opposition to such proceeding, and I should have joined him; but that is by no
means the case. The subject before us, requires an investigation of the conduct
of the late house, and that of their committee which made the report, whereon
was founded the law for annulling the charter of the bank: respecting their
conduct, and on every part of it, I have a right to speak my sentiments,
provided they are delivered in a manner not inconsistent with any privileges of
this house.

The report made by the said committee, declares, as I said before, That the
bank is in every view incompatible with the public safety. I ask was that
committee either able or willing to consider the subject in every view? I do
not hesitate to pronounce (...). Did that committee take a view of the services
which the bank had rendered to the united states? I believe they did not; and
yet that was one of the points of view in which they ought to have considered
it: for when chartered rights are to be destroyed, the matter should really be
considered in every point of view. As the committee did not choose to make
mention of those services, many of which must have been known to them, I shall,
I trust, be excused for giving some little account of them.

In the beginning of the year 178^, the money and credit of the united states
were at so low an ebb, that some members of the board of war declared to me*
that they had not the means of sending an express to the army. I mention this
only as one instance, to show that distressful state of our finances, which
induced congress to make the appointment of a superintendent, which was done in
the month of February in that year: and a still stronger proof of our distress
will be shown, by a bare mention, that a motion was, about the time of that
appointment, made in congress, by an honorable delegate from the state of
Virginia, to authorize general Washington to seize all the provisions that
could be found within a circle of twenty miles round his camp. The motion
having been submitted to me, as superintendent elect, I requested that it might
be withdrawn, and pledged myself to procure, upon my private credit, a supply
of four or five thousand barrels of flour, in a short time, for the use of the
army; and I was happy enough to succeed in the attempt. The various scenes of
distress, and the extreme difficulties which presented themselves to my view at
that time, were sufficient to have deterred any man from the acceptance of such
an appointment; but, however unequal to the station, the attempt was
indispensible. I found it absolutely necessary, previous to the acceptance, to
make certain stipulations, as leading to the only possible chance of success:
amongst these was that of not being liable to make good the previous
engagements taken on account of the united states, well knowing that such
demands must soon have run me down -- Another stipulation was made with the
minister of France, for a credit upon the king's treasury, which was granted in
a very limited degree. That minister did not want inclination to go greater
lengths; but I have reason to believe, that he was limited by instructions,
both as to the sum and terms of the loan; terms which it may be improper for me
to mention here, although they would add another proof of our then miserable
situation.

This credit, however, and the confidence reposed in me by the then legislature
of Pennsylvania, laid the foundation for appreciating the paper money of this
state, and enabled me to feed and move the army during the remainder of the
year 1781. I was happy enough to find that assembly disposed to give every
possible aid to those designs which were then formed for promoting the public
service. The executive branch of government was equally well disposed. I have
now a gentleman in my eye who then presided: he knows the applications I was
obliged to make; he gave ready compliance as far as he could, and I feel a
pleasure in bearing this public testimony to his exertions at the time. --
Under the pressure of those difficulties I have mentioned, the idea of a public
or national bank suggested itself, as a measure that might be extremely useful
in my attempts to regain for the united states, that credit which had been
lost. I made the proposal for establishing it to congress, which met their
approbation. Every one knows the terms on which it was offered to the public:
and yet from the month of May, when the proposals were published, until the
month of September or October following, there were not more subscriptions in
the whole, than amounted to about seventy thousand dollars. During this time,
one of his most christian majesty's frigates arrived at Boston, and brought a
remittance in specie of about four hundred and seventy thousand dollars. This
sum was brought to Philadelphia, and deposited in the vaults of the bank. I
determined from the moment of its arrival, to subscribe on behalf of the united
states, for those shares in the bank which remained vacant; but such was the
amount of the public expenditures, that, notwithstanding the utmost care and
caution to keep this money, nearly one half of the sum was exhausted before the
institution could be organized. In November 1781, the president and directors
of the bank were elected; they obtained a charter of incorporation from
congress -- and opened the bank for transacting business in January 1782. I
subscribed the sum then remaining in the treasury, being about 254,000 dollars,
into the bank stock, for account of the united states, which became thereby the
principal stockholders. And I shall now read an extract taken upon this
occasion, from a statement of the accounts of the united states of America,
during the administration of the superintendent of finance, which was made out
and published before my resignation, intended for the information of my
fellow-citizens, and deposited in the treasury office, under an expectation
that the books would have been distributed or sold: why they have been
withheld from the public eye, I do not know; I meant them for public
investigation; and, as the officer concerned feared none that could be made
into my conduct. It lies with those who have withheld the books, to account
for it.

This extract states, that on the first of April 1782, the united states
possessed stock in the bank, to the amount of 252, 918 28-90 dollars; and that
they were then indebted for money borrowed of the bank, 300,000 dollars, by
which it appears, that if this institution had not taken place, the treasury
would have been 50,000 dollars worse than nothing.

The requisitions of congress, for 8,000,000 of dollars, which were passed the
preceding November, required no payment from the states until May: and it is
well known, that long after that time, they produced no effect: at that period,
public credit had gone to wreck; and the enemy built their most sanguine hopes
of overcoming us, upon this circumstance; but at that crisis our credit was
restored by the bank.

On the first of July 1782, the united states held to the amount of 253,000
28-90 dollars in bank stock, and were then indebted to the bank 400,000
dollars, which is nearly 150,000 dollars more than the amount of their said
stock. I am sensible that by mentioning these transactions, I expose the
president and directors of the bank to the only censure that can affect them.
The then stockholders might with some appearance of reason have complained that
they had extended their credit to the united states too far beyond the bounds
of discretion: but let it be considered, that they were told, and truly told,
by him that presided over the finances, that the fate of their country depended
very much upon the assistance required from time to time at their hands. Their
desire to render public service, and their confidence in the assurance given
repeatedly (...) faithful repayment, will surely justify (...) risqued a part
of the property confided to them (...) security of the whole: but, even
supposing any censure to lie, how far such censure will justify the present
opposition of those concerned in the attack upon the bank, I leave to the
decision of every gentleman present. In October 1782, the united states
continued, as before, possessed of bank stock for 253,394 58-90 dollars, and
indebted 400,000 dollars. Before January 1783, the president and directors
growing rather uneasy at this heavy loan, and fearing censure, they called upon
me for relief, and I sold out stock of the united states to the amount of
200,000 dollars, and paid 300,000 dollars in part of the debt: so that on the
first of January 1783, the united states held stock for 53,394 58-90 dollars,
and owed the bank, 100,000 dollars.

On the first of April following, the situation remained the same. By the first
of July, I had sold the whole of the bank stock belonging to the united states,
and they remained in debt to the bank, 129,800 dollars. On the first of October
1783, this debt was increased to 164,781: but by the first of January 1784, the
united states were discharged of that debt.

The president and directors of the bank had no pledge after the sale of the
stock, for the debt of the united states, other than that of the public faith
given in proper writings by their officer. During these times of distress and
want, the utility of the bank was not confined to the advances made to the
superintendent for public service. It was eminently beneficial, by extending
discounts to contractors who supplied the army with provisions, and to others
concerned in trusting articles necessary for the supplies of the various public
departments; sometimes the notes were discounted upon public, and sometimes
upon private credit. I have frequently been obliged to take the contractors'
notes to me for the sums due to them, and endorse such notes in my private
capacity, so that they might obtain discounts on those notes to pay themselves:
by these, and such other means as could then be devised, anticipations were
effected, until public moneys could be collected to discharge the notes. Some
members of this house know, and can vouch the truth of this relation; one in
particular, who contracted with me for feeding the troops and prisoners at
Reading, on very moderate terms, who gave great satisfaction in the execution,
got but little profit, but always appeared well pleased with the opportunity of
being so far useful to his country. This gentleman must remember these things
well.

From the aids given by this institution, the united states were enabled to
keep up, feed, and clothe an army, consisting of a larger number of men than
they had had in the field before, or than they could have maintained without
these aids. This army was, in every point, on a much more respectable footing
than formerly, and they kept the enemy at bay.

And shall this institution, from which, not only the united states, but this
state, as a member of the union, has derived such solid advantages, lose all
its merit and credit, by the report of a committee of the late house of
assembly, stating opinions, unsupported by a single fact? Had the committee
called upon me, I would have given them this information, and given it upon
oath, if required. Nay, I am even now ready, if necessary, to quit my seat as a
member, and appear at the bar of this house, to prove the truths I have
advanced.

I now appeal to that gentleman, who has asserted, that this state has received
no consideration for the charter granted to the bank, whether her share of
services and credit derived from it, was not an ample consideration? Every
person who hears me, will, I doubt not, agree that it was. I will not, however,
advocate the cause of the bank, merely from past services; but will try to
show, that it may also be useful to the public in time to come.

The report says, the bank has a direct tendency to banish a great part of the
specie from this country. From what information the committee derived this
knowledge, or whether it was instinctive, I cannot pretend to decide. But I
maintain that it has a direct contrary tendency. The money of the stockholders
and depositors is drawn into its vortex, and how is it to be got out of their
cellars? -- The directors will not certainly give it away -- they lend it but
for short periods, and few of those borrowers would risque a shipment of money
which must so soon be repaid. Formerly, when a ship was put up for London, the
remitters who wished to ship specie, were obliged, if they had not the money,
to cast about for ways and means of obtaining it, either by borrowing or buying
of their neighbors and acquaintance, and away it went if they succeeded. At
present, under similar circumstances, the remitters are obliged to make
application to the bank for discounts: but the directors being interested to
obstruct the shipments of money, and knowing those who want discounts for that
purpose, they watch them as closely as a cat does a mouse, and refuse such
discounts until the ship is gone. Such refusals may possibly have given rise,
in part, to the charge of partiality. The directors, knowing how injurious the
exportation of specie is to the operations of the bank, will not lend money for
exportation. No considerable sums can be sought after or obtained for this
purpose, without their being aware of it; the experience and habits they have
acquired in the course of their management, enable them to perceive the
approaching evil; and they endeavor to counteract and obstruct it, as soon as
discovered. Thus, although they cannot prevent the exportation of specie, they
render it far more difficult than it would otherwise be, and consequently the
bank has no tendency to banish the specie. The report of last year, therefore,
so far as it is grounded on this charge, is grounded on a falsehood.

This report proceeds to tell us, that the bank, after banishing a great part
of the specie of the country, collects nearly the whole of the remainder into
the hands of the stockholders. How this can come to pass, it is not easy to
ascertain. Every six months a dividend is made of the profits of the bank: and
if we reflect who are the stockholders, we shall find it most probable that the
dividends are devoted to their current expenses, for the support of themselves
and families, and by that means circulated again amongst the community. At any
rate, the stock cannot increase by means of the profits, unless new shares are
purchased, which cannot now be done. And if it were to be done, the number of
stockholders would increase with the number of shares sold: consequently the
charge of accumulating the wealth of the state, into the hands of a few
individuals, falls to the ground.

The report goes on to state, That the accumulation of enormous wealth in the
hands of a society who claim perpetual duration, will necessarily produce a
degree of influence and power, which cannot be entrusted in the hands of any
set of men whatsoever, without endangering the public safety. How is this
accumulation of enormous wealth to take place? If an individual possesses one
share in the bank stock, it cannot accumulate: it will always remain one share:
for the profits are divided and drawn out half yearly. An increase of the
number of stockholders, increases the number of shares; and by experience has
been found to reduce those profits. What then is meant by this accumulation?
this influence? They are mere bugbears, held out to terrify the ignorant and
unsuspecting members of the community.

If, indeed, it is meant, that by the sale of more shares, the president and
directors will have the management of more money than while the stock is
confined and small, I grant it* and the consequence would be, that they could,
with a larger capital, be more useful. As to influence, it may be depended upon
as a fact, that if ever such an institution could create influence, this bank
has had the opportunity from January 1782, to the present time: and who has
seen or felt this influence during that period? But supposing such an influence
to exist, how far could it go? it could only extend to those who should be
under a necessity to borrow; and only so long as it should be considered a
favor to obtain loans. Had this institution been let alone, the confidence it
had obtained, would soon have procured such an increase of stockholders and
stock, as would have turned the tables: and instead of its being deemed a
favor to obtain loans at the bank, the directors would have been glad to
receive applications for them, from men of proper credit: and as the capital
increased, they would not only have been enabled to accommodate the public more
generally, but it might have so happened, that they would have had it in their
power to lend to farmers for the improvement of their lands.

Has any of this much-dreaded influence shown itself in the legislature? I
answer, no. If any member will say yes, let him show when -- let him show how
-- let him produce evidence of the fact. But if such influence did exist, is it
possible that it could extend beyond the bounds of the city? One of my worthy
colleagues and myself are stockholders, and gentlemen affect to suppose we are
under this influence: this is considering the matter in the worst point of
view. But for the sake of argument, if we admit it for a moment, how far does
our influence go? We offer our sentiments on various occasions: we urge reasons
and arguments which we, at least, think ought to have weight, and to carry
conviction. But if these arguments are offered against a certain system of
measures, there are certain gentlemen from the country, who possess a kind of
magic, which produces much greater effect than our reasoning. We carry very few
points against this magic charm: and with a vote on the question, our influence
is ended.

The report goes further to say, That the bank is not dependent on government.
I am very glad it is not; (...) never will be. The moment it becomes depen^^^^
on government, that moment it is destroyed. The confidence of the public is
necessary to its existence: and that confidence has been acquired by the
punctual compliance with its engagements. Were it under the control of
government, the people would withdraw their confidence; and neither
stockholders or depositors would be found to trust their money under such
control. Gentlemen may say what they please of the credit of government; but
the fact is, that such credit is not obtained. Government ought to have credit:
and no man wishes more than I do, to see it established, but not through this
channel. If government, in the present state of things, could control the funds
of the bank, and were to apply them to the use of the state, how should an
individual, whose money was taken by such authority, obtain satisfaction?
Should he go to law with the state? No; the government has too much power, and
he must submit to what it should dictate. But if the president and directors of
the bank abuse their trust, and misapply his money, the law is stronger than
they are: and the law will give him relief.

The report continues, The great profits of the bank, which will daily increase
as money grows scarcer, and which already far exceed the profits of European
banks, have tempted foreigners to vest their money in this bank, thus to draw
from us large sums for interest. The committee might as well have stated, that
the profits of a mill increase in proportion to the scarcity of corn, by which
it loses the toll, as that the profits of the bank will increase as money grows
scarcer: for money is the life and soul of a bank, and as necessary as plenty
of corn is to a mill. The first part of this clause has, therefore, no
foundation in truth: and as to that part relative to foreigners taking away our
specie, in payment of the interest or dividends which will arise on their
stock, I am glad of the opportunity of entering into the consideration of it,
having heard it frequently urged by sensible men as a grievance, that this
country should pay dividends to foreigners, which they consider as a kind of
tribute. I shall remark, by the way, that when foreigners place money in the
bank for the purchase of stock, it proves that instead of facilitating the
export of specie, the institution has a tendency to draw it into this country.

I assert, that it is the interest of this country to borrow money from abroad,
and pay either interest, or bank dividends for the use of it.

Did the first settlers of America bring capitals with them! Some few
individuals might: but the generality certainly did not: if they could
accomplish the bringing the necessary implements of husbandry, it was doing a
great deal. The settlers that have continued to follow the first comers, from
that time to this, were in the same way: very few have brought capitals; and
yet nearly all have grown rich. How did this happen? It has happened by the use
of European capitals. How were these obtained for that use? Not by borrowing
money; for they could not, it is true, obtain such loans: if they could, the
country would have grown rich much faster. But they borrowed goods. America has
risen to opulence by means of the credit she obtained in Europe. The goods so
borrowed, or, in other words, bought upon credit, were not procured on the same
easy terms, on which money is usually lent. It would have been much better for
the traders in America, to borrow money at six, eight, ten per cent. or at any
rate of dividend made by the bank, and to have purchased their goods with the
ready money so borrowed: for with ready money, those purchases might have been
made, ten, fifteen, twenty, and perhaps in some articles, thirty per cent.
cheaper than on credit.

It is true, that the merchants in England usually shipped goods on one year's
credit, without charging interest for that year. But it has been always said,
and in some instances proved upon trials in the courts of law, that the year's
interest is amply compensated by the advances put on the real cost of the
goods, besides other benefices derived by the English merchant, by means of
drawbacks, discounts, etc. etc. And if the American importer cannot pay at the
expiration of the twelve months, an interest account commences, and is
continued in such manner, that he pays at the rate of compound interest, until
the debt is discharged. Under these disadvantages, the credit, obtained in
Europe, at a rate of interest equal to fifteen, twenty, or perhaps thirty per
cent. has been the foundation of that prosperity which we behold in America.
That credit has been extended by the importer to the country shopkeeper; and,
through him, to the farmer and mechanic, who being thereby enabled to pursue
their labors, have drawn produce from the surface and bowels of the earth,
which has not only defrayed the whole of the cost and charges, but enriched the
industrious. Must not, then, an institution which draws money from Europe for
the use of our citizens, at the rate of 7 3 4ths or 8 per cent. be extremely
beneficial? Could America by means of such institutions, or by any other means,
obtain loans sufficient to enable her to purchase all the goods wanted from
Europe, with ready money, she would find a vast and lasting advantage in it.
The plan and utility of a loan office are pretty well understood -- A farmer
borrows at that office at the rate of six per cent. per annum interest -- this
enables him to improve his land to the best advantage: and (...) well directed
industry, he raises annually from that land an income exceeding the rate of
interest, which soon enables him to discharge the debt, and enrich himself. In
like manner, if we can create a credit in Europe, and borrow at six, eight, or
ten per cent, so long as such loans can be employed to raise an income
exceeding the interest paid, we enrich ourselves by the difference. The
establishment of the bank had created that credit in some degree: and
Pennsylvania, so long as her citizens can derive a better income from the
capitals of Europeans vested in our bank stock, than those Europeans derive
from the dividends, ought to hold out encouragement for an increase of such
stockholders, rather than pursue measures for diminishing their shares.

The report proceeds -- Foreigners will doubtless be more and more induced to
become stockholders, until the time may arrive, when this engine of power may
become subject to foreign influence. This country may be agitated with the
politics of European courts, and the good people of America reduced once more
to a state of subordination and dependence upon some one or other of the
European powers. This conveys a most extraordinary position; that foreigners,
by depositing their money with us, shall become our enemies, and seek our
destruction; and that those who place confidence in us, shall endeavor to ruin
us. I hardly imagine that this can require a serious answer. The contrary
proposition is self-evident. Had we at every court in Europe, persons so warmly
interested in our favor as those stockholders must be, we should have warm
supporters in case any of those courts should form hostile designs against us.
Nothing can make such stockholders our enemies, but breaking our contracts with
them.

The report adds, "at best, if it were even confined to the hands of Americans,
it would be totally destructive of that equality which ought to prevail in a
republic." What equality is here meant? Why did not the committee explain it?
Holding more or less shares in the bank cannot destroy it, unless they meant
equality in the possession of property. If that was their view, they should
first have reported a law, fixing limits to industry -- and an agrarian law for
making an equal division of property. But I believe those measures would prove
as disagreeable to the members of that committee, as to the stockholders of the
bank. Each of them, I imagine, possesses more now than would fall to his share
on such a division; and there is no reason to suppose, they would be fond of
parting with what they hold: for, on the contrary, they are like their
neighbors, trying to get more. I may be told, that this is my case -- Agreed
-- I have some property; repeated attempts have been made to deprive me of it
-- I have not only resisted such attempts successfully, but continue to exert
myself in the acquisition of more. Make a division, and that industry ceases.

"We have nothing," the report continues, "in our free and equal government,
capable of balancing the influence which the bank must create."

On this point, it is only necessary to mention the late attempt -- not to
balance -- but totally to destroy the bank. I shall therefore make no other
appeal, than to the report itself, for the refutation of this assertion.

The report proceeds, "We see nothing, which, in the course of a few years, can
prevent the directors of the bank from governing Pennsylvania."

Therefore there is nothing, for if there had been, so wise a committee must
have seen it. But did they see any thing that was likely to place the
government in their hands? I may safely answer no, for if they had, they would
not have failed in that part of their duty -- they would have mentioned it in
the strongest terms.

Again the report proceeds, "Already the house of assembly, the representatives
of the people, have been threatened that the credit of our paper currency will
be blasted by the bank."

I ask, who made those threats? Is it in proof that the president and directors
of the bank have made them? If they have been so imprudent, let it be shown,
and I agree that they abide the consequences: if such threats have been made by
other persons, advocates of the bank, can their conduct be urged as a serious
charge against the institution? But even supposing such threats to have been
made, let us see what has actually been done: The only opposition to the
measure of emitting paper money, was made during the time that measure was in
agitation: and surely that was the proper time for those who disapproved it, to
make their opposition. They did not continue to oppose after the measure was
adopted: at least the president and directors of the bank did not. It was not
expected of them that they should give hard money in exchange for the paper
emission: they could not, without being guilty of a breach of trust: but upon
the request of some friends to the paper money, they agreed to receive it on
deposit, and to answer the drafts of the depositors, drawn at their own will
and pleasure; this was done at some expense, much trouble, and at least so far
gave countenance and credit, as to induce many to receive it in payment. In
fact, they gave the paper every countenance they consistently could, and
probably more than they ought to have done.

"If," concludes the report, "this growing evil continues, we fear the time is
not very distant when the bank will be able to dictate to the legislature of
Pennsylvania, what laws to pass and what to forbear." I hope the legislature of
Pennsylvania will always be composed of men independent in spirit --
independent in fortune: whilst this is the case, there is nothing to fear from
this bug-a-boo; such men would spurn at all attempts to dictate to the
legislature.

But I have already shown, that no such danger as is here held out, can
possibly arise from the bank. So long as the electors of the state take care to
return for their representatives, men of sense, integrity, spirit, and
property, the people will derive security to their lives, liberties, and
property. And although it was, some time since, fashionable with some people to
cry out, that men of property should be excluded from any share in the
government, yet it will be found, that the public safety consists best with
placing the government in the hands of those who contribute to bear its burdens.

I have now gone through the report; and have, I think, proved that it is not
founded in truth, supported by facts, nor warranted by any information given
to, or obtained by, the committee who made it. Instead of adducing facts, they
have stated opinions: and what has been done in consequence? The then house of
assembly, in consequence of that report, passed an act for taking away the
charter of the bank. The preamble to that act, states, "That the bank has been
found injurious to the state."

It is then no longer a matter of opinion -- as stated in the report: but is in
the preamble asserted as a matter of fact. I maintain that the assertion is
untrue. Desirous to treat the former house with as much decency as the occasion
will permit, I refrain from using other epithets, which might with propriety be
applied; but the round assertion in the preamble to the act, demands as strong
a reply: there was no proof to support that assertion: the committee did not
even pretend to any. The house was deceived by the tenor and plausibility of
the report: and that committee are culpable.

Will this house, then, suffer to remain enrolled amongst the laws of
Pennsylvania, an act, passed under deception, and founded on mere assertion of
matter, neither proved or supported? I hope they will not. I hope this house
has too great a regard for the honor of the state, to permit that law to
remain unrepealed.

Ordered, that the further consideration of the report be postponed.

Adjourned,

Friday, March 31, 1786, A. M.
RESUMED the consideration of the report of the committee, to whom were
referred the memorials praying a repeal or suspension of the law annulling the
charter of the bank.

Mr. Whitehill. A great deal has been said on the subject now under
consideration of this house. I still remain of my former opinion (for I have
heard no reason adduced to convince me of the contrary) that the charter and
institution of the bank were totally incompatible with the interest and welfare
of Pennsylvania. In that opinion I shall remain, until I hear better reasons
offered on the other side of the question.

The report before the house, conveys a number of invidious reflections on the
late assembly, and on their committee who made the report relative to the bank.
In taking a review of it, I think it will appear those reflections are
ill-founded, and unwarranted by fact.

It states, that the report made to the late house, was grounded in general
notions preconceived, or on the current popular opinions and speculations,
without much consideration being bestowed on the special subject; and the same
may at least be said of the petitions presented against the bank:

And that the house did not derive from either members of that committee, or
the said petitioners, those clear lights, which would have been necessary to
their deliberations, on so difficult and interesting a subject, and which, from
the instructions to their committee, they seem to have desired.

What is to be supposed the enquiry necessary to be made in this case? or what
the lights necessary to the deliberations of the house? Are not those popular
opinions, the opinions of the people of the state? And can the house of
assembly, the representatives of the people at large, have a surer guide to
regulate their conduct, than the opinions of their constituents?

The charge of not affording the president and directors a hearing, is ill
founded. Because they were not heard until the third reading of the bill, does
it therefore necessarily follow, that they were not heard at all?

The late house is charged with having come to a hasty determination, and
broken through the procrastinating forms of proceeding, which were fixed as
fences, against the sudden violences of power. This is a wrong statement, and a
very unjust insinuation. The repealing act was passed with every usual
formality.

Not having made any enquiry at the bank, is stated as very criminal in the
committee -- But that would have been a very improper place to make any
enquiry. Would the president and directors have told us of the partiality or
favouritism they might have been guilty of? Would they have told us of any
failure in their duty? They would have given us no such information. Would they
have told us that the bank was incompatible with the safety or welfare of the
state? No such thing. A gentleman from the city [mr. R. Morris] has said that
if we had applied to him, he would have given us information -- But we might as
well apply at the bank as to him -- he is deeply interested in the institution.

The committee enquired into the nature of the bank -- and its compatibility
with the public welfare -- and found no such compatibility. It has been asked,
how is the bank dangerous -- how incompatible with the public welfare? I shall
endeavor to show how. It advances paper on the credit of the money in its
vaults, and its loans are confined to 45 days -- a period which can never
afford any opportunity for the country people to profit by it: as it is
impossible they can come down here every 45 days to renew their obligations. It
moreover cramps the credit and circulation of the paper money of the state.

I am against the report as proposing to re-establish the bank on its former
charter. [Here mr. Whitehill read that clause of the charter, which empowered
the corporation to have a stock not exceeding ten millions of dollars -- and
that which appointed the president and directors: he then added:] This stock of
ten millions of dollars was too great an estate -- it afforded too great a
liberty to the bank. The president and directors were incorporated without the
house knowing any of their bye laws and regulations. The same persons might be
president and directors all their lives. There would have been no end of the
corporation, but by a repeal of their charter, let them exercise their powers
how they would.

The late house has been charged with a hasty determination in repealing the
charter: But the house that granted it, was much more hasty in its proceedings:
as I shall show. On the 22d of February, 1782, a letter was presented from the
president and directors of the bank, praying leave to bring in a bill to
incorporate the subscribers thereto. The 25th of the same month, the bill was
brought in, and read a first time: no committee had been appointed to prepare
it. The 26th, it was on motion read a second time, and ordered to be
transcribed and printed for public consideration. Thus it appears there was not
a single day between the first and second reading. The 25th of March, it was
read a third time, and ordered to be engrossed. The first of April it was
enacted into a law. All this was in the same session. In this mode was the
charter obtained. Time for consideration was not allowed to the public, the
bill was gone through with such precipitancy. Yet the late house is charged
with having broke through the procrastinating forms, although the repealing act
lay over from the winter sessions to the fall, a period of four or five months.
At the fall sessions, counsel was heard for and against it. The committee could
not be charged with having deceived the house: for after they had made the
report, the matter was fairly argued, as well by the members, as by the
counsel. -- After all this deliberation -- all these lights thrown upon the
subject -- it may be safely said, that no business ever was more fairly argued
-- Why, then, are we charged with hasty measures?

The bank does not help the farmer -- nor promote the agriculture of the state.
If the farmer, who is the strength of the country, be cut off from procuring
supplies of money, to enable him to improve his lands, the state must languish.
A loan office is the only sure means of encouraging agriculture, and enabling
the farmer to bring his produce to market. This cannot be established by hard
money, for that is in the vaults of the bank: and while the stockholders can
derive 16 per cent from their money, no hopes remain of borrowing at legal
interest. The laws have guarded against extortion -- but these laws are evaded
by the bank. Shall we support this engine of destruction, and enable a few men
to take advantage of their wealth, and to stop discounts whenever they please,
in times of the greatest distress?

The question at present is, whether the state shall give way to the bank, or
the bank give way to the state? For the bank is set up as a party in the state
-- It has created great disturbance. How often has it been before the house of
assembly, taking up the public time, and occasioning a waste of the public
money? In 1782 -- in 1784 -- in 1785 -- at our last sessions, and now again.
What is the design in all this? Is it the good of the state? Can we believe, if
the bank had a tendency to promote the interest of the people, that the state
would oppose it? If the gentlemen can show that it has such a tendency, I shall
be happy to join in support of it.

I am not surprised the gentlemen are so solicitous to procure another charter
for the bank. While it has no charter, their private circumstances are liable
to account for any deficiencies: and how do we know whether they can settle
their accounts, and have money enough to pay off their notes? Cannot it go on
as a private bank? How many banks in Europe are carried on in that manner? I
hope we will not give a monopoly of banking to those gentlemen. It has been
denied to be a monopoly. -- But when other persons wished to establish a second
bank, the president and directors of the present bank had sufficient influence
to prevent them from getting a charter. Indeed one of the gentlemen from the
city acknowledged that it had been a monopoly during the war.

Mr. R. Morris. I beg leave to explain. I did not say that the bank was a
monopoly during the war. I only said that if the charge of monopoly ever had
any appearance of foundation, it was during that period.

Mr. Whitehill. I believe it will not be denied to be a monopoly, if it has
sufficient influence to make head against all attempts at establishing a
similar institution. The gentleman has said, that if we do not repeal the law
taking away the charter of the bank, an appeal will be made to the courts of
justice. I should have been better pleased that this mode had been tried first,
and that the matter had not been bro't before this house.

One part of the report states, that the memorialists may be construed to speak
the sense of Pennsylvania. How many are there of them? Two thousand nine
hundred and forty seven -- of whom 670 are from Lancaster county: although we
may safely say, it is probable that not 60 are acquainted with the nature of
banks, and the various matters contained in those memorials, and the charges
they convey against the late house and committee. There were one thousand
petitioners from Lancaster against the erection of the shambles in High Street.
This, therefore, as has been already stated, only proves the activity of the
persons interested in the bank, in procuring signers to the memorials. With the
same activity, I have no doubt, twenty or thirty thousand petitioners might be
procured to expunge the bank. Therefore it is wrong to say they speak the sense
of the community.

The president and directors of the bank, have not only a separate interest
from the state -- but also an opposite interest. Their advantage lies in
depreciating the paper money of the state -- for the more of that is suppored,
the less of theirs they can issue. Upon every consideration, therefore, the
bank is incompatible with the welfare of the state.

One gentleman has said that the state has done violence to the bank -- and
that it has suffered more than the house can remedy, even by restoring the
charter. The house did not take away any of their property -- the charter was
not their property. It was a piece of sealed writing, which the house might
burn when they pleased. Their property is as safe as it was.

The late house of assembly did not take away the charter of the bank for any
crime -- nor did they charge the president and directors with having forfeited
it. They took up the consideration of the matter upon general principles --
they found it would be impossible to establish state paper money while the
charter remained. Why then should they destroy the credit of that, which was
the only effectual mode that had been discovered for relieving the suffering
creditors? But a gentleman lately proposed to have all the paper money called
in, in order to make way for the bank.

If charters cannot be repealed, because they are contracts, it affords a great
invitation to fraud. A gentleman in enumerating the powers of the house of
assembly from the constitution, did not read the whole sentence -- at the
conclusion of which it is stated that they shall possess all the other
necessary powers of a legislature. Charters of public corporations, when not
found agreeable to the welfare of the people, may be taken away by the
legislature. Two instances of the sort have occurred in this state. One was the
charter of the college of Pennsylvania, and the other the charter of the
proprietaries.

Mr. Finlay. This question, which has so long engaged the attention of the
house, and on the merits of which, gentlemen eminent for discernment, have
exercised so much ability, is of such importance in itself, and involves in it
such extensive consequences, as to justify my requesting the attention of the
house to a few observations which I propose to offer respecting it.

Much has been said respecting the extraordinary reasoning in the preamble of
the report under debate, which bears evident marks of the manner in which
disappointed avarice chagrins an interested mind. I shall observe, that though
the reasoning in the report of the committee of the late house, recommending
the passing a law to repeal the charter of the bank, were insufficient or
mistaken, yet if sufficient reasons do now exist in the nature of the case, to
support the principles thereof, it ought not to be repealed. This proposition
is supported by legislative and judicial examples. In appeals from the lower to
the higher courts, the question is not -- what were the reasons the lower
courts assigned for their decision? but "whether was the decision just or not?"
-- Many examples might be produced, of reports of committees, and preambles of
laws, not expressing the true and proper reasons of the respective resolutions
or laws. To try all laws by the reasons assigned in their preambles, would be
an endless task. Therefore, not to dwell on this, I shall endeavor to prove,
that the legislature had a power to repeal the charter of the bank; and that
sufficient reasons did exist, to justify the expediency of their doing it.

All governments being instituted for the good of the society to which they
belong, the supreme legislative power of every community necessarily possesses
a power of repealing every law inimical to the public safety. But the
government of Pennsylvania being a democracy, the bank is inconsistent with the
bill of rights thereof, which says, that government is not instituted for the
emolument of any man, family, or set of men. Therefore, this institution being
a monopoly, and having a natural tendency, by affording the means, to promote
the spirit of monopolizing, is inconsistent with not only the frame but the
spirit of our government. If the legislature may mortgage, or, in other words,
charter away portions of either the privileges or powers of the state -- if
they may incorporate bodies for the sole purposes of gain, with the power of
making bye-laws, and of enjoying an emolument of privilege, profit, influence,
or power, -- and cannot disannul their own deed, and restore to the citizens
their right of equal protection, power, privilege, and influence, -- the
consequence is, that some foolish and wanton assembly may parcel out the
commonwealth into little aristocracies, and so overturn the nature of our
government without remedy.

This institution is inconsistent with our laws -- our habits -- our manners.
-- Our laws and habits countenance long credits, and afford slow methods for
recovering debts. They subject our real estates to alienation, and to be sold
for debts. They divide our estates, both real and personal, more equally among
our heirs, than the laws or habits of any other country I know of. We are too
unequal in wealth to render a perfect democracy suitable to our circumstances:
yet we are so equal in wealth, power, etc. that we have no counterpoise
sufficient to check or control an institution of such vast influence and
magnitude. We have no kingly prerogative -- no wealthy companies of merchants
incorporated -- no hereditary nobles, with vastly great estates and numerous
dependents -- no feudal laws to support family dignity, by keeping landed
estates undivided. What security, then, can we purpose to ourselves against the
eventual influence of such wealth, conducted under the direction of such a
boundless charter?

This charter was for a perpetuity -- not subject to change -- In this it was
contrary to our constitution, which is liable to change every seven years.

But let us take a more distinct view of the nature of this institution, and of
human nature itself. Enormous wealth, possessed by individuals, has always had
its influence and danger in free states. Thus, even in Rome, where patriotism
seems to have pervaded every mind, and all her measures to have been conducted
with republican vigor, yet even there, the patricians always had their clients
-- their dependents -- by the assistance of whom they often convulsed the
counsels, and distracted the operations of the state, and finally overturned
the government itself. But the Romans had no chartered institutions for the
sole purposes of gain. They chartered no banks.

Wealth in many hands operates as many checks: for in numberless instances, one
wealthy man has a control over another. Every man in the disposal of his own
wealth, will act upon his own principles. His virtue, his honor, his sympathy,
and generosity, will influence his disposals and designs; and he is in a state
of personal responsibility. But when such an unlimited institution is erected
with such a capital, for the sole purpose of increasing wealth, it must operate
according to its principle; and being in the hands of many, having only one
point in view, and being put in trust, the personal responsibility arising from
the principles of honor, generosity, etc. can have no place. The special
temper of the institution pervades all its operations: and thus, like a snow
ball perpetually rolled, it must continually increase its dimensions and
influence.

This institution having no principle but that of avarice, which dries and
shrivels up all the manly -- all the generous feelings of the human soul, will
never be varied in its object: and, if continued, will accomplish its end, viz.
to engross all the wealth, power, and influence of the state.

The human soul is affected by wealth, in almost all its faculties. It is
affected by its present interest, by its expectations, and by its fears. And
must not, therefore, every thinking man see what advantage this institution has
on the human feelings, above that of wealth held by many individuals? If our
wealth is less equal than our kind of government seems to require -- and if
agrarian laws are unjust in our present situation, how absurd must it be for
government to lend its special aid in so partial a manner, to wealth, to give
it that additional force and spring, which it must derive from an almost
unlimited charter? Can any gentleman avoid seeing this to be eventually and
effectually overturning our government? Democracy must fall before it. Wealth
is its foundation, and gain its object and design.

Thus it appears that this institution is inconsistent with our general laws,
customs, and circumstances, and even with the nature of our government. The
proofs are not founded on facts of doubtful credibility. They are drawn from
the nature of things: and the principles of nature being justly stated, this
kind of arguments are conclusive. They carry their evidence with them, with a
certainty like that of the sparks flying upwards, or the waters running to the
sea.

Upon the same principles, it is evident that in the present state of our
commerce, the bank facilitates both public and private ruin. The balance of
trade being constantly against us, commerce with us has contracted a different
meaning from what it has in Europe. There it is founded on the produce and
manufactures of the respective countries, for which the merchant finds a
foreign market, and in lieu of which he brings a suitable return. From the
excess of the exports, the nation is enriched. With us it may, with more
propriety, be styled importation than commerce: and this importation, carried
on to too great a degree before the revolution, is greatly facilitated by the
bank.

A worthy gentleman from the city [mr. Morris] has declared it as his opinion,
that precedents from Ireland are improper, as that country does not boast of
its commerce or wealth, and is under English trammels. He says it is a good
country to import people, linen, and potatoes from -- but not commercial
precedents. I do not pretend to much commermercial knowledge. I have indeed
some general knowledge; and am of opinion, if we had such linen and cambric
manufactures as the Irish -- if we exported so much beef, butter, and pork --
and manufactured so much woollens as they do -- we should be possessed of the
immediate means of commerce. But, being under British trammels, her people, who
ought to be employed at home, are obliged to emigrate in abundance. If they are
esteemed an article of commerce, that branch of her trade has been much to our
advantage.

But as for us, though we have the foundations of commerce, we have not, nor
can we soon have the means of carrying it on extensively to advantage. We
export flour, which, through the scarcity of laborers, has failed in the
quantity. We export flaxseed, which, through the oldness of the lands
contiguous to market, and the change of seasons, has also failed greatly, so as
to be scarcely worth mentioning. We export lumber, which has failed in like
manner, and must continue to fail, in proportion as our woodland is cleared. Is
this a balance for our amazing importations, not only from Europe but both the
Indies? From those vast importations, the number of our dealing people was
increased. The bank gave the means of purchasing foreign cargoes -- the access
was easy -- but the credit short. -- The hasty day of payment approached --
hence the numerous tribe of brokers arose. The involved debtor went from friend
to friend for the assistance of credit -- from broker to broker for costly
supplies of cash -- until ruin overwhelmed him with confusion and woe: and he
who was, or appeared to be, a capital dealer, fell. Like a mighty oak in the
woods, he crushed many by his fall. Thus of late, the cry of private ruin in
this city, has not only been heard by our sister states -- but by foreign
nations. Thus has the state been drained of what money was circulating within
it, and the means of supporting the revenues and credit thereof been taken
away: no doubt there has been a concurrence of other causes. The imprudence of
the unfortunate is often assigned as one cause: and no doubt it was: but
experience forbids to set down the unfortunate always as fools or knaves. Many
who had fair and honest prospects, or who assisted with their credit those who
had, finding every usual means of extricating themselves cut off by the
inundation of foreign goods, have, whilst possessed of honest principles and
competent sagacity, sunk in the common ruin.

Much has been said of the merits of the bank in preventing the money from
leaving the country. I know the exportation of money is contrary to its
interest. But the little arts of the directors, to detain it in the country,
are contemptible as an argument, and ineffectual as a means. What are the
methods by which they retain it? A gentleman [mr. Morris] has told us, that
when a vessel is up for England, the directors know those who apply for
discounts, in order to send the money away, as readily as a cat knows a mouse,
and that they refuse them. -- Are these the mighty means? Is this the boasted
security?

I have already proved that the bank facilitates importation: consequently it
facilitates contracting debts abroad: and if the debts are facilitated, why
clog the payment? Better that the remittances could be made in an air balloon,
and the freight saved. In Spain where they have the precious metals poured in
from their settlements, and are manufacturers of money -- in order to prevent
its being exported, ten per cent. (if I am not mistaken) is charged on the
remittances to England: and a higher duty is charged on the remittances from
the Havannah and New Orleans. Yet can any man of understanding say that the
Spanish dominions are enriched by this? By no means. They are scarcer of money,
in proportion to their uses, than we are.

The way for individuals or nations to get rich, is not to have artificial
difficulties laid in the way of paying their debts; but to contract few of
them. The debts must be paid: and the bank collects the money to a point, where
it can be easier found in large sums for exportation, than in any other manner:
and those little shifts, which depend on personal sagacity or integrity, are
fit only for a plausible coloring for refusing to supply those who are not
favorites; and the more effectually discover how well it is calculated to
promote the monopolizing of trade. What security have we that its assistance
will not be partially exerted for this purpose?

This institution is itself a monopoly -- being incorporated a great trading
company -- and having a right to turn ten millions of dollars into trade, if
the president and directors please -- or to lay out that amount upon land. So,
by taking advantage of a scarcity of money, which they have it so much in their
power to occasion, they may become sole lords of the soil. If they may
monopolize trade -- if they may monopolize the soil -- why not the government
too? Doubtless they may.

I do not say whether or no the bank is a monopoly in the strict legal sense of
the word. This is not to my purpose. But I say that it is, in its nature and
principles, in the common popular sense, a monopoly: and being so in its
nature, it must be so in its effects. This is a certain conclusion. I do not
charge the directors or stock-holders personally with such designs: but this
being the nature of the institution, it becomes the indispensible duty of the
directors to conduct it according to its natural principles.

Great wealth seems, even with individuals, to have a tendency to monopolizing.
It was the saying of a wise writer, when riches increase, they are increased
that have them -- increased in their appetite for riches, and in their
endeavors to procure them.

This institution I believe to be inimical to the emission and credit of paper
money. Let us for a moment compare the state paper with that of the bank, with
respect to their service to this country. For this purpose, I beg leave to
advert a little to the history of paper money. Its amazing usefulness to
Pennsylvania, before the revolution, is well known. But when the necessities of
congress obliged tham to emit paper money, they were obliged to emit it in
great quantities, and had not the power or means of appropriating sufficient
funds for its redemption. And to look back, I rather wonder that those
emissions served us so well, than otherwise. Though the measure was then
unavoidable, I must observe there is not sufficient safety in one public body
judging of the quantity of money to be emitted -- and another, or rather many
other public bodies having to judge of and appropriate the means of redeeming
it. But there is more safety in one body being obliged to judge of the quantity
-- the uses -- the funds -- and the manner of redemption.

When this state emitted the island state money, as it was called, the funds
were sufficient, but not immediately productive; and there was abundance of
paper money in circulation. Yet it stood its ground tolerably, until the vast
sum of 500,000l. was emitted upon funds uncertain in their operation, and not
productive then, nor in a sufficient degree yet. This sunk the credit of the
other with it; and became a valuable speculation -- perhaps to some of the
planners of the emission. The other resumed its credit instantly, when the
funds became productive. But having spoken largely on this subject in the last
house, I shall say no further now -- but observe that the last emission has
funds much more than sufficient. These funds are constantly productive: and the
uses which keep it in circulation, are abundant. Therefore it cannot fail of
holding its credit -- and has stood its ground against a very powerful
opposition indeed. Though I do not say that any direct attack was made upon it
by the directors of the bank -- as I do not blame them for not receiving it --
yet it was evidently opposed through the influence of that institution. In the
eighth general assembly, the directors wrote to the house, dissuading them from
the emission they were about to make, giving their opinion that it would not
do, and offering a loan. The prophesying its fate, by those who were supposed
to have the power to blast it, had the desired effect; and the emission was
dropped. When the funding bill was going through the late house, could those
who were interested in, or dependent on, the bank, do more than they did, to
prevent the emission, and to discourage the people, already rendered suspicious
by former events? Did not the friends of the bank, in that house, predict that
it would be three or four for one, as soon as emitted? Did not the gentlemen of
this house who are interested in the bank, endeavor at our last session, to
have it all called in? Have they not afterward complained of its not
purchasing the necessaries of life? Did not one gentleman tell us it was from
two and a half to five per cent. below par? I must answer, that instances of
the kind have not struck my observation. I very lately changed a considerable
sum, and have seen others do the same, without asking or being offered any
advance. There can be none who would ask or give any advance, but such as are
interested in, or indebted to, the bank. At least, in all my dealings in the
city, none have hesitated to take it, but those who told me they must have
money for the bank. Considering these things, there is nothing wonderful in
some instances of such an advance being given. It is but the price of
convenience. I have frequently seen three pence given in Ireland for getting
silver for a guinea: but the people there never thought the gold of less value
on that account. Many such instances might be produced.

A gentleman from the city [mr. Morris] has mentioned the quick circulation of
the paper as an argument against its credit. He says it returns to the treasury
almost as fast as issued. I congratulate the state of Pennsylvania upon the
news, as a satisfactory evidence of returning confidence. It brightens our
prospects of prosperous days. The public creditor has been relieved by it. The
moneyless farmer has with it paid his taxes, which had accumulated for years
past. It has brought into circulation the little hard money that remained. Our
treasury is kept busy receiving it, and as busy paying it away. Who refuses the
paper money from us? None -- for the comptroller general is kept employed
almost night and day -- people hurry him so that they may get it. Certainly the
gentleman could not mean this as an argument against paper money.

Much might be said on the advantages of the loan office. But the principles of
this institution are so well understood, that I should esteem it an insult to
the good sense of the house to enter on them.

Thus far I have mostly confined myself to principles, and the reason and
nature of things: arguments of this kind being justly laid, I take to be most
convincing: for every man knows things will operate according to their nature.
But I beg leave now to animadvert on certain arguments made use of by some of
the reasoners on the other side: for hitherto I have only touched on a few of
them, in order to illustrate my subject. I would first observe that I took no
notes at the time of the debate -- as I did not then design to enter so largely
on the subject. I shall therefore remark on but few of the gentlemen's
arguments.

A worthy gentleman from the city [mr. Fitzsimons] informs us, that he is a
stockholder in, and director of, the bank; and that there are several
stockholders members of this house. -- He justly observes, that this does not
debar them from the constitutional right of canvassing for offices at elections
-- and advocating their own cause on the floor of this house. Doubtless the
gentleman is right. For though the constitution excludes executive officers
from seats in the legislature, lest they should influence it to make their
salaries more lucrative, or their duties more easy: yet the convention
neglected to guard against men, who have procured peculiar privileges by
obtaining partial laws in their own favor, for the sole purpose of gain,
advocating their own cause by the advantage of a seat in this house. This
reminds me of the famous laws of Solon, which, though an excellent system,
neglected to provide any punishment for a person who should murder his father
or mother -- doubtless not expecting such a crime would ever be committed. And
indeed I think the convention guarded so well against the legislature of this
state granting any kind of monopolies, or partial prerogatives, as cut off the
probability of any such thing happening in this state: yet such is the course
of affairs, that advantage has been taken of the embarrassments and
inexperience of the state, and this very thing has happened.

As to canvassing at elections, I apprehend it is not common nor honorable to
canvass for a seat in the legislature, where the candidate has only in view to
serve the public. But where he has a cause of his own to advocate, interest
will dictate the propriety of canvassing for a seat. Indeed the emolument
arising from it, would induce but few wise men to canvass for a seat in this
house purely to serve the public: for few who know the importance of the
service, will think themselves fit for it. We also allow to the gentlemen that
they have a right to advocate their own cause, on the floor of this house. But
they will allow us to consider, that it is their own cause they are advocating;
and to give credit to their opinions, and to think of their votes accordingly.
And here I call the attention of the house for a moment, to consider the
situation of the parties engaged in this argument: If the bank is a common good
-- diffusing beneficial influences through the whole state -- increasing the
price of lands and produce -- if we saw it to be useful to the commonwealth --
would it not be our own interest to encourage it? Can this house suppose us
wicked enough to destroy our own interest or the public's from mere envy? On
the other hand, this house must observe, that however hurtful and dangerous it
is to the general good, the gentlemen on the other side are interested in
supporting it: and if it were safe and beneficial, it would also (...) our
interest to support it.

The same worthy gentleman has told us, that the circulation and amount of the
bank paper is little understood. This I believe is perfectly true. But is this
a reason that we should grant a charter to the bank? Surely not. Shall the
legislature of Pennsylvania enact a charter for an institution they do not
understand? Certainly every honest member on this floor, who does not fully
understand the mystery of banking, or who has a doubt upon his mind, of the
safety or utility of such an institution, will vote against the resolution.

Another worthy gentleman [mr. Morris] has told us, that it is his opinion, if
the question is to come before a court of justice, the judges, though their
opinions might be otherwise, yet on account of their characters as law
officers, would condemn the repealing law, as a nullity. What! would the judges
complement the bank by deciding contrary, not only to their own sentiments, but
to law itself? If this be the case, it must be a very influencing institution,
and a very dangerous one indeed.

The same worthy gentleman informs us, that if the bank is not continued, there
will not, at some seasons, be a ship loaded with flour, at the port of
Philadelphia. But I ask, how were they loaded before the war? how were they, or
how are they, loaded at Baltimore and other ports? Baltimore exports more in
proportion to its imports than Philadelphia does: and this is worthy of our
observation. But as I have detained the house longer than I designed, and as
the gentleman who spoke last, discussed to advantage many arguments I had in
view, I shall conclude by offering a few more general observations.

There is now no chartered bank existing: therefore the case is before us on
original ground. The question is not whether or no we will repeal a charter;
but whether or no we will give one. Whether or no the last house assigned
proper reasons for what they did, is not our business: for we know they did no
injustice to the bank. They took away none of the property. The holders have
their money; therefore it was not like an agrarian law, as the gentleman
alleged -- They may still keep a private bank. And here I beg leave to remark,
that as a private bank is all the constitution admits of, so it would have the
same advantages in trade, and more security to the people than a chartered
bank. For, under the charter, the incorporated property was the only security
to the public: therefore the stockholders, who have the property of it, and
draw the dividends from it, might be rolling in wealth, and the bank break and
ruin thousands. The bank might be robbed, or thrown into the Delaware, and the
owners who profit by it, be safe as to their estates. None but men of wealth
have money to spare to be bankers: and shall this house give a special law to
enable monied people to increase their gain, without having either their
persons or estates upon the same level of responsibility as the other citizens?
By no means: this house will not do it. If the legislature did so, it would
give a legal sanction to a snare of the greatest danger.

This is the only state in the union saddled with a bank. Our sister states,
sensible of the magnitude and danger of such an institution, have, as far as I
am informed, refused to sanction it. Maryland and New York, I know, have done
so. They have seen the danger, and learned by our example. Let us for some time
learn by theirs. Such an institution might in time be formidable to the whole
united states.

I cheerfully acknowledge, however, the great merit of the worthy gentleman who
has informed us that he laid the plan of the bank, and led it into operations.
I acknowledge that the bank has been of great service to the united states --
not in our darkest times -- for these were in some measure over, when
Cornwallis was taken -- which was before the bank existed. But the service was
reciprocal. It was part of the French money, to the value of which the united
states became stockholders, that enabled the bank to open its operations: and
if that institution was, for a part of the next season, of essential service,
it was but a suitable return: and the financier, for making so proper a use of
it, deserves and enjoys great credit. But the public are not indebted to this
institution -- or, if they are, they will doubtless give that debt a preference
to debts even much earlier contracted. Congress money did us essential service
in our darkest hours: shall it, therefore, be continued? No: it, became
dangerous; and consequently ceased. The army were no longer necessary, and
would have been dangerous; and were therefore discontinued. General Washington,
with all the virtue and glory of his persevering services, resigned his honors
and authority, when he ceased to be necessary -- though he did not cease to be
either useful or safe. If we must be saddled with this dangerous institution
for ever, because of its former usefulness and convenience, surely Oliver
Cromwell should have been rewarded in England by the continuing his heirs to
occupy the government, instead of being branded as a usurper, and "damned to
everlasting same." By the same rule, despotic government, which is the most
convenient, ought always to be preferred and continued.

One other observation occurs to me, which I have often thought of, and to
which I yet request the attention of the house. If a bank is supported in
Philadelphia, it will give another kind of credit, and another kind of
circulating medium to the city and its vicinity, than to the more remote parts
of this extended state: and the bank may increase the circulating medium to any
quantity it pleases, which will occasion an artificial increase in the prices
of things, and the manner of living. It will gradually affect the interests,
manners, and habits, with such distinguishing peculiarities, as will occasion
sooner or later a dissolution or separation of this state. This would be a very
undesirable event: and yet the instituting a bank can scarcely fail producing
it. Perhaps, when this event takes place, this city and a small territory
around it, may, like Hamburgh and Dantzick, not only promote monopolies, but
have its foundation placed in the principles of monopoly and aristocracy. For
the common interest of Pennsylvania, for the honor and advantage of human
nature, I wish such events may be at a great distance.

Mr. Fitzsimons. The gentleman has mis-stated some of the observations I made.
I did not say I had canvassed for my own seat: that is not the truth. Whether
my seat is more beneficial to me, than that gentleman's to him, I leave (...)
to judge.

(...) Lollar. I beg to detain the house a few minutes. A gentleman from the
city [mr. R. Morris] has been a little facetious in his remarks on some of the
arguments I made use of on Wednesday. I confess his superior knowledge, and do
not pretend to oppose mine to his. However, when a matter amounts to a
self-evident proposition, I think myself qualified to form an opinion on it. I
said that the bank facilitated commerce -- which, in the present state of our
trade was against it, as it enabled the British creditor to carry off cash for
his goods, and saddle the merchant here with the payment, in the hasty manner
prescribed by the bank. from this he drew an inference, that I was opposed to
the payment of our debts -- which is by no means the case. With respect to
partiality or favouritism, I did not charge the directors with it -- I only
read part of the petition from Chester county, presented to the late house
against the bank, to evince how much was in their power. I said that under the
old government, they had no idea of a bank. To this the gentleman answers, by
telling us he, at that time, had one in contemplation. I do not doubt the
fertility of the gentleman's imagination. He is certainly competent to the
forming that or any similar plan: and probably the present bank is the very one
he had then in view.

I do not pretend to call in question the usefulness of the bank during the
war. The officers and soldiers of our army were likewise useful during the war:
but would we infer from thence that they should be still kept up? The profits
of the bank have well paid for its services. Our officers and soldiers have
been dismissed with a commutation of pay for five years.

The gentleman tells us, that if the legislature were to grant a monopoly of
particular branches of our trade to any set of men, the laws granting such
monopoly, would be void in themselves; and seems to think that the law
annulling the charter of the bank, is a nullity -- If that be the case, the
incorporating law was equally a nullity.

Another member from the city tells us, he has had the honor of being a
director of the bank since its first establishment. He might have added, that
so he would remain during life, if the present mode of voting according to
property, continued. In the bank of England, (if I am rightly informed) every
person possessed of a share of 500l. has a vote; and those possessed of a
number of shares, no more.

When another bank was attempted to be established in this city, the president
and directors, by lowering their terms, drew it into their vortex: and thus
defeated the attempt.

The bank is not compatible with our constitution, which does not admit of
granting peculiar privileges to any body of men.

On motion ordered that the further consideration of the report be postponed.

Adjourned till three o'clock in the afternoon.

Eodem Die, P. M.
RESUMED the consideration of the report, etc. Mr. R. Morris. The gentlemen
from the country, by fixing such short adjournments, make this a hard service.
They scarcely allow us time to take a comfortable dinner and glass of wine,
before we are obliged to return to the charge: however, though they are
impatient to return home, they should allow us time to consider and digest the
arguments used upon this floor. It would be but decent to do so. I shall now
endeavor to follow and discuss the arguments of those gentlemen who have
spoken against the bank in the present debate: many of them I consider as
totally unnecessary; and such I mean to pass by unnoticed.

The gentleman from Cumberland began his oration by telling us, that he still
retained his own opinion; and should continue to do so, until he heard better
reasons than those yet offered. I never heard any declaration from that
gentleman's lips, which obtained more credit with me than this. I do sincerely
believe, that he does and will retain his opinion. Even were an angel from
heaven sent with proper arguments to convince him of his error, it would make
no alteration with him. I did not -- I could not entertain the least
expectation that my colleagues or myself should be able to produce any effect
upon so predetermined a mind as his.

This gentleman went into a discussion of the report now before us, in which I
do not mean to follow him. The committee who brought in that report, have
justified it: and I have already given it all the support which to me appears
necessary.

He has admitted that the committee of the late house made no enquiries
respecting the bank, although they were directed to do so: and seems to insist
that such enquiries were unnecessary, because the popular opinions, he says,
were against the bank. But where did he collect the popular opinions? How were
such opinions communicated? Had he, indeed, said that the opinion of a party
was against it, he would have said right. But was the popular opinion
communicated by 1199 petitioners, even when opposed by upwards of 600
remonstrants? According to the doctrine of another gentleman on his side of the
question, near 3000 petitioners (unopposed) do not at this time convey the
popular opinion. But even if we suppose the late house to have been possessed
of the popular opinion, I deny that this was proper ground, on which to found
legislative acts: nor can it warrant or justify the proceedings of the late
assembly with regard to the bank. Popular opinions originate with individuals:
false appearances are frequently given by those who have secret designs: and
men for the most part take them on trust. Specious arguments and groundless
assertions take place of reason; and run away with what is called popular
opinions. The conduct of an assembly founded upon such opinions, will not
support itself. If our laws are to be enacted in conformity with popular
opinions, they must be altered as such opinions change, which generally happens
every two or three months: for opinions, taken up hastily, and propagated for
party purposes, cannot hold long. If, indeed, a popular opinion appears to have
reason and justice for its basis, then it is well to make it the ground of our
proceedings. But who is to judge? The representatives of the people: and when
popular opinions run counter to reason, they should counteract their influence,
by showing them to be wrong, and not pass acts in compliance with them.

The gentleman complains, that the committee of the late house have been
censured for not calling at the bank -- laying great stress upon -- "calling
at." If that committee thought it inconsistent with their dignity to call at
the bank, they might have obtained the necessary information without calling
there. The president and directors would have waited upon that committee as
readily as they have done on the committee of this house; and would have
answered such questions as they might have thought proper to put to them. But
he asks, "of what use would it have been, to make enquiry at the bank? Would
the president and directors have made answer to criminate themselves? Would
they have told us that the institution was dangerous to the welfare of the
state?" To this I answer, that had proper questions been asked, proper answers
might have been obtained: and although the president and directors would not
criminate themselves, yet we know, that, in the examination of witnesses, truth
is frequently discovered, even when endeavors are made to conceal it. But, in
this case, there could have been no cause of concealment.

I have mentioned in the course of this debate, that had the committee called
upon me, I should have given them, (and upon oath if required) the same
information respecting the services derived by the united states from the bank,
as I have had the honor to relate to this house. The gentleman asks, why apply
to me, who would have given the same kind of answers as the president and
directors? Let us examine the force of this reasoning. I am no otherwise
interested in the bank, than as a stockholder; and my bank stock is more easily
disposed of, or parted with, than any other of my property, except cash.
Suppose, then, that inclination, necessity, or any other circumstance, should
happen to induce me to sell my stock, from that moment I cease to be
immediately or personally interested in that institution. But this is not the
case with me as a member of the community. My landed estate -- my family -- and
likewise the interest I hold in common with other citizens -- must attach me
too strongly to the general welfare of the state, to admit of a possibility
that I should engage in the support of an institution incompatible with the
public safety. Should I sell my stock, the purchaser becomes interested in the
support of the institution, instead of my being so: and in that case, I should
be no otherwise concerned in its support, than as a citizen believing it to be
of general benefit: and as such I am persuaded that I should as solicitous as I
am at present. The gentlemen opposed to the bank constantly hold out the idea,
that the persons interested in it, are always the same -- and that it is a
monopoly confined to a few. Now it is certain, that on the contrary, the
property in bank stock is constantly changing hands. Where, then, is this
permanent interest that should induce us to sacrifice the good of the country
to the good of that establishment? The market is constantly open for the sale
and purchase of this bank stock: and if the gentlemen in opposition seriously
believe in the advantages which they say are derived from holding that stock,
why do they not invest some part of their property in it -- for property they
have -- and there are always shares to be sold?

The holders of that stock differ as widely, I presume, in their political
principles, views, pursuits and desires, as the holders of lands, houses, or
other property. These gentlemen may, when they please, be of the number. How,
then, is this cry of monopoly supported? My information is not to be trusted,
because I am interested in the bank: but surely I am more deeply interested in
the state -- and that in a way too that it is hardly possible for me to detach
myself from it, were I so inclined. But very different is my situation with
respect to the bank. I am as deeply concerned to obtain good laws, and to
enforce the due execution of them, as any gentleman in this house: and I hope,
notwithstanding the insinuation made, that it will never be supposed I would
sacrifice the interest and welfare of the state to any interest I can possibly
hold in the bank.

Such of the members of this house, as are disposed to give a fair and candid
discussion to the arguments used in this debate, will see clearly that the bank
is neither dangerous to, nor incompatible with, the welfare of the state: and
these were the assumed principles upon which the repealing law was founded. If
that assumption was taken up lightly and upon false grounds, as my reasoning
tends to prove, I hope gentlemen will give that reasoning its just weight: for
I cannot see why it should lose its force, on the supposition of my being
interested in the event. Let the arguments used, be considered, not as coming
from parties interested, but abstractedly as to their force and solidity.

The gentleman tells us, that the bank issues paper on the credit of the money
in its vaults -- and that its discounts being confined to forty-five days, the
farmer can derive no benefit from such limited loans. If the state will deposit
hard money in the hands of the treasurer, for the purpose of exchanging it on
demand for the paper they may issue on the credit of such deposits, no doubt
can be entertained but the state paper, under such circumstances, will have
full credit.

In the notes which I have taken of the speeches of my opponents, I so
frequently meet with paper money -- paper money -- paper money -- that it will
be impracticable for me to follow them throughout on that topic, and speak to
it as often as they have done. I find, however, this is the great sore; and
cannot help expressing my astonishment at this constant cry for paper money by
the country gentlemen, when it is notorious that they will not sell the produce
of their farms for it. No merchant, with ever so much paper money at command,
can purchase the produce of the country for exportation. Therefore I cannot
ascribe this constant clamor about paper money to any other cause than a
desire to pay debts with less than their just amount, or to purchase lands at
less than their value. I insist that there is no necessity for paper money. No
industrious man, in his individual capacity, can feel a want of it: and
wherever it is emitted, it will be more likely to produce public mischief than
public good. This question of paper money has been agitated in several of the
states; and been rejected by Massachusetts, Rhode Island, New Jersey, and
Maryland: it is now pending in New York, where it is said it will also be
rejected. I think I may safely say that this cry for paper money is not a
popular cry, whilst those who ask it, refuse to give it currency, by refusing
to part with their produce for it. Yet these same patriots are constantly
reproaching the bank as the cause of that want of credit, which themselves
occasion to the paper money.

The gentleman complained that the members of the committee of the late house
were called upon to defend themselves. It is true, they stand charged with not
having done their duty: but they are at liberty to defend themselves against
the charge, if they can, or to let it alone. He said also that it is indecent
to investigate the proceedings of a former house of assembly. But if he
examines the journals, he will find precedents; and see that other houses have
canvassed the conduct of their predecessors, and even that he has himself been
an active agent therein. He must not expect to escape scrutiny; nor must this
house. Those amongst us, who may be returned to occupy those seats next year,
may be called upon to justify the conduct of this house, or of themselves: for
my part, I hope to retire, and remain a private citizen, which suits both my
inclination and affairs much better than to be in public life, for which I do
not find myself very well qualified; and am, therefore, inclined to leave my
place to those that are. But so long as I act a part in public life, so long I
expect my conduct to be examined: and however disagreeable this may be to some
gentlemen, there is no remedy but to bear it patiently.

All the gentlemen who have spoken against the bank, have plumed themselves
much upon a supposition that the learned counsel who pleaded the cause of that
institution before the late assembly, had conceded this point, that when the
balance of trade is against a country, a bank is injurious to that country. I
am well acquainted with that gentleman's extensive abilities, and shall ever
acknowledge them -- but with all deference, I shall venture to say, that if he
made such a concession, he was not authorized either by his employers, or by
the fact. But was such a concession made? examine the whole of his reasoning on
that point, he, I am authorized to say, considers it differently. Such a
concession was neither intended nor meant to be made by him. The present state
of our trade, when the balance is against us, may be, and is extremely
injurious to the operations of the bank -- not the bank injurious to trade or
the country: and it is that which the learned counsel had in view, if I am not
much mistaken.

The balance of trade is much spoken of in this debate: but I doubt if it be a
subject well understood. Since the conclusion of the war, the balance of trade
has been against us, and still continues to be so. The cause I have already
stated impart, when I mentioned that the sanguine expectations which foreigners
formed of reaping immense profits by adventuring to this country, had caused
such vast importations of manufactures, as will require time to enable us to
discharge the sum for which they were sold to our citizens.

The evils consequent to such immense importations, are at an end. The first
adventurers have paid so dearly for their rash undertakings, and so many have
been ruined, that this adventurous spirit is cured. Our own importers have been
involved in the general calamity. Each imported goods agreeably to what he
thought the wants of the country: and having sold them to shopkeepers and
others, who, from the then state of cultivation of the country, and consequent
deficiency of produce, were unable to pay, they are disabled from making
remittances: and for want of those remittances, their credit, if not totally
lost, is greatly injured in Europe; so that it will not speedily be in their
power to renew excessive importations. This loss of credit may be considered in
a two-sold point of view -- either as a misfortune, or as of service to the
country in general -- which it will prove, is in the womb of time to show: but
I am of opinion, that wise laws, calculated to establish punctuality in our
dealings, may turn the present loss of credit to future advantage. The people
are falling into their former habits of industry and frugality. We may,
therefore, reasonably expect that agriculture will flourish, and the state of
cultivation in America surpass what was its most flourishing condition previous
to the revolution. The balance of trade will then be turned in our favor: and
specie will return as fast as it has lately been drained away. This situation
of things is not very distant: and there is no occasion to destroy the bank on
account of the balance of trade on which it has no influence.

It is said, that so great an estate as that of the bank, in the hands of a
few, must be dangerous. This is supposing the capital of ten millions of
dollars to be completed; and that in that case, it must carry all before it:
whereas the present capital does not amount to one million, which belongs to
many, and not to a few. And the stock cannot be accumulated, so as to be
injurious, as the gentlemen assert, and still be confined to the hands of a few
persons: for it can only accumulate by increasing the number of stockholders. I
should not have touched upon this, but to show the fallacy of their arguments.

The member from Cumberland complains, that the assembly which granted the
charter, did not know the byelaws and regulations previous to making the grant.
True, they did not: and they must have been witches, indeed, to have known
them, for I believe they were not then formed: but any thing will serve as a
charge against the bank: and this may do as well as any of the rest.

He asks, how can the farmers derive benefit from the bank? If they cannot
obtain loans, they cannot raise produce; and they cannot have loans without a
loan office; and without produce, we can have no trade; we cannot have a loan
office without paper money; and we cannot get hard money to supply our
necessities, for it is in the bank, etc. etc. Having already answered in the
course of the debate, those points which are urged and repeated again and
again, without regard to what has been said in contradiction or explanation --
I shall now only observe, that so long as men are made as they are at present,
they will cultivate the earth, and raise produce: whether this is effected by
the mere efforts of industry, or with the aid of loans, is immaterial: and
while there is produce to spare, there will be commerce. Therefore let the
landed and commercial interest shake hands, for they do and must promote each
others advantage.

This member again asserts, that there is not hard money sufficient for the
establishment of a loan office -- it is in the bank. A stranger hearing this
complaint so often repeated, would suppose that all the hard money in the state
was in the bank, and no possibility to come at it; that it was locked up there,
and the people deprived of all use of it. Hundreds here present know the
contrary. Whoever visits the bank, will see some people constantly bringing in
money, and some taking it away: -- the bank being, with respect to the
circulation of specie, as the heart to the circulation of blood.

The same gentleman says, that the bank has made sixteen per cent. by its
stock, or perhaps more -- and that this must be done by extortion. He should
have been tender of making this charge without being possessed of proofs to
support it. If he can prove it, I shall not offer another word in favor of the
bank.

Mr. Whitehill. I did not say it was by extortion.

Mr. R. Morris. I shall not insist upon the matter, but shall take the
gentleman's own explanation. I have already said, and I am warranted in
asserting it, that the profits of the bank do not exceed 8 per cent. on an
average. At the time the high dividends were made, the capital of the bank was
small, and the exigencies of the united states required large advances and
discounts -- there were, besides, numerous private calls for discounts which
could not be refused: and the directors were compelled to discount more heavily
in proportion to their stock than they wished. During that period, the united
states shared in those dividends of 10 to 16 per cent. per annum, and paid only
6 per cent. per annum for what they borrowed. These high profits arose from
accidental circumstances, as I have mentioned, and, if needful, can prove --
for I know the fact to be so.

In my notes I meet with a jumble of assertions made by this member -- but no
attempt to answer the arguments I offered yesterday. The gentleman asks, shall
the state give way to the bank, or the bank to the state? and adds, that the
bank should not interfere with the state. By the state I suppose he means a
party in the state. I wish the state had not interfered with the bank -- and
the bank would never interfere with the state.

He speaks with severity of the trouble the house have had with the bank -- how
frequently it has been before the assemblies -- and the waste of time and money
thereby occasioned. The business of a bank was first brought before the
assembly of this state, by recommendation of congress. It became a duty of the
president and directors to apply to that house for a charter: they did so, and
it was obtained. The second time the president and directors of the bank
applied to the legislature, was in opposition to an application made by certain
persons inimical to the existing bank, for an act to establish another. This
attempt to establish another bank, had for its object, the destruction of the
bank of North America. The motives were neither founded in reason nor any
desire to promote the public welfare: and the president and directors conceived
it a duty due to their constituents that they should come before that assembly
and endeavor to show the pernicious tendency of that measure. The third time
they appeared, was in opposition to certain petitions, praying to have their
charter taken away. I suppose the gentleman thought them troublesome at that
time, as well as now: but their appearance was then unavoidable. The
petitioners in this third instance, as well as in the second, brought them
before the house. And how is the bank brought before us now, for the fourth
time? The stockholders had determined not to trouble us -- they had determined
on an appeal to another place: therefore the memorial of the president and
directors presented the last session, is not the foundation of the present
proceedings. But a large number of our fellow citizens have, by petition and
memorial, called upon this house to repeal the law passed last year for
annulling the charter of the bank. If the gentleman finds it troublesome to
receive such petitions, let him say so; and not cry out against the president
and directors as if they caused the trouble he complains of; for it is not so.

The gentleman says, this house does not know the state of the bank, or whether
the president and directors are able to pay their notes. To which I answer,
that this house has no right to know the state of the bank. We are not asked to
trust them, or to take their notes. Those who entrust their money in the bank,
or take its notes, may ask such questions: but I believe they do not think it
necessary: if they did, I am persuaded that full and ample satisfaction would
be given. He says, that the memorialists in favor of the bank, do not
understand the nature of it. I believe they know at least as much as the
petitioners against it. The memorialists have pretty generally felt the
benefits resulting from it: -- those from the country, by finding a quick sale
and ready money for their produce, and receiving this ready money at the bank,
saw that the institution was beneficial and convenient: and so seeing, they can
easily comprehend that the attempt to suppress it is injurious to the country.

As to the number of signers to those memorials or petitions in favor of the
bank, this gentleman lays no stress on them: for with proper exertions of
industry, says he, twenty or thirty thousand signers might be got to expunge
the bank. In short, this gentleman is constantly making assertions, which he
cannot, or does not, support with argument: and therefore I must meet him with
an assertion in this point, which is, that with less exertion or industry can
twenty or thirty thousand signers be obtained in support of the bank.

Having now done with the member from Cumberland, I proceed to examine the
arguments adduced by a gentleman, Mr. Finlay.
for whose understanding and abilities I have great respect; and who generally
supports what he undertakes to defend, not only with strength of reasoning, but
manages it with candor. I cannot, however, help observing, that he has
deviated more from that candid line of conduct in this debate, than I have ever
known him to do before.

He says the present house is not to enquire into what has been done by the
late one -- but whether sufficient reasons now exist, to warrant a renewal of
the charter; and adds, that in all governments there must be a power lodged
somewhere, which has a right to give and a right to take away.

I agree that in all governments, supreme power must be lodged somewhere. In
ours, the assembly has the sole right of granting charters -- but no right to
take them away. The power there goes on a different principle: and so it does
in all except arbitrary governments. In Great Britain, the sovereign grants
charters, but he cannot take them away: the laws of the land have pointed out
another mode of annulling them. As well may it be said that the assembly of
this state, having exercised their sovereign authority in the establishment of
a land office, from whence grants of lands are made to individuals, have a
right to exercise the same sovereign authority by destroying that office, and
resuming the lands again. This would be exercising the power to give, and the
power to take away: but the assembly has no right to such power: if it has, God
help us! There are certain forms by which an individual may lose his lands; but
never, I hope, by a wanton act of legislative power. A considerable part of its
time has been spent by this house in granting charters of incorporation to
religious societies, which are asked for the purpose of enabling them to
receive donations and legacies, for the support of ministers and payment of
contingent charges, etc. If those charters may be revoked at will, I should not
be surprised to see it done a few years hence, on some pretense or other. What
then is to become of the capital they may have respectively accumulated by
means of the donations and legacies received in the mean time? Probably a
certain gentleman, who is fond of escheats, may, if then in power, urge that
the state should be heir to the corporations which suffer political death. What
a hopeful situation must the country be in, under such systems as these! This
gentleman says, let us examine our government -- It is a democracy, and gives
to all men equal rights: and agrarian laws may not be incompatible with the
spirit of it: but we are not yet arrived at the period when such laws would be
proper. I trust this member has better principles than to advocate so wicked a
measure as a general division of property

Mr. Finlay. I beg leave to explain. What I said, was, that agrarian laws would
be unjust in our present situation.

Mr. R. Morris. They are unjust in all cases. The gentleman has remarked, "that
wealth has a tendency to counteract our manners and the principles of our
government. Why then should we give sanction, says he, to an institution
founded on wealth? The stockholders must be men of wealth," etc.

If wealth be so obnoxious, I ask this gentleman why is he so eager in the
pursuit of it? I frequently see him visiting the land office: Those visits, I
presume, are not for pastime; although I do not doubt but they are for very
proper purposes. --

Mr. Finlay. I never took up a foot of land in my life. What business I have
transacted at that office, has been to serve others.

Mr. R. Morris. I have heard that some of the country gentlemen, whilst they
are here attending in assembly, take up lands for their neighbors -- and
receive so much per cent. for transacting the business in the office.

Mr. Finlay. I must again set the gentleman right. I never received a farthing
for such business in my life.

Mr. R. Morris. The gentleman has told us they had no banks in Rome, during the
days of the republic. The Romans were a very different sort of people from the
Pennsylvanians. They did in their days what they thought right and proper for
them to do: but their conduct in this respect can never serve as a rule for
ours.

"The object of the bank, he says, is gain -- It is managed by themselves, that
is, by the stockholders -- and they have it always in view to lift their gain
-- Equality is the darling of our government -- and the constitution says
government is instituted to preserve equal privileges, etc. -- the bank, he
says, cannot be common amongst the citizens, and is therefore contrary to the
constitution -- and being perpetual, it is contrary to our laws, habits,
manners," etc.

The charter of the bank being perpetual, is made use of as a strong argument
against it: but really I do not know why we are told that the constitution is
liable to change every seven years; and therefore it is inferred that the bank
should not have longer duration: although the charter is perpetual, the
stockholders are and will be constantly changing. It has been said that the
charter is only a piece of paper, which the house may throw in the fire at
pleasure. I say it did not derive its value from its being written on paper,
but from having received the sanction of the legislature, which the house
cannot so easily get rid of, as of the paper.

How does it appear that the bank is not common to our citizens? All of them
who have money and inclination, may buy shares, or deposit there, at pleasure.
How does it appear that the bank is contrary to our laws, habits, manners and
customs? While the law incorporating the bank had existence, it certainly was
consistent with our laws: and continues so now, while conducted as a private
bank, against which there is no law. It consists well with our habits and
customs -- for we find the people in the daily habit and custom of lodging
their money in the bank, and taking it away again at pleasure.

This gentleman has spoken of the low ebb of our commerce; and says it is
almost entirely confined to importation: and he has remarked upon what fell
from me, relative to Ireland not being a commercial nation. I hope I did not
wound the gentleman's feelings, nor those of any other Irishman who heard me:
it was far from my intention. I have been in Ireland -- have experienced the
hospitality of its inhabitants -- and will venture to say, there are few
people, not Irish, who entertain greater esteem for the country and people than
I do: many of my intimacies are with gentlemen from that country -- some of
whom are now my hearers, and know the truth of what I say. All I meant was,
that Ireland was not the most proper country in the world, to furnish us with
precedents in commercial matters. I am not now to learn, that she exports large
quantities of beef, butter and pork, and some manufactures: but still her trade
is confined. I hope she has now laid the foundation for an enlarged commerce:
and none will rejoice more than I shall, to see it extended to her greatest
advantage.

The commerce of America is really, as the gentleman says, at a low ebb. It was
on a much more respectable footing before the late war, than it is at present.
We then exported large quantities of wheat, flour, Indian corn, beef, butter,
pork, iron, lumber, and other articles, from this port. The neighboring
provinces made the like exports. New England exported fish, oil, whalebone,
etc. Maryland and Virginia, tobacco, provisions, iron, lumber, etc. North
Carolina, naval stores; South Carolina and Georgia, rice, indigo, peltries,
etc. and every part of the continent had staple commodities suited to the
consumption of foreign markets, which enabled us to pay for the things we had
occasion to import. Certain it is, that our exports are now much less than they
were then, which is somewhat surprising, as every article of produce commands a
good price, and nothing remains on hand to perish for want of purchasers.
Whether this decrease of exports is the consequence of less culture of the
country, or of an increased home consumption, I cannot decide. But this is
certain, that the returning habits of industry, with the daily progress of
population, must give an amazing increase of produce for exportation: and I
should not be surprised, were this to happen much sooner than even the most
sanguine expectations point out. If the position be true, that we are in a
miserable situation so long as our imports exceed our exports -- I hope it will
be admitted, and soon be experienced, that the reverse of that position will
place us in a flourishing state. But that the bank facilitates those
importations, I have already denied; and have in some degree proved the
contrary: and were it necessary, further proof might be adduced, although it
seems improper to prove a negative.

The gentleman observes that after the establishment of the bank, a great
number of bankruptcies happened. But what is this to the bank? If he means to
charge the bank as the cause of them, he ought to have shown it, and to have
named the instances. But he could do neither the one nor the other. Those
bankruptcies were occasioned by very different circumstances: particularly many
of them were occasioned by the parties having at the approach of peace, (which
they did not foresee or believe) imported or purchased large quantities of
goods, which had cost the advanced prices of war time, with the high rates of
freight and insurance -- so that from the large importations subsequent to the
conclusion of peace, at a lower cost, and vastly cheaper rates of freight and
insurance, they were disabled from selling those goods but at an immense loss.
The vendues were crowded with them -- those who were distressed, being forced
to sell: and several who were able to stand the shock, have of those
dear-bought goods, many on hands to this day. These are amongst the
circumstances that brought on the greater part of those bankruptcies which are
alluded to. But is the bank to be charged as accessory thereto, merely because
they happened about that time? Surely not: on the contrary, many were saved by
the seasonable aids which they derived from it.

He says the arts of the directors of the bank, to prevent exportation of
specie, are contemptible. One of the charges made against the bank, is, that it
has a direct tendency to banish specie: In defending it against this charge, it
is first shown that the bank is interested in preventing the export of specie;
and then some of the means made use of, are mentioned: upon this, the cry is
changed: the gentleman loses sight of the first charge, and exclaims that the
arts used, are contemptible. Why should we not, says he, pay our debts, when we
have contracted them? I agree that we ought and must pay our debts: and other
means failing, the specie must go for the purpose: and as we agree in this, I
hope he will also agree to exculpate the bank from the charge of banishing the
specie: for the bank neither encourages, gives aid, or facility to the
contracting of those debts: the bank gives neither credit nor security for
debts contracted in Europe: and it is for the payment of those debts that
specie is exported.

Our importations, he says, are too extensive. Agreed: but why bring this in as
a charge against the bank? Has the bank engaged in commerce? Have the president
and directors made any importations for the benefit of the institution? No.
They are restrained by the charter from engaging in commerce.

The influence of the bank is again brought up. I have already observed, that
such influence, if it exists at all, can never extend beyond the city: and even
there, the necessity of sometimes refusing discounts, creates more enemies,
than granting them makes friends. Probably, the gentleman may think that I
stand indebted to this kind of influence for my seat in this house; but I
promise him, that if I had thought so, I would not have accepted it. I am of
too independent a spirit to accept any station or office that can be offered to
me, unless I were convinced that the offer was made from public confidence in
my being able to render the service expected of me. This influence has never
existed: neither my colleagues nor myself owe any thing to it.

The gentleman has found a very ingenious argument to prove that our present
paper money has the confidence of the people -- that is, its quick circulation.
But I attribute that quickness of circulation to a totally different cause,
viz. the want of that confidence. It began to be issued in July last: and
nearly the whole of the emission had returned into the treasury in October or
November. It was pushed from hand to hand, like the lighted stick in the play
of "Jack's alive, and alive like to be," each holder fearing that it should die
in his hands: and it is laughable to hear this gentleman congratulate the state
on the returning confidence and virtue of the people, in receiving and paying
this paper so quick. I must claim my share of this merit: for I acknowledge, I
have assisted this quick circulation (so much admired by the worthy member) by
parting with it as soon as possible after it came to my hands.

The memorial of the committee of merchants against paper money, is charged as
proof against the bank on that subject: but even supposing the whole committee
of merchants to be stockholders, the stock they may respectively possess, does
not exceed two, three, four or five shares, amounting to 800, 1200, 1600, or
2000 dollars: and is this the great matter that could induce them to oppose
paper money, if there were no other considerations? This interest in bank stock
is not permanent -- but changeable: and their shares, if they hold any, could
only influence during the time they possessed them. But in common charity,
these gentlemen ought to suppose that so respectable a set of men have some
other principle of conduct than merely self-interest.

The letter from the president of the bank, offering a loan of money to the
state, to prevent the necessity of issuing paper money, is now become a charge
also, against the institution -- because it is an evidence of the directors
being opposed to paper money. Now, in my opinion, this letter proves their
merit: they thought paper money would be injurious to the state; and therefore
they offered to lend what was wanted, rather than it should sustain that
injury. It may be said they offered to lend what was wanted, rather than the
bank should sustain the injury which paper money would do it. Agreed: the
interest of the state and of the bank are the same in this, as they are in all
other instances.

The opposers of the bank, we are told, have no private interest to serve by
their opposition. But so long as they regard the bank and its supporters as one
party, and themselves as another, they are as much interested in the question
as their opponents. In fact, we have all one common interest in the welfare of
our country: and although the defenders of the bank may have a small and
separate interest in that institution, I am confident there is not one of us
that would urge the restoring of the charter, if we regarded it as incompatible
with the public welfare. The member from Westmoreland asks, can it be supposed
that the gentlemen on his side of the question would oppose the bank from mere
motives of envy? I believe that if they had been left fairly to themselves,
they would not have opposed it at all -- or at least that they would not now
oppose it: but there are others at the bottom of this opposition -- people who
feel a political interest in the matter, whose suspicions have been roused, by
the dread of phantoms presented to their imagination through the medium of envy
and jealousy. I could speak plainer -- but it is unnecessary.

This same gentleman draws a curious conclusion, from my having, as he states
it, formed an expectation that the judges, however opposed individually to the
bank, would in the courts decide in its favor. His conclusion is, that I
depend on bank influence to obtain such a decision. But the question to be
decided in the courts, is not whether the bank is useful or injurious? It is,
whether a charter once granted, can be annulled without proof or even pretense
of forfeiture? This is a general question, affecting all corporations: and
however some of the judges might be inclined to oppose the bank, I still rest
satisfied in my opinion of the integrity of their decision, and in my belief
that they will be too regardful of their law characters, which become an object
for history, ever to subject the judgment seat to reproach.

In reply to my observations respecting the difficulty of selling inward and
purchasing outward cargoes for shipping, he asks, how were our ships loaded
before the revolution? I answer, and the fact is well known, that delays
frequently, I may say constantly occurred for want of facilities in raising
money, and the merchant had it not always in his power to purchase the produce
brought to market by the farmer. The bank has remedied this inconvenience to
both: destroy the bank, and I have no doubt the case will again become familiar
to the most respectable traders.

He has observed that this is the only state saddled with a bank, although
attempts to establish them have not been wanting at Boston, New York and
Baltimore. But this observation will not serve the gentleman. At Boston they
have an established bank, countenanced and incorporated by the government. At
New York they have a bank; a charter has not been obtained -- but I have been
informed that it was withheld, when applied for, only because the persons
applying for it, were obnoxious to government. The attempt to establish a bank
at Baltimore, failed for want of subscriptions to a sufficient amount of
capital, and not for want of a charter. However, if the bank in this city be
destroyed, I venture to pronounce, that banks will soon be established both in
New York and Baltimore: and our measures will give great advantage to those
places, which are usually considered as our dangerous rivals.

I might follow this gentleman's observations still further; but not having, on
account of his absence, been much used to his voice of late, and from his
speaking rather low at times, I found difficulty in taking notes of all he
said. I wish, however, that he had addressed our understanding, by speaking to
facts -- instead of appealing to our feelings, by arguments drawn from what he
calls the nature of things. In this he has shown more address and judgment than
candor.

Considering what has fallen from the member from Montgomery county [mr.
Lollar] this morning, as a kind of apology for what he said on the first day, I
shall pass it over without remark, and proceed to make some general
observations.

The report of the committee of last year contains matter of opinion only, and
of opinions unsupported by fact. The bank is said to be of no use to the
farmer: I beg leave to ask, whether it is not useful to the farmer to meet a
ready sale for his produce? If it be, I insist that the bank, in its
operations, is useful to the farmer. I have heretofore experienced the
inconvenience arising from the want of a bank. When produce has been in plenty
at market, and I been eagerly bent on the purchase of it, although possessed of
property sufficient, I could not command money for the purpose; and the farmer
could not sell upon credit: thus both have suffered distress, which would have
been relieved by a bank. The exports in those days were very considerable: --
the house of which I was then a member, have shipped in one year from forty to
fifty thousand barrels of flour, and other articles in proportion. Such
purchases required large sums of money: and these were extremely difficult to
raise.

The quantity of produce for exportation, will now be increased every year: and
the demand for money will also increase. If the bank be destroyed, the
merchants of these days, will experience the difficulties I have mentioned. The
farmers and millers bringing their produce to market, must wait for the sale,
until money can be raised. They will be frequently compelled to sell at reduced
prices, such as a chance monied man may please to offer: or they must place
their goods in the hands of factors, who must derive their advantage by way of
commission, storage, and charges, all which the farmer must pay. Whereas, if a
bank is suffered to exist in full force, the merchant's occasional necessities
can be relieved by discounts, and the farmer meet with ready sale for his
produce. This I conceive to be the greatest use the farmers can wish to derive
from the bank.

The first attack on the bank, gave a check to the price of produce, which has
continued to be felt ever since: and if the bank be destroyed, those farmers
who raise more than they consume, will become sensible of the consequences.

The bank, we are told, not only does not lend to the farmers -- but prevents
their getting money on loan. This I deny. Millers and farmers of
responsibility, if they have connections in the city to indorse their notes,
can procure discounts at the bank, as readily as the citizens of Philadelphia.
In order to consider properly the charge that the bank prevents people from
lending their money on bond and mortgage, which they say it effects, by the
enormous dividends drawn upon bank stock, it is necessary to state the amount
of that stock, and to whom it belongs: --

The stock at present amounts to 870,400 dollars, which, divided by 400, gives
2176 shares, whereof 285 shares belong to foreigners, of which nine tenths to
Holland. None of the money invested in these shares, would, if there was no
bank, be lent in this state upon bond and mortgage, we may safely conclude.
Various have been the applications made by our citizens to borrow money in
Europe, particularly in Holland: and although the best landed security which this
country affords, has been offered, yet every application has failed; and not a
single shilling has been obtained that I could ever learn. Six hundred and six
shares belong to inhabitants of New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Connecticut, New
York, New Jersey, Delaware, and Virginia: a considerable part of these shares
were subscribed during the war, by persons stimulated thereto by the belief
that placing a part of their funds in the bank of North America, would afford a
great aid to the cause of the united states. These shares are divided among
many individuals: can it, therefore, be believed, that any part of the money
paid for these shares, would, upon a dissolution of the bank, be lent upon bond
and mortgage to our citizens? If those stockholders were disposed to lend in
that manner, it would, doubtless, be in their own respective states, to their
own fellow-citizens, within their own view, and within the protection of those
laws under which they live. -- Six shares are held by inhabitants of Chester
county, one by an inhabitant of Lancaster, five by inhabitants of Westmoreland,
twelve by inhabitants of Berks, twelve by inhabitants of Bucks, and fourteen by
inhabitants of Philadelphia county. These fifty shares were probably subscribed
on the same patriotic principles: and, if the bank were destroyed, it is
possible that this money, or some part of it, might be lent upon bond and
mortgage. But the whole amount of fifty shares is only 20,000 dollars: and it
is doubtful whether any part of even this pittance would (...) lent out. The
remaining shares, being 1235, belong to citizens of Philadelphia, and
principally to the commercial men, whose greatest inducement to continue
stockholders, is to support an institution which affords them accommodation and
convenience, by means of discounts. With a very few exceptions, we may say that
not one dollar of this money, would ever be lent out on bond and mortgage.
There are very few if any of this class of stockholders who do not stand in
need of the whole of their money in the course of business: and when in need,
they borrow occasionally perhaps the whole amount, or more: It is upon these
principles, the merchants generally remain stockholders -- when one does not
want his money, it is earning his share of the dividend from another: and by
thus clubbing a capital together, as it were, the occasional wants of all are
supplied. But I am perfectly satisfied, that none of the money paid for these
shares, can be lent on bond and mortgage. Does it not, therefore, appear that
this charge is as groundless as the others?

Before the war, monied men were fond of lending upon bond and mortgage: it was
a favorite practice; was thought perfectly safe; and enabled those who were
advanced in years, to receive an income, so as to live at ease and quiet; and I
doubt not this practice might have been revived, had not most of those lenders
suffered severely -- some in the whole -- and others in part* and even those
who have escaped loss, are deterred from lending again by the dread of paper
money and tender laws; and so long as this dread continues, all hopes must be
relinquished, of borrowing upon bond and mortgage.

Whilst the practice of lending upon bond and mortgage existed, there was
another practice existed with it. The lenders were chiefly citizens; and for
the convenience of collecting the interest on the day it fell due, they
preferred lending to those citizens of Philadelphia, who wanted to borrow; so
that the farmers, even in those days, could not obtain loans, until the
citizens were satisfied; now, should the days of loaning return, the bank will
prove useful to the country in that respect; for by the temporary discounts
which citizens obtain at the bank, it is probable that most of their wants may
be supplied, and thereby their competitions with the farmers be prevented. I
have known many a man formerly obliged to borrow money for twelve months,
although he only wanted it for three, four or six; but the practice was to lend
for twelve; and the capitalists thought it too troublesome to lend for a
shorter time. A certain rich citizen of Philadelphia, inimical to the bank, now
taken and hugged to the bosoms of those gentlemen who so warmly advocate the
interest of the farmers, declares publicly, that he is an enemy to the
institution because he could purchase flour cheaper, were it destroyed, From
this declaration, the farmers may form some judgment how far the bank is
useless or injurious to them.

In effect, the utility of the bank is experienced by every man in the state,
at some period or other. I have shown clearly it is useful to the farmer and
miller. The mechanic derives also his share of benefit and convenience from
this institution. Punctuality in paying his workmen is of great advantage to
the master, and absolutely necessary to the comfortable subsistence of the
journeymen. The employer must have it in his power to make regular payments to
the master mechanic, -- or he, in his turn, cannot be punctual. It has
heretofore happened, that those who built houses, or gave employment to various
trades, have not had it in their power to pay punctually, according to their
engagements. The like may be expected again. But in all such cases, on future
occasions, relief may be found at the bank. The employer, giving his note to
the master, their joint credit, if they are entitled to credit, will procure
the sum wanted, by discount at the bank. This observation must strike every
mechanic at the first glance; and, if he turns his attention to the subject,
his own thoughts will point out various modes by which he may draw resources
and conveniences from this institution. In short, the same reasoning will apply
to every description of men that have any thing to do with money.

Is it possible, then, that we shall pursue measures for the destruction of an
institution so useful? One would think that the first thing which offers itself
to our consideration, on the nature of a bank, would be sufficient to prevent
the pursuit of such a measure. It is, that a number of persons have placed in
the care of the president and directors of the bank a sum of money for the
express purpose of lending to those that want to borrow; and this sum those
persons (stockholders) cannot draw out again; but it must remain for that use.
Besides this, there is also a further sum constantly in the power of the
directors, which enables them to extend their loans beyond the capital or
stock; and on which part of the profits of the bank arise. The integrity,
punctuality and prudence of the president and directors have obtained such
credit with the citizens of Philadelphia, that numbers of them deposit their
money in bank for safety and convenience. It is received and paid at their
pleasure, without expense or risque to the depositor. And the sums so collected
to a point, being considerable, the bank is enabled always to lend a part of
the money so placed: as it is not in the nature of things that the depositors
should all call for their money at one and the same time -- consequently, a
part of the sum will answer the demands of the whole; and by this means, it
must be seen, that sums of money are constantly brought into circulation and
use, that would otherwise lie mouldering in the chests of those who would
neither lend nor use them; and that the bank, by this credit, is enabled to
extend its utility amongst those whose necessities, disappointments, interest,
or convenience, incline them to borrow.

I have been frequently told, out of doors, although it has not been mentioned
here -- indeed it could not with propriety be mentioned here -- that the
opposition to the bank is in part levelled at me personally. If any oppose it
in that view, and suppose that my interest would suffer by the annihilation of
the bank, they are grossly mistaken. I am not stimulated by the consideration
of private interest, to stand forth in defense of the bank: for be assured,
sir, that if this, be destroyed, another shall arise out of its ashes -- one
that will be of great advantage to my interest, and to the interest of those
who may join me in the establishing it: nay, should I be disappointed in
procuring such associates as I would choose in the undertaking, I will
establish a bank on my own capital, credit, and resources; and so far from
doubting its success, I do not hesitate to pronounce that even my enemies (and
God knows I seem to have enough of them -- at least political enemies -- for I
know of no other cause for them being so) -- will deal with and trust me; not
that I expect they may like me better then than now; but they have confidence
in me; and, for the sake of their own interest and convenience, they will deal
with me.

The gentleman from Westmoreland has acknowledged the utility of the bank
during the war; and has drawn a comparison between it and the continental army.
The continental army, says, he, were useful during the war: and yet we
disbanded them. But surely they were not disbanded because they had been useful
-- but because, when peace was established, they were no longer necessary. He
acknowledges that this institution was useful; and yet endeavors to abolish it
-- because it has been said that it was injurious.

He also made a comparison between the bank and general Washington. I have ever
acknowledged the services and merits of that great man. His utility during the
war will never be denied: and in his resignation, he acted consistently with
that noble and disinterested spirit by which he had been actuated during his
command. He did what was expected of him: and it will ever be a part of my
pride to join in paying him every tribute of praise. But this comparison ought
not to have been made; the general's acceptance of command, and the
establishment of the bank, are very different things; and took place on very
different principles. The first was the patriotic act of a noble mind, which
had not only the service of his country, but also honor and glory in view. The
last arose from necessity, having also the service of the country for one part
of its object, and the interest and emolument of those who should engage in it,
for the other. The country has received the service: and now endeavors are
used to requite it with ingratitude. But further services and benefits may be
expected by America from this bank. We are now at war with the Algerines. Every
one knows that peace must be purchased of them with arms or with money. In
either case, money is necessary: and we know that the most pressing
requisitions of congress, do not prevail with the states to raise it as fast as
they ought: nay, whilst the several states are deliberating whether or how they
shall raise money, one part of the citizens of the united states are plundered
of their property by the seizure of their ships and cargoes; and another part
of them are condemned to slavery. Let us suppose that the commissioners
employed for the purpose, had so far succeeded, that the Algerines had agreed
to make peace, on the receipt of a sum of money -- where shall congress get the
money? We have not so well enabled them to acquit their engagements in Europe,
as to afford any reasonable prospect that they can borrow more. But upon such
an occasion, this institution -- the bank -- might again be of essential
service to the united states. In this state, we are now threatened with
internal troubles at Wioming: no person can tell what may happen in that
quarter: if things go on as they have done, we may be in want of every aid
Where are we to find sudden resources, or the sums that may become necessary to
put an end to those troubles, and extend the protection of government over the
boundaries of the state? Various circumstances tend to show, that upon this and
every proper occasion, the government of Pennsylvania might be sure to command
every aid and assistance which the bank can give: And shall we then, from a
mere pretended opinion that this institution has been injurious, "rip up the
goose that lays the golden eggs?"

Mr. Smilie said the gentleman had assumed another ground. The debate had,
until that stage, been conducted with decency -- how far he [mr. Morris] had
departed therefrom, he left those present to judge. The members opposed to the
bank were by him charged directly with speculating in the depreciation of the
paper money -- and indirectly with perjury. He might be under the necessity of
recriminating. If he should be obliged to touch upon any circumstances of that
gentleman's private conduct, he hoped he would bear it patiently.

Ordered, that the further consideration of the report be postponed.

Adjourned.

Saturday, April 1, 1786, A. M.
RESUMED the consideration of the report of the committee, to whom were
referred the memorials praying a repeal or suspension of the law annulling the
charter of the bank.

Mr. Fitzsimons. After the able discussion which this subject has undergone,
little seems to be left for me to say. My worthy colleague, whose knowledge and
experience are so superior to mine, has gone largely into it: but as appeals
have been made by our opponents to the feelings of the farmer and the tradesman
-- and as he has left some points untouched -- I must pray the attention of the
house, while I endeavor to make some observations on them.

If there appears to have been any attempt at reasoning, by those who are
opposed to the resolution, it has been by the member from Westmoreland. That
gentleman has the capacity of stating clearly, and reasoning justly. If he has
failed in either, on the present occasion, it must be imputed rather to the
badness of the cause he has undertaken, than to the want of ability in himself.

To his reflections upon government, I shall make little reply. If our habits
and our circumstances are not well adapted to our frame of government, it is
the fault of those who made it: for our habits and our circumstances were
nearly the same as they are at present, when the constitution was formed.

His observations upon trade, being drawn from theory, it would be improper to
remark severely on them: but it may not be unuseful to show they are not well
grounded.

His arguments went to prove, that our imports exceeding our exports to a very
great amount, must prove injurious -- in short, they went to prove, that our
trade, as it is at present, ought not to be encouraged. But these opinions, as
well as some others that have been advanced in the course of this debate, have
been taken upon trust: and though they may correspond very well with the
situation of Westmoreland county, and some others which are not within reach of
a seaport to dispose of their products -- it will be difficult to persuade
those farmers who have been accustomed to bring the produce of their industry
to this city, and receive money for it, that trade is injurious. I believe
experience has fully proved the contrary; and that the commerce of Pennsylvania
has been eminently useful in promoting and encouraging its agriculture and
improvements.

As to the trade of import, which the gentleman conceives to operate so
forcibly to our ruin, I do not wonder he should not be well informed respecting
it: as I find many hold that opinion, who have better means of information.
Immediately after the peace took place, the importations were very great. The
people in Europe seem to have considered Philadelphia as the emporium of
America; and directed their operations to it accordingly: but does that
gentleman know what part of those importations was again exported? Does he know
that we have usually imported for the consumption of West Jersey, Delaware, the
Eastern Shore of Maryland -- and that almost every state in the union derived
supplies of European goods from us -- after those great importations were made
-- and that this state derived a very considerable revenue upon their
consumption? An impost of 100,000l. per annum, paid into the treasury, ought to
convince the gentleman, that trade even to him is not unuseful -- he has a
share of that revenue.

Amsterdam imports from all parts of the globe, and to an immense amount. Are
the United Netherlands, or the province of Holland, ruined by those
importations? -- or are they not rather the source of their wealth? That city
pays two-fifths of all the expenses of the states; Philadelphia has paid in
nearly the same proportion, of all the expenses of Pennsylvania. Philadelphia
was likely to become the Amsterdam of America: but the gentlemen from Fayette,
Westmoreland, etc. being such adepts in the science of commerce, have taken
effectual measures to prevent it.

In the gentleman's observations upon commerce, he had almost forgotten our
exports -- "a little flaxseed," -- but not worth mentioning.

There have been shipped from this port 14,000 hogsheads of tobacco, in a year,
at 3l. per hhd. worth 42,000l. exclusive of freight; 40,000 barrels of flour;
300,000 bushels of wheat; with a variety of other articles: which are surely of
some value.

We were not only the importers for other states, but the exporters likewise.
In the year 1784, 12,000 hogsheads tobacco, the produce of Virginia and
Maryland, were shipped from this port. It appears by the returns from the
customhouse, that 1116 sail of vessels entered and cleared at it last year: the
value of the cargoes of such a number, must surely be of some consequence. But
whatever may have been the advantages of this commerce, I repeat it -- our own
unwise restrictions will operate to lessen them.

That the extent of our importations has been injurious to the state, is become
a fashionable doctrine: it is propagated to serve some purpose, and has
obtained credit: but how does this appear? The value of our imports may be
pretty accurately known, by the books of the collector: but the proportion of
them sold to the states around us, which go by land, or by inland navigation,
cannot be ascertained. The exportation of specie is the proof principally
relied on, and from thence the ruin of the state is predicted. For my own part,
I see money exported with as little reluctance as I see any other merchandise
-- I consider it but as a merchandise, -- and that if we export it at one time,
we shall import it at another. I wonder how we obtained this money --
Pennsylvania has neither gold or silver mines -- but she has what is better,
and what will purchase gold and silver at all times. This complaint, however,
of the export of specie, does not come well from the advocates of paper money.
I think a very common assertion of theirs, is -- that a virtuous people can
live without gold or silver: and they would all wish to be thought virtuous.

It appears to me a little paradoxical, that an importation of an over
proportion of goods can be injurious to a country. It does not follow, that
because the merchants import more goods than are necessary, that the people
should buy more than they want. It may possibly oblige the importer (as has
been the case in many instances) to sell them for less than cost: but surely
the loss there must be to the seller, and not to the buyer: and as the sellers
on those terms, have been generally foreigners, the loss has been theirs, and
the gain been ours. It may have been a temptation to unthinking people to buy
more than they had occasion for -- and our merchants have suffered in the sale
of such goods as they had on hand, which must have been caused by the low price
of the others: but it is a novel complaint, that a choice of goods, to be
bought at less than their cost, should be an injury to the purchaser.

To complain of the want of money, is not peculiar to the present times. Such
complaints always have, and always will be made. I think the average price of
flour, during the last year, would be near 50s. for the barrel (1cwt. 3qrs.);
of wheat, 9s. per bushel; of flaxseed, 15s. per bushel; and immediate sale, and
payment on delivery. This, surely, did not argue a want of money. Was there any
part of the produce of the country brought to market, that could not be sold
for ready money, and at a very high price? I believe not.

I am ready, however, to acknowledge that this is not the case at present. The
produce of the country has fallen in price: and, what is worse, there are not
purchasers for it, at any price. If I were to assert that this is owing in part
to a stoppage of discount at the bank, perhaps it would be controverted -- I
leave those that would controvert it, to account for it otherwise.

Thus much I have thought necessary to say upon the subject of commerce, that
the positions laid down by the gentleman from Westmoreland, might not be taken
for granted.

As he was obliged to acknowledge that the bank was useful to commerce, he
meant to show that commerce was injurious to the state; and of course, that the
bank, which gave facility to that commerce, was necessarily injurious.

Upon the subject of the bank, I have yet said very little: my worthy colleague
has explained its usefulness very fully. From the arguments used against it, we
would be led to infer, that the money locked up in its vaults, is useless to
the good people of the state; and that if it were not for such an institution,
the whole of that money would be lent out on bond or mortgage in the country.
Let us examine if this is really the case.

If this money was not in the bank, would it necessarily be lent out in the
country? Or, being in the bank, is it therefore unemployed? It is easy to prove
that neither of these is the case.

Of the present stock of the bank, 360,000 dollars are the property of persons
who are not inhabitants of, or resident in Pennsylvania: and I believe it will
not be pretended that the owners of that part of the stock would send it to
Pennsylvania, to be lent out at interest. There is yet no instance of
foreigners lending money in this state on private security. And such of the
stockholders as are citizens of the sister states, would not be likely to send
it here for that purpose -- because the rate of interest is as high, at least,
in the other states as in Pennsylvania -- and there is as good security there.
Of the remaining stock, near 500,000 dollars are the property of people in and
near the city, divided among about two hundred and fifty persons: most of those
are in business, and became stockholders to encourage the institution, because
it operates to their convenience, and because they can borrow not only as much
as they own of the stock, but much more, according to their credit and
circumstances. -- Very few of them, however, could put their money out to
interest. Few of the merchants of the present day, have money beyond their
immediate occasions: if this is the case -- and I believe it cannot be
disproved -- very little, if any of the present capital would be lent out in
the country at interest, though there had never been a bank.

But does it follow that the money's being in the bank renders it less useful
to the citizens? Surely it does not. The dividends made to the stockholders
prove that it is all employed: and whatever the dividend exceeds the common
interest of money, proves that more is circulated than its stock: of course, so
much is added to the circulation beyond the actual specie.

There can be no method by which the circulation is better assisted than by a
bank of deposit and discount, such as the bank of North America is. Among
trading people, where there are no banks, every merchant or trader must at all
times have money in his chest or in his drawer unemployed: if a man is in the
receipt of money, he cannot lay it out again the day he receives it. If he
wants to make a purchase of any considerable value, he collects money for some
time in order to enable him to make that purchase; or, if he has bought on
credit, he collects to make good his payment when it becomes due: by this means
it must happen, that a considerable part of the money used in that place, must
every day be absolutely useless. But where there is a bank, a trader, when he
receives money, sends it there, for these reasons -- that it is kept in safety,
without any expense; that the more he keeps there, the better credit he has;
and that if he occasionally borrows, his making deposits of money is an
inducement to the directors to lend to him. By keeping the money there, the
whole sum, which would have lain in the hands of the different owners, is
collected together: and as all the owners never want their money on the same
day, the bank is enabled to lend for short periods a certain part of that
money; and thereby give that part circulation, which would otherwise be
useless. Thus it appears that collecting money in a bank, increases the
circulation: and the utmost that the country gentlemen can any ways contend
for, is -- that they, living at a distance, and wishing to be accommodated with
loans of money for long periods, cannot have them at the bank. But is that a
reason that the inhabitants of the city and its vicinity shall not have the
privilege of accommodating each other? Though the money is not lent to the
farmer, yet, as it facilitates the purchase of his products, and the procuring
him ready money for them, he derives thereby a full share of the advantage.

Another objection has been artfully made to the operations of the bank, which
deserves notice: viz. that the aid it gives the merchant, enables him to keep
up his goods till he can obtain a better price for them, than if they were to
be immediately sold. This objection is more plausible than solid. It is in the
nature of trade, that when it is free, the profit is soon reduced as low as the
trade will admit: it must afford sufficient for the encouragement of those
concerned in it, or they will leave it off: if it exceeds that proportion, for
any time, so many will engage in it, as to reduce the profit.

If, when a ship arrives, the merchant can, by a loan of money from the bank,
dispatch her again immediately, she performs, perhaps, two voyages more in the
year, than if he is obliged to detain her till the cargo is sold: and this will
certainly enable him to sell his goods cheaper, or to give more for the
products of the country. A moderate capital, such as ours generally are, turned
four times a year, will enable the merchant to sell for a less profit than if
he turns it but twice. So that in every view in which this institution is
taken, it will be found advantageous.

With respect to the liberality of its management, the instances are
innumerable. When the legislature of this state were unable to pay the officers
of their army, they granted them certificates; and mortgaged the revenue of the
excise for payment of the interest. When the interest became due, the revenue
was not collected: and the distress of the officers was great. On that
occasion, without any particular application, the bank advanced the money; and
took the reimbursement when the revenue was collected.

At the time when its aid to the united states had put it out of the directors'
power to make private discounts, they, upon an application of the legislature,
advanced 5000l. for the defense of the frontiers.

I remember when the enemy's row boats took vessels within our port, and
carried them off: and the state had not the means of granting protection
against so inconsiderable, though insulting an enemy. On that occasion, the bank,
by an advance of about 25,000l. enabled the merchants to sit out a ship, which,
within a few days, not only cleared the bay and river, but captured a cruizer
of twenty guns, belonging to the British fleet.

The instances of its services are innumerable. Ask the managers of the house
of employment: they will tell you the poor could not be fed without the
assistance of the bank. -- Ask the wardens of the city; and they will tell you
that the city could not now be lighted but by means of the loans obtained
there. But it is needless to repeat the instances: for I may say there is no
service, public or charitable, to which its assistance has been denied. Perhaps
its use will be better understood when the want of it is sufficiently felt --
and though the present attempt to crush it may succeed for a time, I have no
doubt it will be as eagerly called for as it is now decried.

I cannot help observing, that there are gentlemen in this house, who sometimes
instruct -- but oftener insult us with their reading -- One has brought us an
extract from the journals of the Irish commons, to prove that the people of
Ireland were opposed to the establishment of a bank. Several writers have
treated on the subject of banking -- one, a writer in great repute, Mr. Smith,
who treated on the wealth of nations, states that the trade of Glasgow was
doubled in 15 years after the establishment of a bank there -- and that
improvements of every kind kept pace with that increase. Thus if banks were
regarded as injurious in some places, they have been found beneficial in others.

Mr. Smilie. This subject has been so ably handled by the gentlemen who have
spoken against the report under the consideration of the house, that it is not
requisite to enter deeply into it. It is however necessary to take notice of
some remarks which have fallen from the gentlemen in favor of the report.

Great stress is laid on one circumstance, and a loud clamor raised, because
the committee of last year did not go to the bank. But I would ask, what
enquiry should we have made at the bank? What information would have been
afforded us there? Would the directors have laid open their books to us? I
remember well a question put to the directors by the committee who made the
report before us, were they willing to give information to the committee
consistent with the secrecy of the institution? If the committee of last year
had called, they would not have laid open their books. And if the committee had
enquired how far the president and directors had abused the trust reposed in
them, it would have been altogether useless and unnecessary. This being the
case, the committee were perfectly right in not calling at a place where they
could not obtain the intelligence requisite. There was another reason: the bank
not being under the control of government, the committee could not oblige them
to lay before them a state of their accounts, or their books.

Some of the arguments on this question have been so much refined as to be
above the comprehension of us country people. A gentleman tells us, that the
balance of trade is a mere speculation. I must confess I am not much acquainted
with trade -- but I know there is some such thing as a balance of trade -- and
that it is greatly against this country at present.

The question of right in this house to take away a charter, has been pretty
well discussed, and it now seems well understood. Two of the members on the
other side have conceded the point. The others have not -- but their arguments
amount to that, when our situation is considered. As charters are granted by
the assembly -- they can be revoked no other way than by the assembly. They
cannot be taken away by the courts of justice, as they are given by the
legislature.

It has been said, that the bank is dangerous to the state, and in support of
this, the plan of mortgaging to it the revenues has been adduced. The gentleman
who proposed this plan, replies, that he was not authorized by the directors to
make the proposal to this house. Another member who is one of the bank
directors, tells us the same thing. But really I can hardly stretch my
credulity so far, as to believe that to be the case. If it was, I do not
scruple to say, it was an insult to this house, to propose to them the adoption
of a measure, to which if they had acceded, they would have left it in the
power of the directors to laugh at them.

The gentlemen in favor of the present report, have manifested a violent
degree of resentment against the committee of last year, who made the report
relative to the bank -- at the same time they seem desirous to keep clear of
the late house. But if the committee were wicked, the house must have been no
less criminal -- as they must have been either ignorant, or equally wicked. The
policy of this proceeding, is easily seen. There were no hopes of changing the
minds of the members of the committee of last year, now in this house --
therefore it was not judged necessary to keep any measures with them -- but the
late house is treated with more lenity, in hopes that some of its members now
here, might come over in favor of the bank. One gentleman [mr. Fitzsimons]
wishes he could separate the committee from the house, and make them personally
responsible. Had he proposed to impeach them, he would have shown a more manly
spirit, and not a worse disposition. But the committee as well as the house of
last year, are accountable only to their country, which will judge of their
conduct.

A gentleman from the city, [mr. Morris] has called upon us to show abuses in
the conduct of the directors of the bank. I am in possession of one fact --
which, however, I shall not mention, unless I am urged to it. --

The same gentleman has asserted, that the public creditors would have been
better paid, had the paper not been struck -- if the impost duties had been
collected. That they were not collected, was not the fault of the late house --
it arose from the misconduct of some of the officers whose duty it was to
collect them. But the last house could not pay the public creditors without the
paper money.

The gentleman mentions the endeavors of the directors of the bank to prevent
usury. But here facts stand in our way. Can any gentleman say that usury was
not coeval with the bank? The five per cent. per month is too well known, and
its effects too sensibly felt, to render it necessary to do more than barely
mention it. All this was unknown before the establishment of the bank.

He seems to call in question the understanding of the late committee and asks,
were they able or willing to consider the subject of the bank in every point of
view? As to capability, I am not disposed to contend with him on that head -- I
shall readily admit him my superior. The gentleman then gives us a high
encomium on the services of the bank during the late contest -- and tells us of
his having lodged 4 or 5000 barrels of flour in the camp of general Washington,
on its own account. But it is not to him nor to the bank we are indebted for
our independence -- I should be glad it was ascertained to whom we owe that
event -- there are so many claimants, that it should be decided on. A certain
writer, a friend of that gentleman's, lays claim to a great share of it -- I
wish they would settle it between them.

The gentlemen in favor of the report have labored hard to show the dreadful
consequences of meddling with property. But what right of property has been
invaded by the repealing act? If it had, indeed, confiscated the property of
the stockholders, and applied it to the use of the state, then there might be
some foundation for such an argument. No such thing has been done or even
attempted. The assembly only determined that the bank should not be held under
their charter. Will any man say that property may not be applied to improper
uses? Suppose a man had a mind to employ his property in erecting magazines and
laying by military stores, has not the assembly a right to pass a law to
prevent him?

The gentleman is exceedingly hurt at the repetition of paper money -- in our
speeches. But the bank is as dear to him as the paper money is to us, and as
frequently occurs in his speeches. I have lately read a pamphlet on paper money
-- and all the writer says on the subject, is, what an old German told him a
long time ago -- viz. That paper was paper -- and money was money. But if an
unprincipled author, who lets out his pen for hire, had so far relaxed in his
last performance that his employers would not pay him for it -- if he, in want
of his food, in passing through the market, should find a five shilling bill in
his pocket, and, going to a tavern, procure for it his dinner, and a pot of
beer, he would be apt then to cry out -- This paper money, I find, after all,
is victuals and drink to me.

The directors of the bank are chosen by the stockholders, who vote in
proportion to their property. If we examine this mode, we shall find it highly
dangerous: as all is done by nine or ten men -- so that the bank will remain
under the present directors, during their lives, which is a direct tyranny,
they being the representatives of a few men only.

A gentleman from the city [mr. R. Morris] thanked God that the bank is not
under the control of government. At a former day he was of a different opinion
-- [Here mr. Smilie read two articles of the proposals for forming the bank --
signed by Mr. Morris -- wherein the clause subjecting the accounts of the bank
to the inspection of the superintendent of finance, is praised and styled
excellent.]

It appears by these articles that he thought it an excellent part of the plan
of the bank that it should be under the control not only of congress, but of
the state -- but it must be considered that he, as superintendent of finance,
was the person who had the control of it. So that at different times, he
entertains different sentiments on the subject.

The gentleman tells us the state has not credit -- that it is too powerful to
have it. But if the state has not credit, how can it communicate credit to the
bank? And if the bank has credit, why ask it of this house?

I now refer to one of the notes I took while this gentleman was speaking
yesterday. He tells us that the members in favor of paper money, seek it, for
the purpose of paying off debts at an under value --

Mr. R. Morris. I did not make the charge the gentleman says, only against the
members in favor of paper money, but I meant to (...) the advocates of it in
general. I desire that my words may be taken in their true sense. This charge
has not originated with me -- It has been made from one end of the continent to
the other -- in news papers, in public debates -- and in private conversation
-- so that it is no new thing.

Mr. Smilie on this declared himself satisfied with the explanation given by
mr. Morris -- and said he should not pursue the course he had proposed to
himself in his discourse.

Mr. Morris declared it was not his wish or desire to prevent the member from
taking the fullest latitude. He had a fair opportunity. Mr. Morris added he had
not risen with a view to hinder it.

Mr. Smilie. The gentleman made some observations on the members from the
country speculating in lands and receiving so much per cent. for what business
they transact --

Mr. Morris said a note had just been put into his hand, stating that a member
then in the house would, if called upon, prove what he said relative to some of
the members receiving so much per cent for transacting their neighbors
business.

Mr. Smilie. What other members may do, I know not -- but I have transacted a
great deal of business for my neighbors, and have never received a copper for
it. I do not know that it would be criminal to receive payment -- nor do I know
who the gentleman means to charge. This information I regard as addressed to
the galleries.

It is denied that the bank facilitates commerce. But I think it is evident
that it does. Cargoes of goods have been purchased in one day, which could not
have been the case but for the bank. The bank, making it convenient to get
money, facilitates the purchase of goods. It will not be controverted that
goods are purchased quicker by its means, than they possibly could without it.

We are told that the friends of the bank have given support and countenance to
the paper money. I do not pretend to assert the contrary. But I have heard it
strongly asserted. A gentleman says that a discount on the paper money of from
2 to 5 per cent may be had. If such depreciation has taken place, it is
occasioned by the bank; as it does not receive the paper money: and
consequently persons indebted to that institution are obliged to procure hard
money at all events -- so that the bank is the cause of discount being given.

The same gentleman seems to consider us as mere machines. He says, if we were
left to ourselves, we would not be now opposed to the bank. I have never been
urged to my opposition -- I have opposed the bank from conviction that the
charter was incompatible with the welfare of the state -- and I concluded it
must be destroyed. What! does he suppose we are duped, or that we are
dishonest? If we were capable of being bought off, it must be acknowledged we
have not among us persons capable to purchase. If any members of this house
were corrupt enough to betray for reward the trust reposed in them, the
gentlemen on the other side have the means in their hands to prevail on them.

Mr. R. Morris. I said that a person possessed of considerable wealth, opposed
to the bank from private views, was hugged in the bosoms of those inimical to
that institution from other considerations, although there is no other tie or
connection between them.

Mr. Smilie. I have never been attempted by any such person. I have taken up
the matter upon higher ground: and as to what the gentleman who spoke yesterday
in favor of the bank, said, respecting the attack upon that institution being
levelled at him personally, I must declare that I have been been actuated by no
such motive. As a private citizen, I respect him -- although as a politician, I
happen to differ from him in sentiment.

To conclude: We have now no bank. The question, therefore, is, whether we
shall have a bank or (...)? -- not barely whether we shall have a bank -- but
whether we shall have such a bank as we had before? for no modification is
offered -- the report before the house proposes to revive the old charter. Are
we prepared to agree to such a report? Are we prepared to give a charter
empowering the corporation of the bank to hold ten millions of dollars -- and
that in what kind of property they please? When I look round me, and see so
many independent members, I feel a confidence that they will never agree to
vest the powers consequent to such a property in a board of directors chosen by
six or seven stockholders. Fears and jealousies were entertained at the time of
granting the charter, when the doctrine of banking was but little understood:
and two attempts were made to limit it: they then only looked forward to the
ill consequences to be apprehended from it. We have seen some of them: I
therefore trust, that instead of restoring the charter, in order, as the report
says, to restore the honor of the state, we shall save it from that instrument
of destruction.

Dr. Logan declared he esteemed himself so unqualified for a discussion of the
question under debate, that he had not proposed to trouble the house, by rising
to speak to it. Being entirely disinterested in the matter, he had resolved to
give his vote according as he should be convinced; and was sorry to see that
the gentlemen opposed to the bank, instead of answering the arguments made use
of on the other side, had recourse to personalities. The bank, at its first
establishment, had been conducted on such narrow principles, as to induce
numbers of gentlemen to unite in their endeavors to establish another, which
had induced the president and directors to alter their plan. He had then become
a subscriber, when the doors were thrown open -- but had since that period sold
out.

Had the members who spoke against the present report, made good their charges
against the bank, he had determined to vote with them, although not convinced
of the propriety of the house assuming judicial powers. But the charges were
not made good.

There were, he said, two modes by which the interests of agriculture could be
promoted; by a loan office, and by the bank, which latter, furnishing the
merchants with money, procured a ready sale for produce. As a farmer, he had
experienced the good consequences of it. The other, by enabling the farmer to
borrow money for the improvement and cultivation of his lands, greatly advanced
his interests.

Mr. Whitehill. One of the city members has remarked, that he believes, if an
angel from heaven were to endeavor to convince me, it would have no effect: if
an angel spoke as he has done, I should regard him as a fallen angel.

He has said, that farmers or millers may be accommodated with loans by the
bank. But can any farmer in Lancaster or Cumberland derive benefit from loans
for forty-five days? They cannot come here to renew their obligations. -- Facts
are stubborn things.

He also says that notwithstanding the cry of the country people for paper
money, they will not receive it in payment for their produce. I have received
it equal to gold or silver for produce. Perhaps others are afraid: and indeed
when we hear a gentleman of such wealth and influence declare that he puts it
away as fast as he can, for fear of depreciation, is it not enough to shake the
credit of the paper money?

The gentleman has said that industry is promoted and manufactures encouraged
by the bank: but loans at forty-five days will do neither the one nor the other.

It has been observed, that the bank has not a capital of ten millions of
dollars, and that therefore no danger is to be apprehended on that head. But it
might have had that capital by the charter: why then should we restore it?

A gentleman has in answer to me remarked, that it was impossible for the
legislature which granted the charter, to know the bye-laws of the bank. I ask,
then, was it not absurd to give a charter empowering the corporation to make
such bye-laws as they pleased?

The bank, for aught we know, might have become a trading company; and, by
stopping discounts, at particular times, might take advantage of the private
merchants --

Mr. Fitzsimons. The corporation is restrained from trading by the charter. --

Mr. Whitehill demanded -- by what charter?

To this mr. Fitzsimons replied by the charter of congress.

Mr. Whitehill. This is nugatory. The charter of congress is of no avail here.
Congress had no power to grant any charter -- and in this instance stepped out
of their line. If that was all the restraint on the president and directors,
they might have become a trading company when they pleased.

The bank, it is hinted, enables the merchant to purchase produce -- and the
farmer consequently gets a better price. But flour was three dollars per
hundred, before the revolution, and it is not much higher now.

The whole business is reduced to this: when the danger of the bank
monopolizing trade is urged, the charter of congress is pleaded; and we are
told that the state is safe. But this is a nullity. Let the bank go on, as it
stands at present. The people who deal in it will be safer. If the money in the
vaults is not sufficient, the estates of the subscribers will be responsible.
This has been observed already -- and not a word has been offered in answer to
it. Is it not better have two or three equal banks, and then the citizens will
be courted for their custom, than one which can do as it may see fit?

Mr. Woods said if the gentleman's observation, that the charter was but a mere
piece of paper, which the house might burn at pleasure, was true, the
constitution was also a piece of paper, and might with equal justice be burned;
if that was the case, God help poor Pennsylvania! Those gentlemen who pretended
to be constitutionalists, thought themselves exempt from attending to the
constitution -- They made it a nose of wax, which they twisted at pleasure.

Mr. R. Morris. I did not intend to have risen again on this question: but as
some new matter has occurred, I think it may not be improper to offer a few
additional observations.

A member has remarked upon the manner in which the question was proposed by
the chairman of the committee whose report is under debate -- viz. whether they
were willing to give such information as was not inconsistent with the secrecy
of that institution? He has from this drawn an inference that any application
from the committee of the late house would have been fruitless, on account of
this secrecy. But herein he is much deceived: this secrecy relates to the state
of accounts depending between individuals and the bank: and the necessity of
this secrecy every one must see. I appeal to the feelings of all who hear me,
whether they would choose the state of their accounts should become known to
any but those officers of the bank to whom they are confided? The depositors of
money there, would no more have their deposits made public than if the cash
remained in their chests: and much less would those who stand indebted, consent
to have the state of their accounts known to any but those with whom the debt
is contracted. As superintendent of finance, I was entitled to receive daily a
state of the accounts of the bank: but neither the directors nor myself ever
considered this as extending to the accounts of individuals: and I never was
made acquainted with any such matter. This is the only kind of secrecy, I
apprehend, that could have been meant by the committee, or that could be
necessary for the president and directors to observe; for as to the state of
their own affairs, that is, the affairs of the bank generally, I take it, they
would, whenever needful or proper, explain them without hesitation.

Upon the doctrine of charters, the gentleman insists that they cannot be taken
away in the courts of law: in which I agree, that unless there be a forfeiture
on the part of the corporation, they cannot.

I shall not, however, dwell upon this subject -- but proceed to the proposal
for mortgaging certain revenues to the bank. That proposal did not go to the
extent gentlemen are pleased to mention. One member has remarked that it is
very extraordinary such a proposal should have been made without the knowledge
of the president and directors; and added, that if such was the case, it was an
insult to the house.

That proposal was made by a member of this house, who had a right to make it:
and if the house had agreed to that proposal, they must, as he mentioned at the
time, have appointed a committee to negociate and settle the affair with the
president and directors of the bank. Surely there was nothing like an insult in
this.

I shall pass over the assertions that the impost and taxes would not have been
sufficient to pay the public creditors, with observing that if they had been
duly collected, there would have been in the treasury a sum fully adequate.

It has been insisted that usury has been coeval with the bank. Usury sprung up
on the decease of the continental money; and if I had expected the charge to
have been renewed and insisted on, I might have brought evidence of the fact. I
am satisfied that some of the brokers' books would show it, and probably those
might be obtained without much difficulty.

The member from Fayette seems to charge me with claiming the merit of bringing
about the revolution. In this, however, no part of my conduct will justify him.
It is not my practice to claim merits which do not belong to me. It is true, in
defending myself from attacks which have been made, I have been obliged
sometimes to mention services performed; and by so doing, they are submitted to
public investigation, and would be contradicted, if not truly stated. When I
mentioned the supplies of flour sent to general Washington's camp, it was
introduced to show the distresses of the times: however, I did not, as this
gentleman was pleased to express himself, say it was sent at my expense; but
that it was obtained upon my credit: neither has my vanity or folly ever
prompted me to pretend that I established the independence of America. It is my
glory to have had a share in it; and I am not ashamed of the share which has
fallen to my lot; I hope it will ever do me honor.

As to the claims made by the author whom the gentleman mentioned, I know
nothing about them. I shall not contest his claims, nor those of any other
person. Whoever have deserved well of their country, or think they have done
so, shall not be disturbed by me. There are thousands and thousands who have
been honorably concerned: and I am as ready to give to each his share of
merit, as I am to receive even what credit that gentleman himself will allow me.

In this house we enjoy the freedom of speech: every member may deliver what
sentiments he pleases; and, if he chooses, he may attack characters without
being accountable to any tribunal, provided he observes the decency and decorum
due to the house: but I cannot refrain from a wish that it were laid down as a
rule, never to abuse this privilege, by attacking those who cannot speak here,
and of course have it not in their power to defend themselves. I am led to
these observations, by the gentleman having introduced into his speech an
author, who, he says, is unprincipled, hires out his pen for pay, and who, in
walking the market place, without money in his pocket, finds a five shilling
bill, steps into a tavern, procures with it a dinner, etc. and then exclaims,
this paper money, after all, if it be not money, is to me victuals and drink.
This author, whoever he is, is not on this floor; and consequently cannot do
himself justice here. Whether he is paid or not, I cannot say. He is not in my
pay: nor do I know any that do pay him: for, if I guess right at the person, I
can pretend to nothing more than common acquaintance, and the intercourse of
common civility which has arisen in consequence of his long residence here, and
which originated in his public services. But I feel for his situation, in this
instance, having been, in the same manner, attacked on this floor, when I could
not be permitted to repel those attacks, as I had not then a seat in assembly.
I do not reproach the member for using the freedom of speech -- but I wish more
delicacy were observed. If the author in question has been guilty of any
impropriety, there are proper places to bring him to punishment, and in which
he can be admitted to make his defense.

It has been observed in this debate, that the directors of the bank being
chosen by the stockholders, -- and these voting according to property, -- the
directors are elected by six or seven men, largely concerned in stock: and this
manner of voting is strongly objected to. I ask what should give the right of
voting in such an institution, but property? Shall those who hold a small
number of shares, have equal votes with those who hold a great number? You may
as well pass an Agrarian law, and divide the property. Who would invest their
money in such an institution, if that regulation were to take place? Voting
according to property is the only proper mode of election, although a deviation
has taken place. Shall a man with a fortieth part of the interest in bank stock
which another holds, have an equal voice with him in the election of those who
are to manage that interest? Surely not. It has been said that the directors
exercise a tyranny over the stockholders. I wish it had been shown how: their
continuance in office is given as a reason: and it is urged that they may
remain in office as long as they live, which would be a species of tyranny.
Their continuance in office is a proof that they enjoy the confidence of the
stockholders -- not that they tyrannize over them. However, a change in the
direction was intended: and a number of the stockholders went to the late
election, with intent to vote-in some new hands. But the attack on the bank
seeming to render its duration doubtful, they re-elected the same gentlemen, in
order that if the business were to be closed, it might be done by those* who,
having so long conducted it, were best acquainted with it.

The eleventh and thirteenth articles of the proposals for establishing the
bank, published with my name thereto, are brought forward by the member from
Fayette, to show that my sentiments are changed respecting the control of
government over this institution. The clause subjecting the state of the bank
accounts to the inspection of the superintendent of finance, was then excellent
and highly approved, because I was the superintendent -- but now, he remarks, I
thank God it is not under the control of government. I am still of opinion that
the clause was excellent, and that it was useful.

The institution was framed under an expectation that the public moneys were to
be placed there from time to time -- and that it would derive advantage from
the public funds passing through that channel. It was therefore judged proper
for the bank to submit to such inspection, and necessary to create public
confidence -- first, because the public money being deposited there, the united
states would, by their officer, know that it was secure: and secondly,
individuals having transactions with the bank, would think themselves safe, and
believe in its stability, whilst it enjoyed the confidence of government, and
its proceedings were subject to such a check as the inspection of them by a
public officer of high trust. These are the considerations that induced my
approbation to those clauses then. But what is the case now? The united states
have no longer a superintendent, and although they have a board of treasury
with the same powers, they have no funds in the bank: therefore no necessity
exists of any examination into the state of that institution on their part: and
with respect to individuals, it has fully acquired the necessary confidence: so
that in neither case is this inspection any longer necessary.

If, indeed, the state of Pennsylvania had thoughts of depositing money in the
bank, the government might talk of control; and would have a right to make
terms. They might stipulate as a condition, that the treasurer of the state, or
some other of their officers, should so far have inspection of the bank, as to
know, before the treasurer, the collectors of taxes, of imposts, of duties, of
excise, etc. should deposit public moneys there, that such deposits would be
perfectly secure: and I am persuaded that the president and directors would
have no objection to the appointment of such an officer, to whom, in such case,
they would freely communicate a state of the general accounts of the bank. This
kind of connection between government and the bank, would be very proper: but
any subjection or dependence of the bank on the government, would be
inconsistent with its nature. -- The attempt, then, to prove any inconsistency
in my opinions fails -- my present being perfectly consistent with my former
opinions on this point.

As to what I said respecting members receiving per centage for transacting
business in the land-office, I do not know it of my own knowledge -- but by
information: and I have a paper in my hand, stating that a member of this house
will, if called upon, prove the fact.

The gentleman said that this information was addressed to the gallery. But if
the gallery had been cleared, and the doors of this house closed, I should have
gone into the same explanation that I have done in the course of this business.
It is true, I rejoice that so many of my fellow citizens are present at these
debates: as they will probably, from the explanations respecting the bank,
become better acquainted with the nature of it, than many of them were before;
and it only wants to be understood, to make it fully and clearly seen how much
the interest of every man in the state may be or is benefitted by it.

It has in the course of this debate been more than once asserted, that the
paper money of the state, is depreciated by the bank. This I deny totally. The
paper money is received on deposit at the bank, at considerable expense and
trouble: one or more clerks at handsome salaries, are necessary for the
receiving and paying it, and for keeping accounts with the depositors. The
president and directors of the bank do all this without an iota of profit --
being prompted thereto by a desire of supporting the credit of that paper they
are charged with depreciating. From the third of June 1785, to the
twenty-eighth of February in the present year, they received of this paper on
deposit 104,460l. 18s. 4d. From the twenty-eighth of February, to the present
day, they have received 2819l. 15s. 8d. -- making in the whole 107,280l. 14s.
And the credit of this account is, -- For sundries paid from the third of June
1785, to the twenty-eighth of February, 97,767l. 15s. 6d. ditto paid from the
first to the twenty-eighth of March, 3520l. 11s. 6d. -- Balance remaining on
hand, 5992l. 7s. From this statement it appears, that the whole amount of the
emission, that for the loan-office excepted, has already passed through the
bank: for this, accounts have been opened in bank for sixty-seven persons. -- I
hope it will not be asserted that all these pains are taken in order to destroy
the credit of the paper money. I have already answered the charges against
myself on this subject, -- although perhaps it might have been as well to pass
them by, as I have done others, in silent contempt.

The gentleman from Fayette with much modesty, declares, he does not pretend to
an equal degree of understanding with us. We, however, admit that he has it,
and the contest between us, is an acknowledgment, on our part, of his
possessing equal abilities: but I hope this modesty was not assumed to extort
compliments from us.

The gentleman says, he hopes the members of this house are not capable of
being corrupted. I hope with him that they are not. I have no suspicions of the
kind -- nor ever had. But members of assembly are liable to be influenced in
their conduct, as well as other men. However, whether they are or are not, I
have never made an attempt to influence any one of them: nor can any one say,
that I have ever held a conversation, done, or said a single thing to influence
his vote upon any question whatever.

Mr. Smilie. The worthy member gave the house to understand, that if it were
not for some people, we would not now be opposed to the bank. On this I
remarked, that if we were capable of being corrupted, those on our side of the
question had not the means of corruption in their hands.

Mr. R. Morris. As there are persons out of doors prejudiced against the
institution, it is natural for them to exert all their influence to injure it.
They get hold of the members -- and tell them fine stories, make strong
assertions, and by degrees lead them into their snares, by means of deception,
without any attempt at corruption: and this is by no means uncommon. It is well
known that mankind are slaves to prejudices -- and to prejudices frequently not
their own -- but such as are taken up on the credit of others. I thank God our
legislature is incorruptible. I believe it has always been so: and I hope it
will ever so continue -- at least we have one security for it -- I cannot see
how or for what it would be worth while to corrupt them, were they so disposed.
If in this or any other part of the debate, when animated with the subject, I
have not treated the members opposed to me with all the decency and decorum
they could wish, I should be sorry for it -- as being contrary to my intention:
but I am not sensible that any such thing has escaped me. Indecencies may tend
to inflame -- but they seldom convince.

The same gentleman says, he respects my private character -- but must differ
from me in politics. I wish we could agree in our political opinions: it might
be of some advantage to the state: but as we cannot, we must be content -- he
to hold his opinions -- and I to enjoy mine.

Some expressions which have dropped from this gentleman and from the member
from Cumberland, seem to imply, that had the report before us, proposed any
modification of the bank charter, it might have met with their approbation --
but that in its present form, it is inadmissible. I do not see how the
committee could have made a report of that kind: they certainly were not
authorized to do it. It has been fully proved that the repealing law does not
rest on the same support as our other laws: it is not founded in truth and fact
-- but in the preamble the reverse is asserted: and this is of itself a
sufficient cause for repealing that repealing law.

I am not willing to take up more of the time of this house: it would be going
over again the same beaten track. We are pretty well tired of the subject by
this time: and I hope the question will soon be put. I hope that no doubts
remain as to the utility of the bank. I trust it has been clearly proved, that
it has never been injurious to the safety or welfare of the state in any shape
or way.

Mr. Finlay. Had my arguments of yesterday, been stated justly, and replied to
with fairness, I would not have thought it necessary further to detain this
house -- as the attention of the members is, I conceive, already wearied out. I
have, doubtless, been unhappy in speaking less distinctly or less audibly than
usual, so as to occasion them to be unjustly stated. The manner in which I then
investigated the case, has been made an honorable mention of by the gentlemen
on the other side of the debate; but could I ascribe the treatment my arguments
met with, in stating them yesterday, from a gentleman of eminent discernment
[mr. Morris] to artifice, it would be a more flattering circumstance, than any
eulogiums the gentleman has been pleased to bestow. However, candor obliges me
to acknowledge that the gentleman who spoke first this morning [mr. Fitzsimons]
replied to some of my arguments with ability, stated them fairly, and answered
sensibly. And there are, certainly, many good arguments respecting the
convenience of the bank, that may apply in its favor: and it is the duty of
this house to compare the arguments arising either from its utility or its
mischief -- its safety or its danger -- and by giving each of them due weight,
to observe how the balance turns.

I shall now proceed to mention some instances of the treatment my arguments
met with yesterday; and then prosecute some observations which I touched but
slightly at the first -- and also some which I then waved.

My first argument was entirely mis-stated. Knowing that the preamble of the
report under debate, contains reasoning totally improper and disgraceful, I
thought it would have been an insult to the dignity of the house to argue upon
it, which I therefore declined, alleging, that though the reasons assigned by
the committee of the late house, for repealing the charter, were insufficient,
yet, if sufficient reasons do now exist in the nature of the case, their
decision ought not to be repealed. This I illustrated by judicial examples; and
alluded to legislative ones, of which I shall now mention one. In the act
lately passed for opening the road by the Water Gap, the reason assigned, is,
that there is no road there. Surely, this is not the true reason, although it
is the only one assigned by this house: for if that were the true and a
sufficient reason, it would imply that this house ought to make special laws
for opening roads in all places where they are wanted, which is, by standing
laws, the business of the county courts. The true reason must have been not
only the utility of that road, but the broken and uninhabited state of that
country. But the gentleman alleged that I applied this argument to the
resolution now before the house.

I mentioned agrarian laws merely on account of the use the gentleman had made
of them, in alleging that the charter of the bank could not be taken away
without admitting agrarian laws. I observed that though wealth was not equal
enough in this state to the genius of our government, yet to admit those laws
was improper; and, under our government, would be unjust: but that they had
nothing to do with the present case, which was not taking away property -- was
not touching the cash of the proprietors of the bank -- but solely repealing a
law which gave an undue and impartial advantage to one set of men. How could
the gentleman's fears be alarmed from this? How could he say that I alleged
though agrarian laws were not just now proper, that they would be so some short
time hence? It was the gentleman himself introduced the term: and I only
attempted to rescue it from the improper use he had made of it.

I mentioned as an argument the unsuitableness of such an institution to the
government, laws, and habits of this state. The gentleman stated that I had
said it was contrary to law. Surely, if a disputant has the power to make his
antagonist say what he pleases, he may easily reply: so the gentleman has done.
He says it was not contrary to law -- because the charter was a law. It was not
contrary to habit -- for the people had a habit of applying at the bank for
discounts, and carrying their money there to deposit it. I beg now to repeat
and enforce some of my arguments on that head.

The frame of government of this state, being the great deed of trust between
those in government and the citizens at large, is a charter of the first
importance; and circumscribes and contains all other charters that can lawfully
exist: yet it is a charter for only seven years. It is not only subject to
change, as all other governments are, by natural right -- but it must, by the
law of its own existence, be brought to the test septennially. And can the
legislature give charters more sacred and more permanent than the government
itself? No: the very nature of things forbids it. By our laws, all estates,
real or personal, are divisable; the grand source and support of feudal dignity
are therefore taken away -- since by law, every child, with one small
exception, enjoys an equal share: and our habits with respect to testaments
perhaps correspond more perfectly with our laws, than those of any other
country in the world. Our real estates are subject to be sold for debts; and
are actually daily selling in this manner. In a country, where we have no
wealthy incorporated companies of merchants -- where we have no nobles with
great estates, permanent in the family line -- where we have no royal
prerogative supported by an enormous civil list and numberless dependents -- I
say in a country where we have no counterpoise to correct its influence or
control its enormities by their own -- shall we grant such an institution?
Shall we give such an artificial spring to congregated wealth? By no means. It
was in this manner I argued its inconsistence with the spirit of our laws, etc.
and not in the manner stated by the gentleman.

My arguments on the usefulness of the bank -- and the examples by which I
illustrated them -- were treated in the same manner. But this house heard my
arguments and the manner in which the gentleman accommodated them to his
replies: therefore I shall not rescue them; but shall just observe, that I
acknowledged freely the usefulness of the bank -- I gave it all the credit I
thought it deserved: but did the gentleman acknowledge the usefulness of paper
money or a loan office? Did he give paper money one grateful compliment for the
good it has at any time done? No -- he did not.

I forbore yesterday saying much about paper money or a loan office -- as
things sufficiently understood: but I beg leave now to offer a few further
observations respecting them. By the last emission we have anticipated our
revenue, and so made a saving to the state; by it we have relieved our
suffering creditors; by it we have brought in our revenues, and filled our
treasury, which had for years groaned with emptiness. By means of the spring it
gave to circulation, it brought in more specie than we could have otherwise
got. By means of it, the gentleman answerable to his wishes, will get more old
debts paid in to him; and, answerable to his diffidence, he acknowledges he can
put it away again immediately. By the last emission, Pennsylvania has recovered
her dignity; and shown herself to be possessed of that wisdom which pervaded
her counsels whilst she was a colony.

The institution of a loan-office is one of the most masterly strokes of
national good sense: the advantages of the present one, though so new in its
operations, have been of amazing service. Vast numbers of our citizens were in
debt to the state for their lands, which they held by occupancy only: those
people have been enabled to pay their debts to the state; and to assist the
public creditors, by increasing the demand for their certificates. I will
mention one instance: -- as I was coming to this city last week, I met with a
man who had patented his own land, and procured a loan of one hundred pounds.
In consequence (...) orders I had with me, I received about half his loan; and
brought it back to pay for the lands of others. Thus it not only pays an
interest, but sinks a treble interest.

A loan-office, at this time, is not only a source of revenue, to the amount of
the net interest it brings; but has contributed by raising the demand, to raise
the public certificates from 3s. 9d. to 6s.: and as every pound value of them
laid out as above, takes off an interest from three to four for one, by sinking
such a proportion of the public debts -- it is one of those honorable and
useful kinds of speculation, fraught with advantage both to the state and to
individuals; and gives the surest fund for the redemption of paper money. The
institution of a bank, on the other hand, as I said before, increases usury;
promotes the spirit of monopoly; and, in our present situation, prevents
improvements and equal circulation of money.

All the gentlemen on the other side of the question, deny that it promotes
usury. Let us examine this a little. Does it not give a facility to trade? Is
not this its proper use? Is not the balance of trade against us? Does it not,
therefore, give facility to importation in a degree too great for our
exportation? Surely, it does. When gentlemen obtain the assistance -- the ready
and generous assistance of the bank, to purchase imported goods -- must they
not pay at a short and a certain day? And when the market is glutted with
goods, and the appetite of the consumer cloyed, what shall -- what can the
borrower do? He may and often does go to the vendue stores, and lose his
property by ready money sales, at the rate of 50s. a minute: or he may go to
the rapacious brokers, whose existence in Philadelphia is coeval with the bank,
and of them borrow at five or six per cent. per month. This has been the
relief, no less common than destructive -- the mournful relief of those who
have with the best designs and flattering expectations, made use of the
delusory assistance of the bank: and thus it is likely to be with every
institution inconsistent with the laws and manners of a people.

But this is not all: the bank, it is certain, takes a kind of compound
interest itself: and when simple interest requires about seventeen years to
enable one million of dollars to grow into two -- the method practiced by the
bank (supposing the holders not to draw their dividends) would make one million
produce above six in about 26 years: and to follow this thought for a century
to come, how amazing the idea! In the bank money is arrested. It must increase,
without a possibility of becoming less. It is secured by such a charter from
every risk, and guarded against every danger but what may arise from the
possible villainy of the conductors of its operations.

As wealth is the means of conducting -- as wealth is the means of obtaining
monopolies -- even when in the hands of jarring individuals -- how much more
must it facilitate such designs, when in the hands of a permanent society,
congregated by special privilege, and actuated by the principles of united
avarice? Let us suppose for a moment, that I possessed the greatest real estate
under the government, and that I had likewise the greatest commercial wealth,
and consequently a greater credit in all commercial countries than any other
citizen in the state, and that I had the greatest number of shares in, and
consequently the greatest influence over the bank, would not I in this case
have it in my power to monopolize the most valuable foreign markets, and to say
who shall and who shall not trade? Would it not be in my power to fix the rate
of exchange as I pleased -- so that when in the natural course of trade it
should be 163 or 170, I could raise it to 175 or 180? I could increase the
necessity of remitting by bills, and avail myself of that necessity.

The bank in the present state of things, prevents even the improvement of this
city. Houses and lands have been sold, and their price locked up in the bank,
where it is free from taxes, and where it increases without the labor of the
owner. Thus by discouraging improvements, it prevents population, and with it
the rising glory and strength of the commonwealth. An equal circulation of the
signs of wealth, tends to promote equal interests -- equal manners -- and equal
designs: but the situation and circumstances of few countries admit of equal
circulation: yet surely government ought not to give its special aid to render
circulation necessarily unequal. However this is an argument well understood,
and has been spoken to formerly.

One gentleman [mr. Morris] would persuade us that the transfers of stock
prevent the dangers or cure the evils of the institution. How can this be? Will
a few individuals transferring their bank stock, change the principles -- the
nature -- and influence of the institution? By no means; but this is too plain
a case to dwell upon; and has already been well spoken to.

Against the right of the legislature to dissolve such charters, it has been
often said that that body might as well disannul the patents of our lands: and
for the same purpose, agrarian laws have been, I think, rather improperly
mentioned. What do these arguments mean? Is dissolving the charter of the bank,
and entering into it, to take away the gold and silver from the owners, for the
public use, the same thing? Surely no. But the right of the legislature is so
clearly confessed by gentlemen of legal knowledge -- it is so essential to the
safety of government -- and has already been so well spoken to -- that it would
perhaps be an insult to the good sense of this house, to say any thing further
on this head.

Much has been said by gentlemen on the other side of the question, respecting
the advantage arising from the bank to the farmer, the mechanic, etc. -- It
seems to be denied that the balance of trade is against us; or that the bank
promotes that unfavourable balance. One gentleman [mr. Fitzsimons] supposes
that I stated the exports from Pennsylvania too low: I believe he did not hear
me well -- for in every other mention of my arguments, he did me justice. I
will therefore repeat my sentiments on that head. We export flour -- but not so
much as formerly: this is owing, among other things, to a scarcity of laboring
people: the drain of young men during the war, and for many years having so few
emigrants, accounts for this. We export flaxseed, though not so much of it as
usual: the binding of our lands, through long working, and the change of
seasons, together with people depending more upon hemp, accounts for this. That
the lumber trade must continue to decay, requires no investigation to account
for it. What else of consequence does Pennsylvania export? Nothing, I believe,
worth enumerating: yet we have the foundations of commerce, which rising ages
will doubtless improve. I perfectly ageee with the gentleman that it is our
duty to cultivate the mutual interest of the farmer, the mechanic, and the
merchant; but how is this to be done? We have been told we ought to alter the
balance of trade, etc. but in the present state of things, we may as well talk
of turning the stream of the Delaware. To cultivate these now jarring
interests, and render them mutual, we must first propagate or import a greater
number of people, that we may have labor of all sorts cheaper; we must
encourage our own produce and manufactures; we must try to curb our luxury --
to mortify our madness for trade and foreign wares. Our present manner of
trading, if persisted in, must prevent us from ever being in any reputable
degree, an independent or a commercial nation; still it is said that the
balance of trade is not so much against us; but I ask any gentleman acquainted
with it, if the rate of exchange is not against us? I ask is not the rate of
exchange the touchstone of trade -- and the infallible criterion which side the
balance turns to? It shows the price of money. Is not the rate of exchange more
against us than before the bank existed? I believe it is; and the influence of
the bank is well calculated to keep it so. I wish for a commerce built upon the
foundation of population and industry; every other kind of commerce must be
ruinous, and ought to be discouraged.

The trade of Amsterdam has been mentioned by a gentleman, and applied to our
case; but I cannot see any similarity. It is true, the people of Amsterdam have
very little of the produce of their own country to trade upon; but they make
the materials of almost all the world their own -- so as to promote population
and industry; they are in a great degree the mechanics, the factors, and the
carriers of Europe; and their wealth is the envy even of London herself. But we
neither manufacture nor carry for ourselves -- nor do we get rich.

A gentleman from the city [mr. Fitzsimons] has mentioned the cheap bargains
overtrading and usury have given many an opportunity of obtaining: but I should
have thought this a sufficient argument on the other side. Is it not an
evidence of the evils about which we complain? Is it not the cause of the ruin
of many?

The great amount of the impost received last year is also used as an argument:
certainly this is an incontestible evidence to my purpose. We received
100,000l. of an impost: and we may presume that much escaped the notice of the
officers: and the impost a part of that time was low: how amazingly, therefore,
must our imports have exceeded our exports! I suppose the difference could not
have been less than fifty, perhaps a hundred to one. Can any nation long exist,
conducting such a trade? The gentleman mentions the vast improvements
occasioned in Scotland by banks since their establishment. I believe Scotland
has received benefit from banks: but our circumstances and those of Scotland
are very different; and though I am not sufficiently informed to be able to
describe the banks of Scotland, I know they are neither chartered nor conducted
like the late bank, now under debate.

A worthy member [mr. Morris] in his arguments in favor of the bank told this
house, that I also loved wealth, and pursued it -- Doubtless I do. I love and
pursue it -- not as an end, but as a means of enjoying happiness and
independence; and so far I am for enjoying it. Though I have it not in any
proportion to the degree of what the worthy gentleman has informed us of
himself -- yet I have more land than I can make a proper use of, and not a
great deal less than I wish to have, though I purchased it at second hand. I
have enough of wealth to give a spring to industry; and to procure the
necessaries and a competence of the comforts of life. But he has said that I
follow land-jobbing; that he has seen me in the land office; and that if I did
not procure lands for myself, I charged commission upon doing it for my
neighbors. I denied these charges with perhaps too much warmth -- not because
they were disgraceful -- but because they were, as applied to me, mistaken; the
gentleman has told us today that he is able to prove the charge against some
one person. I wish the person was produced, and the charge proved; I should
insist on the proof being brought forward, but from a consciousness that it
will not apply to me -- and from an opinion that it was improperly introduced
into the present debate. However, I believe, if members of this house are
meant, the (...) are rare; and I should have passed the whole as a piece of
humor, but for the opportunity it gives me of offering a short but true
picture of the situation of many of my constituents. Living as they do, in a
new settlement, after having encountered the accumulated woods of ages, and
beasts ravenous by nature, and rendered still more so by the unbounded extent
of their range, they had scarcely made openings round their abodes -- they had
not banished the beasts of prey -- when men more fierce, more cruel than the
beasts, desolated their new raised dwellings, and spread destruction far and
wide. Now, when they are returned, and feebly repairing the ruins of their
dreary wastes, they find themselves in debt to the state for the very lands in
defending which many of them lost their dearest friends and all their wealth.
They endeavor -- they strive with arduous diligence to pay the state its due:
and, to be able to call the lands their own, they sell the last cow and sheep,
to procure a little money (for nothing but cows and sheep will find money
there). I myself have been urged to take the last cow -- to take any thing they
had, in order to secure their lands. They raise the last shilling they are able
-- and plead, as if for life, that we may add a few dollars to the scanty sum;
and these are the people from whom the gentleman seems to think I take
enriching commissions; but all the generous feelings of the human soul forbid
such means of obtaining wealth; and it is a method much better suited to the
habits of a merchant than a farmer.

One argument much used on the other side of the debate, I beg leave, although it
has been well replied to already, to notice a little further. It respects the
number of petitioners who have now brought this matter (it is said) before the
house -- it is emphatically called the voice of the people. In addition to what
other gentlemen have justly observed upon this argument, I would further
remark, that in every government (even the most absolute) the popular opinion,
if not immoral, is the voice of God; but in Pennsylvania, it is not only
formally but in fact the voice of the government -- the government being solely
founded on the popular authority; and the legislature being authorized and
instructed to speak the popular voice, they are necessarily supposed to speak
the voice of the people; one exception may be admitted, viz. if some new case
arise, or if some new information is obtained, the majority of the people
instructing and informing their representatives, ought to be attended to. But
is this the case in the present debate? By no means. The petitioners do not
amount to one twentieth of our constituents; and under all the influence that
the nature of the institution cannot fail to produce on the human mind, surely
it is wonderful, every thing considered, that a much greater number of
petitioners was not obtained, and strange that the gentlemen should make use of
the few that are obtained, as an argument; but the case is too plain to be
dwelt upon.

Having labored arguments too long, which are clear in themselves, and, I
trust, well understood in this house -- I shall just observe that as some of
them have been mis-stated, a few instances of which I have mentioned -- and
some others replied to with candor and ability -- and as the two gentlemen who
have risen in answer, have made honorable mention of my general arguments, but
stated their objections -- I have ground to believe that those observations of
mine which have not been replied to, are admitted; and, indeed, as they were
drawn from the nature of things, I think they were unanswerable -- for things
will ever operate according to their nature.

We are one great family: and the laws are our common inheritance. They are
general rules, and common in their nature. No man has a greater claim of
special privilege for his L.100,000 than I have for my L5. No. The laws are a
common property. The legislature are entrusted with the distribution of them.
This house will not -- this house has no right, no constitutional power to give
monopolies of legal privilege -- to bestow unequal portions of our common
inheritance on favorites.

This bank, the charter of which has been dissolved, and is now endeavored to
be renewed again, was truly an extraordinary creature. None like it does, I
believe -- none like it ever did exist in any nation: and surely such (...)
being will never be restored -- will never be created again by the legislature
of this state. If we should restore it, we would have no security but in the
moderation of the directors and stockholders: but who will answer -- who can be
responsible for future men -- future times -- and future events?

Mr. Clymer. Being considerably indisposed, I should not have taken any part in
this day's debate, but that the report before us has been cavilled at. The
gentleman from Fayette has again censured the charge in it, against the
committee of the late house for not making enquiry at the bank. Where would
have been the use of this, says he, does any one think the president and
directors would have given any information against themselves? I will tell that
gentleman its uses: It would have, at least, satisfied the forms of justice:
and, had answers to proper questions been refused, it would have furnished more
real matter against them, than any which has been alleged. The gentleman from
Westmoreland has found it exceptionable in attacking the law on a wrong
principle. When a law is once passed, says he, you should attend to its policy
-- and not to the means by which it was obtained -- or, in effect, if the end
be good, it shall sanctify the means. It has been a reproach to the order of
the jesuits, that they held this doctrine: but I find there may be jesuits out
of the Roman church. It is not taught by any presbyterian synod that I know of.
It is not drawn from religion or morals -- it is not the usual doctrine of the
world, -- near three thousand of our fellow citizens know nothing of it: they
have, in their memorials to this house, omitted the policy of the law, to
arraign the means of obtaining it -- it was sufficient for them that the means
were bad. The committee to whom their memorials were referred, have followed
their example: they have proved that the late house were deceived by their
committee -- that the repealing law stands upon the falsest ground, the
assumption in the preamble being absolutely without support from fact, and is
not now contended for in argument: they are therefore fully justified in the
conclusions they have drawn from those premises.

It was the least of my design to touch upon any thing but what concerned the
report: but as the vote is, I suppose, to be immediately put, I would rectify
the same gentleman's notion concerning the banks of Scotland, which he seems to
think are banks of mortgage: as far as I have read or heard, there were two
banks of discount at Edinburgh, which also lent on mortgage for a time, as long
as they were able. Being obliged to drop the practice, the landholders, to
supply their necessities, instituted a new bank at Air, for the sole purpose of
lending on mortgage. But the long credit on such loans, soon reduced it to the
greatest difficulties. It at length broke, and involved the whole country in
ruin.

Previous to putting the question on the report, mr. Hannum moved to add to the
resolution it contained, a direction to the committee to introduce a clause
into the bill it recommended to be brought in, a clause subjecting the charter
of the bank to proper regulations, restrictions and limitations.

This motion was negatived. -- Yeas, 30 -- Nays, 39.

On the question, will the house adopt the resolution submitted by the
committee? the yeas and nays were as follow, viz.

YEAS 28.
Robert Morris, Thomas Fitzsimons, George Clymer, John Salter, George Logan,
Wm. Robinson, jun. Robert Ralston, James Moore, Thomas Bull, John Hannum,
Samuel Evans, Townsend Whelen, Adam Hubley, Alexander Lowrey, Emanuel
Carpenter, Joseph Work, Abraham Scott, William Parr, Henry Miller, David
M'Connaughty, Michael Schmyser, Philip Gartner, Joseph Lilly, Henry Tyson,
David M'Clellan, Adam Eichelberger, George Woods, Samuel Wheeler,
NAYS, 41.
William Will, James Irvine, Isaac Gray, John Clark, Arthur Erwin, John Smith,
Joseph Thomas, Robert Smith, Jonathan Morris, Robert Whitehill, John Carothers,
Frederick Watts, John Creigh, Abraham Lincoln, Nicholas Lutz, Henry Spyker,
Philip Kreemer, Davis Davis, Baltzer Gehr, Robert Trail, Peter Trexler, jun.
Peter Burkhalter, Robert Brown, John Piper, Frederick Antis, Samuel Dale,
William Todd, William Finlay, John Hughes, John M'Dowell, James Edgar, John
Smilie, James M'Calmont, Abraham Smith, John Rhea, Benjamin Rittenhouse, Robert
Lollar, Adam Orth, Robert Clark, David Krouse, Daniel Bradley,
So it was decided in the negative, and the report rejected.

FINIS.

