AN ADDRESS FROM THE GENERAL COURT, TO THE PEOPLE OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF
MASSACHUSETTS.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY ADAMS AND NOURSE, PRINTERS TO THE HONORABLE GENERAL COURT.
M, DCC, LXXXVI.

The Committee appointed to prepare an Address to the People, beg leave to
report the following. AN ADDRESS FROM THE GENERAL COURT, TO THE PEOPLE OF THE
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS.
AT a period, when grievances are complained of, in diverse counties of the
State; when the symptoms of discontent are manifest and alarming, and
individuals resort to arms, to support their disaffection, and oppose the
Courts of Justice; it becomes the duty of the Legislature, to investigate, and,
as far as may be, to remove the grounds of complaint; to undeceive those, who
are misguided by false representation; and if lenient means are ineffectual, to
vindicate by vigorous and decisive measures, the honor of government, and
provide for the security of the State.

The General Court have therefore employed the greater part of the present
session, hitherto, in examining the causes of uneasiness, and the objections
made to the measures of government; and in providing (as far as honor and
justice would allow) relief from the burdens, under which the citizens of the
Commonwealth have labored: and we now request the attention of our
constituents, to the state of public affairs; and the reasons, why a compliance
with the wishes of some of them, would be dishonorable to us, and injurious to
themselves.

We have no doubt, that endeavors are used by evil and designing men, to
alienate the affections of the people in general, from those who are concerned
in the administration of government; but conscious of the rectitude of our
intentions, we are convinced, that if the public measures are examined with
candor, the confidence you lately reposed in us, will not be lessened; and
that however great the public burdens are, attempts have not been wanting on
our part, to alleviate them: no man in the community is exempt from those
burdens; the members of the Legislature have their full share; and can it be
thought they would designedly impose unnecessary burdens on themselves, or
omit any thing that might tend to their relief from such burdens? Their duty
and their interest, would equally forbid it, for the relief of their
constituents would be their own.

As we apprehend a great part of the uneasiness in the State, has arisen from
misinformation, we shall in the first place subjoin a state of the public debt,
as well the particular debt of this Commonwealth, as this State's proportion of
the national or Continental debt.

The debt of this Commonwealth is in notes issued by the late Treasurer
Gardner, and the present Treasurer, which are called, either consolidated or
army notes.

The consolidated notes that have been issued, amount to L.1,381,675 18 10 The
army notes amount to 250,114 14 4 1,631,790 13 2
Of the army notes, provision has been made by the tax No. 4, for the
redemption of L.140,000 And by tax No. 5, provision is made for the redemption
of 100,000 240,000 0 0 Which being deducted, leaves 1,391,790 13 2 The notes
redeemed and received into the treasury for the sale of lands, etc. amt. to
34,650 14 8 Which being subtracted, there remains 1,357,139 18 6 The notes for
which Eastern lands have been sold, and which have not yet been received in the
treasury, will amount to 30,693 0 4 There remains therefore, due from the
Commonwealth, for the redemption of which no provision has been made by tax,
notes to the amount of L.1,326,446 18 2
Of the consolidated notes abovementioned, about ninety thousand pounds were
issued for the principal and interest of the notes, which had been given before
the war by Treasurer Gray; the remainder were issued for money borrowed, and
for clothing, stores, and other goods purchased, and for services performed,
since the commencement of the war, at the price in silver, or reduced to that
value, by the scale of depreciation.

The army notes were given to the officers and soldiers of this State's line of
the army, for their wages, at the rate promised before any depreciation had
taken place.

The national, or Continental debt, is either foreign or domestic.

The foreign debt being for money borrowed in France, Spain and Holland,
according to an estimate made by Congress, amounts to 7,885,085 dollars, which
is equal in the lawful money of this State, to L.2,365,525 10 0 The annual
interest of which, part at 4 and part at 5 per cent. is 369,038 dollars, equal
in lawful money, to 110,711 8 0 This State's proportion of the abovementioned
foreign debt, according to the last requisition, is, 353,925 7 0 This State's
proportion of the annual interest of the foreign debt, is, 16,564 6 0 The
Continental domestic debt, which is due to the citizens of the United States,
for the service of the army, and the other expenses of the war, and which is on
interest at the rate of 6 per cent. was estimated in the year 1783, at about
thirty-four million of dollars; but that estimate was formed partly on
conjecture, and by the latest accounts from Congress; it is now computed at
twenty-seven million of dollars, which is equal, in the lawful money of this
State, to, 8,100,000 0 0 This State's proportion of the Continental domestic
debt, according to the last requisition, is, 1,211,906 0 0 Of which sum we have
now in the treasury of this State, in loan-office certificates and final
settlements, received of diverse persons on settlement of accounts, for lands,
and for the old Continental currency, 49,705 14 0 Remains, L.1,162,200 6 0
Exclusive of the above debt, which is due from the Continent to individuals,
each State has a demand upon the confederacy, for money expended and service
done for the benefit of the Continent; this State has large claims, and it is
supposed we are considerably in advance; but there is no ground for the
suggestion, that we owe little or nothing of the Continental debt; for it is to
be considered that each of the other States has demands also, and some of them
large demands; and the method of settlement, therefore, must be, to examine the
claims of the several States, and the whole that are allowed, will form an
aggregate sum, which will be a debt due from the United States to the several
States in the Union; that aggregate sum must then be apportioned on the several
States, and if our claims amount to more than our proportion of that sum, we
shall have credit for the balance; but although we think the balance in our
favor, on the settlement of these accounts, will be considerable, we have no
reason to expect it will be in any measure sufficient to answer our proportion
of the abovementioned domestic debt.

No endeavors have been wanting, on the part of this State, to effect a
settlement of the abovementioned accounts with the Continent; a Commissioner
from Congress some time since attended nearly a year in this State for the
purpose of settleing accounts; his attention indeed was chiefly taken up in the
settlement of private accounts: since that time, another Commissioner has
attended as long, for the same purpose: a Committee of two persons, on the part
of the State, are chiefly employed in the business: considerable progress has
been made; but the accounts are almost beyond conception numerous, intricate,
and of difficult adjustment, owing in a great measure to the different modes,
in which the accounts were kept, to the variety, and sometimes the supposed
defect of vouchers; and to the different paper currencies and their different
states of depreciation: but we hope the business will be accomplished, as soon
as industry can effect it. The other States, have not yet settled their
accounts; until that is done, if ours were settled, we should not be able to
know, whether we are in advance or not.

Although from the foregoing statement, it appears that a large debt is due,
yet when our resources, and the manner in which payment can be made, are
considered; we think the inhabitants of the Commonwealth will be satisfied, not
only that they are able to pay the debt; but that it may be discharged without
greatly distressing them.

The particular debt of this Commonwealth is almost wholly due to its citizens;
the payment therefore will not weaken the State by draining it of its property.
Considerable sums are expected from the sale of lands in the easterly part of
the State, and every measure that prudence will admit, is taken for the speedy
sale of those lands.

Of the national or Continental debt, that part which is due to foreigners,
must be paid in gold or silver; if the Continental impost should take place,
which there is much reason to expect, it would immediately discharge us from
the interest, and in a few years from the principal of this debt.

Our full share of the Continental domestic debt, is undoubtedly due to the
inhabitants of this State; Congress have resolved, that the lands ceded to them
by the individual States, shall be disposed of, for the payment of that debt;
and we have lately received information, that such measures have been taken for
surveying those lands, that a very large tract may in a short time be disposed
of for that purpose, and that purchasers will not be wanting.

The grant of the supplementary fund is complained of: the reasons why the
Ligislature adopted that measure, are expressed in the preamble of the act; and
we think ourselves entitled to expect, that no one will condemn the measure
before he has attended to those reasons. We hope that means will soon be
devised to bring into the treasury of this State, our proportion of the
Continental securities; in that case the act will never operate.

We are informed that the public securities are now disposed of at a lower rate
than at any former period: but suppose there was no depreciation upon any of
those securities, perhaps the sums we have paid in taxes, in hiring men, and
purchasing supplies for the army, within the last eight years, are more than
the whole amount both of our State debt, and our proportion of the Continental
debt.

If the public had been able to prevent the depreciation of the public
securities, we think strict justice would have required it; but notwithstanding
the most solemn promises of future payment, that depreciation has taken place;
perhaps therefore a criminal breach of faith is not yet imputable to the public
Counsels: but if, when it is within our power, we refuse to redeem the
securities; what excuse shall we have? Can we be willing, that the history of
the American revolution, shall be blackened with the tale, that we refused to
redeem the securities we had given to effect it; and shall our posterity blush
to hear of the event, because the perfidy of their ancestors exceeded their
glory?

Some have observed, that the Continental currency is not redeemed, unless at
the rate of seventy-five for one; and propose that the whole debt be reduced by
law to the present current value: but is there not a wide difference between
the cases? the first emissions of that currency were comparatively small; after
it had suffered a depreciation beyond what has happened to any of the public
securities, immense sums were brought into circulation; and the public received
a consideration for them, not more than at the rate of one for forty or fifty,
and perhaps more; it was therefore thought unreasonable to redeem them at the
nominal value: besides, if the securities should be reduced by law to five
shillings on the pound, they would instantly fall in their current value, to
one shilling; there would then be the same reason for reducing them to that
sum, and from thence to nothing.

If an individual is involved in debt, both prudence and honesty require him to
be frugal, and pay his debt as soon as may be. By a long and expensive war, we
incurred a large public debt, though far less than that, which our enemies
incurred; but instead of using every effort to pay it, diverse persons have
employed themselves in devising methods to get rid of it, without payment; many
indeed have employed much more time and money to this end, than (if better
employed) might have purchased their whole proportion of the public securities;
they allege, that many of the first possessors have been obliged to sell them,
for little more than one third of their amount, and therefore that the present
holders ought to receive no more; but we should do well to remember, that the
public has received the full value of all the notes they have issued; they were
made transferable by law, and many of them have been sold; but if we had paid
them as we promised, very few would have been sold; and shall we take no
measures to pay them now, because we have omitted the payment so long?

It is said to be unreasonable to compel the man, who has been obliged to sell
his securities at a low rate, to redeem them at the nominal value: this
observation is made with an ill grace, when every man, who has sold his notes,
can purchase them again at a lower rate than he sold them.

The nations of Europe, are unable to maintain war, without borrowing; much
less could we: but in case of a war, who would lend us, if our neglecting seven
years to pay the sum borrowed, will justify our not paying at all?

Policy, therefore, as well as justice, demand, that we do all in our power to
satisfy our creditors. In private life, the man who avails himself of artifice
and fraud, will soon find his character blasted, and himself the object of
contempt; while he, who encompassed with difficulties, maintains an honest
course, may hope for the friendship of man, and the favor of Heaven. The same
will be the case in states and communities, so long as righteousness exalts a
nation.

Among the late various complaints, perhaps none is more frequently made, than
that the people are ignorant what becomes of their money; that they pay large
taxes, and never learn how they are disposed of. We shall therefore state the
amount of the several taxes, commencing with the gold and silver tax in 1780,
and including the taxes granted since that time, except the tax granted in
March last, the payments that have been made on those taxes, the impost and
excise, etc. and the manner in which the money, etc. arising therefrom, has
been expended.

The amount of the taxes since 1780, is L.1,407,895 12 1^ Abatements to several
towns on those taxes, L.111,226 2 1 Still due upon those taxes, 279,437 1 1
390,633 3 2 ^/^ Received into the treasury upon the abovementioned taxes,
1,017,2^2 9 7 The amount of impost and excise 154,378 6 4 The amount of one per
cent. duty on Auctioneers, 4,196 0 7 The amount of what has been received for
absentees estetes sold, 25,283 15 11 Received of Naval-Officers, 2,715 19 2
Anticipated on the several taxes, and on the impost and excise, by the
Treasurer's orders, 78,481 4 0 Received of sundry Agents, Commissary-General,
etc. etc. 44,090 16 5 1,326,378 12 1
The following is an account of the manner, in which the money, etc. received
for taxes, etc. abovementioned, has been expended.

Warrants drawn on the treasury for the payment of militia-rolls, Continental
teamsters, repairs of the Castle, pay of the garrison there, officers and
soldiers disabled in former wars, officers and soldiers disabled in the late
war, Committee to purchase cannon and other warlike stores, accounts allowed by
the Committee on accounts, building light-houses, Committee to settle the
boundary line between this State and New York, the survey and sale of Eastern
lands, etc. the warrants drawn from October, 1781, to October 1786, although
some of the services were performed before, L.295,588 1 5 Paid to the
Continental Receiver of taxes, 169,002 6 0 Mr. Appleton's certificates,
received for taxes, which are not yet paid to the Continental Receiver,
L.12,894 18 0 Militia rolls for sundry services, and for the pay of three and
six months men, 112,427 0 5 For teamsters, paid Col. Jabez Hatch, 18,601 4 5
Col. J. Allan, for Eastern Indian department, freight of clothing from France,
quarters, etc. for the officers of the French army, while in Boston, one and a
half years pension to Richard Gridley, Esquire and a balance of a gratuity of
twenty-four dollars specie, due to the soldiers of this Commonwealth's line of
the army, 8,303 3 2 Warrants for 3 month's pay of the army, in 1780, 30,717 7 0
New emission bills redeemed and burnt, 150,329 15 2 Ditto redeemed, and now in
the treasury, 44,146 3 9 Interest paid on the new emission bills, 15,576 5 4
Army notes redeemed, 95,624 2 10 Bounties paid for killing wolves, 1,405 0 0
Interest paid on State notes, from July 1782, to October 1786, 265,371 1 2
Certificate money redeemed and burnt, which was issued in 1781, to purchase
stores for the army, and receivable on the tax of that year, 8,364 0 0
Certificate money redeemed and now in the treasury, 9,987 0 0 Allowance to
Peter Savory, on account, for supplies from France, 982 16 0 Balance of the
gold and silver tax, that was due from Sheriffs, remaining to be by them
accounted for, 3,858 1 6 Paid sundry taxes, which became due on absentees
estates, before those estates were sold, and sundry resolves of Court to
discount such taxes, 3,842 13 3 Paid to Continental Commissary, for wounded
officers and soldiers, in addition to what is charged in the first article,
10,335 15 0 Committee for settling with the army, methodizing public accounts,
and settling with the Commissioners of Congress, L.2,069 13 8 President and
Professors of Harvard-College, since the year 1781, including a grant made to
President Langdon, for services previous to that time, 2,362 16 8 To members of
Congress, from June 1780, to September 1786, 11,558 8 2 Warrants in favor of
the former and present Governor, from October 1780, to October 1786, 6,150 0 0
For the members of the Council, at 8 s. per day, for each day's attendance at
the Council Board, since the year 178^, 3,387 1 10 For the members of the
Senate, from October 1780, to October 1786, at 7 s6 per day, for each day's
attendance, 9,052 6 1 For the members of the House of Representatives, for
their service during the same period, at 7 s. per day, for each day's
attendance, 44,865 10 0 Treasurer and Clerks, Secretary and Clerks,
Commissary-General, Chaplain of the Court, Messengers of the Court and of the
Council, and Clerks of the Committee on valuation, 6,941 10 2 The Judges of the
Supreme Judicial Court, 7,143 11 7 Attorney General, in full of his services in
that office, before 1783, 1,063 12 0 Committee for revising the laws, and their
Clerk, 209 16 0 Record books, stationary and fuel* not paid by Committee of
accounts, 271 19 4 1,351,633 19, 11 Deduct what remains unpaid on the warrants
in favor of the Governor, the General Court, etc. etc. etc. 25,255 7 9
L.1,326,378 12 1
The particular accounts of payments from the treasury, are exceeding lengthy,
and could not with any convenience be here inserted,

It appears that of the above taxes which have been received into the treasury,
the greater part has been disbursed for defraying the expenses incurred by the
war; more than one hundred and eighty thousand pounds have been collected for
the use of Congress, partly in specie to enable them to pay for such services
as required prompt payment, to support the federal government, and pay the
interest of the foreign debt, and partly in the certificates of Mr. Appleton,
for the payment of the interest of the domestic debt.

It also appears, that exclusive of the sums paid to Congress, the public debt
has been much lessened. Almost the whole sum expressed in the first article of
the account of moneys expended, was paid to the militia and for other services
and supplies in the war; and was a part of the debt of this state, although notes
had not been given for it. The new emission bills, and the certificate money,
etc. and the warrants for rolls, etc. were also debts of the Commonwealth,
although the latter were charged to the Continent; and therefore, exclusive of
the army notes that are redeemed, more than six hundred and fifty thousand
pounds have been paid within the last six years, toward the debt of this
state, besides the interest of the notes of this Commonwealth.

The taxes abovementioned, were all made payable, either in specie or in the
new emission currency, or in the army notes, or in the certificate money
abovementioned, or the certificates of Mr. Appleton. Exclusive of these, the
people of this Commonwealth have paid large taxes of a different description.

By a resolve of December 3d, 1780, 4240 men were required to be raised by this
Commonwealth, for 3 years, or during the war. It appears by the returns of the
several towns, that the average price of hiring those men, was L.85 13 s. --
The expense of the whole, therefore, was L.363,156 0 By a resolve of March,
1782, 1500 men were ordered to be raised for the like term, the average price
of which was L.61 14 s8. -- The whole expense, therefore, was* 92,350 0 The
average price of hiring 2700 men, for three months, in 1781, was L.7 -- The
whole amounted to, 18,900 0 The average price of hiring 500 men, for five
months, in 1781, was L.7. -- and the whole amounted to 3500 0 Three beef taxes
have been granted, for procuring in the whole, 8,927,115 lb. of beef, which at
4d. per lb. would amount to 148,785 5 The old emission currency redeemed and
brought into the treasury, at the rate of 1 for 75, amounted to 122,655 12
L.749,346 17
The above expense it is manifest was occasioned by the war.

The account of the manner in which the money etc. received for taxes, etc. has
been expended, includes all the warrants that have been drawn on the Treasurer
from October 1781, to October 1786; the expense of civil government, to wit,
the Governor, Council, Senate and House of Representatives, Members of
Congress, Judges and Attorney General, Secretary and Treasurer and Clerks,
Commissary-General, Chaplain, Messengers, Committee for revising the laws, etc.
would, according to this account, be ninety thousand five hundred and forty
four-pounds fifteen shillings and two pence, for the last five years: but we
find that near the close of the paper-currency, warrants often times were not
drawn until a considerable time after the services were performed. In the
warrants mentioned in the above account in favor of the members of the General
Court and of the Congress, only five thousand six hundred and nineteen pounds 8
s. 1 d. was for service performed before October 1781, notwithstanding which we
shall consider the above sum of ninety thousand five hundred and forty-four
pounds fifteen shillings and two pence, as wholly the expense of civil
government the last five years; it will then follow that eighteen thousand one
hundred and eight pounds nineteen shillings, has been the annual expense of
government; about one half of this sum is for the service of the House of
Representatives; their travel is paid by the state, but their attendance is
ultimately paid by the towns they respectively represent; their travel is less
than one fifth part of the whole sum allowed them, and therefore four-fifths of
the expense of the Representatives is not so properly the charge of the
Commonwealth in general as of the particular towns that choose them. The
Sessions of the General Court since the war, have necessarily been frequent and
lengthy. A revision of the laws was found necessary, and has taken much time:
the matters to be attended to have been vastly numerous, and a far greater
variety of difficult and important questions has arisen than formerly, upon
which the people in different parts of the country were divided in sentiment;
as the Representatives brought to Court the views of their constituents, the
sessions have been lengthened out, by long and interesting debates. The
dsturbances at different times in the state, have also multiplied and
protracted the sessions. These embarrassments we hope are nearly at an end, and
whenever they cease, the expenses of civil government, will be considerably
diminished.

We shall state for your information on this subject, an account of the
salaries and emoluments of the several officers of government, before and since
the revolution.

The Governor, under the former administration, received a salary of L.1300 in
specie, he had the use of the province house, gardens, etc. he also received
for every register 5s. -- for every certificate under the province seal, 3s. --
one third part of all seizures and prizes, a considerable sum from the
naval-officer, and other emoluments, amounting, it is supposed, to L.1000 per
annum, making in the whole L.2300, -- he was also exempted from taxation.

The Governor, under the present constitution, has the yearly salary of
L.1100, no house or accomodations are provided for him, he receives no
perquisites or emoluments whatever, and is not exempt from taxes. When the
Governor's salary was settled, soon after the constitution, regard was had to
the probability that money would soon be as scarce and valuable as it was
before the war.

The Lieut. Governor, under the former administration, received no salary; but
as Captain of the Castle, received wages, rations, and the benefit arising from
passes, all which it is supposed amounted to L.250 per annum; the chief of the
time he was a member of the Council.

The Lieut. Governor, under the present constitution, receives no salary as
Lieut. Governor: but as Captain of the Castle, he also receives wages,
rations, and the like benefit arising from passes, all which, it is supposed,
amount to the same sum of L.250 per annum; he is also a member of the Council.

The Judges of the Superior Court, under the former administration, received as
follows, -- in the year 1774 a salary of L.300 was granted to the Chief
Justice, the other four received L.250 each; the fees of office, to wit, for
the entry of every action 6 s. 8 d. etc. etc. etc. which they received, paid
more than their traveling expenses, which were over and above their salary,
notwithstanding the business was far less than it is at present; some of the
Judges at least, were in other offices, as Judges of Probate, Counselors, etc.

Soon after the present constitution took place, salaries were granted to the
Judges of the Supreme Judicial Court, as follows, to wit. To the Chief Justice,
L.320 per annum, and to the other four Judges L.300 each. Since that time the
jurisdiction of that Court has been much enlarged, new powers have been given
to them to permit the sale of lands; they are now the Supreme Court of Probate,
they have jurisdiction in all cases of divorce and alimony, which heretofore
belonged to the Governor and Council. A Court is also holden in the county of
Lincoln. In consideration that their business was greatly increased, by an act
of February 1785, an addition of L.50 per annum was made to each of their
salaries, to commence January 1, 1784, and continue until January 1, 1787; they
are restrained by the constitution from receiving any other emolument whatever;
all the fees now taken by them, being deducted out of their salaries: great
part of their time is taken up in the service of the Commonwealth, on the
circuits, and nearly the remainder on the public business, at their respective
homes, in examining matters of law which are continued for their examination
and judgment; and it is supposed that the salary of the present Judges, is less
than the salary and purquisites of the former Judges.

The Treasurer under the former administration received L.267 per annum, and
was Counselor during the time he was in office: the office in which his
business was done, was found him by the the government, besides which an annual
grant from L.100 to L.120, was made him, for extra-services.

The present Treasurer has L.350, with a house and office, and his whole time
is employed in the business, and cannot have any other advantage whatever.

The Secretary under the former administration, received L.140 per annum,
besides his fees, which are supposed to amount to L.200 more, in the following
manner, to wit. for every certificate under the province seal, 2 s. engrossing
acts and laws, 6 s. each, every commission of a Justice of Oyer and Terminer
and Justice of the Peace, 6 s. 8 d. -- every commission under the great seal,
for places of profit, 6 s. 8 d. -- every order of the General Court for the
benefit of particular persons; 6 s. 8 d. -- every writ for electing
Representatives, 5 s. etc. etc. -- and yet his time was not half employed, and
additional grants upon many occasions were made him.

The present Secretary has a salary of L.250 per annum; the fees of office the
last year amounted to L.140, and were deducted from the aforesaid sum. He has
no fees of office but what are deducted from his salary, which is not nearly
equal to the salary and perquisites of the former Secretary, notwithstanding
the service rendered to government is more than double.

Before the war the province had two Agents at the Court of Great Britain, who
received a salary of L.400 lawful money each.

The Delegates at Congress, received for the last year, thirty three-shillings
per day, while they were in service: at the last May session, it was determined
that they should receive 2 6 s. for each day's attendance, for the year, which
commenced the first Monday of November current, which is to include every
expense.

The officers of Harvard-College now receive the same salaries as they did for
a number of years previous to the revolution.

The Clerk of the House of Representatives under the former administration,
received from L.90 to L.100, and received pay as a member of the Court.

The Clerk of the present House has received at the rate of L. 135 the sessions
being more frequent and much longer than formerly, and he cannot be a member of
the House.

The Messenger of the General Court formerly received L.120 -- The present
Messenger receives only L. 80.

It was supposed the avails of the Attorney General were very small during the
war, he was appointed to that office June 12th, 1777.

In January 1779, a grant was made him of L.900 of the old emission, equal in
specie, to L.100 0 In May, 1780, another grant was made him, of L.7500, equal
in specie, to 107 0 In March, 1784, a grant was made him in specie, of 1063 12
The whole amount of what has been granted him since his appointment to that
office, in 1777, is 1270 12
A considerable part of the money granted to the Attorney General in paper, was
not received till its value was much less than the sums to which it is
liquidated as above.

From this statement of facts, our constituents will judge, if there is any
ground for the suggestion, that the support of civil government is become an
insupportable burden upon the people.

It has been said indeed, that the Governor and the General Court are paid by
the Treasurer in money, when other creditors can get nothing, except orders on
the Constables of the several towns; but the present Governor has received
only L.15 1 s. 3 d. more than two quarters of his salary; the amount of what he
has received has not been sufficient to discharge his taxes since his first
election to the office of Governor; and there is not a member of the General
Court, who has received a farthing in specie from the Treasurer for his service
the present year -- nor have they since the constitution took place, received
from the treasury nearly so much in money as their actual expenses.

The fitting of the General Court in Boston, has occasioned uneasiness;
doubtless it would be more convenient for a part of the State, if it was holden
at some other place; but the interest and wishes of a part, are not to be
considered alone: Boston has long been thought the most convenient place: some
of the General Court have supposed otherwise; but the major part were against a
removal, and must the minor part therefore rise against the government? Because
they could not have every thing as they wished, could they be justified in
resorting to force? Such a principle would destroy all society. Attention,
however, has been paid to the instruction of many towns respecting the removal
of the General Court out of the town of Boston, and a Committee consisting of a
member from each county, has been appointed to consider the subject and report.

It never can be the case, that the whole community shall be of the same
opinion; in a republican government the major part must govern: if the minor
part governs, it becomes an aristocracy: if every one opposes at his pleasure,
it is no government, it is anarchy and confusion.

In some parts of the Commonwealth, it is frequently said, if our
Representative goes to Court, he will do us no service; for the measures he is
in favor of, will not be adopted: but why will they not be adopted? Every
measure that is proposed, is attended to, and considered; and if finally
rejected, it is because the majority think it inexpedient; and how absurd and
contradictory would the proceedings of the Court be, if every proposition
should be acceeded to.

The complaints in different parts of the State are repugnant, and petitions
from different places, request measures directly opposite; it is impossible
therefore, that all should be gratified: what then shall be done? Unless we
submit to be controuled by the greater number, the Commonwealth must break in
pieces; but neither will the inhabitants of any county or town be all of the
same sentiments, each man therefore must be a part, and the whole reduced to a
state of nature.

If then it is plain, that the vote of the major part must govern, the question
is, where shall that vote be taken? Not in a county convention; because
nine-tenths of the State are not represented, and their interest is not
attended to. The constitution has pointed out the mode of representation; and
will any one suppose, that because the persons chosen, are called a General
Court, they have less integrity of patriotism, than if they were called a
convention?

It is even said by some, that a new constitution is necessary; and although
the sentiments of the persons, who complain, are opposite on this point, the
subject may demand some attention. The objection made to the present
constitution, is the expense of the government. From the foregoing statement of
that expense for the last five years, we find, that if the expense of the House
of Representatives is included, it will not exceed eighteen thousand, one
hundred and nine pounds by the year; as there are in the State, more than
ninety-four thousand polls, if the whole sum was paid by the polls, each poll
must pay three shillings and ten pence and no more; but as about two-thirds of
the taxes are paid by the estates, the tax upon a poll, according to the
present mode of assessment, would be less than sixteen-pence.

It has been alleged, that the salaries given to the officers of government,
are a great burden.

The Governor has per annum L 1100 0 0 The Secretary 250 0 0 The Treasurer 350
0 0 The Judges of the Supreme Court 1775 0 0 The Commissary-General 150 0 0
Total. 3625 0 0
If this sum was wholly paid by the polls, the tax would be no more than
nine-pence halfpenny upon a poll: it must therefore be apparent to every
reasonable man, that the large taxes we have paid have not been applied to the
support of civil government.

We have but lately heard that the Senate has been thought by any one to be a
grievance; if it has been so considered, we think it must have been owing to
inattention; for we are convinced that every judicious man who attends to the
nature of our government, will consider that as an important and necessary
branch of the Legislature.

Before the constitution was formed every town in the State had a right to send
one or more Representatives; the people at that time were very tenacious of
this right; it is highly probable they would be so at the present time; perhaps
the very persons who complain would not be willing to part with it, for if they
preferred a Legislature elected by counties, to one chosen by the several
towns, such an assembly would be constituted like the present Senate, and
differ only in name; however, the cost of an experiment would far exceed the
sum proposed to be saved, as a revision of the constitution may take place in
1795, when it is to be hoped the minds of men will be in a more tranquil state.

An attempt to form the present constitution was begun in the year 1777, and
was not completed until the year 1780; the cost and trouble attending it, we
all remember were exceeding great, and perhaps nothing would finally have been
agreed to, if an unusual spirit of mutual condescension had not prevailed; a
sense of common danger from abroad produced internal harmony and union: But
what hope could we now have of that mutual compliance, which would be necessary
to agree upon a form of government, when the tempers of so many are in a state
of irritation? Should the present government be overthrown, a state of general
confusion would ensue; and after we had experienced all the horrors of anarchy,
and the effects of unrestrained violence and revenge, our dear earned freedom,
would probably be swallowed up, by domestic despotism or foreign dominion.

The constitution is as free and popular as the preservation of society will
admit; and indeed some have feared, it is more so: it has been highly applauded
by foreigners and approved by the people: all persons employed in the
legislative or executive parts of government, depend annually upon the people
for their choice; if the people are dissatisfied with their conduct, they have
an opportunity yearly to appoint others, in whom they can more fully confide.
Can there be any necessity then, of resorting to irregular, or violent
measures, to obtain redress of grievances?

That the people are overburthened with taxes is said to be a grievance: the
taxes have indeed been very great; perhaps the General Court have misjudged of
the abilities of their constituents, but it may be that those who complain, if
they knew the state of the public debt, and the motives of the Legislature,
would be satisfied. We shall therefore state them.

The sums applied to the use of the United States, were esteemed by Congress to
be indispensably necessary; and the General Court in former years supposed they
could not with any regard to their duty as a part of the union, refuse the
payment; nor could we think ourselves under less obligations to provide for the
payment of that part of the tax granted in March last, which is appropriated to
the use of the Continent.

The necessity of a speedy payment of the before mentioned part of that tax, is
complained of as a grievance. By the resolve of Congress of Sept. 27th, 1785,
it was provided, that the Commissioners of the Continental Loan-Office should
not on any pretense whatever, issue any certificates for the interest of the
Continental debt, until the State for which he was Loan-Officer, should have
passed a Legislative act, complying with the requisition in the said resolve;
and by the same resolve it was required, that the Legislature of each State
should provide in the act complying with that requisition, that if on the first
day of January, 1787, the said certificates should not be in the hands of some
proper officer, the deficiency should be paid in specie: it was therefore
absolutely necessary, that the act should be constructed as is was, otherwise
no certificates could have been issued; notwithstanding which, application is
now made to Congress, that the term for receiving those certificates may be
prolonged.

The army notes were made payable, one third part in 1784, one third in 1785,
and the remainder in 1786. The service of the officers and soldiers of the late
army, was acknowledged by all to be exceedingly meritorious, and perhaps no
part of the community had greater reason to complain of grievances than they.
It was represented that many of them were urgent to have the notes redeemed:
they were issued upon this express condition, that they should be receivable in
the first taxes after they should become payable, and the General Court well
knew, that if the abilities of the people were sufficient, it would be greatly
for their advantage to redeem them.

We think the observations that have been made will explain the necessity of
that part of the taxes, which has been applied to the support of civil
government. With regard to the residue of the taxes it is apparent, from the
manner in which the expenditures have been made, that they were occasioned by
the war. When the war first commenced, the people solemnly engaged to each
other to carry it on until they obtained security of their rights, although their
lives and fortunes should be the price of the purchase: if there was the least
truth or sincerity in these declarations, could it be supposed, they would
individually grudge the contribution of their part of the expense, when the
event exceeded their most sanguine expectations.

Public credit is one of the most important trusts committed to the
Legislature; in proportion as that declines, the State is weakened and in
danger. It is of the same importance to a community, as a character for truth
is to individuals. The want of a paper currency has been complained of as a
grievance; but we find that in diverse places where complaints have arisen, the
idea of a paper currency is rejected with marks of great disapprobation. Indeed
a little attention to the subject, we conceive, must satisfy every intelligent
and unprejudiced mind, that the emission of such a currency would be
exceedingly prejudicial. If it could be carried into circulation, the solid
coin would be exported, the morals of the people would become more depraved,
designing men would practice innumerable frauds; and if it should ever
afterward be redeemed, it would plunge the State in deeper distress: If it
should not be redeemed, it would cause the ruin of many individuals, and brand
the State with infamy. And upon whom would that ruin fall? Not upon the artful
and unprincipled, they would gain by the fraud; not upon the prudent and
discerning, they would be guarded against it; but the loss would chiefly happen
to the widow and the orphan, the simple and unwary; the most innocent and
defenseless part of the community; that part, whose interests the Legislature
ought to defend with peculiar attention. The widow and orphan are the special
charge of the Supreme Being, and all are enjoined to exercise vigilance and
tenderness for their welfare. This injunction every man, possessed of natural
affections, must feel the force of; for who can tell how soon his wife and his
children may fall a prey to sharpers and speculators, if a paper money system
shall be adopted.

A full experiment of this State's ability to uphold the credit of a paper
medium, was made in the case of the new emission: the faith of the United
States, and of this State, were both pledged for its support; a fund was
provided, sufficient to pay the interest; and although, when it first came into
circulation, it passed at the rate of one and seven-eighths for one, interest
to a large amount in silver was paid upon the nominal sum; notwithstanding
which, at the very time the interest was paying, the currency rapidly
depreciated.

We presume there is not a man in the State, who supposes, that if we ^mitted a
paper currency, it would not depreciate; and if it depreciates, it will pass at
different rates, in different places, and to different persons, at the same
time; it will therefore produce the same effect as diverse weights and diverse
measures, which we are assured are an abomination.

We feel in common with our neighbors the scarcity of money; but is not this
scarcity owing to our own folly? At the close of the war, there was no
complaint of it; since that time, our fields have yielded their increase, and
heaven has showered its blessings on us, in uncommon abundance; but are we not
constrained to allow, that immense sums have been expended, for what is of no
value, for the gewgaws imported from Europe, and the more pernicious produce of
the West Indies; and the dread of a paper currency impedes the circulation of
what remains: It is said however, that such a currency would give us present
relief; but like the pleasure of sin, it would be but for a reason; and like
that too, it would be a reproach to the community, and would produce calamities
without end.

Until the people can forget the injuries and frauds occasioned by paper
currencies, in their own time; we think they must be satisfied, of the
inexpediency and injustice, of making new emissions.

Within a few years the habits of luxury have exceedingly increased, the usual
manufactures of the country have been little attended to. That we can buy goods
cheaper than we can make them, is often repeated, and is even become a maxim in
economy, although a most absurd and destructive one. While these habits continue,
the wisest Legislature will not be able to remove our complaints: The emission
of a paper currency, and such like expedients, may seem to refresh us for a
moment; but they will serve to fan the flame, that must eventually consume us.

Without a reformation of manners, we can have little hope to prosper in our
public or private concerns. At the close of the war we greedily adopted the
luxurious modes of foreign nations. Although our country abounds with all the
necessaries of life, the importations from abroad, for our own consumption,
have been almost beyond calculation; we have indulged ourselves in fantastical
and expensive fashions and intemporate living; by these means our property has
been lessened and immense sums in specie have been exported. Government is
complained of, as if they had devoured them; and the cry of many persons now
is, make us paper money. This request is next in point of imprudence, to that
of the Israelites to Aaron, to make them a calf; and a compliance would be but
a little more honorable or advantageous, in the one case, than it was in the
other.

As the difficulty in paying debts increased, a disregard to honesty, justice
and good faith, in public and private transactions become more manifest That
virtue, which is necessary to support a Republic, has declined; and as a
people, we are now in the precise channel, in which the liberty of States has
generally been swallowed up. But still our case is not desperate; by recurring
to the principles of integrity and public spirit, and the practice of industry,
sobriety, economy, and fidelity in contracts, and by acquiescing in laws
necessary for the public good, the impending ruin may be averted, and we become
respectable and happy. -- By such means, we may falsify the invidious
predictions our enemies, that we should crumble to pieces, and should be too
corrupt to maintain republican freedom. In such a cause we may hope, that the
God of our fathers, who has defended us hitherto, will prosper the work of his
own hands, and save the fair structure of American liberty from falling into
ruin.

We make no boast of uncommon skill in legislation; but sacredly regarding the
oaths we have taken, we claim the merit of upright designs, and of pursuing as
far as we can judge, a system formed on the principles of justice, and
calculated to promote the honor, the safety and happiness of the State.

In a Commonwealth, where a spirit of unreasonable jealousy and a complaining
temper, are indulged and countenanced, it will be impossible to give
satisfaction to the people: if Angels in such case were to govern us,
opposition would be made to their administration; indeed we have a striking
instance that when such humors prevail, even the authority of the Supreme
Being will be thought a grievance. The people of Israel were under his
particular care and government; He was their Lawgiver and Judge; He delivered
them from their oppressors; He led them through the sea; He rained them down
the corn of Heaven, and sent them meat to the full; but notwithstanding, they
complained of His government and wantonly provoked His anger; like that people,
we have experienced astonishing testimonies of the divine favor. God forbid!
that like them, we should requite him with murmuring and ingratitude, and
provoke him to destroy us.

When the people are distressed with the conduct of any government, it may at
least deserve a reflection, whether the difficulty is not with themselves. At
the last election in this State, perhaps a greater number of new Members were
returned, than at any former period; they came together with a fixed design, to
gratify their constituents, in every thing which the interest of the community
would permit; and they never lost sight of that object; notwithstanding which,
greater dissatisfaction with public measures is expressed at this time, than
ever before since the revolution. The Legislature have attended to all the
petitions that have been presented, and all the complaints that have been made;
so far as justice will allow, they will comply with the requests in those
petitions and remove the grounds of those complaints. If they possess abilities
and integrity equal to the other members of the community, the advantages they
derive from the information collected from all parts of the State, and a public
discussion of subjects, render them more capable to judge, of the fitness of
public measures; but if they are to have the favor of the people, and a voice
in the public Counsels, only on condition of their establishing iniquity by
law, they are willing to lose the shameful pre-eminence.

The General Court have heard with inexpressible concern, of the insurrections
in several counties of the State. The pretense that the Court of Common Pleas,
is a grievance, affords but a wretched excuse for such outrageous proceedings;
that Court, except a small alteration in the name, has existed time immemorial;
no complaints were heard against it in former times; no application has been
made to the Legislature before this session to abolish it. The fees, except
those of Jurors and witnesses, are in many instances less, and we think in none
greater than they were before the war. Provision has been made to enable the
citizens to settle their demands without resorting to that Court, if they are
disposed to do it; several years since, the Justices of the Peace were
authorized to take acknowledgements of debts, even to the largest amount; and
more lately an act was passed to enable any persons in difference, who could
agree to refer their disputes, to resort to a Justice and enter into a rule for
that purpose, without being subject to the expense of an action. But if the
Court of Common Pleas has been by any supposed unnecessary, how surprising
then, the idea, that any persons could think themselves justified, in opposing
by force, an ancient institution, without taking a single step to obtain
redress in a regular method. But not content with obstructing the Courts of
Common Pleas, the disaffected have taken arms to prevent the sitting of the
Supreme Judicial Court, against which, not a single complaint has been uttered.
These proceedings are the more alarming, as they can be accounted for, only on
the supposition, that the instigators wish to subvert all order and government,
and reduce the Commonwealth, to the most deplorable state of wretchedness and
contempt.

In this view, our situation appears exceedingly alarming; sufficiently so, to
arrest the most serious attention* and summon the united efforts, of all orders
in the State. Some persons have artfully affected to make a distinction between
the government and people, as though their interests were different and even
opposite; but we presume, the good sense of our constituents will discern the
deceit and falsity of those insinuations. Within a few months the authority
delegated to us will cease, and all the citizens will be equally candidates in
a future election; we are therefore no more interested to preserve the
constitution and support the government, than others: but while the authority
given us continues, we are bound to exercise it for the benefit of our
constituents. And we now call upon persons of all ranks and characters to exert
themselves for the public safety. Upon the Ministers of religion, that they
inculcate upon the minds of their people, the principles of justice and public
virtue; that they earnestly endeavor to impress them with sentiments of
reverence to the Deity and benevolence to men, and convince them of the ruinous
effects of luxury and licentiousness. Upon the officers of every denomination,
that they endeavor to inform the ignorant; and by their examples of economy,
to induce others to the practice of the same virtue; and that they use their
utmost efforts to suppress the insurrections of such lawless and violent men,
as may wish to pull down the fabric of law and government, and level it with
the dust. And upon the whole body of the people, that they provide for the
instruction of the rising generation; that they practice all those virtues
which are the ornament and strength of society, and abstain from those vices
and follies, that weaken the State, and have a tendency to its ruin; and
especially that they oppose with fortitude and perserverance, all attempts to
impede the course of justice and render their own lives and property insecure.

Many who disapprove insurrections against the government, neglect to afford
their aid, in suppressing them; but to stand still, inactive spectators in such
case, is like a man who when his house is in flames, should stand with folded
arms, and console himself with this, that he did not set it on fire.

We persuade ourselves, that the far greater part of those who have been
concerned in the late dangerous tumults, have been deluded by the false
representations of men who go about to deceive; and we wish them to reflect how
fatal such proceedings may prove in the issue, to themselves and their
children; that they must increase the public burdens, and embarrass the
measures calculated for relief; that it is their own constitution and laws they
are endeavoring to overthrow; that this constitution and these laws were
formed for the safety of every member of the State; and that the man who
attempts to subvert those laws, and that constitution, does in effect make an
attempt upon the life, liberty and property of every member of the community;
and we conjure them, by all that they hold dear and sacred, forthwith to desist
from such ruinous pursuits.

Perhaps there are some, who deaf to the voice of reason, and lost to all sense
of justice and virtue, may resolve to continue in their dangerous course; but
let them be assured, although they flatter themselves that the considerations
of friendship and affinity, may delay the time of recompense; yet the vengeance
of an injured community, must one day, pursue and overtake them.

TREASURY-OFFICE, 27th October, 1786.
I HAVE examined and compared the statements that are here presented to the
public, and so far as respects the accounts in this office, I find they are
just and true.

THOMAS IVERS, Treasurer.

IN SENATE, OCTOBER 30, 1786.
THE foregoing Address was read and accepted; and thereupon,

ORDERED, That the Secretary cause twelve hundred copies thereof, to be printed
as soon as may be; each Member of the Legislature to be furnished with one
copy, and one copy to be sent to each of the Ministers of the several parishes,
and the Clerks of the several towns, districts and plantations, within this
Commonwealth. And the said Ministers are required to read the same to their
respective assemblies, on Thanksgiving-Day, immediately after divine service,
or to call a Lecture and read the same on that occasion; and in both cases they
are requested to give notice on the preceding Sabbath, of the time when the
same will be read. -- And the Clerks of the said towns, districts and
plantations, are directed to read the same at the next meeting of the towns,
districts or plantations, to which they respectively belong; and where no such
meeting is to be held at an early period on other business, the Selectmen of
such town, district or plantation, are directed to call a meeting specially for
that purpose.

Sent down for concurrence. SAMUEL PHILLIPS, jun. President.
In the HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES, Nov. 14, 1780. Read and concurred. ARTEMAS
WARD, Speaker.
True copy. Attest. JOHN AVERY, jun. Secretary.


