AN HUMBLE, EARNEST, AND Affectionate ADDRESS TO THE CLERGY.

BY WILLIAM LAW, A. M.

TO WHICH IS PREFIXED A SHORT ACCOUNT OF HIS LIFE AND CHARACTER.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, IN MARKET-STREET, BETWEEN
SECOND AND THIRD-STREETS, M DCC LXXXVI.

SOME ACCOUNT OF WILLIAM LAW, AUTHOR OF THE FOLLOWING ADDRESS AND DIVERSE OTHER
RELIGIOUS TRACTS.
HE was born at King's Cliff, a Market Town in Northamptonshire, (G. B.) in the
Year 1687; his Parents were of good Repute and in Circumstances, which enabled
them to give him a liberal Education. -- He was sent early to the University of
Cambridge and was of Emanuel College, where his superior Genius soon
distinguished itself by three Letters to (Hoadly) the Bishop of Bangor so
greatly, that upon their Publication the celebrated Bishop Atterbury waited
upon him and made him this Compliment; "Mr. Law, from your Writings, instead of
seeing a Youth, I should have expected to see gray Hairs." The universal
Applause those three Letters met with, instead of filling his mind with Pride
and Vanity, the too pregnant Attendants of superior Abilities and human
Applause, only served to make him the more retired from the World, in order the
more deeply to look into himself.

He lived a single Life, and the last twenty Years of it in the same Town in
which he was born; but the Reasons of his not continuing in the Ministry can
only be conjectured: For it is not known that he ever acquainted any one with
them.

As to his Sentiments concerning all Churches of the present Time, they are
sufficiently manifest in his Writings; and they are, that all of them are in a
fallen State both with respect to Doctrine and Practice, having wandered very
far from the Truth, and the Spirit of the Gospel, placing Religion in a regular
round of formal, dull Duties, or Performances, and empty, groundless Doctrines,
instead of the real Love of God and Man. The first Fruits which his Retirement
produced were his two excellent Treatises of Christian Perfection and Serious
Call to a Devout and holy Life: From these instructive Writings, by a gradual
Progress in Spirituality and sound Philosophy, Providence called him (when he
was duly qualified for it) to illustrate and unfold deep mystic Writings, which
he has done with much Fullness and Depth of Penetration.

In the Year 1727 he founded a Charity-school at King's Cliff, and afterward
added two Tenements for two ancient Women with a weekly Allowance.

In the Year 1745, Elizabeth Hutchinson, relict of Archibald Hutchinson, Esquire of
Westminster, founded another School in the same Place, for the Education and
Clothing of eighteen poor Boys, and afterward added to it four little
Tenements for four ancient Widows. -- These Charities are under the Direction
of six Trustees, and are always to be appropriated only to the Benefit of the
Town of King's Cliff.

The following Circumstances whereby he was enabled to be extensively useful
are remarkable. -- Attending the Feast of the Sons of the Clergy at St. Paul's
Cathedral, a Gentleman who was unknown to him came to him and asked his Name,
to whom he modestly answered, "My Name, Sir, is William Law." Whereupon upon
the Gentleman gave him a Letter directed to our Author himself, which he, for
the present, put into his Pocket, and which, upon opening it at a convenient
Opportunity, he found enclosed a Bank Note for one thousand Pounds Sterling:
And at another time a Bank Note for five hundred Pounds Sterling, was sent him
from an unknown Hand. Note here, that the abovenamed Elizabeth Hutchinson, and
-- Gibbons, retiring from the distracting Cares which attend Gentlewomen in
high Life, lodged their Money in the Public Funds and lived with W. Law for
several Years before his Death; and afterward resided very amicably in the
House which he left; never going up to London, but enjoying the Sweets of
Retirement.

George Ward, that Self-denying Mystic, to whom several of Law's Letters which
have been published are directed, a most amiable Man, scarce known to the
World, commonly visited them once a Year.

That truly pious and catholic-spirited Writer, Doctor Philip Doddridge, in a
Sermon to young Persons, has the following Passage concerning William Law. "It
is an awakening Saying of one of the most lively and pathetic, as well as most
pious, Writers which our Age has produced. That the Condition of Man, in his
natural State, seems to be like that of a Person sick of a variety of Diseases,
knowing neither his Distemper nor Cure, but unhappily enclosed in a Place where
he could hear, or see, or taste, or feel nothing, but what tended to inflame
his Disorder. Law of Christian Perfection, Page, II.

The Writer of the Life of John Buncle, A noted Deist.
after having unreasonably censured William Law, as a Visionary and Enthusiast,
etc. was obliged to acknowledge the following excellent Character of him and of
the aforementioned Treatises. The Reverend Nonjuror, Mr. WILLIAM LAW, was a Man
of Sense, a fine Writer and a fine Gentleman. His Temper was charming, sweet,
and delightful; and his Manners quite primitive, and uncommonly pious: He was
all Charity and Goodness, and so soft and gentle in Conversation, that I have
thought myself in Company with one of the Men of the first Church at Jerusalem,
while with him. He had likewise the justest Notions of Christian Temper and
Practice, and recommended them in so insinuating a Manner, that even a Rake
would hear him with Pleasure? I have not seen any Thing like him among the Sons
of Men in these particulars. He was really a very extraordinary Man; and, to
his Honor, be it remembered, that he had the great Concern of human Life at
Heart, took a Deal of Pains in the Pulpit, and from the Press, witness his two
fine Books on Christian Perfection and a Devout Life; to make Men fear God and
keep his Commandments. He was a good Man indeed. These are good Books, written
in the true Spirit of Christianity and well worth the Consideration of
Christians.

This engaging Character of Wm. Law brings to Mind the following Anecdote we
have somewhere met with. "The Earl of Peterborough, after a Visit paid by him
to Fenelon, Archbishop of Cambray, said to Alexander Pope, Fenelon is a Man
cast in a particular Mould which has not been used for any Body else: He is a
delicious Creature! But I was forced to get from him as soon as I possibly
could; for else he would have made me pious."

In his younger Years Law exhibited very conspicuously, sufficient Proofs of
being learned in human Arts and Sciences; but he soon embraced the Counsel our
Savior gave the rich young Man and renounced the World wholly; and solely
followed CHRIST, in Meekness, Humility and Self-denial. In his latter Years he
was looked upon as quite absorbed and thoroughly animated with Love to GOD and
Men; so that the Powers of Life in him were nothing but heavenly Love and
heavenly Flames.

A Writer, under the Signature of Christophilus, in Lloyd's Evening Post in the
Year 1772, speaking of William Law and recommending his Writings, says, "Though
I had no long Acquaintance with him, yet a few Months before his Decease, I was
indulged with an ample and intimate Conversation with him upon the State of
Religion in our Time and Nation, and on many other the most interesting
Subjects. This I regard as a Favor of GOD bestowed on me, and which I would
not have been without on any Consideration. I only wish to make the very best
Use of it, in all Respects. -- Mr. Law lived as he wrote and died as he lived.
I am pretty credibly informed that amidst the most excruciated Pains of the
Stone, and at the Age of Seventy five Years, immediately before his
Dissolution, rising up in his Bed, he said, Take away these filthy Garments; I
feel a Fire of Love within, which has burnt up every Thing contrary to itself
and transformed every Thing into its own Nature. Oh! might every Minister and
each of their Flocks (of every Denomination) live the Life and die the Death of
this truly righteous Man!"

"To give a short Specimen of the Conversation which passed between us; Sir,
(says he) I am not fond of religious Gossiping. My best Thoughts are in my
Works, and to them I recommend you. If I should seem to you a positive old
Fellow, I cannot help it, well knowing the Ground from which I write: But, dear
Sir, above all Things be present with, and attend carefully to, your own Heart;
there you will be sure to meet with all the Evil; and there only you can meet
with God and all real Goodness. -- Having already reaped Benefit by this
Advice* (through God's Mercy) I communicate it to the Public for the same End;
it is needful; and may it prove, together with his other Writings, a Standard
lifted up against that Inundation of infidel Profligacy and notional Faith;
against the numberless Number of flagrant Sinners and hypocritical, false
Saints, which every where divide a fallen Christendom."

"Upon my own Knowledge, says the worthy Hartley, Mr. Law was a Gentleman of
free Conversation and often received Company at his House in King's Cliff."

He died April 9th 1761, Aged 75 Years, and the whole of the following Address
was sent by himself to be printed, except a few Pages, the last of which was
written by him not many Days before his Death, and though it appears chiefly
directed to the Episcopal Clergy, is of common Concern to all professed
Ministers of the Gospel and Christians in general.

An Extract from a Letter written by the late WILLIAM LAW, to J*** R*****, of
Northampton, in Answer to one from the latter, wherein he intimated to W. L. a
Desire to pay him a VISIT, proposing thereby to receive Instruction from his
Conversation on the SPIRITUAL LIFE.
AS to your Intention of a Visit here I can say Nothing to encourage it, and
though my Countenance would have no forbidding Airs put on by myself, yet as
old Age has given me her own Complexion, I might perhaps bear the Blame of it.

But my chief Objection against a Visit of this Kind, is the Reason which you
give for it, viz. For my instructive Conversation on the Spiritual Life.

An Appointment for religious Conversation has a taking Sound, and passes for
a Sign of great Progress in Goodness; but with Regard to myself such a Meeting
would rather make me silent than a Speaker in it.

First, Because I hurt myself, and am only acting a Part if I speak to Persons
on spiritual Matters either sooner or further than as the Spirit of God (which
blows when and where it lists) would be resisted in me if I held my Tongue.

Secondly, Because it is deluding the Persons I speak to, and helping them to
be content with an imaginary false Food, should I as a spiritual Assistant
speak to them of any Thing but that which is their own Evil and their own Good:
For true Edification arises only from such Knowledge, and not from devout
Harangues on the spiritual Life in general, though set forth in the most
enlivened Words.

The Spiritual Life is Nothing else but the working of the Spirit of God within
us, and therefore our own Silence must be a great Part of our Preparation for
it, and much speaking or Delight in it will be often no small Hindrance of that
Good which we can only have from hearing what the Spirit and Voice of God
speaks within us.

This is not enough known by religious Persons; they rejoice in kindling a Fire
of their own, and delight too much in hearing of their own Voice, and so lose
that inward Unction from above which can alone new create their Hearts.

To speak with the Tongues of Men or Angels on religious Matters, is a much
less Thing than to know how to stay the Mind upon God, and abide with him in
the Closet of our Hearts, observing, loving, adoring, and obeying his holy
Power within us.

Rhetoric and fine Language about the Things of the Spirit is a vainer Babble
than in other Matters; and he that thinks to grow in true Goodness by hearing
or speaking flaming Words or striking Expressions, as is now much the Way of
the World, may have a great Deal of Talk, but will have but little of his
Conversation in Heaven.

I have wrote very largely on the Spiritual Life, and he that has read and
likes it, has of all Men the least Reason to ask me any Questions about, or
visit me on that Occasion. He understands not my Writings, nor the End of them,
who does not see that their whole Drift is to call all Christians to a God and
Christ within them, as the only possible Life, Light, and Power of all Goodness
they can ever have; and therefore as much turn my Readers from myself, as from
any other Lo here, or Lo there. -- I invite all People to the Marriage of the
Lamb, but no one to myself.

Your Humble Servant, W. L.
SHOULD the Perusal of the foregoing Extract excite in the Minds of any a
Desire to become acquainted with more of this Author's Sentiments respecting
the important Subject of Christianity, they are referred to his Literary Works,
which well deserve the most serious and attentive Perusal, being evidently the
Fruits of an unfeigned Piety: They prove beyond the smallest Degree of Doubt,
the Insufficiency of the Human Reason unenlightened by Revelation to comprehend
the Mysteries of the Christian Religion, which are only clearly understood by
the Spiritually Discerning.

This Divinely-inspired Writer has wisely rejected, as vain and trifling with
Respect to the great Cause of True Religion, all those abstruse Speculations
which are merely human, and equally within the Reach of the virtuous and the
vicious, as they too frequently serve but to divert the Mind from the proper
Object of its Contemplation. How very inconsiderable is that Knowledge which
relates only to Things terrestrial, that Study which extends not beyond the
narrow Confines of Time, when compared to the Acquisition of True Wisdom, which
makes wise unto Salvation, whose Ways are Ways of Pleasantness, and all whose
Paths are Peace. Those who receive their Instructions from the Source of Divine
Knowledge, and pursue that Mode of Conduct it points out to them, will
assuredly experience that Peace which the World can neither give nor take away,
and anticipate with Joy inexpressible that awful Moment, that most solemn
Season when the immortal Soul shall take its Flight to the unexplored Regions
of Futurity. Happy is the Man that finds Wisdom: Whosoever finds her finds
Life, and shall obtain Favor of the Lord.



AN ADDRESS TO THE CLERGY.
THE Reason of my humbly and affectionately addressing this Discourse to the
Clergy, is not, because it treats of Things not of common concern to all
Christians, but chiefly to invite and induce them, as far as I can, to the
serious Perusal of it; and because whatever is essential to Christian
Salvation, if either neglected, overlooked, or mistaken by them, is of the
saddest Consequence both to themselves, and the Churches in which they
minister. -- I say essential to Salvation, for I would not turn my own
Thoughts, or call the Attention of Christians to any Thing, but the one Thing
needful, the one Thing essential, and only available, to our Rising out of our
fallen State, and becoming, as we were at our Creation, an holy Offspring of
God, and real Partakers of the divine Nature.

If it be asked, What this one Thing is? It is the SPIRIT OF GOD brought again
to his FIRST POWER OF LIFE IN US. Nothing else is wanted by us, nothing else
intended for us, by the Law, the Prophets, and the Gospel. Nothing else is, or
can be effectual, to the making sinful man become again a godly Creature.

Every thing else, be it what it will, however glorious and divine in outward
Appearance, every Thing, that Angels, Men, Churches, or Reformations, can do
for us, is dead and helpless, but so far as it is, the immediate Work of the
Spirit of God, breathing, and living in it.

All Scripture bears full witness to this Truth, and the End and Design of all
that is written, is only to call us back from the Spirit of Satan, the Flesh,
and the World, to be again under full Dependence upon, and Obedience to the
Spirit of God, who out of free Love, and thirst after our Souls, seeks to have
his first Power of Life in us. When this is done, all is done, that the
Scripture can do for us. -- Read what Chapter, or Doctrine of Scripture you
will, be ever so delighted with it, it will leave you as poor, as empty, and
unreformed, as it found you, unless it be a Delight, that proceeds from, and
has turned you wholly, and solely to the Spirit of God, and strengthened your
Union with, and Dependence upon Him. For Love and Delight in matters of
Scripture, whilst it is only a Delight that is merely human, however Specious
and Saint-like it may appear, is but the Self-love of sallen Adam, and can have
no better a Nature, till it proceeds from the Inspiration of God, quickening
his own Life and Nature within us, which alone can have, or give forth a godly
Love. For if it be an immutable Truth, that no man can call Jesus, Lord, but by
the Holy Ghost, it must be a Truth equally immutable, that no one can have any
one Christ-like Temper, or Power of Goodness, but so far, and in such Degree,
as he is immediately led, and governed by the holy Spirit.

The Grounds and Reasons of which, are as follow.

All possible Goodness, that either can be named, or is nameless, was in God
from all Eternity, and must to all Eternity be inseparable from him; it can be
no where, but where God is. As therefore before God created any Thing, it was
certainly true, that there was but one that was good; so it is just the same
Truth, after God has created innumerable Hosts of blessed, holy, and heavenly
Beings, that there is but one that is good, and that is God.

All that can be called Goodness, Holiness, divine Tempers, heavenly
Affections, etc. in the Creatures, are no more their own, or the Growth of
their created Powers, than they were their own, before they were created. But
all that is called divine Goodness and Virtue in the Creature, is nothing else,
but the one Goodness of God manifesting a Birth, and Discovery of itself in the
Creature, according as its created Nature is fitted to receive it. This is the
unalterable State between God and the Creature. Goodness, for ever and ever,
can only belong to God, as essential to him, and inseparable from him, as his
own Unity.

God could not make the Creature to be great, and glorious in itself; this is
as impossible, as for God to create Beings into a State of Independance on
himself. The Heavens, says David, declare the Glory of God; and no Creature,
any more than the Heavens, can declare any other Glory, but that of God. And as
well might it be said, that the Firmament shows forth its own Handiwork, as
that a holy, divine, or heavenly Creature, shows forth its own natural Power.

But now, if all that is divine, great, glorious, and happy, in the Spirits,
Tempers, Operations, and Enjoyments of the Creature, is only so much of the
Greatness, Glory, Majesty, and Blessedness of God, dwelling in it, and giving
forth various Births of his own triune Life, Light, and Love, in and through
the manifold Forms, and Capacities of the Creature to receive them, then we may
infallibly see the true Ground and Nature of all true Religion; and when, and
how, we may be said to fulfill all our Religious Duty to God. For the Creatures
true Religion, is its rendering to God, all that is God's, it is its true
continual Acknowledging all that which it is, and has, and enjoys, in and from
God. This is the one true Religion of all intelligent Creatures, whether in
Heaven, or on Earth; for as they all have but one and the same Relation to God,
so though ever so different in their several Births, States or Offices, they
all have but one and the same true Religion, or right Behavior toward God.
Now the one Relation, which is the Ground of all true Religion, and is one and
the same between God, and all intelligent Creatures, is this, it is a total,
unalterable Dependence upon God, an immediate, continual receiving of every
Kind, and Degree of Goodness, Blessing, and Happiness, that ever was, or can be
found in them, from God alone. The highest Angel has nothing of its own, that
it can offer unto God, no more Light, Love, Purity, Perfection, and glorious
Hallelujahs, that spring from itself, or its own Powers, than the poorest
Creature upon Earth. Could the Angel see a Spark of Wisdom, Goodness, or
Excellence, as coming from, or belonging to its self, its Place in Heaven would
be lost, as sure as Lucifer lost his. But they are ever abiding Flames of Pure
Love, always ascending up to, and uniting with God, for this Reason, because
the Wisdom, the Power, the Glory, the Majesty, the Love, and Goodness of God
alone, is all that they see, and feel, and know, either within, or without
themselves. -- Songs of Praise to their heavenly Father, are their ravishing
Delight, because they see, and know, and feel, that it is the Breath and Spirit
of their Heavenly Father that sings and rejoices in them. -- Their Adoration in
Spirit and in Truth never ceases, because they never cease to acknowledge the
ALL of God; -- the ALL of God in themselves, and the ALL of God in the whole
Creation. This is the one Religion of Heaven, and nothing else is the Truth of
Religion on Earth.

The Matter therefore plainly comes to this, Nothing can do, or be, the Good of
Religion to the intelligent Creature, but the Power and Presence of God, really
and essentially living and working in it. But if this be the unchangeable
Nature of that Goodness and Blessedness, which is to be had from our Religion,
then of all Necessity, the Creature must have all its Religious Goodness, as
wholely and solely from God's immediate Operation, as it had its first Goodness
at its Creation. And it is the same Impossibility for the Creature to help
itself to That, which is good, and blessed in Religion, by any Contrivance,
Reasonings, or Workings of its own Natural Powers, as to create itself. For the
Creature after its Creation, can no more take any Thing to itself, that belongs
to God, than it could take it, before it was created. And if Truth forces us to
hold, that the Natural Powers of the Creature could only come from the one
Power of God, the same Truth should surely more force us to confess, that That
which comforts, that which enlightens, that which blesses, which gives Peace,
Joy, Goodness, and rest to its natural Powers, can be had in no other way, nor
by any other Thing, but from God's immediate, holy Operation found in it.

Now the Reason, why no Work of Religion, but that which is begun, continued,
and carried on by the Living Operation of God in the creature, can have any
Truth, Goodness, or divine Blessing in it, is because, nothing can in Truth
seek God, but that which comes from God. Nothing can in Truth find God, as its
Good, but that which has the Nature of God living in it; like can only rejoice
in like; and therefore no religious Service of the Creature, can have any
Truth, Goodness, or Blessing in it, but that which is done in the Creature, in,
and through, and by a Principle and Power of the divine Nature begotten, and
breathing forth in it all holy Tempers, Affections, and Adorations.

All true Religion is, or brings forth, an essential Union, and Communion of
the Spirit of the Creature, with the Spirit of the Creator: God in it, and it
in God, one Life, one Light, one Love. The Spirit of God first gives, or sows
the Seed of divine Union in the Soul of every Man; and Religion is That, by
which it is quickened, raised, and brought forth to a Fullness, and growth of a
Life in God, -- Take a Similitude of this, as follows. -- The Beginning, or
Seed of animal Breath, must first be born in the Creature from the Spirit of
this World, and then Respiration, so long as it lasts, keeps up an essential
Union of the animal Life with the Breath, or Spirit of this World. In like
manner, divine Faith, Hope, Love, and Resignation to God, are in the religious
Life, its acts of Respiration, which so long as they are true, unite God and
the Creature, in the same living, and essential manner, as animal Respiration,
unites the Breath of the Animal, with the Breath of this World.

Now as no Animal could begin to respire, or unite with the Breath of this
World, but because it has its Beginning to breathe, begotten in it from the Air
of this World, so it is equally certain, that no Creature, Angel or Man, could
begin to be religious, or breathe forth the divine Affections of Faith, Love,
and Desire toward God, but because a Living Seed of these divine Affections,
was by the Spirit of God first begotten in it. -- And as a Tree, or Plant can
only grow, and fructify by the same Power, that first give Birth to the Seed,
so Faith, and Hope, and Love toward God, can only grow, and fructify by the
same Power, that begat the first Seed of them in the Soul. Therefore divine,
immediate Inspiration, and divine Religion, are inseparable in the Nature of
the Thing.

Take away Inspiration, or suppose it to cease, and then no Religious acts, or
Affections, can give forth any Thing, that is godly or divine. For the Creature
can offer, or return Nothing to God, but That, which it has first received from
him; therefore, if it is to offer and send up to God, Affections, and
Aspirations, that are divine and godly, it must of all necessity have the
divine and godly Nature living, and breathing in it. -- Can any Thing reflect
Light, before it has received it, or any other Light, than that which it has
received? Can any Creature breathe forth earthly, or diabolical Affections,
before it is possessed of an earthly, or diabolical Nature? Yet this is as
possible, as for any Creature to have divine Affections rising up, and dwelling
in it, either before, or any farther, than as it has, or partakes of the divine
Nature, dwelling, and operating in it.

A religious Faith, that is uninspired, a Hope, or Love, that proceeds not from
the immediate Working of the divine Nature within us, can no more do any divine
Good to our Souls, or unite them with the Goodness of God, than an Hunger after
earthly Food, can feed us with the immortal Bread of Heaven. -- All that the
natural, or uninspired Man does, or can do in the Church, has no more of the
Truth, or Power of divine Worship in it, than that, which he does in the Field,
or Shop, through a Desire of Riches. -- And the Reason is, because all the Acts
of the Natural Man, whether relating to Matters of Religion, or the World, must
be equally Selfish, and there is no Possibility of their being otherwise. For
Self-love, Self-esteem, Self-seeking, and Living wholly to Self, are as
strictly the Whole of all that is, or possibly can be, in the Natural Man, as
in the Natural Beast; the one can no more be better, or act above this Nature,
than the other. Neither can any Creature be in a better, or higher State than
this, till something Supernatural is found in it; and this Supernatural
something, called in Scripture, the WORD, or SPIRIT, or INSPIRATION of God, is
that alone, from which Man can have the first Good Thought about God, or the
least Power of having more heavenly Desires in his Spirit, than he has in his
Flesh.

A Religion that is not wholly built upon this Supernatural Ground, but solely
stands upon the Powers, Reasonings, and Conclusions of the Natural, uninspired
Man, has not so much as the Shadow of true Religion in it, but is a mere
Nothing, in the same Sense, as an Idol is said to be Nothing, because the Idol
has nothing of That in it, which is pretended by it. For the Work of Religion
has no divine good in it, but as it brings forth, and keeps up essential Union
of the Spirit of Man, with the Spirit of God; which essential Union cannot be
made, but through Love on both Sides, nor by Love, but where the Love that
works on both Sides, is of the same Nature.

No Man therefore can reach God with his Love, or have Union with him by it,
but he who is inspired with that one same Spirit of Love, with which God loved
himself from all Eternity, and before there was any Creature. -- Infinite Hosts
of new created Heavenly Beings, can begin no new Kind of Love of God, nor have
the least Power of beginning to Love him at all, but so far as his own holy
Spirit of Love, wherewith he has from all Eternity loved Himself, is brought
to Life in them. This Love that was then in God alone, can be the only Love in
Creatures, that can draw them to God; they can have no Power of cleaving to
Him, of willing that which He wills, or adoring the divine Nature, but by
partaking of that eternal Spirit of Love; and therefore the continual,
immediate Inspiration, or Operation of the holy Spirit, is the one only
possible Ground of our continually Loving God. And of this inspired Love, and
no other, it is, that St. John says, He that dwells in Love, dwells in
God. Suppose it to be any other Love, brought forth by any other Thing, but the
Spirit of God, breathing his own Love in us, and then it cannot be true, that
he who dwells in such Love, dwells in God.

Divine Inspiration was essential to man's first created State. The Spirit of
God, breathed into, or brought to Life in him, was that alone, which made him a
holy Creature in the Image and Likeness of God. To have no other Mover, to live
under no other Guide or Leader, but the Spirit, was that, which constituted all
the Holiness, which the first man could have from God. Had he not been thus at
the first, God in him and he in God, brought into the World as a true
offspring, and real Birth of the holy Spirit, no Dispensation of God to fallen
man, would have directed him to the holy Spirit, or ever have made mention of
his Inspiration in Man. For fallen Man could be directed to Nothing, as his
Good, but that which he had, and was his Good, before he fell. And had not the
holy Spirit been his first Life, in and by which he lived, no inspired Prophets
amongst the Sons of fallen Adam, had ever been heard of, or any holy men
speaking as they were moved by the holy Ghost. For the Thing would have been
impossible, no fallen Man could have been inspired by the holy Spirit, but
because the first Life or Man was a true and real Birth of it; and also because
every fallen Man, had by the Mercy and free Grace of God, a secret Remains of
his first Life, preserved in him, though*, hidden, or rather swallowed up by
Flesh and Blood; which secret Remains, signified, and assured to Adam, by the
name of a Bruiser of the Serpent, or Seed of the woman, was his only capacity
to be called, and quickened again into his first Life, by new Breathings of the
holy Spirit in Him.

Hence it plainly appears, that the Gospel State, could not be God's last
Dispensation, or the finishing of Man's Redemption, unless its whole Work, was
a Work of the Spirit of God in the Spirit of Man; that is, unless without all
Vails, Types, and Shadows, it brought the Thing itself, or the Substance of all
former Types, and Shadows, into real Enjoyment, so as to be possessed by Man in
Spirit, and in truth. Now the Thing itself, and for the Sake of which, all
God's Dispensations have been, is that first Life of God, which was essentially
born in the Soul of the first Man, Adam, and to which he died. But now, if the
Gospel Dispensation comes at the End of all Types, and Shadows, to bring forth
again in Man, a true and full Birth of that holy Spirit, which he had at first,
then it must be plain, that the Work of this Dispensation, must be solely, and
immediately the Work of the holy Spirit. For if Man could no other possible
way, have had a holy Nature, and Spirit at first, but as an Offspring, or Birth
of the holy Spirit, at his Creation, it is certain from the Nature of the
Thing, that fallen Man, dead to his first holy Nature, can have that same holy
Nature again, no other way, but solely by the Operation of that same holy
Spirit, from the Breath of which, he had at first, a holy Nature and Life in
God. Therefore immediate Inspiration is as necessary to make fallen Man alive
again unto God, as it was to make Man at first, a Living Soul after the Image,
and in the Likeness of God. And Continual Inspiration is as necessary, as Man's
Continuance in his redeemed State. For this is a certain Truth, that That
alone, which begins, or gives Life, must of all Necessity be the only
Continuance, or Preservation of Life. The second Step can only be taken by
That, which gave Power to take the first. -- No Life can continue in the
Goodness of its first created, or redeemed State, but by its continuing under
the Influence of, and working with, and by that powerful Root, or Spirit, which
at first created, or redeemed it. Every Branch of the Tree, though ever so
richly brought forth, must wither and dye, as soon as it ceases to have
continual Union with, and Virtue from that Root, which first brought it forth.
And to this Truth, as absolutely grounded in the Nature of the Thing, our Lord
appeals as a Proof, and full Illustration of the Necessity of his immediate
indwelling, Breathing, and Operating in the redeemed Soul of Man, saying, I am
the Vine, ye are the Branches, as the Branch cannot bear fruit of itself, no
more can ye, except ye abide in me. He that abides in me, and I in him, the
some brings forth much Fruit. If a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a
withered Branch; for without me, ye can do* Nothing. John xv.

Now from these Words, let this conclusion be here drawn, viz. That therefore,
to turn to Christ as a Light within us, to expect Life from nothing but his
holy Birth raised within us, to give ourselves up wholly and solely to the
immediate, continual Influx, and Operation of his holy Spirit, depending wholly
upon it for every Kind, and Degree of Goodness and Holiness, that we want, or
can receive, is, and can be Nothing else, but proud, rank Enthusiasm.

Now as infinitely absurd as this conclusion is, no one that condemns
continual, immediate Inspiration, as gross Enthusiasm, can possibly do it with
less absurdity, or show himself a wiser Man, or better Reasoner, than he that
concludes, that because, without Christ we can do Nothing, therefore we ought
not to believe, expect, wait for, and depend upon his continual, immediate
operation in every Thing that we do, or would do well. -- As to the Pride
charged upon this pretended Enthusiasm, it is the same absurdity. Christ says,
without me ye can do Nothing, the same as if he had said, As to yourselves, and
all that can be called your own, ye are mere helpless Sin and Misery, and
Nothing that is good, can come from you, but as it is done by the continual,
immediate Breathing and Inspiration or another Spirit, given by God, to
overruled your own, to save and deliver you from all your own Goodness, your
own Wisdom, and Learning, which always were, and always will be, as corrupt and
impure, as earthly and sensual, as your own Flesh and Blood. Now is there any
selfish, creaturely Pride, in fully believing this to be true, and in acting in
full Conformity to it? If so, then he that confesses, he neither has, nor ever
can have a single Farthing, but as it is freely given him from Charity, thereby
declares himself to be a Purse-proud, vain Boaster of his own Wealth. Such is
the spiritual Pride of Him, who fully acknowleges, that he neither has, nor
can have the least Spark, or breathing after Goodness, but what is freely
kindled, or breathed into him by the Spirit of God. Again, if it is spiritual
Pride, to believe, that Nothing that we ever think, or say, or do, either in
the Church, or our Closets, can have any truth of goodness in it, but that
which is wrought solely and immediately by the Spirit of God in us, then it
must be said, that in order to have religious Humility, we must never forget to
take some Share of our religious Virtues to ourselves, and not allow (as Christ
has said) that without Him, we can do Nothing that is good. It must also be
said, that St. Paul took too much upon him, when he said, the Life that I now
live, is not mine, but Christ's that lives in me.

Behold a Pride, and an Humility, the one as good as the other, and both
logically descended from a Wisdom, that confesses it comes not from above.

The Necessity of a Continual Inspiration of the Spirit of God, both to begin
the first, and continue every step of a divine Life in Man, is a Truth, to
which every Life in Nature, as well as all Scripture, bears full Witness. -- A
natural Life, a beastial Life, a diabolical Life, can subsist no longer, than
whilst they are immediately and continually under the working Power of that
Root, or Source, from which they Sprung. Thus it is with the divine Life in
Man, it can never be in him, but as a Growth of Life in, and from God. -- Hence
it is, that Resisting the Spirit, Quenching the Spirit, Grieving the Spirit, is
that alone, which gives Birth and Growth to every Evil that reigns in the
World, and leaves Men, and Churches, not only an easy, but a necessary Prey to
the Devil, the World, and the Flesh. And Nothing but Obedience to the Spirit,
trusting to the Spirit, walking in the Spirit, praying with and for its
continual Inspiration, can possibly keep either Men, or Churches, from being
Sinners, or Idolaters, in all that they do. For every Thing in the Life, or
Religion of Man, that has not the Spirit of God, for its Mover, Director, and
End, be it what it will, is but earthly, sensual, or devilish. -- The Truth and
Perfection of the Gospel State, could not show itself, till it became solely a
Ministration of the Spirit, or a Kingdom in which the holy Spirit of God, had
the doing of all that was done in it. -- The Apostles, whilst Christ was with
them in the Flesh, were instructed in heavenly Truths from his Mouth, and
enabled to work Miracles in his Name, yet not qualified to know, and teach the
Mysteries of his Kingdom. After his Resurrection, He conversed with them forty
Days, speaking to them of Things appertaining to the Kingdom of God; nay though
he breathed on them, and said, receive ye the Holy Ghost, etc. yet this also
would not do, they were still unable to preach, or bear Witness to the Truth,
as it is in Jesus. And the Reason is, there was still a higher Dispensation to
come, which stood in such an opening of the divine Life in their Hearts, as
could not be effected from an outward Instruction of Christ himself. For though
He had sufficiently told his Disciples, the Necessity of being born again of
the Spirit, yet he lest them unborn of it, till He came again in the Power of
the Spirit. He breathed on them, and said receive ye the Holy Ghost, yet that
which was said and done, was not the Thing itself, but only a Type or outward
Signification, of what they should receive, when He, being glorified, should
come again in the Fullness, and Power of the Spirit, breaking open the Deadness,
and Darkness of their Hearts, with Light and Life from Heaven, which Light did,
and alone could, open, and verify in their Souls, all that he had said, and
promised to them, whilst he was with them in the Flesh. -- All this is
expressly declared by Christ himself, saying unto them, I tell you the Truth,
it is expedient for you that I go away; therefore Christ taught them, to
believe the Want, and joyfully to expect the Coming of a higher, and more
blessed State, than that of his bodily Presence with them. For he adds, if I go
not away, the Comforter will not come; therefore the Comfort and Blessing of
Christ to his Followers, could not be had, till something more was done to
them, and they were brought into a higher State, than they could be, by his
verbal Instruction of them. But if I go away, says he, I will send him unto
you; and when the Comforter, the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you
into all Truth; He shall glorify me (that is, shall set up my Kingdom in its
Glory, in the Power of the Spirit) for he shall receive of mine, and shall show
it unto you: I said of mine, because all Things, that the Father has, are
mine, John xvi.

Now when Christ had told them of the Necessity of an higher State, than that
they were in, and the Necessity of such a comforting, illuminating Guide, as
they could not have, till his outward Teaching in human Language, was changed
into the Inspiration, and Operation of his Spirit in their Souls; He commands
them, not to begin to bear Witness of him to the World, from what they did, and
could in an human Way know of him, his Birth, his Life, Doctrines, Death,
Sufferings, Resurrection, etc. but to tarry at Jerusalem, till they were endued
with Power from on high; saying unto them, Ye shall receive Power, after that
the Holy Ghost is come upon you. And then shall ye bear witness unto me, both
in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and unto the utmost Part of the Earth.

Here are two most important and fundamental Truths fully demonstrated, First,
that the Truth and Perfection of the Gospel State, could not take Place, till
Christ was glorified, and his Kingdom amongst Men, made wholly and solely, a
continual, immediate Ministration of the Spirit: Every Thing before this, was
but subservient for a Time, and preparatory to this last Dispensation, which
could not have been the last, had it not carried Man above Types, Figures, and
Shadows, into the real Possession, and Enjoyment of that, which is the Spirit,
and Truth of a divine Life. For the End is not come, till it has found the
Beginning; that is, the last Dispensation of God to fallen Man, cannot be come,
till putting an End to the Bondage of weak and beggarly Elements, Gal. iv. ver.
9. it brings Man to that dwelling in God, and God in Him, which He had at the
Beginning.

Secondly, That as not the Apostles, so no man from their Time to the End of
the World, can have any true and real Knowledge of the Spiritual Blessings of
Christ's Redemption, or have a divine call, Capacity, or Fitness, to preach,
and bear Witness of them to the World, but solely by that Same divine Spirit,
opening all the Mysteries of a Redeeming Christ in their inward Parts, as it
did in the Apostles, Evangelists, and first Ministers of the Gospel.

For why could not the Apostles, who had been Eye-Witnessess to all the whole
Process of Christ, why could they not with their human Apprehension, declare
and testify the Truth of such Things, till they were baptized with Fire, and
born again of the Spirit? It is because the Truth of such Things, or the
Mysteries of Christ's Process, as knowable by man, are Nothing else in
themselves, but those very Things, which are done by this heavenly Fire, and
Spirit of God in our Souls. Therefore to know the Mysteries of Christ's
Redemption, and to know the redeeming Work of God in our own Souls, is the same
Thing; the one cannot be before, or without the other. Therefore every Man, be
he who he will, however able in all Kinds of human literature, must be an
entire Stranger to all the Mysteries of Gospel Redemption, and can only talk
about them, as of any other Tale, he has been told, till they are brought
forth, verified, fulfilled, and witnessed to, by that, which is found, felt,
and enjoyed, of the whole Process of Christ in his Soul. For as Redemption is
in its whole Nature, an inward, spiritual Work, that works only in the
altering, changing, and regenerating the Life of the Soul, so it must be true,
that Nothing but the inward State of the Soul, can bear true Witness to the
Redeeming Power of Christ. For as it wholly consists in altering that, which is
the most radical in the Soul, bringing forth a new spiritual Death, and a new
spiritual Life, it must be true, that no one can know, or believe the Mysteries
of Christ's redeeming Power, by historically knowing, or rationally consenting
to that, which is said of him, and them, in written, or spoken Words, but only
and solely by an inward, experimental finding, and feeling the Operation of
them, in that new Death, and new Life, both of which, must be effected in the
Soul of Man, or Christ is not, cannot be found, and known by the Soul, as its
Salvation. It must also be equally true, that the redeemed State of the Soul,
being in itself, Nothing else but the Resurrection of a divine and holy Life in
it, must as necessarily from first to last, be the sole Work of the Breathing,
creating Spirit of God, as the first, holy created State of the Soul was. --
And all this, because the Mysteries of Christ's redeeming Power, which work,
and bring forth the renewed State of the Soul, are not creaturely, finite,
outward Things, that may be found, and enjoyed by verbal Descriptions, or
formed Ideas of them, but are a Birth, and Life, and spiritual Operation, which
as solely belongs to God alone, as his creating Power. For Nothing can redeem,
but that same Power, which created the Soul. Nothing can bring forth a good
Thought in it, but that which brought forth the Power of thinking. And of every
Tendency toward Goodness, be it ever so small, that same may be truly affirmed
of it, which St. Paul affirmed of his highest State, yet not I, but Christ that
lives in me.

But if the Belief of the necessity, and certainty of immediate, continual,
divine Inspiration, in and for every thing, that can be holy and good in us, be
(as its Accusers say) rank Enthusiasm, then he is the only sober, orthodox
Christian, who of many a good Thought, and Action, that proceeds from him,
frankly says, in order to avoid Enthusiasm, my own Power, and not Christ's
Spirit living and breathing in me, has done this for me. For if all that is
good, is not done by Christ, then something that is good is done by myself. It
is in vain to think, that there is a middle Way, and that rational Divines have
found it out, as Dr. Warburton has done, who though denying immediate,
continual Inspiration, yet allows, that the Spirit's "ordinary Influence,
occasionally assists the faithful." Sermon. Vol. I.


Now this middle Way, has neither Scripture, nor Sense in it; for an
occasional Influence, or Concurrence, is as absurd, as an occasional God, and
necessarily supposes such a God. For an occasional Influence of the Spirit upon
us, supposes an occasional Absence of the Spirit from us. For there could be no
such Thing, unless God was sometimes with us, and sometimes not, sometimes
doing us good, as the inward God of our Life, and sometimes doing us no good at
all, but leaving us to be good from our selves. -- Occasional Influence
necessarily implies all this blasphemous Absurdity. Again, this middle Way of
an occasional Influence and Assistance, necessarily supposes, that there is
something of Man's own that is good, or the Holy Spirit of God, neither would,
nor could assist, or cooperate with it. But if there was any Thing good in
Man, for God to assist, and cooperate with, besides the SEED of his own divine
Nature, or his own WORD of Life, striving to bruise the Serpent's Nature within
us, it could not be true, that there is only one that is good, and that is God.
And was there any Goodness in Creatures, either in Heaven, or on Earth, but the
one Goodness of the divine Nature, living, working, and manifesting itself in
them, as its created Instruments, then good Creatures, both in Heaven and on
Earth, would have something else to adore, besides, or along with God. For
Goodness, be it where it will, is adorable for itself, and because it is
Goodness; if therefore any Degree of it, belonged to the Creature, it ought to
have a share of that same Adoration, that is paid to the Creator. -- Therefore,
if to believe, that Nothing godly can be alive in us, but what has all its
Life, from the Spirit of God, living and breathing in us; if to look solely to
it, and depend wholly upon it, both for the Beginning, and Growth of every
Thought, and Desire, that can be holy and good in us, be proud, rank
Enthusiasm; then it must be the same Enthusiasm, to own but one God. For He
that owns more Goodness than one, owns more Gods than one. And he that believes
he can have any good in him, but the one Goodness of God, manifesting itself in
him, and through him, owns more Goodness, than one. But if it be true, that God
and Goodness cannot be divided, then it must be a Truth for ever and ever, that
so much of Good, so much of God, must be in the Creature.

And here lies the true, unchangeable Distinction between God, and Nature, and
the natural Creature. Nature and Creature are only for the outward
Manifestation of the inward, invisible, unapproachable Powers of God; they can
rise no higher, nor be any Thing else in themselves, but as Temples,
Habitations, or Instruments, in which the supernatural God, can, and does
manifest himself in various Degrees; bringing forth Creatures to be good with
his own Goodness, to love and adore him with his own Spirit of Love, for ever
singing Praises to the divine Nature, by that which they partake of it. This is
the Religion of divine Inspiration, which being interpreted, is Immanuel, or
God within us. Every Thing short of this, is short of that Religion, which
worships God in Spirit, and in Truth. And every religious Trust or Confidence
in any Thing, but the divine Operation within us, is but a Sort of
Image Worship, which though it may deny the Form, yet retains the Power thereof
in the Heart. And he that places any religious Safety, in theological
Decisions, scholastic Points, in particular Doctrines and Opinions, that must
be held, about the Scripture Words of Faith, Justification Sanctification,
Election, and Reprobation, so far departs from the true Worship of the Living
God within him, and sets up an Idol of Notions, to be worshipped, if not
instead of, yet along with him. And I believe it may be taken for a certain
Truth, that every Society of Christians, whose Religion stands upon this
Ground, however ardent, laborious, and good their Zeal may seem to be in such
Matters, yet in spite of all, sooner or later, it will be found, that Nature is
at the Bottom, and that a selfish, earthly, overbearing Pride in their own
Difinitions, and Doctrines of Words, will by Degrees creep up to the same
Height, and become that same fleshly Wisdom, doing those very same Things,
which they exclaim against in Popes, Cardinals, and Jesuits. Nor can it
possibly be otherwise; for a letter-learned Zeal has but one Nature, wherever
it is, it can only do that for Christians, which it did for Jews; as it
anciently brought forth Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites, and Crucifiers of
Christ, as it afterward brought forth Heresies, Schisms, Popes, papal Decrees,
Images, Anathema's Transubstantiation; so in Protestant Countries, it will be
doing the same Thing, only with other materials; Images of Wood and Clay, will
only be given up for Images of Doctrines; Grace and Works, imputed Sin, and
imputed Righteousness, Election and Reprobation, will have their Synods of
Dort, as truly evangelical, as any Council of Trent.

This must be the Case of all fallen Christendom, as well Popish, as
Protestant, till single Men, and Churches, know, confess, and firmly adhere to
this one Scripture Truth, that our Salvation is in the Life of Jesus Christ in
us. And that, because this alone, was the divine Perfection of Man, before he
fell, and will be his Perfection, when he is one with Christ in Heaven. --
Every Thing besides this, or that is not solely aiming at, and essentially
leading to it, is but mere Babel in all Sects, and Divisions of Christians,
living to themselves, and their own old Man, under a seeming Holiness of
Christian Strife, and Contention about Scripture Words. -- But this Truth of
Truths, fully possessed, and firmly adhered to, brings God and Man together,
puts an End to every Lo here, and Lo there, and turns the whole Faith of Man,
to a Christ, that can no where be a Savior to him, but as essentially born in
the inmost Spirit of his Soul, nor possible to be born there, by any other
Means, but the immediate Inspiration, and working Power of the Holy Spirit
within him. -- To this Man alone, all Scripture gives daily Edification; the
Words of Christ and his Apostles fall like a Fire into him. And what is it,
that they kindle there? Not Notions, not itching Ears, not rambling Desires
after new and new Expounders of them, but a holy Flame of Love, to be always
with, always attending to, that Christ, and his Holy Spirit within him, which
alone can make him to be, and do all that, which the Words of Christ, and his
Apostles have taught. For there is no possibility of being like-minded with
Christ, in any Thing that he taught, or having the Truth of one Christian
Virtue, but by the Nature and Spirit of Christ, become essentially living in
us. Read all our Savior's divine Sermon from the Mount, consent to the
Goodness of every Part of it, yet the Time of practicing it will never come,
till you have a new Nature from Christ, and are as vitally in him, and he in
you, as the Vine in the Branch, and the Branch in the Vine. Blessed are the
pure in Heart, for they shall see God, is a divine Truth, but will do us no
divine good, unless we receive it, as saying neither more nor less, than
Blessed are they that are born again of the Spirit, for they alone can see God.
-- For no Blessedness either of Truth or Life, can be found either in Men or
Angels, but where the Spirit, and Life of God is essentially born within them.
And all Men, or Churches, not placing all in the Life, Light, and Guidance of
the Holy Spirit of Christ, but pretending to act in the Name, and for the Glory
of God, from Opinions which their Logic and Learning have collected from
Scripture Words, or from what a Calvin, an Arminius, a Socinus, or some smaller
Name, has told them to be right or wrong, all such, are but where the Apostles
were, when by the Way, there was a Strife amongst them, who should be the
greatest. And how much soever they may say, and boast of their great Zeal for
Truth, and the only Glory of God, yet their own open, notorious Behavior
toward one another, is proof enough, that the great Strife amongst them is,
which shall be the greatest Sect, or have the largest Number of Followers. A
Strife, from the same Root, and just as useful to Christianity, as that of the
carnal Apostles, who should be greatest. For not numbers of Men, or Kingdoms
professing Christianity, but numbers, redeemed from the Death of Adam, to the
Life of Christ, are the Glory of the Christian Church. And in whatever National
Christianity, any Thing else is meant, or sought after, by the Profession of
the Gospel, but a new heavenly Life, through the mediatorial Nature and Spirit
of the eternal Son of God, born in the fallen Soul; wherever this Spirituality
of the Gospel-Redemption, is denied, or overlooked, there, the Spirit of Self,
of Satanic, and worldly Subtlety, will be Church, and Priest, and supreme
Power, in all that is called Religion.

But to return now to the Doctrine of continual Inspiration. The natural, or
unregenerate Man, educated in Pagan Learning, and scholastic Theology, seeing
the Strength of his Genius in the Search after Knowledge* how easily and
learnedly he can talk, and write, criticize, and determine upon all Scripture
Words and Facts, looks at all this, as a full Proof of his own religious
Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, and calls immediate Inspiration, Enthusiasm; not
considering, that all the Woes denounced by Christ, against Scribes, Pharisees,
and Hypocrites, are so many Woes now at this day, denounced against every
Appearance and Show of Religion, that the natural Man can practice.

And what is well to be noted, every one, however high in human literature, is
but this very natural Man, and can only have the Goodness of a carnal, secular
Religion, till as empty of all, as a new born Child, the Spirit of God gets a
full Birth in him, and becomes the Inspirer and Doer of all that he wills,
does, and aims at, in his whole Course of Religion.

Our divine Master compares the Religion of the learned Pharisees, to whited
Sepulchers, outwardly beautiful, but inwardly full of Rottenness, Stench, and
dead Men's bones.

Now whence was it, that a Religion, so serious in its Restraints, so beautiful
in its outward Form, and Practices, and commanding such Reverence from all that
beheld it, was yet charged by Truth itself, with having inwardly such an
abominable Nature? It was only for this one Reason, because it was a Religion
of Self. -- Therefore from the Beginning to the End of the World, it must be
true, that where Self is kept alive, has Power, and keeps up its own Interests,
whether in speaking, writing, teaching or defending the most specious Number of
Scripture Doctrines, and religious Forms, There, is* that very old Pharisee
still alive, whom Christ with so much Severity of Language constantly
condemned. And the Reason of such heavy Condemnation is, because Self is the
only Root, or rather the Sum total of all Sin; every Sin that can be named, is
centered in it, and the Creature can Sin no higher, than he (...) live to Self.
-- For Self is the Fullness of Atheism, and Idolatry, it is nothing else but the
Creature broken off from God and Christ; it is the Power of Satan living and
working in us, and the sad Continuance of that first Turning from God, which
was the whole Fall, or Death of our first Father.

And yet, sad and Satanical as this Self is, what is so much cherished and
nourished with our daily Love, Fears and Cares about it? How much worldly
Wisdom, how much laborious Learning, how many Subtleties of Contrivance, and
how many flattering Applications and Submissions are made to the World, that
this apostate Self, may have it is Fullness, both of inward Joys, and outward
Glory?

But to all this, it must yet be added, that a Religion of Self, of worldly
Glory and Prosperity carried on, under the Gospel State, has more of a
diabolical Nature, than that of the Jewish Pharisees. -- It is the highest, and
last Working of the Mystery of Iniquity, because it lives to Self, Satan, and
the World, in and by a daily Profession of denying and dying to Self, of being
crucified with Christ, of being led by his Spirit, of being risen from the
World, and set with him in Heavenly Places.

Let then the Writers against continual, immediate, divine Inspiration, take
this for a certain Truth, that by so doing, they do all they can, to draw Man
from that, which is the very Truth and Perfection of the Gospel State; and are,
and can be, no better than pitiable Advocates for a Religion of Self, more
blameable and abominable now, than that which was of old condemned by Christ.
For whatever is pretended to be done in Gospel Religion, by any other Spirit,
or Power, but that of the Holy Ghost, bringing it forth, whether it be praying,
preaching, or practicing any Duties, is all of it, but the Religion of Self,
and can be nothing else. For all that is born of the Flesh, is Flesh, and
nothing is spiritual, but that which has its whole Birth from the Spirit. But
Man, not ruled and governed by the Spirit, has only the Nature of corrupt
Flesh, is under the full Power, and Guidance of fallen Nature, and is that very
natural Man, to whom the Things of God are Foolishness. But Man boldly
rejecting, and preaching against a continual, immediate divine, Inspiration, is
an Anti-Apostle, he lays another Foundation, than that which Christ has
laid, he teaches, that Christ needs not, must not, be all in all in us, and
is a Preacher up of the Folly of fearing to grieve, quench, and resist the Holy
Spirit. -- For when, or where, or how could every one of us, be in Danger of
grieving, quenching, or resisting the Spirit, unless his holy Breathings, and
Inspirations were always within us? Or how could the Sin against the Holy
Ghost, have a more dreadful Nature, than that against the Father and the Son,
but because the continual, immediate Guidance and Operation of the Spirit, is
the last, and highest Manifestation of God in the fallen Soul of Man? It is not
because the Holy Ghost is more worthy, or higher in Nature, than the Father,
and the Son, but because Father and Son, come forth in their own highest Power
of redeeming Love, through the Covenant of a continual, immediate Inspiration
of the Spirit* to be always dwelling, and working in the Soul. Many weak Things
have been conjectured, and published to the World, about the Sin against the
Holy Ghost; whereas the whole Nature of it lies in this, that it is a sinning,
or standing out against the last, and highest Dispensation of God, for the full
Redemption of Man. Christ says, If I had not come, they had not had Sin, that
is, they had not had such a Weight of Guilt upon them; therefore the sinning
against Christ come into the Flesh, was of a more unpardonable Nature, than
sinning against the Father under the Law. So likewise sinning against the Holy
Ghost, is of a more unpardonable Nature, than sinning against the Father under
the Law, or against the Son as come in the Fesh, because these two preceding
Dispensations, were but preparatory to the coming, or full Ministration of the
Spirit. But when Father and Son were come, in the Power and Manifestation of
the Spirit, then he that refuses, or resists this Ministration of the
Spirit, resists all that the holy Three can do, to restore, and revive the
first Life of God in the Soul, and so commits the unpardonable Sin; and which
is therefore unpardonable, because there remains no farther, or higher Power to
remove it out of the Soul. For no Sin is pardonable, because of its own Nature,
or that which it is in itself, but because there is something yet to come, that
can remove it out of the Soul; nor can any Sin be unpardonable, but because it
has withstood, or turned from that, which was the last, and highest Remedy for
the Removal of it.

Hence it is, that grieving, quenching, or resisting the Spirit, is the Sin of
all Sins, that most of all stops the Work of Redemption, and in the highest
Degree separates Man from all Union with God. But there could be no such Sin,
but because the Holy Spirit is always breathing, willing, and working within
us. For what Spirit can be grieved by us, but that which has its will within
us disobeyed? What Spirit can be quenched by us, but that which is, and ever
would be, a holy Fire of Life within us? What Spirit can be resisted by us, but
that which is, and has its Working within us? A Spirit on the outside of us,
cannot be the Spirit of God, nor could such a Spirit be any more quenched, or
hindered by our Spirit, than a Man by Indignation at a Storm, could stop its
Rage. Now, dreadful as the abovementioned Sin is, I would ask all the Writers
against continual, immediate, divine Inspiration, how they could more
effectually lead Men, into an habitual State of sinning against the Holy Ghost,
than by such Doctrine? For how can we possibly avoid the Sin of grieving,
quenching, etc. the Spirit, but by continually reverencing his holy Presence in
us; by continually waiting for, trusting, and solely attending to that, which
the Spirit of God, wills, works, and manifests within us? To turn Men from this
continual Dependence upon the Holy Spirit, is turning them from all true
Knowledge of God. For without this, there is no Possibility of any edifying,
saving Knowledge of God. For though we have ever so many mathematical
Demonstrations or visible Proofs of his Being, etc. we are without all real
Knowledge of Him, till his own quickening Spirit within us, manifests Him, as a
Power of Life, Light, Love, and Goodness, essentially found, vitally felt, and
adored in our Souls. This is the one Knowledge of God, which is eternal Life,
because it is the Life of God manifested in the Soul, that Knowledge of which
Christ says, No one knows the Father but the Son, and He to whomsoever the
Son reveals him. Therefore this Knowledge is only possible to be found in
him, who is in Christ a new Creature, for so it is, that Christ reveals the
Father. But if none belong to God, but those who are led by the Spirit of God,
if we are Reprobates unless the Spirit of Christ be living in us, who need be
told, that all that we have to trust to, or depend upon, as Children of God and
Christ, is the continual, immediate Guidance, Unction, and Teaching of his Holy
Spirit within us? Or how can we more profanely sin against this Spirit, and
Power of God within us, or more expressly call Men from the Power of God unto
Satan, than by ridiculing a Faith and Hope, that look wholly and solely to his
continual, immediate Breathings, and Operations, for all that can be holy and
good in us?

When I am lifted up from the Earth, says Christ, I will draw all Men unto me.
Therefore the one great Power of Christ in, and over the Souls of Men, is after
he is in Heaven; then begins the true, full Power of his Drawing, because it is
by his Spirit in Man that he draws. But who can more resist this Drawing, or
defeat its Operation in us, than he that preaches against, and condemns the
Belief of a continual and immediate Inspiration of the Spirit, when Christ's
Drawing can be in nothing else, nor be powerful any other Way?

Now that which we are here taught, is the whole End of all Scripture; for all
that is there said, however learnedly read, or studied by Hebrew, or Greek
Skill, fails of its only End, till it leads and brings us to an essential God
within us, to feel, and find all that which the Scriptures speak of God, of
Man, of Life and Death, of Good and Evil, of Heaven and Hell, as essentially
verified in our own Souls. For all is within Man, that can be either Good or
Evil to him: God within him, is his divine Life, his divine Light, and his
divine Love; Satan within him is his Life of Self, of earthly Wisdom, of
diabolical Falseness, Wrath, Pride, and Vanity of every Kind. There is no
middle way between these two; He that is not under the Power of the one, is
under the Power of the other. And the Reason is, man was created in, and under
the Power of the divine Life; so far therefore as he loses, or turns from this
Life of God, so far he falls under the Power of Self, or Satan, and worldly
Wisdom. When St. Peter, full of an human good Love toward Christ, advised him
to avoid his Sufferings, Christ rejected him, with a Get thee behind me Satan,
and only gave this Reason for it, for thou savourest not the Things that be of
God, but the Things that be of Men. A plain Proof that whatever is not of, and
from the Holy Spirit of God in us, however plausible it may outwardly seem to
Men, to their Wisdom, and human Goodness, is yet in itself, Nothing else but
the Power of Satan in us. And as St. Paul said truly of himself, By the Grace
of God I am what I am, so every Wise, every Scribe, every Disputer of this
World, every Truster to the Strength of his own rational Learning, every one
that is under the Power of his own fallen Nature, never free from Desires of
Honors, and Preferments, ever thirsting to be rewarded for his theological
Abilities, ever fearing to be abased, and despised, always thankful to those
who flatter him with his distinguished Merit, every such, be he who he will,
may as truly say of himself, Through my turning, and trusting to something
else, than the Grace, and Inspiration of God's Spirit, I am what I am. For
Nothing else hinders any Professor of Christ from being able truly to say with
St. Paul, God forbid that I should glory in any Thing but the Cross of Christ,
by which I am crucified to the World, and the World to me; Nothing makes him
incapable of finding that, which St. Paul found, when he said, I can do all
Things, through Christ that Strengthens me; Nothing hinders all this, but his
Disregard of a Christ within him, his choosing to have a Religion of Self, of
laborious Learning, and worldly Greatness, rather than be such a Gospel Fool
for Christ, as to renounce all that which he recounced, and to seek no more
earthly Honor and Praise than he did, and to will Nothing, know Nothing, seek
Nothing, but that which the Spirit of God and Christ, knows, wills, and
seeks in him. Here, and here alone, lies the Christian's full and certain
Power of overcoming Self, the Devil, and the World. But Christians, seeking,
and turning to any Thing else, but to be led, and inspired by the one Spirit of
God and Christ, will bring forth a Christendom, that in the Sight of God, will
have no other Name, than a spiritual Babylon, a spiritual Egypt, and Sodom, a
scarlet Whore, a devouring Beast, and red Dragon. For all these names belong to
all men, however learned, and to all Churches, whether greater, or less, in
which the Spirit of this World has any share of Power. This was the Fall of
the whole Church, soon after the Apostolic Ages; and all human Reformations,
begun by ecclesiastical Learning, and supported by Civil Power, will signify
little or Nothing, nay often make Things worse, till all Churches, dying to all
own Will, all own Wisdom, all own Advancement, seek for no reforming Power, but
from that Spirit of God, which converted Sinners, Publicans, Harlots, Jews and
Heathens, into an holy, apostolical Church at the first, a Church, which knew
they were of God, that they belonged to God, by that Spirit which he had given
them, and which worked in them.

Ye are not in the Flesh, says the Apostle, but in the Spirit; but then he
adds, as the only Ground of this, if so be that the Spirit of God dwells in
you; surely he means, if so be ye are moved, guided and governed by that, which
the Spirit wills, works, and inspires within you. And then to show the absolute
Necessity of this Life of God in the Soul, he adds if any Man has not the
Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. -- And that this is the State, to which
God has appointed, and called all Christians, he thus declares, God has sent
forth the Spirit of his Son into your Hearts, crying, Abba, Father. Gal. iv. 6.
The same Thing, most surely, as if he had said, Nothing in you, can cry, or
pray to God, as its Father, but the Spirit of his Son Christ come to Life in
you. Which is also as true of every Tendancy in the Soul toward God, or
Goodness; so much as there is of it, so much there is, of the Seed of the
Woman, striving to bring forth a full Birth of Christ in the Soul.

Lo, I am always with you, says the holy Jesus, even to the End of the World.
How is he with us? Not outwardly, every illiterate Man knows; not inwardly,
says many a learned Divinity Doctor, because a Christ within us, is as gross
Enthusiasm, or Quakerism, as the Light within us -- How then shall the faith of
the common Christian, find any Comfort in these Words of Christ's Promise,
unless the Spirit brings him into a Remembrance and Belief, that Christ is in
him, and with him, as the Vine is with, and in the Branch. Christ says,
Without me, ye can do Nothing; and also, If any man love me, my Father will
Love him, and we will come unto him, and make our Abode with him. Now if
without him, we can do Nothing, then all the Love that a Man can possibly have
for Christ, must be from the Power and Life of Christ in him, and from such a
Love, so begotten, Man has the Father, and the Son dwelling, and making their
Abode in him. What higher Proof, or fuller Certainty can there be, that the
whole Work of Redemption in the Soul of Man, is, and can be Nothing else, but
the inward, continual, immediate Operation of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit,
raising up again their own first Life in the Soul, to which Adam our first
Father died?

Again, Christ, after his Glorification in Heaven, says, Behold I STAND at the
DOOR and KNOCK. He does not say, behold ye have me in the Scriptures. Now what
is the DOOR at which Christ, at the Right Hand of God in Heaven, KNOCKS?
Surely it is the Heart, to which Christ is always present. He goes on, IF ANY
MAN HEAR MY VOICE; how hear, but by the hearing of the Heart, or what Voice,
but that which is the Speaking, or Sounding of Christ within him? He adds, AND
OPEN THE DOOR, that is, open his Heart for me, I WILL COME INTO HIM, that is,
will be a living, holy Nature, and Spirit born within him, AND SUP WITH HIM*
and HE WITH ME, Rev. Behold the last, finishing Work of a redeeming Jesus,
entered into the Heart, that opens to him, bringing forth the Joy, the
Blessing, and Perfection of that first Life of God in the Soul, which was lost
by the Fall, set forth as a Supper, or Feast of the heavenly Jesus with the
Soul, and the Soul with him. Can any one justly call it Enthusiasm, to say,
that this supping of the Soul with this glorified Christ within it, must mean
something more heavenly transacted in the Soul, than that last Supper, which he
celebrated with his Disciples, whilst He was with them in Flesh. For that
Supper of Bread and Wine, was such, as a Judas could partake of, and could only
be an outward Type or Signification, of that inward and blessed Nourishment,
with which, the believing Soul, should be feasted, when the glorified Son of
God, should as a creating Spirit enter into us, quickening, and raising up his
own heavenly Nature, and Life within us. Now this continual Knocking of Christ
at the Door of the Heart, sets forth the Case, or Nature of a continual,
immediate, divine Inspiration within us; it is always with us, but there must
be an opening of the Heart to it, and though it is always there, yet is only
felt, and found by those, who are attentive to it, depend upon, and humbly wait
for it. -- Now let any one tell me, how he can believe any Thing of this Voice
of Christ, how he can listen to it, hear, or obey it, but by such a Faith, as
keeps him habitually turned to an immediate, constant Inspiration of the Spirit
of Christ within him? Or how any Heathenish, profane Person, can do more
Despite to this Presence, and Power of Christ in his own Soul, or more
effectually lead others into it, than that Ecclesiastic, who makes a Mock at
the Light within, a Christ within, and openly blasphemes that Faith, and Hope,
and Trust, which solely relies upon being moved by the Spirit, as its only
Power of doing that, which is right, and good, and pious, either toward God,
or Man. -- Let every Man, whom this concerns, lay it to Heart. -- Time, and the
Things of Time, will soon have an End; and he that in Time trusts to any Thing,
but the Spirit, and Power of God working in his Heart, will be but ill fitted,
to enter into Eternity; God must be all in all in us here, or we cannot be his
hereafter. -- Time works only for Eternity; and Poverty eternal must as
certainly follow him, who dies only fully stuffed with human Learning, as he
who dies only full of Worldly Riches* -- The Folly of thinking to have any
divine Learning, but that which the Holy Spirit teaches, or to make ourselves
rich in Knowledge toward God, by Heaps of Commonplace Learning crowded into
our Minds, will leave us, as dreadfully cheated, as that rich Builder of Barns
in the Gospel, to whom it was said, Thou Fool, this Night, shall thy Soul be
required of thee; And then, whose shall all these Things be? Luke xii. So is
every Man that treasures up a Religious Learning, that comes not wholly from
the Spirit of God. -- But to return. To this inward continual Attention, to the
continual working of the Holy Spirit within us, the Apostle calls us in these
Words, See that ye refuse not him that speaks; for if they escaped not, who
refused him, that spoke on Earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn
from Him, that speaks from Heaven, Heb. xii. 25. Now what is this Speaking
from Heaven, which it is so dangerous to refuse, or resist? Surely not outward
Voices from Heaven. Or what could the Apostle's Advice signify to us, unless it
be such a Speaking from Heaven, as we may, and must be always either obeying,
or refusing? -- St. James says, Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you.
What Devil? Surely not an outward Creature, or Spirit, that tempts us by an
outward Power. Or what Resistance can we make to the Devil, but that of
inwardly falling away, or turning from the Workings of his evil Nature, and
Spirit within us? -- They therefore who call us from waiting for, depending
upon, and attending to the continual, secret Inspirations and Breathings of the
Holy Spirit within us, call us to RESIST God in the same Manner, as the Apostle
exhorts us to resist the Devil. For God being only a spiritual Good, and the
Devil our spiritual Evil, neither the one, nor the other, can be resisted, or
not resisted by us, but so far as their spiritual Operations within us, are
either turned from, or obeyed by us. -- St. James having shown us, that
resisting the Devil, is the only Way to make him flee from us, that is, to lose
his Power in us, immediately adds, how we are to behave toward God, that he
may not flee from us, or his holy Work be stopped in us. Draw near, says he,
to God, and God will draw near to you. What is this Drawing near? Surely not by
any local Motion, either in God, or us. But the same is meant, as if he had
said, Resist not God, that is, let his holy Will within you, have its full
work; keep wholly, obediently attentive to that, which he is, and has, and does
within you, and then, God will draw near to you, that is, will more and more
manifest the Power of his holy Presence in you, and make you more and more
Partakers of the divine Nature. Farther, what a Blindness is it in the
forementioned Writers, to charge private Persons with the Enthusiasm of holding
the Necessity, and Certainty of continual, immediate Inspiration, and to attack
them as Enemies to the established Church, when every Body's Eyes see, that
Collect after Collect in the established Liturgy, teaches, and requires them to
believe, and pray for the continual Inspiration of the Spirit, as that alone,
by which they can have the least good Thought, or Desire? Thus, "O God,
Forasmuch as without Thee, we are not able to please Thee; mercifully grant
that thy Holy Spirit may in all Things direct and rule our Hearts." Is it
possible for words more strongly to express the Necessity of a continual,
divine Inspiration? Or can Inspiration be higher, or more immediate in Prophets
and Apostles, than that which directs, that which rules our Hearts, not now and
then, but in all Things? Or can the absolute Necessity of this, be more fully
declared, than by saying, that if it is not in this Degree both of Height and
Continuance in, and over our Hearts, Nothing that is done by us, can be
pleasing to God, that is, can have any Union with him?

Now the Matter is not at all about the different Effects, or Works proceeding
from Inspiration, as whether by it, a Man be made a Saint in Himself, or sent
by Cod with a prophetic Message to others, this affects not the Nature, and
Necessity of Inspiration, which is just as necessary in itself, to all true
Goodness, as to all true Prophesy. -- All Scripture is of divine Inspiration.
But why so? Because holy Men of old, spoke, as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost. Now the above Collect, as well as Christ and his Apostles, oblige us in
like manner to hold, that all Holiness is by divine Inspiration, and that
therefore there could have been no holy Men of old, or in any latter Times, but
solely for this Reason, because they LIVED, as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost. Again, the Liturgy prays thus, "O God, from whom all good Things do
come, grant that by thy holy Inspiration, we may think those Things that be
good, and by thy merciful Guiding may perform the Same." -- Now, if in any of
my Writings, I have ever said any Thing higher, or farther of the Nature, and
Necessity of continual, divine Inspiration, than this Church-Prayer does, I
refuse no Censure, that shall be passed upon me. But if I have, from all that
we know of God, of Nature, and Creature, shown the utter Impossibility of any
Kind, or Degree of Goodness to be in us, but from the divine Nature, living,
and breathing in us, if I have shown, that all Scripture, Christ and his
Apostles, over and over say the same Thing; that our Church Liturgy is daily
praying according to it; What kinder Thing can I say of those Churchmen, who
accuse me of Enthusiasm, than that which Christ said of his blind Crucifiers,
Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.

It is to no Purpose to object to all this, that these Kingdoms are overrun
with Enthusiasts of all Kinds, and that Moravians, with their several
Divisions, and Methodists of various Kinds, are every where acting in the
wildest Manner, under the Pretense of being called, and led by the Spirit. Be
it so, or not so, is a matter I meddle not with; nor is the Doctrine I am upon,
in the least affected by it. For what an Argument would this be; Enthusiasts of
the present and former Ages, have made a bad use of the Doctrine of being led
by the Spirit of God, Ergo, He is enthusiastical, or helps forward Enthusiasm,
who preaches up the Doctrine of being led by the Spirit of God. Now absurd as
this is, was any of my Accusers, as high in Genius, as bulky in Learning, as
Colossus was in Stature, he would be at a Loss to bring a stronger Argument
than this, to prove me an Enthusiast, or an Abettor of them.

But as I do not begin to doubt, about the Necessity, the Truth, and Perfection
of Gospel Religion, when told that whole Nations and Churches, have under a
Pretense of Regard to it, and for the Sake of it, done all the bad Things, that
can be charged upon this, or that leading Enthusiast, whether you call those
bad Things, Schism, Perjury, Rebellion, Worldly Craft, and Hypocrisy, etc. So I
give not up the Necessity, the Truth, and Perfection, of looking wholly to the
Spirit of God and Christ within me, as my promised Inspirer, and only Worker of
all that can be good in me, I give not this up, because in this, or that Age,
both spiritual Pride, and fleshly Lusts have prospered by it, or because Satan
has often led People into all the Heights of Self-glory, and Self-seeking,
under a Pretense of being inspired with Gospel Humility, and Gospel Self-denial.

Another Charge upon me, equally false, and I may say, more senseless, is that
I am a declared Enemy to the Use of Reason in Religion. And Why? Because in all
my Writings, I teach that Reason is to be denied, etc. I own, I have not only
taught this, but have again and again proved the absolute Necessity of it. And
this, because Christ has made it absolutely Necessary, by saying, Whosoever
will come after me, let him deny himself, etc. For how can a Man deny himself,
without denying his Reason, unless Reason be no Part of Himself? Or how can a
rational Creature, whose chief Distinction from Brutes, is that of his Reason,
be called to deny himself any other Way, than by denying that which is peculiar
to himself? Let the Matter be thus expressed, Man is not to deny his Reason.
Well, how then? Why? (N. B.) He is only to deny himself. Can there be a greater
Folly of Words? And yet it is their Wisdom of Words, who allow the denying of
Self, to be good Doctrine, but boggle, and cry out at the denying of Reason, as
quite bad. For how can a Man deny himself, but by denying that, which is the
Life, and Spirit and Power of Self? -- What makes Man a Sinner? Nothing but the
Power, and Working of his natural Reason. And therefore, if our natural Reason
is not to be denied, we must keep up, and follow that, which works every Sin
that ever was, or can be in us. For we can sin no where, or in any Thing, but
where our natural Reason* or Understanding has its Power in us. -- What is
meant in all Scripture by the Flesh and its Works? Is it something distinct,
and different from the Workings of our rational and intelligent Nature? No, it
is our whole intelligent, rational Nature, that constitutes the Flesh, or the
carnal Man, who could not be criminally so, any more than the Beasts, but
because his Carnality, has all its Evil, from his intelligent Nature, or
Reason, being the Life, and Power of it. And every Thing which our Lord says
of Self, is so much said of our natural Reason; and all that the Scripture
says of the Flesh and its evil Nature, is so much said of the evil State of
our natural Reason, which therefore is, ought, and must be denied, in the same
Manner and Degree, as Self and Flesh is, and must be denied.

I have elsewhere shown the gross Darkness and Ignorance, which govern that,
which is called Metaphysics in the Schools, that it is so great, that if you
was to say, that God first creates a Soul out of Nothing, and when that is
done, then takes an understanding Faculty and puts it into it, after that, adds
a Will, and then a Memory, all as independently made, as when a Tailor first
makes the Body of a Coat, and then adds sleeves, and Pockets to it; was you to
say this, the Schools of Descartes, Male-branche, or Lock, could have Nothing
to say against it. Spirit of Love, Part. i. p. 30.


And here Truth obliges me to say, that Scholastic Divinity, is in as great
Ignorance about the most fundamental Truths of the Gospel, as I have again and
again shown, in Regard to the Nature of the Fall of Man, and all the Scripture
Expressions concerning the new Birth; and here also concerning the Doctrine, of
a Man's denying himself, which modern Learning supposes to be possible without,
or different from a Man's denying his own natural Reason; which is an Absurdity
of the greatest Magnitude. For what is Self, but that which a Man is, and has
in his natural Capacity? Or what is the Fullness of his natural Capacity, but
the Strength and Power of his Reason? How then can any Man deny himself, but by
denying that which gives Self, its whole Nature, Name, and Power? If Man was
not a rational Creature, he could not be called to deny himself, he could not
need, or receive the Benefit, and Goodness of Self-Denial: No man therefore can
obey the Precept of denying himself, or have any Benefit or Goodness from it,
but so far as he denies, or dies to his own natural Reason, because the Self of
Man, and the natural Reason of Man, are strictly the same Thing. -- Again, our
blessed Lord said in his Agony, Not my Will, but thine be done. And had not
this been the Form of his whole Life, He had not lived without Sin. -- Now thus
to deny our own Will, that God's Will may be done in us, is the Height of our
Calling; and so far as we keep from our own natural Will, so far we keep from
Sin. But now, if our own natural Will, as having all Sin and evil in it, is
always to be denied, whatever it costs us, I would fain know, how our natural
Reason, can ever escape, or how we can deny our own Will, and not deny that
rational, or intelligent Power, in and from which, the Will has its whole
Existence, and continual Direction? Or how there can be always a Badness of our
own Will, which is not the Badness of our own natural, intellectual Power?
Therefore it is a Truth of the utmost Certainty, that as much as we are obliged
to deny our own natural Will, that the Will of God may be done in us, so much
are we obliged to deny our own natural Reason and Understanding, that our own
Will may not be done, or followed by us. For whoever lives to his own natural
Reason, he necessarily lives to his own natural Will. For our natural Will, in
whatever State it is, is Nothing else, but our natural Reason willing this, or
that.

Now hard, as this may seem to unregenerate Nature, and yet harder to Nature
highly exalted, and big with the Glory of all that, which Wits, Poets, Orators,
Critics, Sophists, and Historians have enriched it with, yet true it is, and a
Truth as certain as the Fall of Man, that this full Denial of our own natural
Will, and our own natural Reason, is the only possible Way for divine
Knowledge, divine Light, and divine Goodness, to have any Place, or Power of
Birth in us. -- All other religious Knowledge, got any other Way, let it be as
great as it will, is only great in Vanity, Emptiness and Delusion. For Nothing
but that which comes immediaetly from God, can have any Thing godly in it, and
all that which comes from Self, and natural Reason, however outwardly colored,
can have no better a Nature within, than Self-seeking, Self-esteem, and fleshly
Wisdom, which ( N. B.) are those very Works of the Devil in us, which Christ
came into the World to destroy -- For the Efforts of natural Reason, and
Self-abilities, to be great in religious Knowledge from our own particular
Talents, are as Satanical Things, as any we carry about us, and most of all fix
us in the highest Contrariety to that State, which our Lord affirms to be
absolutely necessary*

Except ye be converted, and become as little Children, ye canno enter into the
Kingdom of God. -- Now as sure as this is necessary, so sure is it, that no one
can be thus converted, or come under the good Influence of this child-like
Nature, till natural Reason, Self, and own Will, are all equally denied. -- For
all the Evil and Corruption of our fallen Nature consists in this, it is an
awakened Life of own Reason, own Will broken off from God, and so fallen into
the selfish Workings of its own earthly Nature.

Now whether this Self, broken off from God, reasons, wills, and contendeth
about the Difference of Scripture Words and Opinions, or reasons against them
all, the same evil State of fallen Nature, the same Loss of Life, the same
Separation from God, the same evil Tempers of Flesh and Blood, will be equally
strengthened and inflamed by the one, as by the other. -- Hence it is, that
Papists and Protestants are hating, fighting and killing one another for the
Sake of their different, excellent Opinions, and yet, as to the Lusts of the
Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life, they are in the highest
Union, and Communion with one Another. For if you expect a zealous Protestant
to be therefore a new born Creature, alive unto God, or a zealous Papist to be
therefore dead to all divine Goodness, you may be said to have lived in the
World without either Eyes or Ears -- And the Reason why it must be so, is
because bad Syllogisms for Transubstantiation, and better Syllogisms against
it, signify no more toward the casting Satan out of our Souls, than a bad, or
better Taste for Painting.

Hence also it is, that Christendom, full of the nicest Decisions about Faith,
Grace, Works, Merits, Satisfaction, Heresies, Schisms, etc. is full of all
those evil Tempers, which prevailed in the Heathen World, when none of these
Things were ever thought of.

A Scholar, pitying the Blindness and Folly of those who live to themselves in
the Cares and Pleasures of this vain Life, thinks himself divinely employed,
and to have escaped the Pollutions of the World, because he is, day after day,
dividing, dissecting, and mending Church-Opinions, fixing Heresies here,
Schisms there; forgetting all the while, that a carnal Self and natural Reason
have the doing of all that is done by this learned Zeal, and are as busy, and
active in him, as in the reasoning Infidel, or projecting Worldling. For where
Self is wholly denied, there nothing can be called Heresy, Schism, or
Wickedness, but the Want of loving God with our whole Heart, and our Neighbor
as ourselves; nor any Thing be called Truth, Life, or Salvation, but the
Spirit, Nature and Power of Christ living, and manifesting itself in us, as it
did in him. But where Self, or the natural Man is become great in Religious
Learning, there the greater the Scholar, the more firmly will he be fixed in
their Religion, whose God is their Belly.

But that I may fully show the Perverseness of my Accusers, in charging me with
denying the Use of Reason in Religion, see here a Word or two of what I have
said at large, and in the plainest Words, more than twenty-four years ago,
which Doctrine I have maintained in all that I have since written. -- My Words
are these.

You shall see Reason possessed of all that belongs to it. I will grant it to
have as great a Share in the good Things of Religion, as in the good Things of
this Life; that it can assist the Soul, just as it can assist the Body, that it
has the same Power and Virtue in the spiritual, that it has in the natural
World; That it can communicate to us as much of the one, as of the other, and
is of the same Use and Importance in the one as in the other. Can you ask more?
All which I thus make out in the following Manner.

Man, considered as a Member of this World, who is to have his Share of the
Good that is in it, is a sensible, and a rational Creature, that is, he has a
certain Number of Senses, as Seeing, Hearing, Tasting, Touching, and Smelling,
by which he is sensible of that, which the outward World, in which he is
placed, can do for him, or communicate to him, and so is sensible of what Kind,
and Degree of Happiness, he can have from it.

Now besides these Organs of Sense, he has a Power, or Faculty of Reasoning
upon the Ideas, which he has received from these Senses.

Now how is it, that the good Things of this World are communicated to Man? How
is he put in Possession of them? To what Part of him are they proposed? Are his
Senses, or his Reason, the Means of his having so much as he has, or can have
from this World?

Now here, you must degrade Reason just as much, as it is degraded by Religion,
and are obliged to set it as low, with respect to the Things of this World, as
it is set with respect to the Things of the spiritual World. It is no more the
Means of Communicating the good Things of the one, than of the other. And as
St. Paul says, the natural Man cannot receive the Things of the Spirit of God,
for this Reason, because they are spiritually discerned; so you must of
Necessity say, the rational Man cannot receive the Things of this World, for
this Reason, because they are sensibly received, that is, by the Organs of
Sense. Reason therefore has no higher Office, or Power in the Things of this
World, than in the Things of Religion; and Religion does no more Violence to
your Reason, or rejects it any other Way, than all the good Things of this
World reject it: It is not seeing, it is not hearing, tasting, or feeling the
Things of this Life; it can supply the Place of no one of these Senses.

Now it is only thus helpless, and useless in Religion; it is neither seeing,
nor hearing, tasting, nor feeling of spiritual Things; therefore in the Things
of Religion, and in the Things of this World, it has one, and the same
Insignificancy. -- It is the Sensibility of the Soul, that must receive what
this World can communicate to it; it is the Sensibility of the Soul, that must
receive what God can communicate: Reason may follow after in either Case, and
view through its own Glass what is done, but it can do no more. Reason may be
here of the same Service to us, as when we want any of the Enjoyments of this
Life; it may direct us how, and where they are to be had; it may take away a
Cover from our Eyes, or open our Window-shutters, when we want the Light; but
it can do no more toward seeing, than to make way for the Light to act upon
our Eyes. This is all its Office and Ability in the Things of Religion; it may
remove that, which hinders the Sensibility of the Soul, or prevents the divine
Light's acting upon it, but it can do no more: Because the Faculty of
Reasoning, is only the Activity of the Mind upon its own Ideas or Images, which
the Senses have caused it to form from that, which has been stirred up in them;
but has Nothing of the Nature of that which it speculates upon by Ideas: It
does not become dark, when it reasons upon the Cause, or Nature of Darkness,
nor becomes Light, when it reasons about it; neither is it Religion, nor gets
any Thing of the Nature of Religion, when it is wholly taken up in Descriptions
and Definitions of religious Doctrines, and Virtues.

For the Good of Religion, is like the Good of Food and Drink to the Creature,
that wants it. And if instead of giving such an one Bread and Wine, you should
teach him to seek for Relief, by attending to clear Ideas of the Nature of
Bread, of different Ways of making it, etc. He would be left to dye in the Want
of Sustenance, just as the Religion of Reasoning leaves the Soul to perish in
the Want of that Good, which it was to have from Religion. And yet as a Man may
have the Benefit or Food much assisted by the right Use of his Reason, though
Reason has not the Good of Food in it; so a Man may have the Good of Religion
much assisted, and secured to him, by the right Use of his Reason, though
Reason has not the Good of Religion in it. And as it would be great Folly and
Perverseness, to accuse a Man as an Enemy to the true Use of Reasoning about
Food, because he declares, that Reason is not Food, nor can supply the Place of
it; so is it equally so, to accuse a Man, as an Enemy to the Use of Reasoning
in Religion, because he declares that Reasoning is not Religion, nor can supply
the Place of it. We have no Want of Religion, but because we want to have more
of the divine Nature in us, than we have in our fallen Nature. But if this be
the Truth of the Matter (and who can deny it) then we are sure, that nothing
can be our Good in Religion, but that which communicates to us something of
God, or which alters our State of Existence in God, and makes us Partakers of
the divine Nature, in such a Manner and Degree as we wanted. What a Folly then
to put any Trust in a Religion of rational Notions and Opinions logically
deduced from Scripture Words. Do we not see Sinners of all Sorts, and Men under
the Power of every corrupt Passion, equally zealous for such a Religion? Proof
enough, that it has not the Good of Religion in it, nor any Contrariety to the
Vices of the Heart; it neither kills them, nor is killed by them. For as Pride,
Hypocrisy, Envy or Malice do not take away from the Mind, its geometrical, or
critical Abilities; so a Man may be most logical in his Religion of Reason,
Words, Doctrines, and Opinions, when he has Nothing of the true Good of
Religion in him.

But as soon as it is known and confessed, that all the Happiness, or Misery,
of all Creatures consists only in this, as they are more or less possessed of
God, or as they, differently partake of the divine Nature; then it must be
equally known, that Nothing but God, can do, or be any religious Good to us;
and also that God cannot do, or be any religious Good to us, but by the
Communication of himself, or the Manifestation of his own Life within us.

Hence may be seen, the great and like Blindness both of Infidels and
Christians; the one in trusting to their own Reason, dwelling in its own
logical Conclusions; the other in trusting to their own Reason, dwelling in
learned Opinions about Scripture Words and Phrases, and Doctrines built upon
them. For as soon as it is known and confessed, that God is all in all, that in
him we live and move and have our Being; that we can have Nothing separately,
or out of him, but every Thing in Him; that we have no Being, or Degree of
Being but in him; that he can give us Nothing as our Good, but Himself, nor any
Degree of Salvation from our fallen Nature, but in such Degree, as he again
Communicates something more of Himself to us: As soon as this is known, then it
is known with the utmost Evidence, that to put a religious Trust in our own
Reason, whether confined to itself, or working in Doctrines about Scripture
Words, has the Nature of that same Idolatry, that puts a religious Trust in the
Sun, a departed Saint, or a graven Image Demonstration of the gross Errors in
the plain Account, etc. p. 272, etc. 188, etc.
. And as Image Worship has often boasted of its divine Power, because of the
Wonders of Zeal, and Devotion, that have been raised thereby in thousands, and
ten thousands of its Followers; so it is no Marvel, if Opinion-worship should
often have, and boast of the same Effects. -- But the Truth of the whole Matter
lies here: As the WORD manifested in the Flesh, or become Man, is the one
Mediator, or Restorer of Union between God and Man; so to seeing Eyes, it must
be evident, that Nothing but this one mediatorial Nature of Christ, essentially
brought to Life in our Souls, can be our Salvation through Christ Jesus. For
that which saved and exalted that Humanity, in which Christ dwelt, must be the
Salvation of every human Creature in the World. But to return. What poor
divinity Knowledge comes from great Scholars, and great Readers, may be
sufficiently seen from the two following judicious Quotations in a late
Dissertation on Enthusiasm; the one is taken from Dr. Warburton's Sermons, the
other from a Pastoral Letter of Mr. Stinstra, a Preacher amongst the Mennomists
of Friesland. That from Dr. Warburton, stands thus: By them (that is, by the
Writings of the New Testament) the prophetic Promise of our Savior, that the
Comforter should abide for ever, was eminently fulfilled. For though his
ordinary Influence occasionally assists the the Faithful, yet his constant
Abode and supreme Illumination is in the sacred Scriptures Dissertation, p. 10
. Dr. Warburton's Doctrine is this, that the inspired Books of the New
Testament, is that Comforter, or Spirit of Truth, and Illuminator, which is
meant by Christ's being always with his Church. -- Let us therefore put the
Doctor's Doctrine into the Letter of the Text, which will best show how true,
or false it is.

Our Lord says, it is expedient for you that I go away, or the Comforter will
not come: That is, it is expedient for you, that I leave off teaching you in
Word's, that sound only into your outward Ears, that you may have the same
Words in Writing, for your outward Eyes to look upon; for if I do not depart
from this vocal Way of teaching you, the Comforter will not come, that is, ye
will not have the Comfort of my Words written on Paper. But if I go away, I
will send written Books, which shall lead you into such a Truth of Words, as ye
could not have, whilst they were only spoken from my Mouth; but being written
on Paper, they will be my spiritual, heavenly, constant Abode with you, and the
most supreme Illumination ye can receive from Me.

Christ says further; I have many Things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear
them now; howbeit when He, the Spirit of Truth, is come, He shall guide you
into all Truth; for He shall not speak of Himself, for He shall receive of
mine, and shall show it unto you; that is, though ye cannot be sufficiently
instructed from my Words at present, yet when they shall hereafter come to you
in written Books, they will give you a Knowledge of all Truth, for they shall
not speak of themselves, but shall receive Words from me, and show them unto
you. Again, Christ says, These Things have I spoken unto you in Proverbs; but
the Time comes, when I shall no more speak unto you in Proverbs, but will show
you plainly of the Father. That is, hitherto ye have only had spoken Proverbs
from me, and therefore ye have not plainly known the Father; but the Time
comes, when these spoken Proverbs shall be put into Writing, and then ye shall
plainly know the Father. Again, Christ adds, Ye now therefore have Sorrow, but
I will see you again, and your Hearts shall rejoice, and your Joy no Man takes
from you. That is, ye are now troubled at my personal Departure from you; but
some written Books shall be my seeing you again, and in that Visit, ye shall
have such Joy as cannot be taken from you.

Christ also says, if any Man love me, my Father will love him, and we will
come unto him and make our Abode with him: That is, according to the Doctor's
Theology, certain Books of Scripture will come to him, and make their Abode
with him; for he expressly confineth the constant Abode, and supreme
Illumination of God, to the holy Scriptures. Therefore (horrible to say) God's
inward Presence, his operating Power of Life and Light in our Souls, his
Dwelling in us, and we in Him, is something of a lower Nature, that only may
occasionally happen, and has less of God in it, than the dead Letter of
Scripture, which alone is his constant Abode and supreme Illumination. --
Miserable Fruits of a paradoxical Genius!

Christ from Heaven says, Behold I stand at the Door, and knock; if any Man
hear my Voice, and open unto me, I will come into him, and sup with him. This
is his true eminent Fulfiling of his prophetic Promise of being a Comforter,
and Spirit of Truth to his Church, to the End of the World. But according to
the Doctor we are to understand, that not the heavenly Christ, but the New
Testament continually stands and knocks at the Door, wanting to enter into
the Heart, and sup with it; which is no better than holding, that when Christ
calls himself, Alpha and Omega, He means not himself, but the New Testament --
Again, I am the Vine, ye are the Branches; as the Branch cannot bear Fruit of
itself, except it abide in the Vine, no more can ye, except ye abide in me; for
without me, ye can do Nothing. Now take the Doctor's Comment, and then the
Truth of all these Words of Christ was only temporary, and could be true no
longer, than till the Books of the New Testament were written; for then all
this, which Christ had affirmed of himself, of the Certainty, and Necessity of
his Life, and Power in them, ended in the personal Appearance of Christ, and
passed over to the written Words of the New Testament, and they are the true
Vine, and we it is Branches, they are that, without which we can do Nothing. For
thus it must be, if, as the Doctor affirms, the Writings of the New Testament
are that, by which we are to understand, the constant Abode, and supreme
Illumination of God in Man. -- Now absurd, and even blasphemous, as this
Interpretation of the foregoing Text is, it must be evident to every Reader,
that it is all the Doctor's own; for the Letter of Scripture is only made here,
to claim that Divinity to itself, which the Doctor has openly affirmed to be
true of it.

Rabbi, says Nicodemus to Christ, we know that thou art a Teacher come from
God: Now that which was here truly said of Christ in the Flesh, is the very
Truth that must be said of the Scripture, teaching in Ink and Paper; it is a
Teacher come from God, and therefore fully to be believed, highly reverenced,
and strictly followed. But as Christ's Teaching in the Flesh, was only
preparatory to his future, vital Teaching by the Spirit; so the Teaching of
Scripture by Words written with Ink and Paper, is only preparatory, or
introductory, to all that inward, essential Teaching of God, which is by his
Spirit and Truth within us. -- Every other Opinion of the holy Scripture, but
that of an outward Teacher and Guide to God's inward Teaching and Illumination
in our Souls, is but making an Idol-god of it: I say an Idol-god; for to those
who rest in it as the constant Abode and supreme Illumination of God with them,
it can be Nothing else. For, if Nothing of divine Faith, Love, Hope, or
Goodness, can have the least Birth, or Place in us, but by divine Inspiration;
they who think these Virtues may be sufficiently raised in us by the Letter of
Scripture, do in Truth, and Reality, make the Letter of Scripture their
inspiring God. -- The Apostles preached, and wrote to the People by divine
Inspiration. But what do they say of their inspired Doctrine, and Teachings?
What Virtue or Power was there in them? Do they say that their Words, and
Teachings, was the very promised Comforter, the Spirit of Truth, the true
Abode, and supreme Illumination of God in the Souls of Men? So far from such a
blasphemous Thought, that they affirm the direct contrary, and compare all
their inspired Teachings and Instructions, to the dead Works of bare Planting
and Watering, and which must continue dead, till Life come into them from
another and much higher Power. I have planted, says St. Paul, Apollos has
watered, but God gave the Increase. And then further to show, that this
Planting and Watering, which was the highest Work that an inspired Apostle
could do, was yet, in itself, to be considered, as a lifeless, powerless Thing;
he adds, So then, neither is he that planteth, any Thing; nor he that Waters;
but God that gives the Increase. -- But now, if this must be said of all that,
which the inspired Apostles taught in outward Words, that it was nothing in
itself, was without Power, without Life, and only such a Preparation toward
Life, as is that of Planting and Watering; must not that same be said of their
inspired Teachings, when left behind them in Writing? For what else are the
apostolical Scriptures, but those very Instructions and Teachings, put into
Writing, which they affirmed to be but bare Planting and Watering, quite
powerless in themselves, till the living Spirit of God worked with them? Or
will any one say, that what Paul, Peter, John, etc. spoke by Inspiration from
their own Mouths, was indeed but bare* Planting and Watering, in order to be
capable of receiving Life from God; but when these apostolical Teachings and
Instructions, were written on Paper, they were raised out of their first
Inability, got the Nature of God himself, became Spirit and Life, and might be
called the great quickening Power of God, or, as the Doctor says, the constant
Abode, and supreme Illumination of his Spirit with us?

It would be great Folly and Perverseness, to charge me here, with slighting,
or lessening the true Value, Use, and Importance of the inspired apostolical
Scriptures; for if the Charge was just, it must lie against Paul, and not
against me; since I say nothing of them, but that which he says, and in his
own express Words, viz. that all their labor of preaching, instructing and
writing by divine Inspiration, had in themselves no other Nature, Use, or
Power, than that of such planting and watering as could not fructify, till a
higher Power, than was in them, gave Life and Growth to that, which they
planted and watered.

I exceedingly love and highly reverence the divine Authority of the sacred
Writings of the Apostles and Evangelists, and would gladly persuade every one,
to be as deeply affected with them, and pay as profound a Regard to them, as
they would to an Elijah, a St. John Baptist, or a Paul, whom they knew to be
immediately sent from Heaven, with God's Message to them. -- I reverence them
as a literal Truth of and from God, as much the greatest heavenly Blessing,
that can be outwardly bestowed upon us. -- I reverence them, as doing, or
fitted to do, all that good amongst Christians now, which the Apostles did in
their Day, and as of the same Use and Benefit to the Church of every Age, as
their planting and watering was to the first.

But now, if this is not thought that Fullness of Regard, that is due to the
holy Messengers of God; if any one will still be so learnedly wise, as to
affirm, that though Paul's Preaching in his Epistles, whilst he was alive, was
indeed only bare planting and watering, but the same Epistles being published
after his Death, got another Nature, became full of divine and living Power;
such an one has no Right to laugh (as the Doctor does) at the silly Mohammedan,
who believes the Alcoran to be uncreated. For wherever there in divine
Efficacy, there, there must be an uncreated Power. And if, as the Doctor says,
the Scriptures of the New Testament are the only constant Abode, and supreme
Illumination of the Spirit of God with us, all that is said of the eternal
Spirit of God, of the uncreated Light, might and ought to be said of them; that
they are the WORD that was God, was with God, and are our true Immanuel, or God
within us.

I shall now only add this friendly Hint to the Doctor, that he has a Remedy at
hand in his own Sermon, how he may be delivered from thus grossly mistaking the
Spirit of the Gospel, as well as the Law of Moses. -- St. Paul, (says the
Doctor) Had a quick and lively Imagination, and an extensive and intimate
Acquaintance with those Masters in moral Painting, the classic Writers; (N. B.)
all which, he proudly sacrificed to the Glory of the everlasting Gospel Sermon.
Vol. I. p. 229.
.

Now if the Doctor did that, (though it was only from Humility) which he says
the Apostle did proudly, such Humility might be as great a Good to him, as that
Pride was to the Apostle. -- And indeed, one would have thought, that as soon
as the Doctor had discovered these Writers, to be only great Masters in moral
Painting, it should have had the same Effect upon him, as if he had found them
great Masters in Delusion. For where there is moral Painting, there, there is
moral Delusion. And the Spirit, the Life, the Purity, and divine Simplicity of
gospel Truth, is more eluded, lost and destroyed by moral Paintings, whether in
Books or Pulpits, than by any material Colorings put upon Images of Wood or
Clay, to excite spiritual Devotion in Churches. -- Again, if the everlasting
Gospel is now as glorious a Thing, as it was in St. Paul's Days; if the
highest, most accomplished, classic Knowledge, is so unsuitable to the Light
and Spirit of the Gospel, that it is fit for Nothing, but to be cast away, or
as the Doctor says, to be all sacrificed to the Glory of the Gospel; how
wonderful is it, that this should never come into his head, from the Beginning
to the End of his three long Legation-Volumes, or that he should come piping
hot with fresh and fresh classic Beauties found out by himself, in a
Shakespeare, a Pope, etc. to preach from the Pulpit, the divine Wisdom of a
Paul, in renouncing all his great classic Seize, as mere Loss and Dung,
that by so doing, he might win Christ, and be found in him!

Let it be supposed, that our Lord was to come again for a while in the Flesh;
and that his Coming was for this End, to do that for the Christian World,
cumbered with much Learning, which he did to poor Martha, only cumbered with
much Serving, and thereby neglected that good Part, which Mary had chosen; must
we suppose, that the Doctor would hasten to meet him, with his sacred
Alliances, his Bundles of Pagan Trash, and hierogliphic Profundities, as his
full Proof, that Mary's good Part, which shall never be taken from her, had
been chosen for himself, and all his Readers? As well might it be thought, that
the Pope would come richly laden with his blessed Images, his heavenly Decrees,
his divine Bulls, as infallible Proofs of his being born again from above, and
solely devoted to the one Thing Needful.

Let the Doctor figure to himself, the gaudy Pageantry of a divine high Mass in
a Romish Cathedral; let him wonder at that flagrant, daring Contrariety, that
it has to that first Gospel Church of Christ, viz. Where two or three are
gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them. Would he not
still be fuller of Wonder, if he should hear the Pope declaring, that all this
heathenish show of invented Fopperies, was his projected Defense of that first
Church of Christ? -- But if the Doctor would see a Protestant Wonder, full as
great, he need only look at his own theatrical, parading Show of heathen
Mysteries, and heathenish Learning, set forth in highest Pomp. To what End? Why
to bring forth, what he calls, (as the Pope above) his projected Defense of
Christianity.

O vainest of all vain Projects! For what is Christianity, but that which
Christ was, while on Earth? What can it be, but that which it is, and has from
him? He is a King, who has all Power in Heaven and on Earth, and his Kingdom,
like himself, is not of this World. Away then with the Projects of popish Pomp,
and pagan Literature to support it; they are as wise Contrivances, as a high
Tower of Babel, to defend it against the Gates of Hell.

I come now to the Quotation from the pastoral Letter of Mr. Stinstra. A
judicious Writer, (says the Dissertation) observes, that sound Understanding,
and Reason, are that on which, and by which, God principally operates, (N. B.)
when he finds it proper to assist (N. B.) our weakness by his Spirit
Dissertation, p. 7^
.

I cannot more illustrate the Sense, or extol the Judgment, both of the Author,
and Quoter of this striking Passage, than by the following Words.

A judicious Naturalist observes, that sound and strong Lungs, are that, on
which, and by which, the Air or Spirit of this World principally operates, when
(N. B.) he finds it proper to assist, (N. B.) the weakness of our Lungs, by his
Breathing into them. -- Now if any right minded Man, should happen to find his
Heart edified, or his Understanding enlightened, by the above Passage on divine
Inspiration, he will be much pleased at my assuring him, that the Pastoral
Letter of Mr. Stinstra, and the Dissertation on Enthusiasm by Mr. Green, are
from the Beginning to the End, full as good in every Respect, as that is.

These two Instances are Proof enough, that as soon as any Man trusts to
natural Abilities, skill in Languages, and commonplace Learning, as the true
Means of entering into the Kingdom of God, a Kingdom, which is Nothing else,
but Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; he gives himself up to
certain Delusion, and can escape no Error that is popular, or that suits his
State and Situation in the learned, religious World. -- He has sold his
Birthright in the gospel State of divine Illumination, to make a Figure and
Noise, with the sounding Brass and tinkling Cymbals of the natural Man.

Whence is it, that we see Genius, and natural Abilities, to be equally pleased
with, and equally contending for the Errors and Absurdities of every System of
Religion, under which they are educated? It is because Genius, and natural
Abilities, are just the same Things, and must have the same Nature now, as they
had in the ancient Schools of the Peripatetic, Academic, Stoic, and atheistical
Philosophers. -- The Temptation of Honor, which the academic Exercise of Wit
(as Dr. W. says) was supposed to bring to its Professor Divine Legation of
Moses, Book I. page. 33.
; has still its Power amongst Church-disputants. Nor can it possibly ever be
otherwise, till Parts and Genius, etc. do, as the Blind, the Deaf, the Dumb,
and Lepers formerly did; go to be healed of their natural Disorders by the
Inspiration of that Oracle, who said, I am the Light of the World, he that
follows me, walks not in Darkness. -- No Man comes unto the Father but by
me. -- Well therefore might St. Paul say, I have determined to know Nothing
among you, but Christ, and him crucified. -- And had it not been for this
Determination, he had never known, what he then knew, when he said, the Life
that I now live, is not mine, but Christ's that lives in me. -- Now did the
Apostle here overstretch the Matter? Was it a Spirit of Enthusiasm, and not of
Christ living in him, that made this Declaration? Was he here making way for
Ignorance and Darkness to extinguish the Light that came down from Heaven, and
was the Light of the World? -- Did he here undermine the true Ground, and Rock,
on which the Church of Christ, was to stand, and prevail against the Gates of
Hell? Did he by setting up this Knowledge, as the best, and only Knowledge,
that an Apostle need to have, break down the Fences of Christ's Vineyard, rob
the Church of all its strong Holds, leave it defenseless, without a Pale, and a
ready Prey to Infidels? -- Who can say this, but that Spirit of Antichrist,
that confesses not, that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh? For as Christ's
intending Nothing, knowing Nothing, willing Nothing, but purely and solely the
whole Course of his crucifying Process, was the whole Truth of his being come
in the Flesh, was his doing the whole Will of him that sent him, was his
overcoming the World, Death, and Hell; so he that embraces this Process, as
Christ embraced it, who is wholly given up to it, as Christ was, he has the
Will of Christ, and the Mind of Christ, and therefore may well desire to know
Nothing else. -- To this Man alone, is the World, Death, and Hell, known to be
overcome in him, as they were in Christ; to him alone, is Christ become the
Resurrection, and the Life; and he that knows this, he knows with St. Paul,
that all other Knowledge, may, and will be cast away as Dung. -- Now if St.
Paul, having rejected all other Knowledge, but that of a crucified Savior,
which to the Jew was a Stumbling Block, and to the Greek Foolishness, if he had
afterward wrote three such Legation-volumes, as the Doctor has done, for the
Food, and Nourishment of Christ's Sheep, who can have no Life in themselves,
but by eating the true Bread that came down from Heaven; must they not have
been called, Paul's full Recantation of all that he had taught of a Christ
crucified?

The other Instance of Delusion from Book-learning, relates to Mr. Green, who
wanting to write on divine Inspiration, runs from Book to Book, from Country to
Country, to pick up Reports wherever he could find them, concerning divine
Inspiration, from this, and that judicious Author, that so he might be sure of
compiling a judicious Dissertation on the Subject. All which he might have
known to be mere Delusion, and lost Labor, had he but remembered, or regarded
any one single Saying either of Christ, or his Apostles concerning the Holy
Spirit, and his Operations. For not a Word is said by them, but fully shows,
that all Knowledge or Perception of the Spirit, is nothing else but the
Enjoyment of the Spirit, and that no Man can know more of him, than that which
the Spirit himself is, and does, and manifests of his Power in Man.

The Things of God, says St. Paul, knows no Man, but the Spirit of God. Is
not this decisive upon the Matter? Is not this Proof enough, that Nothing in
man, but the Spirit of God in him, can know what the Spirit's Work in Man is,
and does? The Fruits of the Spirit, so often mentioned in Scripture, are not
Things different, or separate from the Spirit, and if the Spirit is not always
working in us, his Fruits must be as absent from us, as he is. St. John says,
hereby we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit, which he has given us. A
Demonstration, that the Spirit can no other Way make himself known to us, but
by his dwelling and working in us. St. James says, every good and perfect Gift
comes from ABOVE: But now does not he in reality deny this, who seeks for the
highest Gift of Knowledge from BELOW, from the poor Contrivance of a
Commonplace Book? Again, If any Man lack Wisdom, let him ask it of God; St.
James does not say, let him go ask Peter, or Paul, or John, because he knew,
that divine Wisdom, was Nothing else, but divine Inspiration. -- But Mr. Green
has got together, his ingenious, his eminent Writers, his excellent, learned,
judicious Authors, his cool, rational-morality Doctors (a set of Men, whose
glorious Names we read no more of in the Gospel, than of the profound
Aristotle, or the divine Cicero) and these are to do that for him, which the
whole College of Apostles could do for no Body. -- Now this Doctrine, that
Nothing but the Spirit can know the Things that be of God; and that the
Enjoyment of the Spirit, is all the Knowledge we can have of him, is a Truth
taught us, not only by all Scripture, but by the whole Nature of Things. For
every Thing, that can be seen, known, heard, felt, etc. must be manifested by
itself, and not by another. It is not possible for any Thing but Light to
manifest Light, nor for any Thing but Darkness to make Darkness to be known.
Yet this is more possible, than for any Thing but divine Inspiration, to make
divine Inspiration to be known. Hence there is a Degree of Delusion still
higher, to be noted, in such Writers, as Mr. Green; for his collection of
ingenious, eminent, rational Authors, of whom he asks Counsel concerning the
Necessity, of Certainty of the immediate Inspiration of the Spirit, are such as
deny it, and write against it. Therefore the Proceeding is just as wise, as if
a Man was to consult some ingenious, and eminent Atheists, about the Truth and
Certainty of God's immediate, continual Providence; or ask a few select Deists,
how, or what he was to believe of the Nature, and Power of gospel Faith. Now
there are the Holy Spirit's own Operations, and there are Reports about them.
The only true Reports, are those that are made by inspired Persons; and if
there were no such Persons, there could be no true Reports of the Matter. And
therefore to consult uninspired Persons, and such as deny, and reproach the
pretense to Inspiration, to be rightly instructed about the Truth of immediate,
continual, divine Inspiration, is a Degree of Blindness, greater than can be
charged upon the old Jewish Scribes, and Pharisees.

The Reports, that are to be acknowledged as true, concerning the Holy Spirit,
and his Operations, are those that are recorded in Scripture; that is, the
Scriptures are an infallible History, or Relation of that which the Holy Spirit
is, and does, and works in true Believers; and also an infallible Direction how
we are to seek, and wait, and trust in his good Power over us. But then the
Scriptures themselves, though thus true, and infallible in these Reports, and
Instructions about the Holy Spirit, yet they can go no farther, than to be a
true History; they cannot give to the Reader of them, the Possession, the
Sensibility, and Enjoyment of that which they relate. This is plain, nof only
from the Nature of a written History or Instruction, but from the express Words
of our Lord, saying, Except a Man be born again of the Spirit, he cannot see or
enter into the Kingdom of God. Therefore the new Birth from above, or of the
Spirit, is that alone, which gives true Knowledge and and Perception of that,
which is the Kingdom of God. The History may relate Truths enough about it; but
the Kingdom of God, being Nothing else, but the Power, and Presence of God,
dwelling and ruling in our Souls, this can only manifest itself, and can
manifest itself to Nothing in Man, but to the new Birth. For every Thing else
in Man, is deaf and dumb and blind to the Kingdom of God; but when that which
died in Adam, is made alive again by the quickening Spirit from above, this
being the Birth which came at first from God, and a Partaker of the divine
Nature, this knows, finds, and enjoys the Kingdom of God.

I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life, says Christ: this Record of Scripture
is true; but what a Delusion, for a Man to think, that he knows and finds this
to be true, and that Christ is all this Benefit, and Blessing to him, because
he assents, consents, and contends, it may be, for the Truth of those Words.
This is impossible. The new Birth is here again the only Power of Entrance;
every Thing else knocks at the Door in vain; I know you not says Christ to
every Thing, but the new Birth. -- I am the Way, the Truth and the Life, tells
us neither more nor less, than if Christ had said, I am the Kingdom of God,
into which Nothing can enter, but that which is born of the Spirit.

Here again may be seen in the highest Degree of certainty, the absolute
Necessity of immediate, divine Inspiration, through every Part of the Christian
Life. For if a Birth of the Spirit, is that alone that can enter into, or
receive the Kingdom of God, come amongst Men; that alone, which can find Christ
to be the Way, the Truth and the Life; then a continual Life, or Breathing of
the Spirit in us, must be as necessary, as the first Birth of the Spirit. For a
Birth of the Spirit, is only to make a Beginning of a Life of the Spirit; Birth
is only in order to Life; if therefore the Life of the Spirit continues not,
the Birth is lost, and the Cessation of its Breathing in us, is nothing else
but Death again to the Kingdom of God, that is, to every Thing, that is, or can
be godly. Therefore the immediate, continual Inspiration of the Spirit, as the
only possible Power and Preservation of a Godly Life, stands upon the same
Ground, and is as absolutely necessary to Salvation, as the new Birth.

Take away this Power, and working Life of the Spirit from being the one Life
of all that is done in the Church, and then, though it be ever so outwardly
glorious in its Extent, or ever so full of learned Members, it can be Nothing
else in the Sight of God but the wise Greek, and the carnal Jew, become a Body
of Water-baptized Christians. For no such an one can be in a better State than
this; the Wisdom of the Greek, the Carnality of the Jew, must have the whole
Government of him, till he is born of, and led by the Spirit of God; this alone
is the Kingdom of God, and every Thing else is the Kingdom of this World, in
which Satan is declared to be the Prince. -- Poor, miserable Man! that strives
with all the Sophistry of human Wit, to be delivered from the immediate,
continual Operation and Government of the Spirit of God, not considering, that
where God is not, there is the Devil, and where the Spirit rules not, there all
is the Work of the Flesh, though nothing be talked of, but spiritual and
Christian Matters. I say talked of; for the best Ability of the natural Man,
can go no farther, than Talk, and Notions, and Opinions about Scripture Words,
and Facts; in these, he may be a great Critic, an acute Logician, a powerful
Orator, and know every Thing of Scripture, except the Spirit and the Truth.

How much then is it to be lamented, as well as impossible to be denied, that
though all Scripture assures us, that the Things of the Spirit of God, are and
must, to the End of the World, be foolishness to the natural Man; yet from
almost one End of learned Christendom to the other, nothing is thought of, as
the true, and proper Means of attaining divine Knowledge, but that which every
natural, selfish, proud, envious, false, vainglorious, worldly Man can do.
Where is that divinity Student, who thinks, or was ever taught to think, of
partaking of the Light of the Gospel any other Way, than by doing with the
Scriptures, that which he does with Pagan Writers, whether Poets, Orators, or
Comedians, viz. exercise his Logic, Rhetoric, and critical Skill, in descanting
upon them? This done, he is thought by himself, and often by others, to have a
sufficiency of divine, apostolical Knowledge. What Wonder therefore if it
should sometimes happen, that the very same vain, corrupt, puffing Literature,
that raises one Man to be a Poet-laureat, should set another in a divinity
Chair?

How is it, that the logical, critical, learned Deist comes by his Infidelity?
Why just by the same Help of the same good Powers of the natural Man, as many a
learned Christian comes to know, embrace, and contend for the Faith of the
Gospel. For, drop the Power and Reality of divine Inspiration, and then all is
dropped, that can set the Believer above, or give him any godly Difference from
the Infidel. For the Christian's Faith has no Goodness in it, but that it comes
from above, is born of the Spirit; and the Deist's Infidelity has no Badness in
it, but because it comes from below, is born of the Will of Flesh, and of the
Will of Men, and rejects the Necessity of being born again out of the
Corruption of fallen Nature. The Christian therefore that rejects, reproaches,
and writes against the Necessity of immediate, divine Inspiration, pleads the
whole Cause of Infidelity; he confirms the Ground, on which it stands; and has
nothing to prove the Goodness of his own Christianity, but that which equally
proves to the Deist, the Goodness of his Infidelity. For without the new Birth,
or which is the same Thing, without immediate, continual, divine Inspiration,
the Difference between the Christian, and the Infidel, is quite lost; and
whether the uninspired, unregenerate, Son of Adam, be in the Church, or out of
the Church, he is still that Child of this World, that fallen Adam, and mere
natural Man, to whom the Things of the Spirit of God, are and must be
foolishness. For a full Proof of this, no more need be seen, than that which
you cannot help seeing, that the same shining Virtues, and the same glaring
Vices are common to them both. For the Christian, not made such, by the Spirit
of God continually inspiring, and working in him, has only a Christianity of
his own making, and can have only such Appearances of Virtues, and will have
such reality of Vices, as natural Self wants to have. Let him therefore
renounce what is called natural Religion, as much as he will, yet unless he is
a new born, and divinely inspired Christian, he must live and die in all his
natural Corruption.

Through all Scripture, nothing else is aimed at, or intended for Man, as his
Christianity, but the divine Life; nor any Thing hinted at, as having the least
Power to raise, or beget it, but the holy, Life-giving Spirit of God. -- How
gross therefore is that Blindness, which reading the Gospel, and the History of
Gospel Christians, cannot see these two fundamental Truths, (1) that Nothing is
divine Knowledge in Man, but the divine Life: (2) That the divine Life in
Nothing else, but a Birth of the divine Nature within him?

But this Truth being lost, or given up, vain Learning, and a worldly Spirit,
being in Possession of the Gospel-book, set up Kingdoms of Strife and Division.
-- For what End? Why, that the Unity of the Church may not be lost. Multiply
Systems of empty Notions and Opinions: For what? Why, that Words, and Forms may
do that for the Church now, which to the first Church, of Christ's own forming,
could only be done, by being born of the Spirit.

Hence it is, that the Scripture-scholar is looked upon as having divine
Knowledge of its Matters, when he is as ready at Chapter and Verse, as the
Critic is at every Page of Cicero. And nothing is looked upon as defective in
divinity Knowledge, but such supposed Mistakes of the Genius of the Hebrew, or
Greek Letter, as the sublime Students of the samed Words of a Milton, or a
Shakespeare, charge, as Blunders upon one another.

Now to call such Scripture Skill, divine Knowledge, is just as solid, and
judicious, as if a Man was said, or thought to know, that which St. John knew,
because he could say his whole Gospel, and Epistles by Heart, without missing a
Word of them. For a literal Knowledge of Scripture, is but like having all
Scripture in the Memory; and is so far from being a divine Perception of the
Things spoken of, that the most vicious, wicked Scholar in the World, may
attain to the highest Perfection in it. But divine Knowledge and Wickedness of
Life, are so inconsistent, that they are mutual Death and Destruction to one
another; where the one is alive, the other must be dead -- Judas Iscariot knew
Jesus Christ, and all that he said and did to his Crucifixion; he knew what it
was to be at the Lord's Table, and to partake of his Supper of Bread and Wine.
But yet, with much more Truth it may be said, that he knew nothing essentially
of all this, and had no better a Knowledge of it, than Pontius Pilate had. Now
all Knowledge of Christ, but that which is from divine Inspiration, or the
New Birth, is but as poor and profitless, as Judas his Knowledge was. It may
say to Christ, as he did, Hail Master; but no one can call Jesus Lord, but by
the Holy Spirit. -- This empty Letter-learned Knowledge, which the natural Man
can as easily have of the sacred Scripture, and religious Matters, as of any
other Books, or human Affairs; this being taken for divine Knowledge, has
spread such Darkness and Delusion all over Christendom, as may be reckoned no
less than a general Apostasy from the gospel State of divine Illumination. For
the gospel State is in its whole Nature nothing else; it has but one Light, and
that is the Lamb of God; it has but one Life, and that is by the Spirit of God.
Whatever is not of, and from this Light, and governed by this Spirit, call it
by what high Name you will, is no more a Part of the gospel State, nor will
have a better End, than that which enters into the Mouth, and corrupts in
the Belly.

That one Light and Spirit, which was only one from all Eternity, before
Angels, or any heavenly Beings were created, must to all Eternity, be that one
only Light and Spirit, by which Angels or Men can ever have any Union, or
Communion with God. -- Every other Light, is but the Light, whence Beasts have
their Sense and Subtilty; every other Spirit, is but that, which gives to Flesh
and Blood, all its Lusts and Appetites. -- Nothing else but the Departure from
the one Light and Spirit of God, turned an Order of Angels into Devils. --
Nothing else but the Loss of that same Light and Spirit, took from the divine
Adam, his first Crown of paradisical Glory, stripped him more naked than the
Beasts, and left him a Prey to Devils, and in the Jaws of eternal Death. --
What therefore can have the least Share of Power toward Man's Redemption, but
the Light and Spirit of God, making again a Birth of themselves in him, as they
did in his first glorious Creation? Or what can possibly begin, or bring forth
this Return of his first lost Birth, but solely that which is done by this
eternal Light and Spirit. -- Hence it is, that the gospel State is by our Lord,
affirmed to be a Kingdom of Heaven at Hand, or come amongst Men, because it has
the Nature of no worldly Thing, or creaturely Power, is to serve no worldly
Ends, can be helped by no worldly Power, receives nothing from Man, but Man's
full Denial of himself, stands upon nothing that is finite or transitory, has
no Existence but in that working Power of God, that created and upholds Heaven
and Earth; and is a Kingdom of God become Man, and a Kingdom of Men united to
God, through a continual, immediate, divine Illumination. What Scripture of the
New Testament can you read, that does not prove this to be the gospel State, a
Kingdom of God, into which none can enter, but by being born of the Spirit,
none can continue to be alive in it, but by being led by the Spirit, and in
which not a Thought, or Desire, or Action, can be allowed to have any Part in
it, but as it is a Fruit of the Spirit?

Thy Kingdom come, thy Will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven. What is God's
Kingdom in Heaven, but the Manifestation of what God is, and what he does in
his heavenly Creatures? How is his Will done there, but because his Holy Spirit
is the Life, the Power, and Mover of all that live in it. -- Many daily read
this Prayer, extol it under the Name of the Lord's Prayer, and yet (for the
Sake of Orthodoxy) preach, and write against all that is prayed for in it. For
nothing but a continual, essential, immediate divine, Illumination can do that,
which we pray may be done.

For where can God's Kingdom be come, but where every other Power but his, is
at an End, and driven out of it? How can his Will only be done, but where the
Spirit that wills in God, wills in the Creature?

What now have Parts, and Literature, and the natural Abilities of Man, that
they can do here? Just as much as they can do at the Resurrection of the Dead;
for all that is to be done here, is nothing else, but Resurrection and Life.
Therefore, that which gave Eyes to the Blind, cleansed the Lepers, cast out
Devils, and raised the Dead; that alone can, and must do all that is to be done
in this gospel Kingdom of God. For every the smallest Work or Fruit of Grace,
must be as solely done by God, as the greatest Miracle in Nature; and the
Reason is, because every Work of Grace, is the same overcoming of Nature, as
when the Dead are raised to Life. -- Yet vain Man would be thought to be
something, to have great Power and Ability in this Kingdom of Grace, not
because he happens to be born of noble Parents, is clothed in Purple and fine
Linen, and faireth sumptuously every Day; but because he has happened to be
made a Scholar, has run through all Languages and Histories, has been long
exercised in Conjectures and Criticisms, and has his Head as full of all
Notions, theological, poetical, and philosophical, as a Dictionary is full of
all Sorts of Words.

Now let this simple Question, decide the whole Matter here: Has this great
Scholar any more Power of saying to this Mountain, be thou removed hence, and
cast into the Sea, than the illiterate Christian has? If not, he is just as
weak, as powerless, and little in the Kingdom of God, as he is. But if the
illiterate Man's Faith, should happen to be nearer to the Bulk of a Grain of
Mustard Seed, than that of the prodigious Scholar, the illiterate Christian
stands much above him in the Kingdom of God.

Look now at the present State of Christendom, glorying in the Light of Greek
and Roman Learning, (which an Age or two ago broke forth) as a Light that has
helped the Gospel to shine with a Luster, that it scarce ever had before. Look
at this, and you will see the Fall of the present Church from its first gospel
State, to have much Likeness to the Fall of the first divine Man, from the
Glory of paradisical Innocence, and heavenly Purity, into an earthly State, and
beastial Life of worldly Craft, and serpentine Subtilty.

In the first gospel Church, Heathen Light had no other Name, than Heathen
Darkness; and the Wisdom of Words was no more sought after, than that
Friendship of the World, which is Enmity with God. In that new born Church, the
Tree of Life, which grew in the Midst of Paradise, took Root and grew up again.
-- In the present Church, the Tree of Life is hissed at, as the visionary Food
of deluded Enthusiasts; and the Tree of Death, called the Tree of Knowledge of
Good and Evil, has the Eyes and Hearts of Priests and People, and is thought to
do as much Good to Christians, as it did Evil to the first Inhabitants of
Paradise. -- This Tree, that brought Death, and Corruption into human Nature at
first, is now called a Tree of Light, and is, Day and Night, well watered with
every corrupt Stream, however distant, or muddy with Earth, that can be drawn
to it.

The Simplicity indeed, both of the gospel Letter, and Doctrine, has the Shine,
and Polish of classic Literature laid thick upon it. -- Cicero is in the
Pulpit, Aristotle writes Christian Ethics, Euclid demonstrates Infidelity and
Absurdity to be the same Thing. -- Greece had but one Longinus, Rome had but
one Quintilian; but in our present Church, they are as common, as Patriots in
the State.

But now, what follows from this new risen Light? Why, Aristotle's Atheism,
Cicero's Height of Pride and Depth of Dissimulation, and every refined, or
gross Species of Greek and Roman Vices, are as glaring in this new enlightened
Christian Church, as ever they were in old Pagan Greece, or Rome. -- Would you
find a Gospel-christian, in all this Midday Glory of Learning, you may light a
Candle, as the Philosopher did in the Midday Sun, to find an honest Man.

And indeed, if we consider the Nature of our Salvation, either with Respect to
that which alone can save us, or that from which we are to be saved, it will be
plain, that the Wit and Elegance of classic Literature, brought into a
Christian Church, to make the Doctrines of the Cross have a better
Salvation-effect upon fallen Man, is but like calling in the Assistance of
Balls, and Masquerades, to make the Lent-penitence go deeper into the Heart,
and more effectually drive all Levity and Impurity out of it. -- How poorly was
the Gospel at first preached, if the Wisdom of Words, and the Gifts of natural
Wit and Imagination had been its genuine Helps? But alas, they stand in the
same Contrariety to one another, as Self-denial, and Self-gratification. To
know the Truth of gospel Salvation, is to know that Man's natural Wisdom is to
be equally sacrificed with his natural Folly; for they are but one and the same
Thing, only called sometimes by one Name, and sometimes by the other.

His intellectual Faculties are, by the Fall, in a much worse State than his
natural animal Appetites, and want a much greater Self-denial. And when own
Will, own Understanding, and own Imagination have their natural Strength
indulged and gratified, and are made seemingly rich and honorable with the
Treasures acquired from a Study of the Belles Lettres, they will just as much
help poor fallen Man to be like-minded with Christ, as the Art of Cookery, well
and daily studied, will help a Professor of the Gospel, to the Spirit and
Practice of Christian Abstinence. -- To know all this to be strictly the Truth,
no more need be known, than these two Things: (1.) That our Salvation consists
wholly in being saved from ourselves, or that which we are by Nature; (2.) That
in the whole Nature of Things, nothing could be this Salvation, or Savior to
us, but such an Humility of God manifested in human Nature, as is beyond all
Expression. -- Hence, the first unalterable Term of this Savior, to fallen
Man, is this, except a Man deny himself, forsake all that he has, yea and his
own Life, he cannot be my Disciple. And to show, that this is but the
Beginning, or Ground of Man's Salvation, the Savior adds, Learn of me, for I
am meek, and lowly of Heart. What a Light is here, for those that can bear, or
love the Light! Self is the whole Evil of fallen Nature, Self-denial and
Humility are our Capacity of being saved. This is every Man's short Lesson of
Life, and he that has well learnt it, is Scholar enough, and has had all the
Benefit of a most finished Education. Then old Adam with all his Ignorance is
cast out of him; and when Christ's Humility is learnt, then he has the very
Mind of Christ, and that which brings him forth a Son of God.

Who then can enough wonder at that Bulk of Libraries, which has taken Place of
this short Lesson of the Gospel? Or at that Number of Champion Disputants, who
from Age to Age, have been all in Arms, to support and defend a Set of
Opinions, Doctrines, and Practices, all which may be most cordially embraced,
without the least Degree of Self-denial, and most firmly held fast, without
getting the least Degree of Humility by it.

What a Grossness of Ignorance, both of Man, and his Savior, to run to Greek
and Roman Schools, to learn how to put off Adam, and to put on Christ? To drink
at the Fountains of Pagan Poets, and Orators, in order more divinely to drink
of the Cup, that Christ drank of? -- What can come of all this, but that which
is already too much come, a Ciceronian-Gospeller, instead of a Gospel-
Penitent? -- Instead of the Depth, the Truth and Spirit of the humble Publican,
seeking to regain Paradise, only by a broken Heart crying, God, be merciful to
me a Sinner; the high-bred Classic will live in daily Transports at the
enormous See Milton's enormous Bliss.
Sublime of a Milton, flying thither, on the unfeathered Wings of high sounding
Words.

This will be more or less the Case with all the Salvation-doctrines of Christ,
whilst under classical Acquisition, and Administration. Those divine Truths,
which are no farther good and redeeming, but as they are Spirit and Life in us,
which can have no Entrance, or Birth, but in the Death of Self, in a broken and
contrite Heart, will serve only to help classic Painters (as Dr. W. As this
Address was wrote sometime ago, in which are certain Strictures upon Dr.
Warburton's Writings, who has lately been consecrated a Right Reverend Lord
Bishop; I thought it more candid not to alter my Style, than to take the
Advantage of charging such gross Errors on a Bishop of Gloucester, which I only
found in a Mr. and Dr. Warburton.
calls them) to lavish out their Colors on their own paper Monuments of
lifeless Virtues.

How came the learned Heathens by their Pride and Vanity, by their Inability to
come under the Humility of the Cross? It was because the natural Man shined in
the false Glory of his own cultivated Abilities. Have Wit and Parts, and
elegant Taste, any more good, or redeeming Virtue in Christians, than they had
in Heathens? As well might it be said, that own Will is good, and has a
redeeming Virtue, in a Christian, but bad, and destructive in a Heathen. I said
a redeeming Virtue in it; because nothing is or can be a religious Good to
fallen Man, but that which has a redeeming Virtue in it, or is, so far as it
goes, a true Renewal of the divine Life in the Soul. Therefore said our only
Redeemer, Without me, ye can do nothing. Whatever is not his immediate Work in
us, is at best but a mere Nothing, with Respect to the Good of our Redemption.
-- A Tower of Babel, may to it is Builders Eyes, seem to hide its Head in the
Clouds; but as to its reaching of Heaven, it is no nearer to that, than the
Earth on which it stands. -- It is thus with all the Buildings of Man's Wisdom,
and natural Abilities in the Things of Salvation; he may take the Logic of
Aristotle, add to that the Rhetoric of Tully, and then ascend as high as he can
on the Ladder of Poetic Imagination, yet no more is done to the reviving the
lost Life of God in his Soul, than by a Tower of Brick and Mortar to reach
Heaven.

Self is the Root, the Tree, and the Branches of all the Evils of our fallen
State. We are without God, because we are in the Life of Self. -- Self-love,
Self-esteem, and Self-seeking, are the very Essence, and Life of Pride; and the
Devil the first Father of Pride, is never absent from them, nor without Power
in them. -- To die to these essential Properties of Self, is to make the Devil
depart from us. But as soon as we would have Self-abilities have a Share in our
good Works, the satanic Spirit of Pride is in Union with us, and we are working
for the Maintenance of Self-love, Self-esteem, and Self-seeking.

All the Vices of fallen Angels, and Men, have their Birth and Power in the
Pride of Self, or I may better say, in the Atheism, and Idolatry of Self; for
Self is both Atheist and Idolater. It is Atheist, because it has rejected God;
it is an Idolater, because it is its own Idol. -- On the other Hand, all the
Virtues of the heavenly Life, are the Virtues of Humility. Not a Joy, or Glory,
or Praise in Heaven, but is, what it is, through Humility. It is Humility
alone, that makes the unpassable Gulf between Heaven and Hell. -- No Angels in
Heaven, but because Humility is in all their Breath; no Devils in Hell, but
because the Fire of Pride, is their whole Fire of Life.

What is then, or in what lies the great Struggle for eternal Life? It all lies
in the Strife between PRIDE and HUMILITY: all other Things, be they what they
will, are but as under Workmen, Pride and Humility are the two Master Powers;
the two Kingdoms in Strife for the eternal Possession of Man.

And here it is to be obseved, that every Son of Adam, is in the Service of
Pride and Self, be he doing what he will, till an Humility that comes solely
from Heaven has been his Redeemer. Till then, all that he does, will be only
done by the right Hand, that the left Hand may know it. And he that thinks it
possible, for the natural Man, to get a better Humility than this, from his own
right Reason (as it is often miscalled) refined by Education, shows himself
quite Ignorant of this one most plain, and capital Truth of the Gospel, namely,
that there never was, nor ever will be, but one Humility in the whole World,
and that is the one Humility of Christ, which never any Man, since the fall of
Adam, had the least Degree of, but from Christ. -- Humility is one, in the same
Sense, and Truth, as Christ is one, the Mediator is one, Redemption is one.
There are not two Lambs of God, that take away the Sins of the World. But if
there was any Humility, besides that of Christ, there would be something else
besides him, that could take away the Sins of the World. -- All that came
before me, says Christ, were Thieves and Robbers: We are used to confine this
to Persons; but the same is as true of every Virtue, whether it has the Name
of Humility, Charity, Piety, or any Thing else; if it comes before Christ,
however good it may pretend to be, it is but a Cheat, a Thief, and a Robber
under the Name of a Godly Virtue. And the Reason is because Pride and Self have
the all of Man, till Man has his all from Christ. He therefore only fights the
good Fight, whose Strife is, that the Self-idolatrous Nature, which he has
from Adam, may be brought to Death, by the supernatural Humility of Christ,
brought to Life in him.

The Enemies to Man's rising out of the Fall of Adam, through the Spirit and
Power of Christ, are many. But the one great Dragon-enemy, called Antichrist,
is SELF-EXALTATION. This is his Birth, his Pomp, his Power, and his Throne;
when Self-exaltation ceases, the last Enemy is destroyed, and all that came
from the Pride and Death of Adam, is swallowed up in Victory.

There has been much sharp looking out, to see where and what Antichrist is, or
by what Marks he may be known. Some say, he has been in the Christian World,
almost ever since the Gospel Times; nay, that he was even then beginning to
appear and show himself. Others say, he came in with this, or that Pope; others
that he is not yet come, but near at Hand. Others will have it, that he has
been here, and there, but driven from one Place to another, by several new
risen Protestant Sects.

But to know with certainty, where, and what Antichrist is, and who is with
him, and who against him, you need only read this short Description, which
Christ gives of himself. (1) I can do nothing of myself. (2) I came not to do
my own Will. (3) I seek not my own Glory. (4) I am meek and lowly of Heart. --
Now if this is Christ, then Self-ability, or Self-exaltation, being the highest
and fullest Contrariety to all this, must be alone the one great Antichrist,
that opposes, and withstandeth the whole Nature* and Spirit of Christ.

What therefore has every one so much to fear, to renounce and abhor, as every
inward Sensibility of Self-exaltation, and every outward Work, that proceeds
from it. -- But now, at what Things shall a Man look, too see that working of
Self, which raises Pride to it is strongest Life, and most of all hinders the
Birth of the humble Jesus in his Soul? Shall he call the Pomps and Vanities of
the World, the highest Works of Self-adoration? Shall he look at Fops and
Beaux, and painted Ladies, to see the Pride that has the most of Antichrist in
it? No, by no means. These are indeed, Marks shameful enough, of the vain,
foolish Heart of Man, but yet, comparatively speaking, they are but the
Skin-deep Follies of that Pride, which the Fall of Man, has begotten, and
brought forth in him. -- Would you see the deepest Root, and Iron-strength of
Pride, and Self-adoration, you must enter into the dark Chamber of Man's fiery
Soul, where the Light of God (which alone gives Humility, and meek Submission
to all created Spirits) being extinguished by the Death, which Adam died,
Satan, or which is the same Thing, Self-exaltation became the Strong Man that
kept Possession of the House, till a stronger than he should come upon him. --
In this secret Source of an eternal fiery Soul, glorying in the astral Light of
this World, a swelling Kingdom of Pomps and Vanities is set up in the Heart or
Man, of which, all outward Pomps and Vanities, are but it is childish,
transitory Play things. The inward Strong Man of Pride, the diabolical Self,
has his higher Works within; he dwells in the Strength of the Heart, and has
every Power and Faculty of the Soul, offering continual Incense to him. -- His
Memory, his Will, his Understanding, and Imagination are always at work for
him, and for no one else. -- His Memory is the faithful Repository of all the
fine Things that Self has ever done; and lest any Thing of them, should be
lost or forgotten, she is continually setting them before his Eyes. His Will,
though it has all the World before it, yet goes after Nothing, but as Self
sends it. His Understanding is ever upon the Stretch for new Projects to
enlarge the Dominions of Self; and if this sails, Imagination comes in, as the
last and truest Support of Self, she makes him a King, and mighty Lord of
Castles in the Air.

This is that full-born, natural Self, that must be pulled out of the Heart,
and totally denied, or there can be no Disciple of Christ; which is only saying
this plain Truth, that the apostate, self-idolatrous Nature of the old Man,
must be put off, or there can be no new Creature in Christ.

Now what is it in the human Soul, that most of all hinders the Death of this
old Man? What is it, that above all other Things, strengthens and exalts the
Life of Self, and makes it the Master and Governor of all the Powers of the
Heart and Soul? It is the fansied Riches of Parts, the Glitter of Genius, the
Flights of Imagination, the Glory of Learning, and the Self-conceited Strength
of natural Reason: These are the strong Holds of fallen Nature, the
Master Builders of Pride's Temple in the Heart of Man, and which, as so many
Priests keep up the daily Worship of Idol-self. -- And here let it be well, and
well observed, that all these magnified Talents of the natural Man are started
up through his miserable Fall from the Life of God in his Soul. -- Wit, Genius,
Learning, and natural Reason, would never have had any more a Name amongst Men,
than Blindness, Ignorance, and Sickness, had Man continued, as at First, an
holy Image of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. -- Every Thing then, that dwelt in
him, or came from him, would have only said so much of God, and nothing of
Himself, have manifested nothing to him, but the heavenly Powers of the Light
and Life of God dwelling in him. -- He would have had no more Sense or
Consciousness of his own Wit, or natural Reason, or any Power of Goodness, in
all that He was, and did, than of his own creating Power, at beholding the
created Heavens, and Earth. -- It is his dreadful Fall from the Life of God in
his Soul, that has furnished him with these high intellectual Riches, just as
it has furnished him with the substantial Riches of his bestial Appetites, and
Lusts. And when the Lusts of the Flesh have spent out their Life, when the
dark, thick Body of earthly Flesh, and Blood, shall be forced to let the Soul
go loose; all these bright Talents will end with that System of fleshly Lusts
in which they began; and that of Man, which remains, will have nothing of its
own, nothing that can say, I do this, or I do that, but all that it has, or
does, will be either the Glory of God manifested in it, or the Power of Hell in
full Possession of it. -- The Time of Man's playing with Parts, Wit, and
Abilities, and of fancying himself to be something great and considerable in
the intellectual World, may be much shorter, but can be no longer, than he can
eat, and drink with the Animals of this World. -- When the Time comes, that
fine Buildings, rich Settlements, acquired Honors, and Rabbi, Rabbi, must take
their Leave of him, all the stately Structures, which Genius, Learning, and
Flights of Imagination, have painted inwardly on his Brain and outwardly on
Paper, must bear full Witness to Solomon's Vanity of Vanities.

Let then the high accomplished Scholar reflect, that he comes by his Wit, and
Parts, and acute Abilities, just as the Serpent came by his Subtilty; let him
reflect, that he might as well dream of acquiring angelic Purity to his animal
Nature, by multiplying new invented Delights for his earthly Passions, and
Tempers, as of raising his Soul into divine Knowledge, through the well
exercised Powers of his natural Reason, and Imagination.

The finest intellectual Power, and that which has the best Help in it, toward
bringing Man again into the Region of divine Light, is that poor, despised
Thing, called Simplicity. This is that, which stops the Workings of the fallen
Life of Nature, and leaves room for God to work again in the Soul, according to
the good Pleasure of his holy Will. It stands in such a waiting Posture before
God, and in such Readiness for the divine Birth, as the Plants of the Earth
wait for the inflowing Riches of the Light, and Air. But the Self-assuming
Workings of Man's natural Powers, shut him up in himself, closely barred up
against the inflowing Riches of the Light and Spirit of God.

Yet so it is, in this fallen State of the Gospel Church, that with these proud
Endowments of fallen Nature, the classic Scholar, full fraught with Pagan Light
and Skill, comes forth to play the Critic and Orator with the Simplicity of
salvation Mysteries; Mysteries which mean nothing else but the inward Work of
God in the Soul of Man, nor any other Work there, but the raising up a dead
Adam, into a living Christ of God.

However, to make way for Parts, Criticism, and Language-learning, to have the
full Management of salvation Doctrines, the well-read Scholar gives out, that
the ancient Way of knowing the Things of God, taught, and practiced by
Fishermen-Apostles, is obsolete. They indeed wanted to have divine Knowledge
from the immediate, continual Operation of the Holy Spirit; but this State was
only for a Time, till Genius, and Learning entered into the Pale of the Church.
-- Behold, if ever, the Abomination of Desolation standing in the holy Place!
-- For as soon as this Doctrine is set up, that Man's natural Parts, and
acquired Learning, have full Right and Power to sit in the divinity Chair, and
to guide Men into that Truth, which was once the only Office and Power of the
Holy Spirit; as soon as this is done, and so far as it is received, it may with
the greatest Truth be said, that the Kingdom of God is entirely shut up; and
only a Kingdom of Scribes, Pharisees, and Hypocrites can come instead of it.
For by this Doctrine the whole Nature and Power of gospel Religion, is much
more denied, than by setting up the Infallibility of the Pope; for though his
Claim to Infallibility is false, yet he claims it from, and under the Holy
Spirit; but the Protestant Scholar has his divinity Knowledge, his Power in the
Kingdom of Truth, from himself, his own Logic, and learned Reason. -- Christ
has no where instituted an infallible Pope; and it is full as certain, that he
has no where spoke one single Word, or given the least Power to Logic,
Learning, or the natural Powers of Man, in his Kingdom; he has never said to
them, whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven; never said
to them, go ye and teach all Nations, no more than he has ever said to Wolves,
go ye, and feed my Sheep. -- Christ indeed said of Himself, according to the
Flesh, it is expedient for you, that I go away; but where has he said of
himself according to the Spirit, it is also expedient for you, that I go away,
that your own natural Abilities, and learned Reason, may have the Guidance of
you into all Truth. This is no where said, unless Logic can prove it from these
Words, without me ye can do nothing, and Lo I am with you to the end of the
World.

The first, and main Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles was, to tell the Jews,
that the Kingdom of God was at Hand, or was come to them. Proof enough surely,
that their Church was not that Kingdom of God, though by God's Appointment and
under Laws of his own commanding. But why not, when it was thus set up by God?
It was because it had human and worldly Things in it, consisted of carnal
Ordinances, and had only Types, and Figures, and Shadows of a Kingdom of God,
that was to come. -- Of this Kingdom, Christ says, my Kingdom is not of this
World; and as a Proof of it, he adds, if it was of this World, then would my
Servants fight for me; which was saying, that it was so different in Kind, and
so superior in Nature to this World, that no Sort of worldly Power could either
help, or hinder it. But of this World, into which the Kingdom of God was come,
the Holy One of God says, in the World, ye shall have Tribulation, but be of
good Comfort, I have overcome the World. Now, how was it, that Christ's
Victory, was their Victory? It was, because he was in them, and they in him,
because I live ye shall live also; in that Day ye shall know that I am in the
Father, and you in me, and I in you.

This was the Kingdom of God come to them, the same Kingdom of God, in which
Adam was born and began his first glorious Life; when the Image and Likeness of
the Holy Spirit, had an outward Glory like that, which broke through the Body
of Christ, when on Mount Tabor his Face did shine as the Sun, and his Raiment
was white as the Light. -- To the Children of this Kingdom, says its almighty
King, when they bring you before Magistrates and Powers, take no Thought how,
or what ye shall answer, or what ye shall say unto them, for the Holy Ghost
shall teach you in that same Hour, what ye ought to say. For it is not ye that
speak, but the Spirit of your Father, that speaks in you.

No higher, or other Thing is here said, than in these other Words, Take no
Thought, what ye shall Eat, or Drink, or where with all ye shall be clothed,
but seek first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and all these Things
shall be added unto you. This is the Truth of the Kingdom of God, come unto
Men, and this is the Birthright Privilege of all that are living Members of
it, to be delivered from their own natural Spirit, which they had from Adam,
from the Spirit and Wisdom of this World and through the whole Course of their
Lives, only to say, and do, and be that, which the Spirit of their Father
works in them.

But now, is not this Kingdom gone away from us, are we not left comfortless,
if instead of this Spirit of our Father, speaking, doing, and working every
Thing in us, and for us, we are left again to our own natural Powers, to run to
every Lo here, and Lo there, to find a Share in that Kingdom of God, which once
was, and never can be any Thing else, but God, the Wisdom and Power of God
manifested in our Flesh? Had it not been as well, nay better for us, to have
been still under Types and Figures, sacrificing Bulls and Goats by divine
Appointment, than to be brought under a Religion, that must be Spirit and Life,
and then left to the jarring Interests, of the Wisdom of the Greek, and the
Carnality of the Jew, how to be living Members of it? For where the Spirit of
God is not the continul, immediate Governor of spiritual Things, nothing better
can come of it. For the Truth and full Proof of this, no more need be appealed
to, than all the Libraries, and Churches of Christendom for many Ages to this
Day.

What is the Difference between Man's own Righteousness, and Man's own Light in
Religion? They are strictly the same Thing, do one and the same Work, namely,
keep up, and strengthen every Evil, Vanity, and Corruption of fallen Nature.
Nothing saves a Man from his own Righteousness, but that which saves, and
delivers him from his own Light. -- The Jew, that was most of all set against
the Gospel, and unable to receive it, was he that trusted in his own
Righteousness; this was the rich Man, to whom it was as hard to enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, as for a Camel to go through the Eye of Needle. -- But the
Christian, that trusts in his own Light, is the very Jew that trusted in his
own Righteousness; and all that he gets by the Gospel, is only that, which the
Pharisee got by the Law, namely, to be farther from entering into the Kingdom
of God, than Publicans and Harlots. -- How comes it, that a Beast, a scarlet
Whore, a horned Dragon, and other the most horrible Descriptions of diabolical
Power, have been by the Spirit of God, made Descriptions of the Christian
Church? How comes it, that the Spirit describes the gospel Church, as driven
into a Wilderness; -- the two faithful Witnesses, Moses and Jesus, as
prophesying so many Ages in Sackcloth, and slain in the Streets of spiritual
Sodom, and Egypt? It is, because Man's own natural Light, Man's own conceited
Righteousness, his serpentine Subtilty, his Self-love, his sensual Spirit, and
worldly Power, have seized the Mysteries of Salvation, that came down from
Heaven, and built them up into a Kingdom of envious Strife, and Contention, for
learned Glory, spiritual Merchandise, and worldly Power. -- This is the Beast,
the Whore, and Dragon, that has and will govern in every private Christian, and
public Church, till dead to all that is Self, they turn to God; not to a God,
that they have only heard of with their Ears, and their Fathers have told them,
but to a God of Life, Light and Power, found living and working within them, as
the essential Life, Light, and Power of their own Lives. -- For God is only our
God, by a Birth of his own divine Nature within us. This and nothing but this,
is our whole Relation to, our only Fellowship with him, our whole Knowledge of
him, our whole Power of having any Part in the Mysteries of Gospel-salvation.
Nothing can seek the Kingdom of God, or hunger and thirst after his
Righteousness; nothing can cry Abba Father, nothing can pray, thy Kingdom come,
nothing can say of Christ, my Lord, and my God, but that which is born of God,
and is the divine Nature itself, in us. Nothing but God in Man, can be a Godly
Life in Man. -- Hence is that of the Apostle, the Letter kills, but the
Spirit gives Life. But you will say, can this be true of the spiritual divine
Letter of the Gospel? Can it kill, or give death? Yes, it kills, when it is
rested in; when it is taken for divine Power, and supposed to have Goodness in
itself; for then it kills the Spirit of God in Man, quenches his holy Fire
within us, and is set up instead of it. -- It gives Death, when it is built
into Systems of Strife and Contention about Words, Notions and Opinions, and
makes the Kingdom of God to consist, not in Power, but in Words. When it is
thus used, then of Necessity it kills, because it keeps from that, which
alone is Life, and can give Life. -- This then is the Whole of the Matter; all
the literal Truths, and Variety of Doctrines and Expressions of the written
Word, have but one Nature, one End, and one Errand, they all say nothing else
to Man, but that one Thing, which Christ said, in these Words, Come unto me,
all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you; just the same,
as when said, Jesus Christ, who is of God, made unto us, Wisdom, Righteousness,
and Sanctification; this is the only Refreshment from Christ. Again, but ye are
washed, but ye are cleansed in the Name of our Lord Jesus; just the same as
when it is said, except ye abide in me, and I in you, ye have no Life in you.
Again, by Grace ye are saved, by Faith ye are saved, says neither more nor
less, than He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, has eternal Life;
the same as when Christ says, Without me ye can do nothing; the same as the
Apostle says, Yet not I, but Christ that lives in me; the same as Christ in
us, the Hope of Glory; if Christ be not in you, ye are Reprobates. -- Therefore
to come to Christ, to have our heavy laden, fallen Nature refreshed by him, to
be born Spirit of his Spirit, to have his heavenly Flesh, and heavenly Blood,
made living in us, before we put off the bestial Body and Blood of Death, which
we have from Adam, is the one only Thing taught and meant by all that is so
variously said in the Scriptures of the Merits and Benefits of Christ to us. --
It is the SPIRIT, the BODY, the BLOOD of Christ within us, that is our whole
Peace with God, our whole Adoption, our whole Redemption, our whole
Justification, our whole Glorification; and this is the one Thing said, and
meant by that new Birth, of which Christ says, except a Man be born again from
above, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. Now, the true Ground, why all
that is said of Christ in such a Variety of Expressions, has only one Meaning,
and points only to one and the same Thing is this, it is because the whole
State and Nature of fallen Man, wants only one Thing, and that one Thing, is a
real Birth of the divine Nature made living again in him, as at the first, and
then all is done, that can be done, by all the Mysteries of the Birth, and
whole Process of Christ, for our Salvation. -- All the Law, the Prophets, and
the Gospel are fulfilled, when there is in Christ, a new Creature, having Life
in, and from him, as really as the Branch has its Life in and from the Vine.
-- And when all Scripture is thus understood, and all that either Christ says
of himself, or his Apostles say of him, are all heard, or read, only as one and
the same Call to come to Christ, in Hunger and Thirst to be filled, and blessed
with his divine Nature, made living within us; then, and then only, the Letter
kills not, but as a sure Guide, leads directly to Life. -- But Grammar,
Logic, and Criticism, knowing nothing of Scripture but its Words, brings
forth nothing but its own Wisdom of Words, and a Religion of Wrangle, Hatred,
and Contention, about the Meaning of them.

But lamentable as this is, the Letter of Scripture has been so long the
usurped Province of School-critics, and learned Reasoners making their Markets
of it, that the Difference between literal, notional, and living, divine
Knowledge, is almost quite lost in the Christian World. So that if any awakened
Souls are here or there found amongst Christians, who think that more must be
known of God, of Christ, and the Powers of the World to come, than every
Scholar can know, by reading the Letter of Scripture, immediately the Cry of
Enthusiasm, whether it be Priest, or People, is sent after them. -- A
Procedure, which could only have some Excuse, if these Critics could first
prove, that the Apostle's Text, ought to be thus read, The Spirit kills, but
the Letter gives Life.

The true Nature, and full Distinction between literal and divine Knowledge, is
set forth in the highest Degree of Clearness, in these Words of our Savior,
The Kingdom of God is like a Treasure in a Field: Thus far, is the true Use,
and Benefit, and utmost Power of the Letter, it can tell us of a Treasure that
we want, a Treasure that belongs to us, and how and where it is to be found;
but when it is added, that a Man goes and sells all that he has, and buyeth
that Field, then begins the divine Knowledge, which is nothing else, but the
Treasure possessed, and enjoyed. Now what is here said, is the same that is
said in these other Words of Christ, except a Man deny himself and forsake all
that he has, he cannot be my Disciple; that is, he cannot partake of my Mind,
my Spirit, and my Nature, and therefore cannot know me; he is only a Hearer of
a Treasure, without entering into the Possession, and Enjoyment of it. And thus
it is with all Scripture, the Letter can only direct to the doing of that which
it cannot do, and give Notice of something that it cannot give.

Now clear and evident as this Distinction is, between a mere literal Direction
to a Thing, and a real Participation of it, which alone is a true Perception of
it, the generality of Christians seem quite insensible of any other religious
Perception, or Knowledge of divine Things, but such Ideas, or Notions of them,
as a Man can form from Scripture Words. Whereas Good and Evil, the only Objects
of religious Knowledge, are an inward State, and Growth of our Life, they are
in us, are a Part of us, just in the same Manner, as seeing and hearing are in
us, and we can have no real Knowledge of them any other way, than as we have of
our own seeing, and hearing. And as no Man can get or lose his seeing, or
hearing, or have less, or more of them, by any Ideas, or Notions, that he forms
about them, just so it is with that, which is the Power of Good, and the Power
of Evil in us, Notions and Ideas have no effect upon it. Yet no other Knowledge
is thought of, or sought after, or esteemed of any Value, but that which is
notional and the Work of the Brain.

Thus, as soon as a Man of Speculation can demonstrate that, which he calls the
Being and Attributes of God, he thinks, and others think, that he truly knows
God. But what Excuse can be made for such an Imagination, when plain Scripture
has told him, that to know God is eternal Life, that is, to know God, is to
have the Power, the Life, and the Spirit of God manifested in him, and
therefore it is eternal Life. No Man knows the Father, but the Son, and he to
whom the Son reveals him. Because the Revelation of the Son, is the Birth of
the Son in the Soul, and this new Creature in Christ, has alone Knowledge of
God, what he is, and does, and works in the Creature.

Again, another, forming an Opinion of Faith from the Letter of Scripture,
straightway imagines, that he knows what Faith is, and that he is in the Faith.
Sad Delusion! For to know what Faith is, or that we are in the Faith, is to
know that Christ is in us of a Truth; it is to know the Power of his Life, his
Sufferings, his Death, his Resurrection and Ascension, made good in our Souls.
To be in the Faith, is to have done with all Notions and Opinions about it,
because it is found and felt by its living Power and Fruits within us, which
are Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. All which, are three
Names, or Powers, peculiar to Jesus Christ; he alone is our Righteousness, our
Peace, our Joy in the Holy Ghost. And therefore Faith is not in us, by Reason
of this or that Opinion, Assent or Consent, but it is Christ, or the divine
Nature in us; or its Operations could not be Righteousness, Peace and Joy in
the Holy Ghost. -- By Faith ye are saved, has no other Meaning than by Christ
ye are saved. And if Faith in its whole Nature, in its Root and Growth, was any
Thing else but Christ, or a Birth of the divine Nature within us, it could do
us no Good, no Power could be ascribed to it, it could not be our Victory, it
could not overcome the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. -- Every Faith, that is
not Christ in us, is but a dead Faith.

How trifling therefore (to say no worse of it) is that Learning, which sets up
a Difference between Faith and its Works, between a Justification by Faith, and
Justification by its Works. -- Is there any Difference between Christ, as a
Redeemer, and his redeeming Works? Can they be set above one another in their
redeeming Efficacy? If not, then Faith and its Works, which are nothing else
but Christ in us, can have no separation from, or excellency above one another,
but are as strictly one, as Christ is one, and no more two Things, than our
Savior, and our Salvation are two different Things in us. Every Thing that is
said of Faith, from Adam to this Day, is only so much said of the Power, and
Life of a one redeeming Christ, working within us; so that to divide Faith from
its Works, is as absurd, as to divide a Thing from its self, a Circle from its
Roundness. No Salvation would have ever been ascribed to Faith, but because it
is in the strictest Sense, Christ himself, the Power of God, living and working
in us. It never would have been said of Faith, that every Power of the World,
the Flesh and the Devil, must yield to it, but because it is that very Christ
within us, without whom we can do nothing. But if without Christ we can do
nothing, and yet all things are possible to our Faith, can there be a fuller
Demonstration, that our Faith is nothing else but Christ born, and living
within us? Whatever therefore there is of Power within us, that tends to
Salvation, call it by what Name you will, either Faith, or Hope, or Prayer, or
Hunger after the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, it is all but one
Power, and that one Power is Christ within us. If therefore Faith, and its good
Works are but one and the same Christ living in us, the Distinction between a
good Faith, and its good Works, and all the contentious Volumes that have been
written about it, are as mere ignorant Jargon, as a Distinction made, and
contended for, between Life, and its living Operations.

When the holy Church of Christ, the Kingdom of God come amongst men, was first
set up, it was the Apostle's Boast, that all other Wisdom, or Learning was sunk
into nothing. Where, says he, is the Wise, the Scribe, the Disputer of this
World? Has not God made them Foolishness? But now, it is the Boast of all
Churches, that they are full of the Wise, the Scribes, the Disputers of this
World, who sit with learned Pomp in the apostles Chair, and have the Mysteries
of the Kingdom of God committed to them.

Hence it is, that from a Religion of heavenly Love, built upon the redeeming
Life, and Doctrines of a Son of God, dying to save the whole World, Division,
Bitterness, Envy, Pride, Strife, Hatred, and Persecution, nay every Outrage of
War and Bloodshed, breathe and break forth with more Strength in learned
Christendom, than ever they did from a Religion of Pagan Idolatry, set up by
Satan.

It may perhaps be here said, must there then be no Learning or Scholarship, no
recondite Erudition in the Christian Church? Must there be nothing thought of,
or gotten by the Gospel, but mere Salvation? Must its Ministers know nothing,
teach nothing, but such Salvation-doctrines, as Christ and his Apostles taught;
nothing but the full Denial of Self, Poverty of Spirit, Meekness, and Humility,
and unwearied Patience, a never ceasing Love, an absolute Renunciation of the
Pomps and Vanities of the World, a full Dependence upon our Heavenly Father; no
Joy or rejoicing but in the Holy Ghost; no Wisdom but that which God gives; no
Walking but as Christ walked; no Reward or Glory for their Labors of Love, but
that of being found in Christ, Flesh of his Flesh, Bone of his Bones, Spirit of
his Spirit, and clothed with the Wedding Garment, when the Bridegroom comes,
when the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a Shout, with the Voice of
the Archangel, and with the Trumpet of God, and the Dead in Christ shall rise
first?

To this the first Answer is, Happy, thrice happy are they, who are only the
thus learned Preachers of the Gospel, who through all their Ministr, seek
nothing for themselves, or others, but to be taught of God; hunger after
nothing but the Bread of Life that came down from Heaven, owning no Master but
Christ, no Teacher but his Holy Spirit; as unable to join with the Diggers in
Pagan Pits of Learning, as with those that Labor for the Wind, and give their
Money for that, which is not Bread.

Secondly, with regard to the Demand of learned Knowledge in the Christian
Church, it may be answered, that all that has been said above, is only for the
Increase and Promotion of it, and that all Ignorance and Darkness may be driven
quite out of it. -- The Church of Christ is the Seat or School of all the
highest Knowledge that the human Nature is capable of in this Life. Ignorance
is every where but in the Church of Christ. -- The Law, the Prophets, and the
Gospel are the only Treasures of all that can be called, the Knowledge either
of God or Man; and he in whom the Law, the Prophets, and the Gospel are
fulfilled, is the only well-educated Man, and one of the first-rate Scholars in
the World. But now, who is he, that has this Wisdom from these rich Treasures?
Who is he, in whom all is known, and fulfilled, which they teach? The Lip of
Truth has told us, that it is he, and he alone, who loves God with all his
Heart, with all his Soul, with all his Mind, and with all his Strength, and his
Neighbor as himself. This is the Man, that is all Wisdom, all Light, and let
into full Possession of all, that is meant by all the Mysteries contained in
the Law, the Prophets, and the Gospel. -- Where this divine Love is wanting,
and a diabolical Self sits in its Place, there may be great Wits, shining
Critics, Orators, Poets, etc. as easily as there may be a profound Machiavel, a
learned Hobbs, or an atheistical Virtuoso. But would you divinely know the
Mysteries of Nature, the Ground and Reason of Good and Evil in this World, the
Relation and Connection between the visible and invisible World, how the Things
of Time proceed from, are influenced by, and depend upon the Things and Powers
of Eternity, there is but one only Key of Entrance; nothing can open the
Vision, but seeing with the Eyes of that same Love, which began and carries on,
all that is, and works in visible and invisible Nature. -- Would you divinely
know the Mysteries of Grace and Salvation, would you go forth as a faithful
Witness of gospel Truths, stay till this Fire of divine Love has had its
perfect Work within you. For till your Heart is an Altar, on which this
heavenly Fire never goes out, you are dead in yourself, and can only be a
Speaker of dead Words, about Things, that never had any Life within you. For
without a real Birth of this divine Love in the essence of your Soul, be as
learned and polite as you will, your Heart is but the dark Heart of fallen
Adam, and your Knowledge of the Kingdom of God, will be only like that which
murdering Cain had. -- For every Thing is Murder, but that which Love does. --
If Love is not the Breath of your Life, the Spirit that forms and governs every
Thing that proceeds from you, every Thing that has your Labor, your Allowance
and Consent; you are broken off from the Works of God, you have left his
Creation, you are without God, and your Name and Nature and Works, can have no
other Name, or Nature, but that which is called Pride, Wrath, Envy, Hypocrisy,
Hatred, Revenge and Self-exaltation under the Power of Satan in his Kingdom of
Darkness -- Nothing can possibly save you from being the certain Prey of all
these evil Spirits, through the whole Course of your Life, but a Birth of that
Love, which is God himself, his Light, and Spirit within you.

There is no Knowledge in Heaven, but what proceeds from this Birth of Love,
nor is there any Difference between the highest Light of an Angel, and the
horrid Darkness of a Devil, but that which Love has made. -- But now, since
divine Love can have no Beginning, but from a Birth of the divine Nature in us,
therefore says St. John, we love him because he FIRST loved us, the same as
saying, we desire God, because he first desired us* for we could not desire
God, but because he first desired us, we could not turn to God, but because he
first turned to us. And so it is, that we could not love God, but because he
first loved us, that is, because he first by our Creation brought forth, and by
our Redemption continued, and kept up that same Birth of his own Spirit of Love
in us. -- For as his holy Spirit must first be a Gift to us, or born in us, and
then we have that, which can worship God in Spirit; so his Love must of all
Necessity be a Gift to us, or born in us, and then we have that of God in us,
which alone can love him with his own Love. -- A Truth, absolutely asserted in
these Words; Love is of God, and he that loves, is born of God.

Let this be my Excuse to the learned World, for owning no School of Wisdom,
but where the one only Lesson, is divine Love; and the one only Teacher, the
Spirit of God. Let no one call this, wild or extravagant; it is no wilder a
Step, no more injurious to Man, to Truth and Goodness, than the owning no God
but one. -- For to be called from every Thing but divine Love, and the Spirit
of God, is only being called from every Thing, that has the Curse of fallen
Nature in it. -- And no Man can come from under this Curse, till he is born
again of divine Love, and the Spirit of God. For thus to be born, is as much
the one sole Happiness, Joy and Glory of Men, both now and ever, as it is the
sole Joy and Glory of Angels eternally in the Heavens. -- Believe me then, thou
great Scholar, that all that thou have got of Wisdom or Learning, Day after
Day, in any other School but this, will stand thee in as much Stead, fill thee
with as high, heavenly Comfort at the Hour of Death, as all the long Dreams,
which Night after Night, thou have ever had in thy Sleep. -- And till a Man
knows this, with as much fullness of Conviction, as he knows the Vanity of a
Dream, he has his full Proof, that he is not yet in the Light of Truth, not yet
taught of God, nor like-minded with Christ.

One of Christ's Followers said, Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my
Father; the Answer was, let the Dead bury their Dead, follow thou me. --
Another said to him, Let me first go bid them Farewell, that are at Home in my
House; Jesus answered, no Man having put his Hand to the Plough, and looking
back, is fit for the Kingdom of God. -- Now let it be supposed, that a Third
had said, Lord, I have left several deep-learned Books at Home, written by the
greatest Masters of Grammar Logic and Eloquence, suffer me first to go back for
them, lest losing the Light, which I had from them, I might mistake the Depth
and Truth of thy heavenly Doctrines, or be less able to prove and preacch them
powerfully to others. -- Would not such a Request as this, have had a Folly and
Absurdity in it, not chargeable upon those two other Requests, which Christ
rejected? -- And yet, what can scholastic, classic, and critical Divinity say
for itself, but that very same Thing, which this Requester here said?

The Holy Jesus said, I am the Light of the World, he that follows me,
walks not in Darkness -- Here spiritual Light and Darkness are as immutably
fixed, and separated from one another, as the Light and Darkness of this World
were divided on the first Day of the Creation. Jesus Christ, the eternal Son of
God, is the one only Light both of Men and Angels. -- Fallen Nature, the
selfish Will, proud Tempers, the highest Abilities, the natural Sagacity,
Cunning, Arts and Subtilties, that are or can be in fallen Men and Angels, are
nothing else but their fullness of spiritual Darkness, from which nothing but
Works of Darkness can come forth. -- In a Word, Darkness is the whole natural
Man; Light is the new born Man from above. Therefore says the Christ of God, I
am the Light of the World, because he alone is the Birth of Heaven in the
fallen Souls of Men. -- But now who can more reject this divine Light, or more
plainly choose Darkness instead of it, than he who seeks to have his Mind
enriched, the Faculties of his fallen Soul cultivated by the Literature of
Poets, Orators, Philosophers, Sophists, Skeptics, and Critics, born and bred up
in the Worship and Praises of Idol Gods and Goddesses? What is this, but like
going to the Serpent, to be taught the innocent Spirit of the Dove; or to the
elegant Lusts of Anacreon and Ovid, to learn Purity of Heart, and kindle the
Flame of heavenly Love in our Souls? Look where you will, this is the Wisdom of
those, who seek to Pagans for Skill, to work in Christ's Vineyard; who from
long Labors in restoring the Grammar, and finding out the hidden Beauties of
some old vicious Book, set up for qualified Artists to polish the gospel Pearl
of great Price. -- Surely this is no better a Proof of their savouring the
Things that are of God, than Peter gave, when his Master said to him, get thee
behind me, Satan. -- A grave Ecclesiastic bringing forth out of his Closet,
skilful Meditations on the Commentaries of a murdering Caesar, or the sublime
Rhapsody of an old Homer, or the astonishing Beauties of a modern Dunciad, has
as much Reason to think, that he is walking in the Light of Christ, and led by
the Spirit of God, as they have, who are only eating and drinking, and rising
up to play.

But to see the exceeding Folly of expecting Ability in divine Knowledge, from
any Thing that is the Wit, Wisdom, or Spirit of the natural Man, you need only
read these Words of the holy Messenger of God, the Elias that was to come. I
indeed, says he, baptize you with Water, but he that comes after me, whose
Shoes Latchet I am not worthy to unloose, he shall baptize you with the Holy
Ghost, and with Fire. -- Now if this which the Baptist said of Christ, is not
our Faith, if we do not receive it as the Truth, in which we are firmly to
stand, then, be as learned as we will, we have no better a Faith, or higher
Wisdom, than those blind Rabbis, who received not the Testimony of John. -- A
Fire and Spirit from above, was the News which he published to the World; this,
and nothing else, was his Kingdom of God that was at hand. -- Now if this Fire
and Spirit from above, has not baptized us into a Birth of the Life of God in
our Souls, we have not found that Christ, and Kingdom of God, to which John
bore Witness. But if (what is still worse) we are so bewitched through the
Sorcery of Learning, as to turn Writers, and Preachers, against this inward,
and only redeeming, heavenly Fire and Spirit, we are baptized with the Spirit
of those, to whom our Lord said, Woe unto you Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites,
for ye shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against Men; for ye neither go in
yourselves, neither suffer ye them that are entering to go in.

For what is, or can be the Fall of a divine Adam, under the Power of Sin,
Satan, and Hell, but the Extinction of that heavenly Fire and Spirit, which was
his first Union with God and all heavenly Beings. -- Say now, that he had not
this heavenly Fire and Spirit at the first, that nothing lived or breathed in
him, but that astral Fire and Spirit, which is the Life and Spirit of all
earthly Animals, and then you have a Religion as divine, as that of the old
Sadducees, who allowed of no Resurrection, Angel, or Spirit. -- For, deny the
Truth and Fullness of a divine Life in the first Man, and then his Fall and
Redemption are equally empty Sounds about nothing. For what can he be fallen
from, or redeemed to, if he has now all that Fire and Spirit of Life, which he
ever had, or ought to have; and if all that is more than this, is but the
Fiction and Dream of a distempered Brain? Tell me, why that burning and shining
Light, that Man that was more than a Prophet, should come with his Water; and
the Son of God, should come with his Fire-baptism. If Man neither wanted, nor
could receive a higher Water, and Fire of Life, than that which he has in
common with the Beasts of the Field? Why is there all this Stir about
Religions, Expiations and Attonements, why all these priestly Ordinations,
Consecrations, Churches, Sacraments, and Provers? For if the Fire and Spirit of
this World, is the one Life, and highest Life, both of Man and Beasts, we have
it unasked for, and on the same Terms, as the Beasts have it, and can only lose
it, as they do, when they lose their Existence.

But if Fire and Spirit from Heaven, can alone make heavenly Creatures, and us,
to be Children of an heavenly Father; if the Son of God took our fallen Nature
upon him, that the first heavenly Fire and Spirit might again come to Life in
us, if divine Life, divine Light, and divine Goodness, can only come from them,
and only in such Degree, as they are kindled in our Souls, what a Poverty of
Sense is it in those, who are called to a Resurrection of the first divine
Life, where a new Creature is taught by that same Unction from above, whence
all the Angels and Principalities of Heaven have their Light and Glory, what a
Poverty of Sense, I say, in such, to set themselves down at the Feet of a
Master Tully, and a Master Aristotle, who only differ from the meanest of all
other corrupt Men, as the Teaching Serpent differed from his fellow Animals, by
being more subtle than all the Beasts of the Field.

Behold then your State ye Ministers, that wait at Christian Altars, who will
have neither Faith, nor Hope, nor Desire of Heavenly Fire kindled in your
Souls, ye have a Priesthood, and an Altar not fit to be named with that, which
in Jewish Days, had a holy Fire from God, descending upon it, which made Priest
and Sacrifice acceptable to God, though only Type and Pledge of that inward
celestial Fire, which Christ would kindle into a never ceasing Burning, in the
living Temples of his new born Children from above.

Complain then no more of Atheists, Infidels, and such like open Enemies to the
gospel Kingdom of God; for whilst you call heavenly Fire and Spirit, kindled
into the same essential Life in us, as they are in holy Angels, downright
Phrensy, and mystic Madness, you do all that infidel Work within the Church,
which they do on the outside of it. -- And if through a learned Fear of having
that done to your earthly Reason, which was done to Enoch when God took him, ye
will own no higher a Regeneration, no more Birth of God in your Souls, than can
be had by a few cold Drops of Water sprinkled on the Face, any of the heathen
Gods of Wood and Stone, are good enough for such an elementary Priesthood. --
For let this be told you, as a Truth from God, that till heavenly Fire and
Spirit have a Fullness of a Birth within you, you can rise no higher by your
highest Learning, than to be elegant Orators about Scripture Words.

Our Lord has said, the Kingdom of God is within you, that is, the heavenly
Fire and Spirit, which are the true Kingdom and Manifestation of God, are
within you. And indeed, where can it be else? Yet what learned Pains are taken,
to remove the literal Meaning from these Words, as too visionary a Thing for
learned Ears. -- And yet it is a Truth obvious to common Sense, that even this
outward World of Stars and Elements, neither does, nor can belong to us, or we
to it, but so far as it is, literally speaking, a Kingdom within us. For the
outward Kingdom or Powers of this World, signify nothing to a worldly Man that
is dead; but no Man is dead, but because the Kingdom of this World with all its
Powers of Fire, Light, and Spirit, stand only outwardly about him, but have
lost their Life and Power within him.

Say now, out of Reverence to sound Literature, and Abhorrence of Enthusiasm,
that the Kingdom of God is not really and virtually within, that its heavenly
Fire, Light, and Spirit, are not, ought not to be born in a sober, right-minded
Follower of Christ, and then you have a good Disciple of Christ, as absolutely
dead to the Kingdom of Heaven, as the Corpse that has nothing of the Fire,
Spirit, and Light of this World in it, is dead to all the outward World round
about it.

What a Sobriety of Faith and sound Doctrine is it, to preach up a Necessity of
being living Members of the Kingdom of Heaven, and at the same time, the
Necessity of orthodoxly holding, that a heavenly Birth, neither is, nor can,
nor ought to be within us! For if it either is, or could, or ought to be within
us, then it could not be a brainsick Folly to believe, that the literal Words
of Christ, had no Deceit, Falsity, or Delusion in them, when he said, Except a
Man be born again from above, he cannot see, or enter into the Kingdom of God.
That is, he cannot possibly have any Godlike, or divine Goodness, he cannot be
a Child of an heavenly Father, but from the Nature and Spirit of his heavenly
Father brought to a real Birth of Life in him. -- Now if without this divine
Birth, all that we have in us, is but fallen Adam, a Birth of Sin, the Flesh,
and the Devil, if the Power of this heavenly Birth is all the Power of Goodness
that is, or was, or ever can be in a Son of Adam; and if Logic, Learning, and
Criticism, are almost every where set in high Places, to pronounce and prove it
to be mere Enthusiasm, and spiritual Phrenzy, what Wonder is it, if Folly of
Doctrine, Wickedness of Life, Lusts of the Flesh, Profaneness of Spirit,
Wantonness of Wit, Contempt of Goodness and Profession of Christianity, should
all of them seem to have their full Establishment amongst us?

What Wonder, if Sacraments, Church-prayers, and Preachings, leave high and
low, learned and unlearned, Men and Women, Priests and People, as unaltered in
all their aged Vices, as they leave Children unchanged in their childish
Follies? For where the one only Fountain of Life and Goodness is forsaken,
where the Seed of the divine Birth is not alive, and going forwards in the
Birth, all the Difference between Man and Man, is as nothing with respect to
the Kingdom of God. -- It matters not what name is given to the old earthly Man
of Adam's bestial Flesh and Blood, whether he be called a zealous Churchman, a
stiff-necked Jew, a polite civilized Heathen, or a grave Infidel; under all
these Names, the unregenerate old Man, has but one and the same Nature, without
any other Difference but that, which Time, and Place, Education, Complexion,
Hypocrisy, and worldly Wisdom, happen to make in him. By such a one, whether he
be Papist, or Protestant, the Gospel is only kept, as a Book, and all that is
within it, is only so much Condemnation to the Keeper, just as the old Man, a
Jew, has kept the Book of the Law and Prophets, only to be more fully
condemned by them.

That the Jewish and Christian Church, stand at this Day in the same Kind of
Apostasy, or fallen State, must be manifest to every one, that will not shut
his Eyes against it. Why are the Jews in a fallen State? It is because they
have refused him, who in his whole Process, was the Truth, the Substance, the
Life, and Fulfilling of all that, which was outwardly taught, and prescribed in
their Law and Prophets.

But is it not as easy to see, that the whole Christian Church are in a fallen
State, and for the same Reason, because they are fallen, or turned away from
that Holy Spirit who was promised, and given to be the one only Power, Life,
and Fulfilling of all that, which was outwardly taught, and prescribed by the
Gospel. For the Holy Spirit to come, was just the same ALL, and FULFILLING of
the whole Gospel, as a Christ to come, was the all, and the Fulfilling of the
Law. -- The Jew therefore with his Old Testament, not owning Christ in all his
Process to be the Truth and Life, and Fulfiller of their Law, is just in that
same Apostasy, as the Christian with his New Testament, not owning the Holy
Spirit in all his Operations, to be his only Light, Guide, and Governor. -- For
as all Types and Figures in the Law, were but empty Shadows without Christ's
being the Life and Power of them, so all that is written in the Gospel is but
dead Letter, unless the Holy Spirit in Man, be the living Reader, the living
Rememberer, and the living Doer of them. Therefore where the Holy Spirit is not
thus owned and received, as the whole Power, and Life of the Gospel State, it
is no Marvel, that Christians have no more of gospel Virtues, than the Jews
have of patriarchal Holiness, or that the same Lusts and Vices which prosper
amongst Jews, should break forth with as much Strength in fallen Christendom.
For the New Testament not ending in the Coming of the Holy Spirit, with Fullness
of Power over Sin and Hell, and the Devil, is but the same, and no better a
Help to Heaven, than the Old Testament without the Coming of a Messiah. -- Need
I now say any more, to demonstrate the Truth of that, which I first said was
the one Thing absolutely essential, and only available to Man's Salvation,
namely, the SPIRIT of God brought again to his FIRST POWER of LIFE IN US. This
was the Glory of Man's Creation, and this alone can be the Glory of his
Redemption. -- All besides this, that passes for a Time betwixt God and Man, be
it what it will, shows only our Fall, and Distance from God and in its best
State, has only the Nature of a good Road, which is only good, because that
which we want, is at the End of it. -- Whilst God calls us by various outward
Dispensations, by creaturely Things, figurative Institutions, etc. it is a full
Proof, that we are not yet in our true State, or that Union with God, which is
intended by our Redemption.

God said to Moses, Put off thy Shoes, for the Place whereon thou stand is
holy Ground. Now this which God said to Moses, is only that very same Thing,
which Circumcision, the Law, Sacrifices, and Sacraments, say to Man. They are
in themselves nothing else but outward Significations of inward Impurity, and
lost Holiness, and can do no more in themselves, but intimate, point, and
direct to an inward Life, and new Birth from above, that is to be sought after.

But here lies the great Mistake, or rather idolatrous Abuse of all God's
outward Dispensations. -- They are taken for the Thing itself, for the Truth
and Essence of Religion. That which the learned Jews did with the outward
Letter of their Law, that same do learned Christians with the outward Letter of
their Gospel. -- Why did the Jewish Church so furiously and obstinately cry out
against Christ, Let him be crucified? It was because their letter-learned Ears,
their worldly Spirit, and Temple-orthodoxy, would not bear to hear of an inward
Savior, not bear to hear of being born again of his Spirit, of eating his
Flesh, and drinking his Blood, of his dwelling in them, and they in him. -- To
have their Law of Ordinances, their Temple-pomp sunk into such a Fulfilling
Savior as this, was such enthusiastic Jargon to their Ears, as forced their
sober, rational Theology, to call Christ, Beelzebub, his Doctrine, Blasphemy,
and all for the Sake of Moses and rabbinic Orthodoxy.

Need it now be asked, whether the true Christ of the Gospel, be less
blasphemed, less crucified by that Christian Theology, which rejects an inward
Christ, a Savior living and working in the Soul, as its inward Light and Life,
generating his own Nature and Spirit in it, as its only Redemption, whether
that which rejects all this as mystic Madness, be not that very same old Jewish
Wisdom, sprung up in Christian Theology, which said of Christ, when teaching
these very Things, He is mad, why hear ye Him? Our blessed Lord in a Parable
sets forth the blind Jews, as saying of himself, We will not have this man to
reign OVER us. -- The sober minded Christian Scholar has none of this Jewish
Blindness, he only says of Christ, we will not have this Man to REIGN IN US,
and so keeps clear of such mystic Absurdity, as St. Paul fell into, when he
enthusiastically said, Yet not I, but Christ that lives in me.

Christian Doctors reproach the old learned Rabbis, for their vain Faith, and
carnal Desire of a glorious, temporal, outward Christ, who should set up their
Templeworship all over the World. -- Vanity indeed, and learned Blindness
enough!

But nevertheless, in these Condemners of rabbinic Blindness, St. Paul's words
are remarkably verified, viz. Wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest
thyself, for thou that judge, do the same Thing. -- For, take away all that
from Christ, which Christian Doctors call Enthusiasm, suppose him not to be an
inward Birth, a new Life and Spirit within us, but only an outward, separate,
distant heavenly Prince, no more really in us, than our high Cathedrals are in
the third Heavens, but only by an invisible hand from his Throne on high, some
Way or other raising and helping great Scholars, or great temporal Powers, to
make a Rock in every Nation for his Church to stand upon; suppose all this
(which is the very Marrow of modern Divinity) and then you have that very
outward Christ, and that very outward Kingdom, which the carnal Jew dreamed of,
and for the Sake of which, the Spiritual Christ was then nailed to the Cross,
and is still crucified by the new risen Jew in the Christian Church. -- If it
now be asked, whence, or from what, comes all this spiritual Blindness, which,
from Age to Age, thus mistakes, and defeats all the gracious Designs of God
toward fallen Mankind? Look at the Origin of the first Sin, and you see it
all. -- Had Eve desired no Knowledge, but what came from God, Paradise had been
the Habitation of her and all her offspring. -- If after Paradise lost, Jews
and Christians had desired no Knowledge, but what came from God, the Law and
Prophets had kept the Jew close to the first Tree of Life, and the Christian
Church had been a Kingdom of God, and Communion of Saints to this Day.

But now Corruption, Sin, Death, and every Evil of the World, have entered into
the Church, the Spouse of Christ, just as they entered into Eve, the Spouse of
Adam in Paradise, in the same Way, and from the same Cause, viz. a Desire of
more, or other Knowledge, than that which comes from God alone. -- This Desire
is the Serpent's Voice within every Man, which does all that to him, and in
him, which the Serpent at the Tree did to Eve. -- It carries on the first
Deceit, it shows and recommends to him that same beautiful Tree of own Will,
own Wit, and own Wisdom, springing up within him, which Eve saw in the Garden;
and yet so blind is this Love of Wisdom, as not to see, that his eating of it,
is in the strictest Truth, his eating of the same forbidden Fruits, as Eve did,
and keeping up in himself all that Death, and Separation from God, which the
first Knowledge-hunger brought forth.

Let then the eager Searcher into Words for Wisdom, the Book-devourer, the
Opinion-broker, the Exalter of human Reason, and every projecting Builder of
religious Systems, be told this, that the Thirst and Pride of being learnedly
Wise in the Things of God, is keeping up the grossest Ignorance of them, and is
nothing else but Eve's old Serpent, and Eve's evil Birth within them, and does
no better Work in the Church of Christ, than her Thirst after Wisdom did in the
Paradise of God. -- Speak, Lord, for thy Servant hears, is the one only Way,
by which any Man ever did, or ever can attain divine Knowledge, and divine
Goodness. -- To knock at any other door but this, is but like asking Life of
that, which is itself Dead, or praying to him for Bread, who has nothing but
Stones to give.

Now strange as all this may seem, to the labour-learned Possessor of
far-fetched Book-riches, yet it is saying no more, nor any Thing else, but that
which Christ said in these Words, Except ye be converted, and become as little
Children, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. For, if classic Gospellers,
linguist Critics, Scripture-logicians, Salvation Orators, able Dealers in the
grammatic Power of Hebrew, Greek, and Roman Phrases, Idioms, Tropes, Figures,
etc. etc. can show, that by raising themselves high in these Seize, they
are the very Men, that are sunk Down from themselves, into Christ's little
Children of the Kingdom of God, then it may be also said, that he who is
laboring, scheming, and fighting for all the Riches he can get from both the
Indies, is the very Man that has left all to follow Christ, the very Man that
labors not for the Meat that perishes.

Show me a Man, whose Heart has no Desire, or Prayer in it, but to love God
with his whole Soul and Spirit, and his Neighbor as himself, and then you have
shown me the Man who knows Christ, and is known of him; -- The best and wisest
Man in the World, in whom the first paradisical Wisdom and Goodness is come to
Life. -- Not a single Precept in the Gospel, but is the Precept of his own
Heart, and the Joy of that newborn heavenly Love, which is the Life and Light
of his Soul. -- In this Man, all that came from the old Serpent is trod under
his Feet, not a Spark of Self, of Pride, of Wrath, of Envy, of Covetousness, or
worldly Wisdom, can have the least Abode in him, because that Love, which
fulfilleth the whole Law and the Prophets, that Love which is God and Christ,
both in Angels and Men, is the Love that gives Birth, and Life, and Growth to
every Thing, that is either Thoughts, or Words, or Actions in him. -- And if he
has no Share or Part with foolish Errors, cannot be tossed about with every
Wind of Doctrine, it is because, to be always governed by this Love, is the
same Thing, as to be always taught of God.

On the other Hand, show me a Scholar as full of Learning, as the Vatican is of
Books, and he will be just as likely to give all that he has for the
Gospel-pearl, as he would be, if he was as rich as Croesus. Let no one here
imagine, that I am writing against all human Literature, Arts and Sciences, or
that I wish the World to be without them. -- I am no more an Enemy to them,
than to the common useful Labors of Life. -- It is literal Learning, verbal
Contention, and critical Strife about the Things of God, that I charge with
Folly and Mischief to Religion. And in this, I have all learned Christendom,
both Popish and Protestant on my Side. For they both agree in charging each
other with a bad and false Gospel-state, because of that, which their Learning,
Logic, and Criticism do for them. Say not then, that it is only the illiterate
Enthusiast, that condemns human Learning in the gospel Kingdom of God. For when
he condemns the Blindness and Mischief of Popish Logic and Criticism, he has
all the learned Protestant World with him; and when he lays the same Charge to
Protestant Learning, he has a much larger Kingdom of Popish great Scholars,
logically and learnedly affirming the same Thing. So that the private Person,
charging human Learning with so much Mischief to the Church, is so far from
being led by Enthusiasm, that he is led by all the Church-learning that is in
the World.

Again, all learned Christendom agrees in the same Charge against temporal
Power in the Church, as hurtful to the very Being, and Progress of a
Salvation-kingdom that is not of this World, as supporting Doctrines that human
Learning has brought into it. And true it is, and must be, that human Power can
only support, and help forward human Things. -- The Protestant brings Proof
from a thousand Years Learning and Doctrines, that the Pope is an unjust
Usurper of temporal Power in the Church, which is Christ's spiritual Spouse. --
The Papist brings the Learning of as many Ages, to show, that a temporal Head
of the Church, is an Antichristian Usurpation. -- And yet (N. B.) he who holds
Christ to be the one, only Head, Heart and Life of the Church, and that no Man
can call Jesus, Lord, but by the Holy Ghost, passes with the learned of both
these People, for a brainsick Enthusiast. -- Is it not then high Time, to look
out for some better Ground to stand upon, than such Learning as this? Now look
where you will, through all the whole Nature of Things, no divine Wisdom,
Knowledge, Goodness, and deliverance from Sin, are any where to be found for
fallen Man, but in these two Points; (1) a total, entire Entrance into the
whole Process of Christ; (2) a total Resignation to, and sole Dependence upon
the continual Operation of the Holy Ghost, or Christ come again in the Spirit,
to be our never ceasing Light, Teacher, and Guide into all those Ways of
Virtue, in which he himself walked in the Flesh. -- All besides this, call it
by what Name you will, is but dead Work, a vain Labor of the old Man, to new
create himself. And here let it be well observed, that in these two Points,
consists the whole of that Divinity, to which a Jewish Orthodoxy at this Day,
is so great an Enemy. For nothing else is meant, or taught by it, but a total
dying to Self (called the Process or Cross of Christ) that a new Creature
(called Christ in us, or Christ come in the Spirit) may be begotten in the
Purity, and Perfection of the first Man's Union with God. -- Now, let the
Christian World forget, or depart from this spiritual Way of Salvation, let any
Thing else be thought of, or trusted to, but the Cross of Christ, and the
Spirit of Christ, and then, though Churches, and Preachers, and Prayers, and
Sacraments, are every where in Plenty, yet nothing better can come of it, than
a Christian Kingdom of Pagan Vices, along with a Mouth-belief of an holy
catholic Church, and Communion of Saints. -- To this melancholy Truth, all
Christendom both at home and abroad bears full Witness. Who need be told, that
there is not a Corruption, or Depravity of human Nature, no Kinds of Pride,
Wrath, Envy, Malice, and Self-love; no Sorts of Hypocrisy, Falseness, Cursing,
Swearing, Perjury, and Cheating; no Wantonness of Lust in every Kind of
Debauchery, but are as common all over Christendom, as Towns and Villages. --
But to pass these by, I shall only instance in two or three Particulars, which
though little observed, and less condemned, yet fully show, that the Beast, the
Whore, and the fiery Dragon, are in Possession of Protestant, as well as Popish
Churches.

And First, can it be said, that Mammon is less served by Christians, than by
Jews and Infidels? Or can there be a fuller Proof, that Christians, Jews, and
Infidels, are equally fallen from God, and all divine Worship, since Truth
itself has told us, that we cannot serve God and Mammon? Is not this as
unalterable a Truth, and of as great Moment, as if it had been said, ye cannot
serve God and Baal? Or can it with any Truth or Sense be affirmed, that the
Mammonist has more of Christ in him, than the Baalist, or is more or less an
Idolater for being called a Christian, a Jew, or an Infidel? Look now at all
those Particulars, which Christ charged upon the Jewish Priests, Scribes, and
Pharisees, and you will see them all acted over again in the fallen State of
Christendom. And if God's Prophets were again in the World, they would have
just the same Complaints against the fallen Christian Church, as they had
against the old, carnal, stiff-necked Jews, namely, that of their Silver and
Gold, they had made themselves Idols, Hos. 8. iv. For though figured Idol-gods
of Gold are not now worshipped either by Jews or Christians, yet Silver and
Gold, with that which belongs to them, is the Mammon God, that sits and reigns
in their Hearts. How else could there be that universal Strife through all
Christendom, who should stand in the richest and highest Place, to preach up
the Humility of Christ, and offer spiritual Sacrifices unto God? What God but
Mammon could put into the Hearts of Christ's Ambassadors, to make, or want to
make a Gain of that Gospel, which from the Beginning to the End, means nothing
else but Death to Self, and Separation from every View, Temper, and Affection,
that has any Connection with the Lusts of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and
the Pride of Life? -- Our Blessed Lord said a Word to the Jews, that might well
have made their Ears to tingle, when he told them, that they had made his
Father's House a Den of Thieves; because Sheep and Oxen were sold, and
Money Changers sitting in the outer Court of the Temple. -- Now if you will
say, that Mammon has brought forth no Profanation like this in our Christian
Church, your best Proof must be this, because our Church-sale, is not Oxen and
Sheep, but holy Things, Cures of Souls, Parsonages, Vicarages, etc. and our
Money Changers, our Buyers, and Sellers, are chiefly consecrated Persons.

Look at Things spiritual, and Things temporal, and say if you can, that the
same Arts, the same Passions, and worldly Wisdom, are not as visibly Active in
the One, as in the Other. -- For if Christ at leaving the World, had said to
his Disciples, Labor to be Rich, -- make full Provision for the Flesh, -- be
conformed to the World, -- court the Favor and Interest of great Men, --
clothe yourselves with all the worldly Honors, Distinctions, and Powers ye can
get; I appeal to every Man, whether Popish and Protestant Churches need do any
Thing else, than that which they now do, and have done for Ages, to prove their
Faithfulness to such a Master, and their full Obedience to his Precepts. And
now, what is all this in Truth and Reality, but the same Whore riding upon the
same Beast, not here or there, but through all fallen Christendom, where God
has only, in every Age, People, and Language, his seven Thousands, who have not
bowed the Knee to Mammon.

Again, Secondly, Ye have heard, says our Lord, that it has been said by them
of Old; thou shall not forswear thyself, but shall perform unto the Lord, thine
Oaths. -- The Jews practiced promissary Oaths, and thought, all was well, when
there was a Performance of them. -- But this, with Numbers of other Jewish
Practices, was not to be allowed in this Kingdom of God, that was then come
into the World. -- Christ totally rejects, and absolutely forbids it, saying, I
say unto you, swear not at all. But instead of it, he appoints and absolutely
demands, a most perfect Simplicity of Language, to support and adorn the mutual
Communication of those, whom he had created again unto Righteousness, and given
Power to become Sons of God: Saying, Let your Communication be YEA, YEA, and
NAY, NAY, for (N. B.) Whatsoever is more than this, comes of Evil. -- What
more could have been done by Christ to prevent the Use, or hinder the Entrance
of an Oath into his Church? What then shall we say of the present universal
Christendom? For if Christ had commanded the direct contrary, had he said,
behold I give you this new Commandment, let not a simple YEA and NAY, be of any
Avail in all your Communication; but let Oaths be required of all that bear my
Name, as a Proof that they belong to me, and act in all their Dealings, as
becomes Saints; for whatsoever is less than this, comes of Evil. -- Had this
been Christ's new Commandment, all the Churches of Christendom, as well Popish
as Protestant, and these reformed Kingdoms of Great Britain and Ireland, might
have much to boast of their Obedience to it. For through Town and Country, in
all ignorant Villages, in all learned Colleges, in all Courts spiritual and
temporal, what with Law-Oaths, Corporation-Oaths, Office-Oaths, Trade-Oaths,
Qualification-Oaths, Simony-Oaths, Bribery-Oaths, Election-Oaths, etc. etc.
etc. there is more Swearing and For-swearing, than all History reports of any
Idol-worshipping Nations. -- It was said of Old, because of Swearing, the Land
mourns; it is full as true to say now, because of Swearing, the Land
rejoiceth in Iniquity, is full of Profaneness, and without any Fear or Awe of
the divine Majesty, daily swallowing down all Manner of Oaths, in the same good
State of Mind, and with as much serious Reflection, as Pot-companions swallow
down their Liquor.

He that despises me, says Christ, despises not me, but him that sent me. --
Can that Church which absolutely requires that, which Christ has absolutely
forbidden, be free from the most open and public despising of Christ? Which in
full Contrariety to his express Word, refuses the Sufficiency of that Yea and
Nay, which he has commanded to be sufficient. And what is still more
wonderful, compels all Orders of Christians to swear by that very Book, which
says to all, whether high or low, Prince, Priest, or People, SWEAR NOT AT ALL.

If the Swearing Law was to order, that instead of kissing the Gospel-book, the
Swearer should say, In Remembrance of, and in Regard to the Words of Christ,
forbidding me to swear, I make this Oath, who would not see the open Contempt
of Christ and his Gospel? But the Contempt of both is as truly there, when the
Gospel-book is kissed by the Swearer; for the Book has nothing relating to
Oaths, but those Words of Christ, which absolutely forbid the Use of them. --
Instead therefore of a SO HELP ME GOD and his HOLY GOSPEL, it might have been
much better, if every Swearing Law through all Christendom, had obliged every
Swearer to finish his Oath with these Words, Let God and his holy Gospel PARDON
ME IN THIS ONE THING.

In a Word, That which calls for, and requires Oaths amongst Christians,
requires that which Christ forbids? but governing Christendom every where
establishes, requires, and even compels Christians to swear, therefore
governing Christendom is fallen from Christ, and acts by and through that
Spirit, which being contrary to Christ, is and must be called ANTICHRIST.

But to proceed now to a third and last Instance, which I shall mention, of the
full Power of Antichrist in, and through every Part of governing Christendom.

In the darkest Ages of Romish Superstition, a martial Spirit of Zeal and Glory
for the Gospel, broke forth in Kings, Cardinals, Bishops, Monks, and Friars, to
lead the Sheep of Christ, Saints, Pilgrims, Penitents, and Sinners of all
Kinds, to proceed in Battle Array, to kill, devour, and drive the Turks from
the Land of Palestine, and the old earthly Jerusalem. -- These Blood-thirsty
Expeditions were called an holy War, because it was a fighting for the holy
Land; they were called also a Croisade, because Crosses and Crucifixes made the
greatest Glitter amongst the sharpened Instruments of human Murder. -- Thus
under the Banner of the Cross, went forth an Army of Church Wolves, to destroy
the Lives of those, whom the Lamb of God died on the Cross to save.

The Light which broke out at the Reformation, abhorred the bloody,
superstitious Zeal of these Catholic Heroes. -- But (N. B.) what followed from
this new risen, reforming Light, what came forth instead of these holy
Croisades? Why Wars, if possible, still more diabolical. -- Christian Kingdoms
with blood-thirsty Piety, destroying, devouring, and burning one another, for
the Sake of that which was called Popery, and that which was called
Protestantism.

Now who can help seeing, that Satan, the Prince of the Powers of Darkness, had
here a much greater Triumph over Christendom, than in all the holy Wars, and
Croisades that went before? For all that was then done, by such high-spirited
Fighters for old Jerusalem's Earth, could not be said to be so much done
against Gospel Light, because not one in a Thousand of those holy Warriors,
were allowed to see what was in the Gospel. But now, with the Gospel opened in
every one's Hands, Papists and Protestants make open War against every divine
Virtue, that belonged to Christ, or that can unite them with that Lamb of God,
that takes away the Sins of the World: -- I say against every divine,
redeeming Virtue of the Lamb of God, for these are the Enemies which War
conquers. For there is not a Virtue of Gospel-goodness, but has its Death-blow
from it. -- For no Virtue has any Gospel-goodness in it any farther, than as
it has its Birth, and Growth, in and from the Spirit of Christ; where his
Nature and Spirit is not, there is nothing but the Heathen to be found, which
is but saying the same Truth, as when the Apostle said, that he who has not,
or is not led by the Spirit of Christ, is none of his.

Now fancy to yourself, Christ, the Lamb of God, after his divine Sermon on the
Mount, putting himself at the Head of a blood-thirsty Army, or St. Paul going
forth with a Squadon of Fire and Brimstone, to make more Havoc in human Lives,
than a devouring Earthquake.

But if this be too blasphemous an Absurdity to be supposed, what follows, but
that the Christian who acts in the destroying Fury of War, acts in full
Contrariety to the whole Nature and Spirit of Christ, and can no more be said
to be led by his Spirit, or be one with him, than those his Enemies, who came
forth with Swords and Staves for to take him.

Blinded Protestants think they have the Glory of slaughtering blind Papists;
and the victorious Papist claims the Merit of having conquered Troops of
Heretics; but alas! the Conquest is equally great on both Sides, both are
entitled to the same Victory; and the glorious Victory on both Sides, is only
that of having gospel Goodness equally under their Feet.

When a Most Christian Majesty with his Catholic Church, sings a Te Deum at the
high Altar, for Rivers of Protestant Blood poured out; or an Evangelick Church
sings Praise and Glory to the Lamb of God, for helping them from his holy
Throne in Heaven* to make Popish Towns like to Sodom and Gomorrah, they
blaspheme God, as much as Cain would have done, had he offered a Sacrifice of
Praise to God, for helping him to murder his Brother. -- Let such Worshippers
of God be told this, that the Field of Blood gives all its Glory to Satan, who
was a Murderer from the Beginning, and will to the End of his Reign, be the
only Receiver of all the Glory, that can come from it.

A glorious Alexander in the heathen World, is a Shame and Reproach to the
human Nature, and does more Mischief to Mankind in a few Years, than all the
wild Beasts in every Wilderness upon Earth, have ever done from the Beginning
of the World to this Day. -- But the same Hero making the same Ravage from
Country to Country with Christian Soldiers, has more Thanks from the Devil,
than twenty Pagan Alexanders would ever have had. -- To make Men kill Men, is
Meat and Drink to that roaring Adversary of Mankind, who goes about seeking
whom he may devour. But to make Christians kill Christians for the Sake of
Christ's Church, is his highest Triumph over the highest Mark, which Christ
has set upon those whom he has purchased by his Blood. -- This Commandment,
says he, I give unto you, that ye love one another. -- By this shall all Men
know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another as I have loved you. --

Can the Duellist, who had rather sheath his Sword in the Bowels of his
Brother, than stifle that which he calls an Affront, can he be said to have
this Mark of his belonging to Christ? and may not he that is called his SECOND,
more justly be said to be Second to none in the Love of human Murder? -- Now,
what is the Difference between the haughty Duellist with his provided Second,
meeting his Adversary with Sword and Pistol behind a Hedge, or a House, and two
Kingdoms with their high-spirited Regiments, slaughtering one another in the
Field of Battle? It is the Difference that is between the Murder of one Man,
and the Murder of an hundred thousand.

Now imagine the Duellist fasting and confessing his Sins to God to Day,
because he is engaged to fight his Brother Tomorrow; fancy again the Conqueror
got into his Closet, on his bended Knees, lifting up Hands and Heart to God,
for blessing his Weapons with the Death of his Brother; and then you have a
Picture in Little of the great Piety, that begins and ends the Wars all over
heavenly Christendom.

What Blindness can well be greater, than to think that a Christian Kingdom, as
such, can have any other Goodness, or Union with Christ, but that very
Goodness, which makes the private Christian to be one with him, and a Partaker
of the divine Nature? O that Pride, Wrath, Ambition, Envy, Covetousness,
Rapine, Resentment, Revenge, Hatred, Mischief, and Murder, are only the Works
of the Devil, whilst they are committed by private, or single Men; but when
carried on by all the Strength and Authority, all the Hearts, Hands, and Voices
of a whole Nation, that the Devil is then quite driven out of them, loses all
his Right and Power in them, and they become holy Matter of Church
Thanksgivings, and the sacred Oratory of Pulpits.

Look at that which the private Christian is to do to his Neighbor, or his
Enemy, and you see that very Thing, which one Christian Kingdom is to do to
another. Look at that which proves a Man to be not led and governed by the
Spirit of Christ, and you see that, which proves a Kingdom to be under the
Dominion and Power of Satan. -- Wherever Pride is, there the Devil is riding in
his first fiery Chariot; and wherever Wrath is, there he has his first
murdering Sword at Work. -- What is it, that fallen Man wants to be redeemed
from, but Pride and Wrath, Envy and Covetuosness? He can have no higher
Separation, or Apostasy from God, no fuller Union with Satan and his Angels,
than he has of the Spirit of these Tempers: They constitute that, which whether
you call it SELF, or Satan in him, the Meaning is the same. Now suppose Man not
fallen into this Self or Satan, and then there could be no more War or fighting
in him, than there was in the WORD made Man in our Flesh. Or suppose him
redeemed from his fallen Nature, by a new Birth of the Lamb of God born in his
Soul, and then he can no more be hired to kill Men gloriously in the Field,
than to carry a dark Lanthorn by Night to a Powder Plot.

Love, Goodness, and Communication of Good, is the immutable Glory and
Perfection of the divine Nature, and nothing can have Union with God, but that
which partakes of this Goodness. -- The Love that brought forth the Existence
of all Things, changes not through the Fall of its Creatures, but is
continually at work, to bring back all fallen Nature and Creature, to their
first State of Goodness.

O poor Sinner, who ever thou art, repent and turn to God, whilst thou have
Adam's Flesh upon thee; for if thou die without Adam's Repentance, black
Lakes, bottomless Pits, Ages of a gnawing Worm, and Fire that never ceases to
burn, will stand between thee and a Kingdom of Heaven afar off.

To prevent all this, and make thee a Child of the first Resurrection, Jesus
Christ, God and Man, the only begotton Son of his infinite Love, came into the
World in the Name, and under the Character of infinite Pity, boundless
Compassion, inexpressible Meekness, bleeding Love, nameless Humility, never
ending Patience, long Suffering, and Bowels of redeeming Mercy, called the Lamb
of God, who with all these supernatural Virtues takes away the Sins of the
World.

Now from this View of God's infinite Love and Mercy in Christ Jesus, willing
nothing, seeking nothing through all the Regions of his Providence, but that
Sinners of all Kinds, the boldest Rebels against all his Goodness, may have
their proper Remedy, their necessary Means of being fully delivered from all
that Hurt, Mischief and Destruction, which in full Opposition to their God and
Creator, they had brought upon themselves; from this View, I say, of God and
Christ, using every Miracle of Love and Wisdom, to give recovery of Life,
Health, and Salvation to all that have rebelled against them, look at the
murdering Monster of WAR. And what can its Name, or Nature be, but a fiery
great Dragon, a full Figure of Satan broke loose, and fighting against every
redeeming Virtue of the Lamb of God?

The temporal Miseries and Wrongs, which War carries along with it, wherever it
goes, are neither to be numbered or expressed. -- What Thievery bears any
Proportion to that, which with the boldness of Drum and Trumpet, plunders the
innocent of all that they have? And if themselves are left alive, with all
their Limbs, or their Daughters unravished, they have many Times, only the
Ashes of their consumed Houses to lie down upon. -- What Honor has War not
gotten, from its Tens and Tens of Hundreds of Thousands of Men slaughtered on
Heaps, with as little Regret or Concern, as at Loads of Rubbish thrown into a
Pit? -- Who, but the fiery Dragon, would put Wreaths of Laurel on such Heroes
Heads? Who but he, could say unto them, Well done, good and faithful Servants?

But there is still an Evil of War much greater, though less regarded. -- Who
reflects, how many Hundreds of Thousands, nay Millions of young Men, born into
this World for no other End, but that they may be born again of Christ, and
from Sons of Adam's Misery, become Sons of God, and fellow Heirs with Christ in
everlasting Glory; who reflects, I say, what nameless Numbers of these, are
robbed of God's precious Gift of Life to them, before they have known the one
sole Benefit of Living; who are not suffered, to stay in this World, till Age
and Experience have done their best for them, have helped them to know the
inward Voice and Operation of God's Spirit, helped them to find, and feel that
Evil, Curse, and Sting of Sin and Death, which must be taken from within them,
before they can die the Death of the Righteous; but instead of all this, have
been either violently forced, or tempted in the Fire of Youth, and full
strength of sinful Lusts, to forget God, Eternity, and their own Souls, and
rush into a kill or be killed, with as much furious haste, and goodness of
Spirit, as Tiger kills Tiger for the sake of his Prey?

Amongst unfallen Creatures in Heaven, God's Name and Nature, is LOVE, LIGHT,
and GLORY. -- To the fallen Sons of Adam, that which was Love, Light, and Glory
in Heaven, becomes infinite PITY and COMPASSION on Earth, in a God, clothed
with the Nature of his fallen Creature, bearing all its Infirmities, entering
into all its Troubles, and in the meek Innocence of a Lamb of God, living a
Life, and dying a Death, of all the Sufferings due to Sin. -- Hence it was,
that when this DIVINE PITY suffered its own life-giving Blood to be poured on
the Ground, all outward Nature made full Declaration of its attoning, and
redeeming Power; the Strength of the Earth did quake, the Hardness of Rocks was
forced to Split, and long covered Graves to give up their Dead. --

Sing, O ye Heavens, and Shout all ye lower Parts of the Earth, for this is OUR
GOD that varies not, whose first creating Love knows no Change, but into a
redeeming Pity toward all his fallen Creatures.

Look now at warring Christendom, what smallest Drop of Pity toward Sinners is
to be found in it? Or how could a Spirit all Hellish, more fully contrive and
hasten their Destruction? -- It stirs up and kindles every Passion of fallen
Nature, that is contrary to the all-humble, all-meek, all-loving,
all-forgiving, all-saving Spirit of Christ. -- It unites, it drives, and
compels nameless Numbers of unconverted Sinners to fall, murdering and murdered
amongst Flashes of Fire, with the Wrath and Swiftness of Lightning, into a Fire
infinitely worse than that in which they died. -- O sad Subject for
Thanksgiving Days, whether in Popish, or Protestant Churches! For if there is a
Joy of all the Angels in Heaven, for one Sinner that repents, what a Joy must
there be in Hell over such Multitudes of Sinners, not suffered to repent? And
if they who have converted many to Righteousness, shall shine as the Stars in
the Firmament for ever, what Chorazins Woe may they not justly fear, whose
proud Wrath and vain Glory, have robbed such numberless Troops of poor
Wretches, of all Time and Place of knowing what Righteousness they wanted, for
the Salvation of their immortal Souls.

Here my Pen trembles in my Hand; but when* O when will one single Christian
Church, People, or Language, tremble at the Share they have in this Death of
Sinners!

For the GLORY OF HIS MAJESTY'S ARMS, said once a Most Christian King: Now if
at that Time, his Catholic Church had called a solemn Assembly to unite Hearts
and Voices in this pious Prayer, O blessed Jesus, dear redeeming Lamb of God,
who came down from Heaven, to save Men's Lives, and not destroy them, go
along, we humbly pray thee, with our Bomb-vessels and Fireships, suffer not
our thundering Cannon to roar in Vain, but let thy tender Hand of Love and
Mercy, direct their Balls to more Heads and Hearts of thine own redeemed
Creatures, than the poor Skill of Man is able of itself to do: -- Had not such
Prayers had more of the Man of the Earth, more of the Son of Perdition in them,
than the Most Christian King's glorying in his Arms?

Again, would you farther see the Fall of the universal Church, from being led
by the Spirit of Christ, to be guided by the Inspiration of the great fiery
Dragon, look at all European Christendom sailing round the Globe, with Fire and
Sword, and every murdering Art of War, to seize the Possessions, and kill the
Inhabitants of both the Indies. -- What natural Right of Man, what supernatural
Virtue which Christ brought down from Heaven, was not here trodden under Foot?
-- All that you ever read or heard ot Heathen Barbarity, was here outdone by
Christian Conquerors. And to this Day, what Wars of Christians against
Christians, blended with Scalping Heathens, still keep staining the Earth and
the Seas with human Blood, for a miserable Share in the Spoils of a plundered
Heathen World! A World, which should have heard, or seen, or felt nothing from
the Followers of Christ, but a divine Love, that had forced them from distant
Lands, and through the Perils of long Seas, to visit Strangers with those glad
Tidings of Peace and Salvation to all the World, which Angels from Heaven, and
Shepherds on Earth, proclaimed at the Birth of Christ.

Here now, let the Wisdom of this world be as Wise as ever it will, and from
its learned Throne condemn all this as Enthusiasm; it need be no Trouble to any
one, to be condemned by that Wisdom, which God himself has condemned as
Foolishness with him. For the Wisdom of this World has all the Contrariety to
Salvation-wisdom, that the Flesh has to the Spirit, Earth to Heaven, or
Damnation to Salvation. It is a Wisdom, whose Spirit and Breath keep all the
Evil that is in sallen Man alive, and which in its highest Excellence, has only
the full grown Nature of that carnal Mind, which is Enmity against God. -- It
is a Wisdom that is sensual, and devilish, that hinders Man from knowing, and
dying all those Deaths, without which there can be no new Life. -- It is a
Wisdom, that turns all Salvation-truths into empty, learned Tales, that instead
of helping the Sinner to confess his Sins, and feel the Misery that is hid
under them, helps him to an Art of hiding, nay of defending them. For that
which the Lusts and Passions do contrary to the Wisdom from above, is proved to
be right Reason, by this Wisdom from below, whose greatest Skill is shown, in
keeping all the Powers and Passions of the natural Man in Peace and Prosperity;
and so the poor blinded Sinner, lives and dies in a total Ignorance of all that
Light, Blessing, and Salvation, which could only be had by a broken and
contrite Heart. -- For (N. B.) with Respect to Conscience, this is the chief
Office of worldly Wisdom; it is to keep all Things quiet in the old Man, that
whether busied in Things spiritual, or temporal, he may keep up the Lusts of
the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life, without any Disturbance
from religious Phantoms, and Dreams of mystic Idiots, who for want of sober
Sense, and sound Learning, think that Christ really meant what he said in these
Words, Except a Man be born again of the Spirit, or from above, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God. -- For this Wisdom come to its highest Perfection, is
a classic moral Painter, which though it cannot alter the Nature, yet can
change the Colors of every Thing; it can give to the most heavenly Virtue such
an outward Form and Color, as will force the stoutest of aged and learned Men
to run away from it; and to a Vice of the greatest Deformity, it can pencil
such charming Features, as will make every Child of this World, wish to live,
and die with it. -- Its next Perfection, is that of a flattering Orator, who
has Praise and Dispraise at his own free Disposal; for as they are all of his
own making, so he can dispose them on whom, and on what he will; not only as
outward, interesting Occasions call for them, but also as the inward
Necessities, the Ups and Downs of his own poor Self want them. For Self,
however willing to be always strong, has its weak Hours, and would be ever
tottering, unless this Elbow-orator kept him every Day (though perhaps not
every Night) free from the disturbing Whispers of a Seed of God in his Soul. --
Now join (if you please) Learning and Religion to act in fellowship with this
worldly Wisdom, and makes their best of it, and then you will have a Depravity
of Craft and Subtlety, as high as Flesh and Blood can carry it, which will
bring forth a glittering Pharisee, with a hardness of Heart, greater than that
of the Sinner Publican.

Demas, says St. Paul, has forsaken me, having loved this present World. --
Here you see all the Good and Blessing, that is inseparable from the Wisdom of
this World, it always does the same Thing, and has the same Effect wherever it
is; it will do to high and low, learned or unlearned, Clergy or Laity, that
same unavoidably which it did to Demas; it will make them forsake Christ, turn
their Backs on every Grace and Virtue of his Holy Spirit, as certainly as the
Love of the World made Demas to forsake Paul.

This Wisdom has asked me, how it is possible for Christian Kingdoms in the
Neighborhood of one another, to preserve themselves, unless the Strength and
Weapons of War, are every ones Defense, against such Invasions, Encroachments,
and Robberies, as would otherwise be the Fate of Christian Kingdoms from one
another.

This Question is so far from needing to be answered by me, that it is wholly
on my Side; it confesses all, and proves all that I have said of the fallen
State of Christendom, to be strictly true. -- For if this is the governing
Spirit of Christian Kingdoms, that no one of them can subsist in Safety from
its neighboring Christian Kingdoms, but by its Weapons of War, are not all
Christian Kingdoms equally in the same unchristian State, as two neighboring
bloody Knaves, who cannot be safe from one another, but as each others
murdering Arms preserve and protect them? This Plea therefore for Christendom's
Wars, proves nothing else but the want of Christianity all over the Christian
World, and stands upon no better a Foundation of Righteousness and Goodness,
than when one Murdering Knave kills another, that would have killed him.

But to know whether Christianity wants, or admits of War, Christianity is to
be considered as in its right State. -- Now the true State of the World turned
Christian, is thus described by the great Gospel prophet, who showed what a
Change it was to make in the fallen State of the World. -- It shall come to
pass, says he, in the last Days, that is, in the Days of Christendom, that the
Mountain of the Lord's House (his Christian Kingdom) shall be established in
the Top of the Mountains, and all Nations shall flow into it; and many People
shall say, let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord's House, and he will teach
us of his Ways, and we will walk in his Paths, Isaiah ii. 2.

Now what follows from this going up of the Nations to the Mountain of the
Lord's House, from his teaching them of his Ways, and their walking in his
Paths? The holy Prophet expressly tells you in his following Words, They shall
beat their Swords into Plow-shares, and their Spears into pruning Hooks: Nation
shall not lift up its Sword against Nation, (N. B.) neither shall they learn
War any more. -- This is the Prophet's true Christendom, with one and the same
essential divine Mark set upon it, as when the Lamb of God said, By this shall
all Men know, that ye are my Disciples, if ye Love another as I have loved you.
-- Christ's Kingdom of God is no where come, but where the Works of the Devil
are destroyed, and Men are turned from the Power of Satan unto God. -- God is
only another Name for the highest and only Good; and the highest and only Good,
means nothing else but LOVE with all its WORKS. -- Satan is only another Name
for the Whole and all of Evil, and the whole of Evil is nothing else but its
whole Contrariety to Love. -- And the Sum total of all Contrariety to Love, is
contained in Pride, Wrath, Strife, Self, Envy, Hatred, Revenge, Mischief, and
Murder. Look at these, with all their Fruits that belong to them, and then you
see all the princely Power, that Satan is, and has in this fallen World.

Would you see when and where the Kingdoms of this fallen World are become a
Kingdom of God, the gospel Prophet tells you, that it is then and there where
all Enmity cease. -- The Wolf, says he, shall dwell with the Lamb, and the
Leopard shall lie down with the Kid. The Calf and the young Lion and the
Fatling together, and a little Child shall lead them. The Cow and the Bear
shall feed, and their young ones shall lie down together, and the Lion shall
eat Straw like the Ox. The sucking Child shall play on the Hole of the Asp, and
the weaned Child shall put his Hand on the Cockatrice's Den. -- For, N. B. they
shall not HURT or DESTROY in all my holy Mountain, that is, through all holy
Christendom. -- Isaiah xi. 6.

See here a Kingdom of God on the Earth; it is nothing else but a Kingdom of
mere Love, where all HURT and DESTROYING is done away, and every Work of Enmity
changed into one united Power of Heavenly Love. -- But observe again and again,
whence this comes to pass, that God's Kingdom on Earth is, and can be nothing
else, but the Power of reigning Love; the Prophet tells you, it is because in
the Day of his Kingdom, the Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the Lord,
as the Waters cover the Sea. -- Therefore, O Christendom, thy Wars are thy
certain Proof, that thou art all over as full of an Ignorance of God, as the
Waters cover the Sea.

As to the present fallen State of universal Christendom, working under the
Spirit and Power of the great fiery Dragon, it is not my Intention, in any
Thing I am here upon, to show how any Part of it can subsist, or preserve
itself from being devoured by every other Part, but by its own Dragon Weapons.

But the Christendom which I mean, that neither wants, nor allows of War, is
only that where Christ is King, and his Holy Spirit the only Governor of the
Wills, Affections, and Designs of all that belong to it. -- It is my Complaint
against, and Charge upon all the Nations of Christendom, that this Necessity of
murdering Arms, is the Dragon's Monster, that is equally brought forth by all
and every Part of fallen Christendom; and that therefore all and every Part, as
well Popish as Protestant, are at one and the same Distance from the Spirit of
their Lord and Savior the Lamb of God, and therefore all want one and the same
entire Reformation.

In these last Ages of fallen Christendom, many Reformations have taken Place;
but alas! Truth must be forced to say, that they have been in all their
Variety, little better than so many runaway Births of one and the same Mother,
so many lesser Babels come out of Babylon the great -- For amongst all the
Reformers, the one only true Reformation has never yet been thought of. -- A
Change or Place, of Governors, of Opinions, together with new formed, outward
Models, is all the Reformation that has yet been attempted.

The Wisdom of this World, with its worldly Spirit, was the only Thing that had
overcome the Church, and had carried it into Captivity. For in Captivity it
certainly is, as soon as it is turned into a Kingdom of this World; and a
Kingdom of this World it certainly is, as soon as worldly Wisdom has its Power
in it. -- Not a false Doctrine, not a bad Discipline, not an usurped Power, or
corrupt Practice ever has prevailed, or does prevail in the Church, but has had
its whole Birth and Growth from worldly Wisdom.

This Wisdom, was the great evil Root, at which the reforming Axe should have
been laid, and must be laid, before the Church can be again that Virgin Spouse
of Christ, which it was at the Beginning. -- If any Man, says St. Paul, will
be wise, let him become a Fool in this World. This admits of no Exception, it
is a Maxim as universal, and unalterable, as that which says, If any Man will
follow Christ, let him deny himself. -- For no Man has any more to deny than
that, which the Wisdom and Spirit of this World are, and do in him. For all
that is in this World, the Lusts of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the
Pride of Life, are the very Things, in which alone the Wisdom of this World
lives, and moves, and has its being. It can be no other, can rise no higher,
nor be any better, than they are, and do. -- For as heavenly Wisdom, is the
Whole of all heavenly Goodness, so earthly Wisdom has the Whole Evil of all the
earthly Nature.

St. Paul speaks of a natural Man, that cannot know the Things of God, but to
whom they are mere Foolishness. This natural Man, is only another Name for the
Wisdom of this World; but though he cannot know the Things that be of God, yet
he can know their Names, and learn to speak that, which the Saints of God have
spoken about them. -- He can make Profession of them, be eloquent in their
Praise, and set them forth in such a desirable View, as shall make them quite
agreeable to the Children of worldly Wisdom. -- This is the natural Man, who
having got into the Church, and Church Power, has turned the Things of God into
Things of this World. -- Had this Man been kept out of the Church, the Church
had kept its first Purity to this Day; for its fallen State is nothing else,
but its Fall into the Hands of the natural Man of this World. -- And when this
is the State of the Church, the Wisdom of this World (which always loves its
own) will be in Love with it, will spare no Cost to maintain it, will make
Laws, fight Battles in Defense of it, and condemn every Man as Heretical, who
dares speak a Word against this glorious Image of a Church, which the Wisdom of
this World has set up.

This is the great Antichrist, which is neither better nor worse, nor any Thing
else, but the Spirit of Satan working against Christ, in the Strength and
Subtlety of earthly Wisdom.

If therefore you take any Thing to be Church-reformation, but a full Departure
from the Wisdom of this World, or any Thing to be your Entrance into a
Salvation-church, but the Nature, Spirit, and Works of Christ, become living in
you, then, whether Papist, or Protestant, Reformation or no Reformation, all
will be just as much Good to you, as when a Sadducee turns Publican, or from a
Publican becomes a Pharisee. -- For the Church of Christ, as it is the Door of
Salvation, is nothing else but Christ himself. -- Christ in us, or we in his
Church, is the same Thing. When that is alive, wills and works in you, which
was alive in Christ, then you are in his Church; for that which he was, that
must they be, who are his. Without this, it matters not what Pale you are in.
To every Thing but the new Creature, Christ says, I know you not; and to every
Virtue, that worldly Wisdom puts on, Get thee behind me Satan, for thou
savourest not the Things that be of God. And the Reason why it must be thus,
why worldly Wisdom, though under a religious Form, is, and can be nothing else,
but that which is called Satan, or Antichrist, is because all that we are, and
have from this World, is that very Enmity against God, that whole Evil which
separates us from him, and constitutes all that Death and Damnation that
belongs to our fallen State. -- And so sure, as the Life of this World is our
Separation from God, so sure is it, that a total Departure from every Subtlety
and Prosperity of worldly Wisdom, is absolutely necessary to change an evil Son
of Adam, into a holy Son of God. -- And here it is well to be observed, that
the Church of Christ is solely for this End, to make us Holy as he is Holy. But
nothing can do this, but that which has full Power to change a Sinner into a
Saint. And he who has not found that Power in the Church, may be assured, that
he is not yet a true Son of that Church. For the Church brings forth no other
Births, but holy Children of God; it has no other End, no other Nature, or
Work, but that of changing a Sinner into a Saint. -- But this can only be done,
just as the Change of Night into Day is done, or as the Darkness is quite lost
in the Light. -- Something as contrary to the whole Nature of Sin, as Light is
to Darkness, and as powerful over it, as the Light is powerful over Darkness,
can alone do this. -- Creeds, Cannons, Articles of Religion, stately Churches,
learned Priests, Singing, Preaching, and Praying in the best contrived Form of
Words, can no more raise a dead Sinner into a living Saint, than a fine System
of Light and Colors can change the Night into Day. For, (N. B.) that which
cannot help you to all Goodness, cannot help you to any Goodness, nor can that
take away any Sin, but that which can take away all Sin.

On this Ground it is, that the Apostle said, Circumcision is nothing, and
Uncircumcision is nothing; and on the same Ground it must be said, that Popery
is nothing, and Protestaneism is nothing, because all is nothing, as to
Salvation, but a Sinner changed into a Saint, or the Apostle's new Creature. --
Call nothing therefore your holy, Salvation-church, but that which takes away
all your Sins; this is the only Way not to be deceived with the Cry about
Churches, Reformations, and Divisions. -- If it be asked, what is meant by
taking away all our Sins, the Whole is fully told us in these Words, To as many
as believed, to them he gave Power to become Sons of God. This is the true
taking away, or Forgiveness of Sins; not a strong Imagination, or Brain-fancy,
that on such an Hour, on such a Day, or in such a Place, you felt and knew
assuredly that all your Sins were forgiven you: By such a Forgiveness of Sins,
that which made you a Sinner is not destroyed, but you will have every Day the
same Necessity or confessing yourself a miserable Sinner, as you had that
Morning, when your Sins were not forgiven you till the Afternoon. -- The true
Forgiveness of Sins, is only then, when that which sinned in us is done away,
or become powerless in us; but nothing can do this, but that Power by which we
become Sons of God. -- A blind Man has then only a Deliverance from his
Blindness, when he is put in full Possession of seeing Eyes; this is the only
doing away of his Darkness. -- Just so, and no otherwise, are our Sins forgiven
us, or done away, when the Power by which we become Sons of God, or the new
Creature, is so given to us, so possessed by us, as seeing Eyes are given to,
and possessed by the Man, who before that was all Blindness. -- And as our old
Man, can only then be said to be truly put off, when the new Man in Christ, is
raised to Life in his Stead, so our Sins are only then truly blotted out, or
done away, when an unsinning Nature, or a Birth of God, that sins not, is
come to be the ruling Life in us.

Many are the Marks, which the learned have given us of the true Church; but be
that as it will, no Man, whether learned or unlearned, can have any Mark or
Proof of his own true Church Membership, but his being dead unto all Sin, and
alive unto all Righteousness. -- This cannot be more plainly told us, than in
these Words of our Lord, He that commits Sin, is the Servant of Sin; but
surely that Servant of Sin, cannot at the same Time be a living Member of
Christ's Body, or that new Creature, who dwells in Christ, and Christ in him.
-- To suppose a Man born again from above, yet under a necessity of continuing
to Sin, is as absurd as to suppose, that the true Christian is only to have so
much of the Nature of Christ born in him, as is consistent with as real a Power
of Satan still dwelling in him. -- If the Son, says Christ, shall make you
free, then ye shall be free indeed. What is this, but saying, if Christ become
to Life in you, then a true Freedom from all Necessity of sinning is given to
you. Now if this is hindered, and cannot come to pass in the faithful Follower
of Christ, it must be, because both the willing and working of Christ in Man,
is too weak to overcome that, which the Devil wills and works in him. --
All this Absurdity, and even Blasphemy, is necessarily implied in that common
Doctrine of Books and Pulpits, which teaches, that the Christian can never have
done sinning, as long as he lives. -- Well therefore may Christendom sleep as
securely as it does, under the Power of Sin, without any Thought, Hope, or
Desire of doing God's Will on Earth, as it is done in Heaven; without any
concern at their not being pure, as he who has called them is pure, or walking
as he walked.

The Scripture knows no Christians, but Saints, who in all Things act as
becomes Saints. But now if the Scripture Saint did not mean a Man, that
eschewed all Evil, and was holy in all his Conversation, Saint and no Saint,
would have only such Difference, as one carnal Man will always have from
another. -- Preachers and Writers comfort the half Christians with telling
them, that God requires not a perfect, sinless Obedience, but accepts the
Sincerity of our weak Endeavors instead of it. -- Here if ever, the Blind lead
the Blind. -- For St. Paul comparing the Way of Salvation to a Race, says, In
a Race all run, but ONE obtains the Prize: So run that ye may obtain. -- Now
if Paul had seeing Eyes, must not they be Blind, who teach, that God accepts
of all that run in the religious Race, and requires not that any should obtain
the Prize. -- How easy was it to see, that the Sincerity of our weak
Endeavors, was quite a different Thing from that, which alone is, and can be
the required Perfection of our Lives. The first, God accepts, that is,
bears with. But why or how? Not because he seeks or requires no more, but
he bears with them, because, though at a great Distance from, they are, or
may be making toward that Perfection, or new Creature, which he absolutely
requires, which is the Fullness of the Stature of Christ, and is that which
Paul says, is the ONE that obtains the Prize.

The same which Paul says, is said by Christ in other Words, strive, says he,
to enter in at the straight Gate. Here our best Endeavors are called for, and
therefore accepted by God, and yet at the same Time he adds, that many shall
strive to enter in, but shall not be able. -- Why so, whence comes this? It is
because Christ himself is the one Door into Life. -- Here the Strivers
mentioned by Christ, and those which St. Paul calls Runners in a Race, are the
very same Persons; and Christ calling himself the one Door of Entrance, is the
same Thing as when Paul says, that one only receives the Prize, and that one,
which alone obtains the Prize, or that enters through the right Door, is
that new Creature in whom Christ is truly born. For whether you consider Things
natural or supernatural, nothing but Christ in us, can be our Hope of Glory.

The Pleader for Imperfection, farther supports himself by saying, no Man in
the World, Christ excepted, was ever without Sin. -- And so say I too; and with
the Apostle I also add, That if we say we have not sinned, we make him a Liar.
-- But then it is as true to say, that we make him a Liar, if we deny the
Possibility of our ever being freed from a Necessity of sinning. For the same
Word of God says, If we confess our Sins, he is faithful and just to forgive
us our Sins, and (N. B.) to cleanse us from all Unrighteousness.

But surely he that is left under a Necessity of sinning, as long as he lives,
can no more be said to be cleansed from all Unrighteousness, than a Man who
must be a Cripple to his dying Day, can be said to be cured of all his
Lameness. -- What weaker Conclusion can well be made, than to infer, that
because Christ was the only Man, that was born and lived free from Sin,
therefore no Man on Earth can be raised to a Freedom from sinning; no better
than concluding, that because the old Man is every one's Birth from Adam,
therefore there can be no such Thing as a new Man, created unto Righteousness,
through Christ Jesus, living and being all in all in him; no better Sense or
Logic than to say, that because our Redeemer could not find us any Thing else
but Sinners, therefore he must of all Necessity leave us to be Sinners. Of
Christ it only can be said, that he is in himself the true Vine; but of every
Branch that is his* and grows in him, it must be as truly said, that the Life
and Spirit of the true Vine, is the Life and Spirit of its Branches, and that
as is the Vine, so are its Branches. -- And here let it be well noted, that if
the Branch has not the Life and Goodness of the Vine in it, it can only be,
because it is broken off from the Vine, and therefore a withered Branch, fit
for the Fire. -- But if the Branches abide in the Vine, then Christ says this
glorious Thing of them, Ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto
you. John xv. 7. -- The very same glorious Thing, which he had before said of
himself, Father, I thank thee, that thou have heard me, and (N. B.) I knew that
thou hear we always. John xi. 41. -- Now say that this new Creature, who is
in such Union, Communion, and Power with God, because Christ is in him, and he
in Christ, as really as the Vine is in the Branches, and the Branches in the
Vine, say that he must be a Servant of Sin, as long as he lives in this World,
and then your Absurdity will be as great, as if you had said, that Christ in
us, must partake of our Corruption.

The sober Divine, who abhors the Pride of Enthusiasts, for the Sake of
Humility, says of himself and all Men, We are poor, blind, imperfect
Creatures, all our natural Faculties are perverted, corrupted, and out of their
right State, and therefore nothing that is perfect can come from us, or be done
by us. Truth enough! And the very same Truth, as when the Apostle says, The
natural Man knows not the Things that be of God, he cannot know them, they
are foolishness to him. This is the Man, that we all are by Nature. -- But what
Scripture ever spoke of, or required any perfect Works from this Man, any more
than it requires the Ethiopian to change his Skin? Or what an instructed Divine
must he be, who considers this old natural Man, as the Christian, and therefore
rejects Christian Perfection, because this old Man cannot attain to it? What
greater Blindness than to appeal to our fallen State, as a Proof of a Weakness
and Corruption, which we must have, when we are redeemed from it? Is this any
wiser, than saying, that Sin and Corruption must be there where Christ is,
because it is there, where he is not?

Our Lord has said this absolute Truth, that unless we be born again from
above, there is no possible Entrance into the Kingdom of God. -- What this new
Birth is in us, and what we get by it, is as expressly told us by his beloved
Apostle, saying, That which is born of God sins not. -- This is as true and
unalterable, as to say, that which is born of the Devil, can do nothing else
but add Sin to Sin. To what End do we pray, that this Day we may fall into no
Sin, if no such Day can be had? But if sinning can be made to cease in us for
one Day, what can do this for us, but that which can do the same Tomorrow?
What Benefit in praying, that God's Will may be done on Earth, as it is in
Heaven, if the Earth, as long as it lasts, must have as many Sinners as it has
Men upon it? How vainly does the Church pray for the baptized Person, That he
may have Power and Strength to have Victory, and to Triumph against the Devil,
the World, and the Flesh, if this victorious Triumph can never be obtained? If
notwithstanding this Baptism and Prayer, he must continue committing Sin, and
so be a Servant of Sin, as long as he lives? What Sense can there be, in making
a Communion of Saints to be an Article of our Creed, if at the same Time we are
to believe that Christians, as long as they live, must in some Degree or other
follow, and be led by the Lusts of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the
Pride of Life?

Whence now comes all this Folly of Doctrines? It is because the Church is no
longer that spiritual House of God, in which nothing is intended and sought
after, but spiritual Power and spiritual Life, but is become a mere human
Building, made up of worldly Power, worldly Learning, and worldly Prosperity in
gospel Matters. And therefore all the Frailties, Follies, and Imperfections of
human Nature, must have as much Life in the Church, as in any other human
Society. And the best Sons of such a Church, must be forced to plead such
Imperfections in the Members of it, as must be, where the old fallen human
Nature is still alive. -- And alive it there must be, and its Life defended,
where, the being continually moved, and led by the Spirit of God, is rejected
as gross Enthusiasm. -- For nothing but a full Birth, and continual Breathing
and Inspiration of the Holy Spirit in the new born Creature, can be a
Deliverance from all that, which is earthly, sensual, and devilish in our
fallen Nature. -- This New Creature, born again in Christ, of that ETERNAL
WORD, which created all Things in Heaven and on Earth, is both the Rock and
Church, of which Christ says, The Gates of Hell never prevail against it. --
For prevail they will, and must against every Thing, but the New Creature. --
And every fallen Man, be he where he will, or who he will, is yet in his fallen
State, and his whole Life is a mere Egyptian Bondage, and Babylonian Captivity,
till the heavenly Church, or new Birth from above, has taken him out of it.

See how St. Paul sets forth the Salvation-church as being nothing else, and
doing nothing else, but merely as the Mother of this new Bitrh. -- Know ye not,
says he, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized
into his Death? Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into Death, that
like as Christ was raised from the Dead by the Glory of the Father, even so we
also should walk in newness of Life. -- Here we have the one true Church
infallibly described, and yet no other Church, but the New Creature. -- He goes
on, For if we have been planted together in the Likeness of his Death, we shall
be also in the Likeness of his Resurrection. -- Therefore to be in Christ, or
in his Church, belongs to no one, but because the old Man is put off, and the
New Creature risen in Christ, is put on. -- The same Thing is said again in
these Words, Knowing this, that our old Man is crucified with him, that the
Body of Sin might be destroyed, That (N. B.) HENCEFORTH we should not serve
Sin; therefore the true Church is no where, but in the New Creature, that
henceforth sins not, nor is any longer a Servant to Sin. -- Away then with
all the tedious Volumes of Church Unity, Church Power, and Church Salvation. --
Ask neither a Council of Trent, nor a Synod of Dort, nor an Assembly of
Divines, for a Definition of the Church. The Apostle has given you, not a
Definition, but the unchangeable Nature of it, in these Words. -- But now being
made free from Sin, and become Servants to God, ye have your Fruit unto
Holiness, and the End everlasting Life. Therefore to be in the true
Salvation-Church, and to be in Christ that New Creature which sins not, is
strictly the same Thing.

What now is become of this true Church, or where must the Man go, who would
fain be a living Member of it? -- He need go no where; because wherever he is,
that which is to save him, and that which he is to be saved from, is always
with him. -- SELF is all the Evil that he has, and God is all the Goodness
that he ever can have; but Self is always with him, and God is always with him.
-- Death to Self, is his only Entrance into the Church of Life, and Nothing but
God can give Death to Self. -- Self is an inward Life, and God is an inward
Spirit or Life; therefore nothing kills that which must be killed in us, or
quickens that which must come to Life in us, but the inward Work of God in the
Soul, and the inward Work of the Soul in God. -- This is that mystic Religion,
which, though it has nothing in it, but that same Spirit, that same Truth, and
that same Life, which always was, and always must be the Religion of all God's
holy Angels and Saints in Heaven, is by the Wisdom of this World, accounted to
be Madness. As wisely done, as to reckon him mad, who says, that the Vanity of
Things temporal, cannot be, or give Life to, the Things that are eternal; or
that the Circumcision of the Flesh is but as poor a Thing, as the whetting the
Knife, in Comparison of that inward, mystic Circumcision of the Heart, which
can only be done by that WORD of God, which is Sharper than any two edged
Sword, and pierces to the dividing asunder of the Soul and Spirit, Heb. iv. 12.
-- Now fancy to yourself a Rabbi-Doctor, laughing at this Circumcision of the
two edged Sword of God, as Gospel Madness, and then you see that very same
Christian Orthodoxy, which at this Day condemns the inward working Life of God
in the Soul, as mystic Madness.

Look at all that is outward, and all that you then see, has no more of
Salvation in it, than the Stars and Elements. -- Look at all the good Works you
can think of, they have no Goodness for you, but when the good Spirit of God is
the Doer of them in you. -- For all the outward Works of Religion may be done
by the natural Man, he can observe all Church-duties, stick close to Doctrines,
and put on the Semblance of every outward Virtue; thus high he can go. But no
Christian, till led and governed by the Spirit of God, can go any higher, than
this feigned, outward Formality of this natural Man; to which he can add
nothing, but his own natural, fleshly Zeal in the Defense of it. For all Zeal
must be of this Kind, till it is the Zeal of that which is born of God, and
calls every Creature only to that same new Birth from above. -- My little
Children, says St. Paul, of whom I travail again in Birth, till Christ be
formed in you. This is the whole Labor of an Apostle to the End of the World.
He has nothing to preach to Sinners, but the absolute Necessity, the true Way,
and the certain Means of being born again from above. -- But if dropping this
one Thing only necessary, and only available, he becomes a disputing Reformer
about Words and Opinions, and helps Christians to be zealously separated from
one another, for the Sake of being saved by different Notions of Faith, Works,
Justification, or Election, etc. he has forgot his Errand, and is become a
blind Leader of all, who are blind enough to follow him. -- For all that is
called Faith, Works, Justification, Sanctification, or Election, are only so
many different Expressions of that which the restored divine Life is, and does
in us, and have no Existence any where, or in any Thing, but the New Creature.
-- And the Reason why every Thing that is, or can be good in us, or to us, is
nothing else but this divine Birth from above, is because, the divine Nature,
dead in Adam, was his entire Loss of every divine Virtue, and his whole Fall
under the Power of this World, the Flesh, and the Devil; and therefore the
divine Nature brought again to Life in Man, is his Faith, his Hope, his Prayer,
his Works, his Justification, Sanctification, Election, or Salvation. -- And
that ELECTION, which systematical Doctors have taken out of its Place, and
built it into an absolute, irreversible Decree of God, has no other Nature, no
other Effect, or Power of Salvation, but that which equally belongs to our
Faith, Hope, Prayer, Love of God, and Love of our Neighbor; and just so far as
these divine Virtues are in us, just so far are we the Elect of God, which
means nothing else but the beloved of God; and nothing makes us the beloved of
God, but his own first Image and Likeness rising up again in us. -- Would you
plainly know what is meant by being elected of God, the same is plainly meant,
as when the Scripture says, God hears those only who call upon him, or that
he can only be found by those who seek him; so he only electeth those and that
which elect him. -- Again, He that honors me, him will I honor, says God;
He that loves me, says Christ, shall be beloved of me and my Father: This is
the Mystery of Election (N. B.) as it relates to Salvation. -- At diverse Times
and in sundry Manners, God may have, and has had his chosen Vessels for
particular Offices, Messages, and Appointments; but as to Salvation from our
fallen State, every Son of Adam is his chosen Vessel, and this as certainly, as
that every Son of Adam has the Seed of the Woman, the incorruptible Seed of the
WORD born along with him; and this is God's unchangeable, universal Election,
which chooses, or wills the Salvation of all Men. -- For the Ground of all
Union, Communion, or Love between God and the Creature, lies wholly in the
divine Nature. -- That which is divine in Man, tends toward God, elects God;
and God only and solely elects his own Birth, Nature, and Likeness in Man. --
But seeing his own Birth, a Seed of his own divine Nature is in every Man, to
suppose God, by an arbitrary Power, willing and decreeing its eternal Happiness
in some, and willing and decreeing its eternal Misery in others, is a
blasphemous Absurdity, and supposes a greater Injustice in God, than the
wickedest Creatures can possibly commit against one another.

But Truth, to the eternal Praise and Glory of God, will eternally say, that
his Love is as universal and unchangeable as his Being, that his Mercy over all
his Works, can no more cease, than his Omnipotence can begin to grow weak.
God's Mark of an universal Salvation set upon all Mankind, was first given in
these Words, The Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Head of the Serpent:
Therefore wherever the Serpent is, there his Head is to be bruised. This was
God's infallible Assurance, or omnipotent Promise, that all that died in Adam,
should have its first Birth of Glory again. -- The eternal Son of God came into
the World, only for the Sake of this new Birth, to give God the Glory of
restoring it to all the dead Sons of fallen Adam. -- All the Mysteries of this
incarnate, suffering, dying Son of God, all the Price that he paid for our
Redemption, all the Washings that we have from his all cleansing Blood poured
out for us, all the Life that we receive from eating his Flesh, and drinking
his Blood, have their infinite Value, their high Glory, and amazing Greatness
in this, because nothing less than these supernatural Mysteries of a God-man,
could raise that new Creature out of Adam's Death, which could be again a
living Temple, and deified Habitation of the Spirit of God.

That this new Birth of the Spirit, or the divine Life in Man, was the Truth,
the Substance, and sole End of his miraculous Mysteries, is plainly told us by
Christ himself, who at the End of all his Process on Earth, tells his
Disciples, what was to be the blessed, and full Effect of it, namely, that the
Holy Spirit, the Comforter (being now fully purchased for them) should after
his Ascension, come in the Stead of a Christ in the Flesh. -- If I go not away,
says he, the Comforter will not come, but if I go away, I will send him unto
you, and he shall guide you into all Truth. Therefore all that Christ was, did,
suffered, dying in the Flesh, and ascending into Heaven, was for this sole End,
to purchase for all his Followers, a new Birth, new Life, and new Light, in and
by the Spirit of God restored to them, and living in them, as their Support,
Comforter, and Guide into all Truth. -- And this was his, LO, I AM WITH YOU
ALWAYS, EVEN UNTO THE END OF THE WORLD.


