A PLAN FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF PUBLIC SCHOOLS AND THE DIFFUSION OF KNOWLEDGE
IN PENNSYLVANIA; TO WHICH ARE ADDED THOUGHTS UPON THE MODE OF EDUCATION, PROPER
IN A REPUBLIC. ADDRESSED TO THE Legislature and Citizens of the State.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR THOMAS DOBSON, IN SECOND-STREET, TWO DOORS ABOVE
CHESNUT-STREET. M DCC LXXXVI.

A PLAN FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF PUBLIC SCHOOLS.
BEFORE I proceed to suggest a Plan for the establishment of public schools in
Pennsylvania, I shall point out, in a few words, the influence and advantages
of learning upon mankind.

I. It is friendly to religion, inasmuch as it assists in removing prejudice,
superstition and enthusiasm, in promoting just notions of the Deity, and in
enlarging our knowledge of his works.

II. It is favorable to liberty. A free government can only exist in an equal
diffusion of literature. Without learning men become Savages or Barbarians, and
where learning is confined to a few people, we always find monarchy,
aristocracy and slavery.

III. It promotes just ideas of laws and government. "When the clouds of
ignorance are dispelled (says the Marquis of Beccaria) by the radiance of
knowledge, power trembles, but the authority of laws remains immovable."

IV. It is friendly to manners. Learning, in all countries, promotes
civilization, and the pleasures of society and conversation.

V. It promotes agriculture, the great basis of national wealth and happiness.
Agriculture is as much a science as hydraulics, or optics, and has been equally
indebted to the experiments and researches of learned men. The highly
cultivated state, and the immense profits of the farms in England, are derived
wholly from the patronage which agriculture has received in that country, from
learned men and learned societies.

VI. Manufactures of all kinds owe their perfection, chiefly to learning --
hence the nations of Europe advance in manufactures and commerce, only in
proportion as they cultivate the arts and sciences.

For the purpose of diffusing knowledge through every part of the state, I beg
leave to propose the following simple plan.

I. Let there be one university in the state, and let this be established in
the capital. Let law, physic, divinty, the law of nature and nations, economy,
etc. be taught in it by public lectures in the winter season, after the manner
of the European universities, and let the professors receive such salaries from
the state as will enable them to deliver their lectures at a moderate price.

II. Let there be four colleges. One in Philadelphia, -- one at Carlisle -- a
third, for the benefit of our German fellow citizens, at Manheim, -- and a
fourth, some years hence, at Pittsburgh. In these colleges, let young men be
instructed in mathematics and in the higher branches of science, in the same
manner that they are now taught in our American colleges. After they have taken
a degree in one of these colleges, let them, if they can afford it, complete
their studies by spending a season or two in attending the lectures in the
university. I prefer four colleges in the state to one or two, for there is a
certain size of colleges as there is of towns and armies, that is most
favorable to morals and good government. Oxford and Cambridge in England are
the seats of dissipation* while the more numerous, and less crowded
universities and colleges in Scotland, are remarkable for the order, diligence,
and decent behavior of their students.

III. Let there be an academy established in each county, for the purpose of
instructing learned youth in the languages, and thereby preparing them to enter
college.

IV. Let there be free schools established in every township, or in districts
consisting of one hundred families. In these schools, let children be taught to
read and write the English and German languages, and the use of figures. Such
of them as have parents that can afford to send them from home, and are
disposed to extend their educations, may remove their children from the free
school to the county academy.

By this plan, the whole state will be tied together by one system of
education. The university will in time furnish masters for the colleges, and
the colleges will furnish masters for the academies and free schools, while the
free Schools, in their turns, will supply the academies -- the colleges, and
the university, with scholars -- students, and pupils. The same systems of
grammar, oratory and philosophy will be taught in every part of the state, and
the literary features of Pennsylvania will thus designate one great, and
equally enlightened family.

A question now rises, and that is, How shall this plan be carried into
execution? -- I answer --

The funds of the university of Pennsylvania (if the English and other schools
were separated from it) are nearly equal to the purpose of supporting able
professors in all the arts and sciences that are taught in the European
universities.

A small addition to the funds of Dickinson college, will enable it to exist
without any further aid from government.

Twenty thousand acres of good land in the late Indian purchase, will probably
afford a revenue large enough to support a college at Manheim, and another on
the banks of the Ohio, in the course of twenty years.

Five thousand acres of land, appropriated to each county academy, will
probably afford a revenue sufficient to support them in twenty years. In the
mean while let a tax from L200 to L400 a year be laid on each county for that
purpose, according to the number and wealth of its inhabitants.

Let sixty thousand acres of land be set apart, to be divided, twenty years
hence, among the free schools. In the mean while let a tax from L30 to L60 a
year be levied upon each district of one hundred families, for the support of
the schoolmaster, and to prompt him to industry in increasing his school, let
each scholar pay him from 1 s6 to 2 s6 every quarter.

But, how shall we bear the expense of these literary institutions under the
present weight of our taxes? -- I answer -- These institutions are designed to
lessen our taxes. They will enlighten us in the great business of finance --
they will teach us to increase the ability of the state to support government,
by increasing the profits of agriculture, and by promoting manufactures. They
will teach us all the modern improvements and advantages of inland navigation.
They will defend us from hasty and expensive experiments in government, by
unfolding to us the experience and folly of past ages, and thus, instead of
adding to our taxes and debts, they will furnish us with the true secret of
lessening and discharging both of them.

But, shall the estates of orphans, batchelors and persons who have no children
be taxed to pay for the support of schools from which they can derive no
benefit? I answer in the affirmative, to the first part of the objection, and I
deny the truth of the latter part of it. Every member of the community is
interested in the propagation of virtue and knowledge in the state. But I will
go further, and add, it will be true economy in individuals to support public
schools. The bachelor will in time save his tax for this purpose, by being
able to sleep with fewer bolts and locks to his doors, -- the estates of
orphans will in time be benefited, by being protected from the ravages of
unprincipled and idle boys, and the children of wealthy parents will be less
tempted, by bad company, to extravagance. Fewer pillories and whipping posts,
and smaller jails, with their usual expenses and taxes, will be necessary when
our youth are properly educated, than at present. I believe it could be proved,
that the expenses of confining, trying and executing criminals amount every
year, in most of the counties, to more money than would be sufficient to
maintain all the schools that would be necessary in each county. The
confessions of these criminals generally show us, that their vices and
punishments are the fatal consequences of the want of a proper education in
early life.

I submit these detatched hints to the consideration of the legislature and of
the citizens of Pennsylvania. The plan for the free schools is taken chiefly
from the plans which have long been used with success in Scotland, and in the
Eastern states There are 600 of these schools in the small state of
Connecticut, which, at this time, have in them 25,000 scholars. Only two
natives of this state have been executed in the course of the last 25 years.
The German Lutherans in Pennsylvania take uncommon pains in the education of
their youth. Not one of this society has submitted to the ignominy of a legal
punishment, of any kind, in the course of the last 17 years.
of America, where the influence of learning in promoting religion, morals,
manners, government, etc. has never been exceeded in any country.

The manner in which these academies and schools, should be supported and
governed, -- the modes of determining the characters and qualifications of
schoolmasters, and the arrangement of families in each district, so that
children of the same religious sect and nation, may be educated as much as
possible together, will form a proper part of a LAW for the establishment of
schools, and therefore, does not come within the limits of this plan.

I shall conclude this part of the plan, by submitting it to the wisdom of the
legislature, whether in granting charters for colleges in future, they should
not confine them to giving degrees only in the arts, especially while they
teach neither law, physic nor divinity. It is a folly peculiar to our American
colleges, to confer literary honors in professions that are not taught by
them, and which, if not speedily checked, will render degrees so cheap, that
they will cease to be the honorable badges of industry and learning.

I have said nothing of the utility of public libraries in each college,
academy and free school. Upon this subject, I shall only remark, that they will
tend to diffuse knowledge more generally, if the farmers and tradesmen in the
neighborhood of them, (upon paying a moderate sum yearly) are permitted to
have access to them.

The establishment of news papers, in a few of the most populous county towns,
will contribute very much to diffuse knowledge of all kinds through the state.
To accomplish this, the means of conveying the papers should be made easy, by
the assistance of the legislature. The effects of a news paper, upon the state
of knowledge and opinions, appear already in several of the counties beyond the
Susquehannah. The passion for this useful species of instruction, is strongly
marked in Pennsylvania, by the great encouragement this paper has received in
those counties. In the space of eight months the number of subscribers to the
Carlisle Gazette, have amounted to above 700. Henry the IVth of France, used to
say, he hoped to live to see the time, when every peasant in his kingdom would
dine on a turkey every Sundays. I have not a wish for the extension of
literature in the state, that would not be gratified, by living to see a weekly
news paper in every farm house in Pennsylvania. Part of the effects of this
universal diffusion of knowledge, would probably be, to produce turkies and
poultry of all kinds on the tables of our farmers, not only on Sundays, but on
every day of the week.

By multiplying villages and county towns, we increase the means of diffusing
knowledge. Villages are favourble to schools and public worship, and county
towns, besides possessing these two advantages, are favorable to the
propagation of political and legal information. The public officers of the
county, by being obliged to maintain a connection with the capital of the
government, often become repositories and vehicles of news and useful
publications, while the judges and lawyers, who attend the courts that are held
in these towns, seldom fail of leaving a large portion of knowledge behind them.

THOUGHTS UPON THE MODE OF EDUCATION PROPER IN A REPUBLIC.
THE business of education has acquired a new complexion by the independence of
our country. The form of government we have assumed, has created a new class of
duties to every American. It becomes us, therefore, to examine our former
habits upon this subject, and in laying the foundations for nurseries of wise
and good men, to adapt our modes of teaching to the peculiar form of our
government.

The first remark that I shall make upon this subject is, that an education in
our own, is to be preferred to an education in a foreign country. The principle
of patriotism stands in need of the reinforcement of prejudice, and it is well
known that our strongest prejudices in favor of our country are formed in the
first one and twenty years of our lives. The policy of the Lacedamonians is
well worthy of our imitation. When Antipater demanded fifty of their children
as hostages for the fulfillment of a distant engagement, those wise republicans
refused to comply with his demand, but readily offered him double the number of
their adult citizens, whose habits and prejudices could not be sha^^^ by
residing in a foreign country. Passing by, in this place, the advantages to the
community from the early attachment of youth to the laws and constitution of
their country, I shall only remark, that young men who have trodden the paths
of science together, or have joined in the same sports, whether of swimming,
scating, fishing, or hunting, generally feel, through life, such ties to each
other, as add greatly to the obligations of mutual benevolence.

I conceive the education of our youth in this country to be peculiarly
necessary in Pennsylvania, while our citizens are composed of the natives of so
many different kingdoms in Europe. Our Schools of learning, by producing one
general, and uniform system of education, will render the mass of the people
more homogeneous, and thereby fit them more easily for uniform and peaceable
government.

I proceed, in the next place, to enquire, what mode of education we shall
adopt so as to secure to the state all the advantages that are to be derived
from the proper instruction of youth; and here I beg leave to remark that the
only foundation for a useful education in a republic is to be laid in RELIGION.
Without this, there can be no virtue, and without virtue there can be no
liberty, and liberty is the object and life of all republican governments.

Such is my veneration for every religion that reveals the attributes of the
Deity, or a future state of rewards and punishments, that I had rather see the
opinions of Confucius or Mahomed inculcated upon our youth, than see them grow
up wholly devoid of a system of religious principles. But the religion I mean
to recommend in this place, is the religion of JESUS CHRIST.

It is foreign to my purpose to hint at the arguments which establish the truth
of the Christian revelation. My only business is to declare, that all its
doctrines and precepts are calculated to promote the happiness of society, and
the safety and well being of civil government. A Christian cannot fail of being
a republican. The history of the creation of man, and of the relation of our
species to each other by birth, which is recorded in the Old Testament, is the
best refutation that can be given to the divine right of kings, and the
strongest argument that can be used in favor of the original and natural
equality of all mankind. A Christian, I say again, cannot fail of being a
republican, for every precept of the Gospel inculcates those degrees of
humility, self-denial, and brotherly kindness, which are directly opposed to
the pride of monarchy and the pageantry of a court. A Christian cannot fail of
being useful to the republic, for his religion teaches him that no man "lives
to himself." And lastly, a Christian cannot fail of being wholly inoffensive,
for his religion teaches him, in all things to do to others what he would
wish, in like circumstances, they should do to him.

I am aware that I dissent from one of those paradoxical opinions with which
modern times abound; that it is improper to fill the minds of youth with
religious prejudices of any kind, and that they should be left to choose their
own principles, after they have arrived at an age in which they are capable of
judging for themselves. Could we preserve the mind in childhood and youth a
perfect blank, this plan of education would have more to recommend it; but this
we know to be impossible. The human mind runs as naturally into principles as
it does after facts. It submits with difficulty to those restraints or partial
discoveries which are imposed upon it in the infancy of reason. Hence the
impatience of children to be informed upon all subjects that relate to the
invisible world. But I beg leave to ask, Why should we pursue a different plan
of education with respect to religion from that which we pursue in teaching the
arts and sciences? Do we leave our youth to acquire systems of geography,
philosophy, or politics, till they have arrived at an age in which they are
capable of judgeing for themselves? We do not. I claim no more then for
religion, than for the other sciences, and I add further, that if our youth are
disposed after they are of age to think for themselves, a knowledge of one
system will be the best means of conducting them in a free enquiry into other
systems of religion, just as an acquaintance with one system of philosophy is
the best introduction to the study of all the other systems in the world.

I must beg leave upon this subject to go one step further. In order more
effectually to secure to our youth the advantages of a religious education, it
is necessary to impose upon them the doctrines and discipline of a particular
church. Man is naturally an ungovernable animal, and observations on particular
societies and countries will teach us, that when we add the restraints of
eclesiastical, to those of domestic and civil government, we produce, in him,
the highest degrees of order and virtue. That fashionable liberality which
refuses to associate with any one sect of Christians is seldom useful to
itself, or to society, and may fitly be compared to the unprofitable bravery of
a soldier, who wastes his valor in solitary enterprises, without the aid or
effect of military associations. Far be it from me to recommend the doctrines
or modes of worship of any one denomination of Christians. I only recommend to
the persons entrusted with the education of youth, to inculcate upon them a
strict conformity to that mode of worship which is most agreeable to their
consciences, or the inclinations of their parents.

Under this head, I must be excused in not agreeing with those modern writers
who have opposed the use of the Bible as a school book. The only objection I
know to it is, its division into chapters and verses, and its improper
punctuation, which render it a more difficult book to read well, than many
others; but these defects may easily be corrected; and the disadvantages of
them are not to be mentioned with the immense advantages of making children
early, and intimately acquainted with the means of acquiring happiness both
here and hereafter. How great is the difference between making young people
acquainted with the interesting and entertaining truths contained in the Bible,
and the fables of Moore and Croxall, or the doubtful histories of antiquity! I
maintain that there is no book of its size in the whole world, that contains
half so much useful knowledge for the government of states, or the direction of
the affairs of individuals as the bible. To object to the practice of having it
read in schools, because it tends to destroy our veneration for it, is an
argument that applies with equal force, against the frequency of public
worship, and all other religious exercises. The first impressions upon the mind
are the most durable. They survive the wreck of the memory, and exist in old
age after the ideas acquired in middle life have been obliterated. Of how much
consequence then must it be to the human mind in the evening of life, to be
able to recall those ideas which are most essential to its happiness; and these
are to be found chiefly in the Bible. The great delight which old people take
in reading the Bible, I am persuaded is derived chiefly from its histories and
precepts being associated with the events of childhood and youth, the
recollection of which forms a material part of their pleasures.

I do not mean to exclude books of history, poetry or even fables from our
schools. They may, and should be read frequently by our young people, but if
the Bible is made to give way to them altogether, I foresee that it will be
read, in a short time, only in churches, and in a few years will probably be
found only in the offices of magistrates, and in courts of justice. In a
republic where all votes for public officers are given by ballot, should not a
knowledge of reading and writing be considered as essential qualifications for
an elector? and when a man, who is of a doubtful character, offers his vote,
would it not be more consistent with sound policy and wise government to oblige
him to read a few verses in the Bible to prove his qualifications, than simply
to compel him to kiss the outside of it?


NEXT to the duty which young men owe to their Creator, I wish to see a SUPREME
REGARD TO THEIR COUNTRY, inculcated upon them. When the Duke of Sully became
prime minister to Henry the IVth of France, the first thing he did, he tells
us, "Was to subdue and forget his own heart." The same duty is incumbent upon
every citizen of a republic. Our country includes family, friends and property,
and should be preferred to them all. Let our pupil be taught that he does not
belong to himself, but that he is public property. Let him be taught to love
his family, but let him be taught, at the same time, that he must forsake and
even forget them, when the welfare of his country requires it. He must watch
for the state as if its liberties depended upon his vigilance alone, but he
must do this in such a manner as not to defraud his creditors, or neglect his
family. He must love private life, but he must decline no station, however
public or responsable it may be, when called to it by the suffrages of his
fellow-citizens. He must love popularity, but he must despise it when set in
competition with the dictates of his judgment, or the real interest of his
country. He must love character, and have a due sense of injuries, but he must
be taught to appeal only to the laws of the state, to defend the one, and
punish the other. He must love family honor, but he must be taught that
neither the rank nor antiquity of his ancestors can command respect, without
personal merit. He must avoid neutrality in all questions that divide the
state, but he must shun the rage, and acrimony of party spirit. He must be
taught to love his fellow creatures in every part of the world, but he must
cherish with a more intense and peculiar affection, the citizens of
Pennsylvania and of the United States. I do not wish to see our youth educated
with a single prejudice against any nation or country; but we impose a task
upon human nature, repugnant alike to reason, revelation and the ordinary
dimensions of the human heart, when we require him to embrace, with equal
affection, the whole family of mankind. He must be taught to amass wealth, but
it must be only to increase his power of contributing to the wants and demands
of the state. He must be indulged occasionally in amusements, but he must be
taught that study and business should be his principal pursuits in life. Above
all he must love life, and endeavor to acquire as many of its conveniences as
possible by industry and economy, but he must be taught that this life "Is not
his own," when the safety of his country requires it. These are practicable
lessons, and the history of the commonwealths of Greece and Rome show, that
human nature, without the aids of Christianity, has attained these degrees of
perfection.

While we inculcate these republican duties upon our pupil, we must not
neglect, at the same time, to inspire him with republican principles. He must
be taught that there can be no durable liberty but in a republic, and that
government, like all other sciences, is of a progressive nature. The chains
which have bound this science in Europe are happily unloosed in America. Here
it is open to investigation and improvement. While philosophy has protected us
by its discoveries from a thousand natural evils, government has unhappily
followed with an unequal pace. It would be to dishonor human genius only to
name the many defects which still exist in the best systems of legislation. We
daily see matter of a perishable nature rendered durable by certain chemical
operations. In like manner, I conceive, that it is possible to analyze and
combine power in such a manner as not only to increase the happiness, but to
promote the duration of republican forms of government far beyond the terms
limited for them by history, or the common opinions of mankind.

To assist in rendering religious, moral and political instruction more
effectual upon the minds of our youth, it will be necessary to subject their
bodies to physical discipline. To obviate the inconveniences of their studious
and sedantary mode of life, they should live upon a temperate diet, consisting
chiefly of broths, milk and vegetables. The black broth of Sparta, and the
barley broth of Scotland, have been alike celebrated for their beneficial
effects upon the minds of young people. They should avoid tasting spirituous
liquors. They should also be accustomed occasionally to work with their hands,
in the intervals of study, and in the busy seasons of the year in the country.
Moderate sleep, silence, occasional solitude, and cleanliness, should be
inculcated upon them, and the utmost advantage should be taken of a proper
direction of those great principles in human conduct, -- sensibility, habit,
imitation, and association.

The influence these physical causes will be powerful upon the intellects, as
well as upon the principles and morals of young people.

To those who have studied human nature, it will not appear paradoxical to
recommend, in this essay, a particular attention to vocal music. Its mechanical
effects in civilizing the mind, and thereby preparing it for the influence of
religion and government, have been so often felt and recorded, that it will be
unnecessary to mention facts in favor of its usefulness in order to excite a
proper attention to it.

In the education of youth, let the authority of our masters be as absolute as
possible. The government of schools like the government of private families,
should be arbitary, that it may not be severe. By this mode of education, we
prepare our youth for the subordination of laws, and thereby qualify them for
becoming good citizens of the republic. I am satisfied that the most useful
citizens have been formed from those youth who have never known or felt their
own wills till they were one and twenty years of age, and I have often thought
that society owes a great deal of its order and happiness to the deficiencies
of parental government, being supplied by those habits of obedience and
subordination which are contracted at schools.

I cannot help bearing a testimony, in this place, against the custom, which
prevails in some parts of America, (but which is daily falling into disuse in
Europe) of crouding boys together under one roof for the purpose of education.
The practice is the gloomy remains of monkish ignorance, and is as unfavourable
to the improvements of the mind in useful learning, as monasteries are to the
spirit of religion. I grant this mode of secluding boys from the intercourse of
private families, has a tendency to make them scholars, but our business is to
make them men, citizens and christians. The vices of young people are generally
learned from each other. The vices of adults seldom infect them. By separating
them from each other, therefore, in their hours of relaxation from study, we
secure their morals from a principal source of corruption, while we improve
their manners, by subjecting them to those restraints, which the difference of
age and sex, naturally produce in private families.

I have hitherto said nothing of the AMUSEMENTS that are proper for young
people in a republic. Those which promote health and good humor, will have a
happy effect upon morals and government. To increase this influence, let the
persons who direct these amusements, be admitted into good company, and
subjected, by that means, to restraints in behavior and moral conduct. Taverns
which in most countries are exposed to riot and vice, in Connecticut are places
of business and innocent pleasure, because the tavern-keepers in that country
are generally men of sober and respectable characters. The theater will never
be perfectly reformed till players are treated with the same respect as persons
of other ornamental professions. It is to no purpose to attempt to write or
preach down an amusement, which seizes so forcibly upon all the powers of the
mind. Let ministers preach to players, instead of against them; let them open
their churches and the ordinances of religion to them and their families, and,
I am persuaded, we shall soon see such a reformation in the theater as can
never be effected by all the means that have hitherto been employed for that
purpose. It is possible to render the stage, by these means, subsurvient to the
purposes of virtue and even religion. Why should the minister of the gospel
exclude the player from his visits, or from his public or private instructions?
The Author of Christianity knew no difference in the occupations of men. He eat
and drank daily with publicans and sinners.

From the observations that have been made it is plain, that I consider it as
possible to convert men into republican machines. This must be done, if we
expect them to perform their parts properly, in the great machine of the
government of the state. That republic is sophisticated with monarchy or
aristocracy that does not revolve upon the wills of the people, and these must
be fitted to each other by means of education before they can be made to
produce regularity and unison in government.

Having pointed out those general principles, which should be inculcated alike
in all the schools of the state, I proceed now to make a few remarks upon the
method of conducting, what is commonly called, a liberal or learned education
in a republic.

I shall begin this part of my subject by bearing a testimony against the
common practice of attempting to teach boys the learned languages, and the arts
and sciences too early in life. The first twelve years of life are barely
sufficient to instruct a boy in reading, writing and arithmetic. With these, he
may be taught those modern languages which are necessary for him to speak. The
state of the memory, in early life, is favorable to the acquisition of
languages, especially when they are conveyed to the mind through the ear. It
is, moreover, in early life only, that the organs of speech yield in such a
manner as to favor the just pronounciation of foreign languages.

I do not wish the LEARNED OR DEAD LANGUAGES, as they are commonly called, to
be reduced below their present just rank in the universities of Europe,
especially as I consider an acquaintance with them as the best foundation for a
correct and extensive knowledge of the language of our country. Too much pains
cannot be taken to teach our youth to read and write our American language with
propriety and elegance. The study of the Greek language constituted a material
part of the literature of the Athenians, hence the sublimity, purity and
immortality of so many of their writings. The advantages of a perfect knowledge
of our language to young men intended for the professions of law, physic or
divinity are too obvious to be mentioned, but in a state which boasts of the
first commercial city in America, I wish to see it cultivated by young men, who
are intended for the compting house, for many such, I hope, will be educated in
our colleges. The time is past when an academical education was thought to be
unnecessary to qualify a young man for merchandise. I conceive no profession is
capable of receiving more embellishments from it.

Connected with the study of our own language is the study of ELOQUENCE. It is
well known how great a part it constituted of the Roman education. It is the
first accomplishment in a republic, and often sets the whole machine of
government in motion. Let our youth, therefore, be instructed in this art. We
do not extol it too highly when we attribute as much to the power of eloquence
as to the sword in bringing about the American revolution.

With the usual arts and sciences that are taught in our American colleges, I
wish to see a regular course of lectures given upon HISTORY and CHRONOLOGY. The
science of government, whether it relates to constitutions or laws, can only be
advanced by a careful selection of facts, and these are to be found chiefly in
history. Above all, let our youth be instructed in the history of the ancient
republics, and the progress of liberty and tyranny in the different states of
Europe. I wish likewise to see the numerous facts that relate to the origin and
present state of COMMERCE, together with the nature and principles of MONEY,
reduced to such a system as to be intelligible and agreeable to a young man. If
we consider the commerce of our metropolis only as the avenue of the wealth of
the state, the study of it merits a place in a young man's education; but, I
consider commerce in a much higher light when I recommend the study of it in
republican seminaries. I view it as the best security against the influence of
heriditary monopolies of land, and, therefore, the surest protection against
aristocracy. I consider its effects as next to those of religion in humanizing
mankind, and lastly, I view it as the means of uniting the different nations of
the world together by the ties of mutual wants and obligations.

CHEMISTRY by unfolding to us the effects of heat and mixture, enlarges our
acquaintance with the wonders of nature, and the mysteries of art, hence it has
become, in most of the universities of Europe, a necessary branch of a
gentleman's education. In a young country, where improvements in agriculture
and manufactures are so much to be desired, the cultivation of this science,
which explains the principles of both of them, should be considered as an
object of the utmost importance.

In a state where every citizen is liable to be a soldier and a legislator, it
will be necessary to have some regular instruction given upon the ART OF WAR
and upon PRACTICAL LEGISLATION. These branches of knowledge are of too much
importance in a republic to be trusted to solitary study, or to a fortuitous
acquaintance with books. Let mathematical learning, therefore, be carefully
applied, in our colleges, to gunnery and fortification, and let philosophy be
applied to the history of those compositions which have been made use of for
the terrible purposes of destroying human life. These branches of knowledge
will be indispensably necessary in our republic, if unfortunately war should
continue hereafter to be the unchristian mode of arbitrating disputes between
Christian nations. Again, let our youth be instructed in all the means of
promoting national prosperity and independence, whether they relate to
improvements in agriculture, manufactures, or inland navigation. Let him be
instructed further in the general principles of legislation, whether they
relate to revenue, or to the preservation of life, liberty or property. Let him
be directed frequently to attend the courts of justice, where he will have the
best opportunities of acquiring habits of arranging and comparing his ideas by
observing the secretion of truth, in the examination of witnesses, and where he
will hear the laws of the state explained, with all the advantages of that
species of eloquence which belongs to the bar. Of so much importance do I
conceive it to be, to a young man, to attend occasionally to the decisions of
our courts of law, that I wish to see our colleges and academies established,
only in county towns.

But further, considering the nature of our connection with the United States
it will be necessary to make our pupil acquainted with all the prerogatives of
the foederal government. He must be instructed in the nature and variety of
treaties. He must know the difference in the powers and duties of the several
species of ambassadors. He must be taught wherein the obligations of
individuals and of states are the same, and wherein they differ. In short, he
must acquire a general knowledge of all those laws and forms, which unite the
sovereigns of the earth, or separate them from each other.

I have only to add that it will be to no purpose to adopt this, or any other
mode of education, unless we make choice of suitable masters to carry our plans
into execution. Let our teachers be distinguished for their abilities and
knowledge. Let them be grave in their manners, -- gentle in their tempers, --
exemplary in their morals, and of found principles in religion and government.
Let us not leave their support to the precarious resources to be derived from
their pupils, but let such funds be provided for our schools and colleges as
will enable us to allow them liberal salaries. By these means we shall render
the chairs, -- the professorships and rectorships of our colleges and academies
objects of competition among learned men. By conferring upon our masters that
independence, which is the companion of competency, we shall, moreover,
strengthen their authority over the youth committed to their care. Let us
remember that a great part of the divines, lawyers, physicians, legislators,
soldiers, generals, delegates, counselors, and governors of the state will
probably hereafter pass through their hands. How great then should be the
wisdom! -- how honorable the rank! and how generous the reward of those men
who are to form these necessary and leading members of the republic!

I beg pardon for having delayed so long, to say any thing of the separate and
peculiar mode of education proper for WOMEN in a republic. I am sensible that
they must concur in all our plans of education for young men, or no laws will
ever render them effectual. To qualify our women for this purpose, they should
not only be instructed in the usual branches of female education, but they
should be instructed in the principles of liberty and government; and the
obligations of patriotism, should be inculcated upon them. The opinions and
conduct of men are often regulated by the women in the most arduous enterprises
of life; and their approbation is frequently the principal reward of the hero's
dangers, and the patriot's toils. Besides, the first impressions upon the minds
of children are generally derived from the women. Of how much consequence,
therefore, is it in a republic, that they should think justly upon the great
subjects of liberty and government!

The complaints that have been made against religion, liberty and learning,
have been made against each of them in a separate state. Perhaps like certain
liquors, they should only be used in a state of mixture. They mutually assist
in correcting the abuses, and in improving the good effects of each other. From
the combined and reciprocal influence of religion, liberty and learning upon
the morals, manners and knowledge of individuals, of these, upon government,
and of government, upon individuals, it is impossible to measure the degrees of
happiness and perfection to which mankind may be raised. For my part, I can
form no ideas of the golden age, so much celebrated by the poets, more
delightful, than the contemplation of that happiness which it is now in the
power of the legislature of Pennsylvania to confer upon her citizens, by
establishing proper modes and places of education in every part of the state.

The present time is peculiarly favorable to the establishment of these
benevolent and necessary institutions in Pennsylvania. The minds of our people
have not as yet lost the yiedling texture they acquired by the heat of the late
revolution. They will now receive more readily, than five or even three years
hence, new impressions and habits of all kinds. The spirit of liberty now
pervades every part of the state. The influence of error and deception are now
of short duration. Seven years hence, the affairs of our state may assume a new
complexion. We may be rivetted to a criminal indifference for the safety and
happiness of ourselves and our posterity. An aristocratic or democratic junto
may arise, that shall find its despotic views connected with the prevalence of
ignorance and vice in the state; or a few artful pedagogues who consider
learning as useful only in proportion as it favors their pride or avarice, may
prevent all new literary establishments from taking place, by raising a hue and
cry against them, as the offspring of improper rivalship, or the nurseries of
party spirit.

But in vain shall we lavish pains and expense, in establishing nurseries of
virtue and knowledge in every part of the state. In vain shall we attempt to
give the minds of our citizens a virtuous and ^^iform bias in early life, while
the arms of our state are opened alike to receive into its bosom, and to confer
equal privileges upon, the virtuous emigrant, and the annual refuse of the
jails of Britain, Ireland and our sister states. Of the many criminals that
have been executed within these seven years, four out of five of them have been
foreigners, who have arrived here during the war and since the peace. We are
yet, perhaps, to see, and deplore the tracks of the enormous vices and crimes
these men have left behind them. Legislators of Pennsylvania! -- Stewards of
the justice and virtue of heaven! -- Fathers of children, who may be corrupted
and disgraced by bad examples; say -- can nothing be done to preserve our
morals, manners, and government, from the infection of European vices?

FINIS.

