NARATIVE OF Mrs. SCOTT and Capt. STEWART's CAPTIVITY.


A TRUE AND WONDERFUL NARRATIVE Of the surprising CAPTIVITY and remarkable
DELIVERANCE of Mrs. FRANCES SCOTT, An Inhabitant of WASHINGTON COUNTY, in the
State of VIRGINIA; who was taken by the Indians on the Evening of the
Twenty-ninth of JUNE, 1785.

CONTAINING ALSO, A particular RELATION of her almost unparralelled Sufferings,
and the Hardships she underwent during her tedious and painful Travels and
Perigrinations of Thirty-two Days, from the Tenth Day of JULY to the Eleventh
of AUGUST, through the dreary Desert, in all which Time Mrs. SCOTT never tasted
any Fish or Flesh, but subsisted entirely on the Juice of Cane-Stalks,
Sassafras Leaves and other Plants; and was often surrounded in her melancholy
and solitary Journey, by Buffaloes, Serpents, Elks, Wolves, Bears, and a
Variety of other hideous, shocking and frightful Beasts who inhabit the
Wilderness of America.

LIKEWISE, A particular DETAIL of the horrid, barbarous and cruel Massacre of
her Husband, Mr. SCOTT, and four Children, and a Lad named BALL, who were most
inhumanly murdered by the blood-thirsty SAVAGES, on the fatal Evening of the
Twenty-ninth of JUNE. -- With some Account of the very remarkable and
providential Manner of her finding the Track in the Wilderness, which led to
her Friends; it being wonderfully discovered to her by two beautiful Birds
which fluttered close by her, and directed her to a Valley, which, had she
missed of would have led her several Hundred Miles astray.

BOSTON: Printed by E. RUSSELL, next Lib. Pole, 1786.

THE EDITOR'S PREFACE TO THIS THIRD EDITION. To the serious and pious READER,
FRIENDS,
AMONG the many remarkable and surprising Instances of the infinite Goodness of
DIVINE PROVIDENCE, afforded to those who place an entire Dependence thereon,
perhaps the following instructing and entertaining NARRATIVE of Facts, which is
related by Mrs. SCOTT, may not seem altogether unworthy the Attention of the
PUBLIC; and, by recording the same, the Publisher thinks he may be a Means not
only of gratifying the Curiosity, but of serving the spiritual Interest of the
READER: If he should, by this Publication, effect either of those Purposes, he
will feel a peculiar Satisfaction, and think himself, in a great Measure,
compensated for his Trouble and Expense.

The EDITOR.
BOSTON, Jan. 1786.
A serious FRIEND has selected a Number of Passages of sacred Writ, which the
Editor has thought proper to insert for the Benefit of the pious Reader, as he
thinks they are very applicable to the unhappy Person who is the Subject of the
following NARRATIVE.
The Passages alluded to are as follow.

Psalm l. Verse 15. Call upon me in the Day of Trouble: I will deliver thee,
and thou shall glorify me.

Ibid, cvii.35, 36. He turns the Wilderness into a standing Water, and dry
Ground into Water-Springs. And there he makes the Hungry to dwell, that they
may prepare a City for Habitation.

Ibid, cxvi.6, 7, 8, 12. The LORD preserves the Simple: I was brought low, and
he helped me. -- Return unto thy Rest, O my Soul; for the LORD has dealt
bountifully with me -- For thou have delivered my Soul from Death, mine Eyes
from Tears, and my Feet from falling. -- What shall I render unto the LORD for
all his Benefits toward me? -- I will take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon
the Name of the LORD.

Ibid, cxxi.1, 2, 7, 8. I will lift up mine Eyes unto the Hills from whence
comes my Help. -- My Help comes from the LORD which made Heaven and Earth. --
The LORD shall preserve thee from all Evil: He shall preserve thy Soul. -- The
LORD shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in from this Time and forever.

Ibid, cxxvi.3, 4. The LORD has done great Things for us, whereof we are glad.
-- Turn again our Captivity, O LORD, as the Streams in the South.

Job v.19. He shall deliver thee in six Troubles: Yea, in seven there shall no
Evil touch thee.

PSALM cxx. Verse 1, 5, 6, 7.

In my Distress I cried unto the LORD, and he heard me. -- Woe is me, that I
sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the Tents of K^dar! -- My Soul has long
dwelt with him that hates Peace. -- I am for Peace: But when I speak, they are
for War.

Ibid, cxxiv.6, 7, 8. Blessed be the LORD who has not given me as a Prey to
their Teeth. -- My Soul is escaped as a Bird out of the Snare of the Fowlers:
The Snare is broken and I have escaped. -- My help is in the LORD, who made
Heaven and Earth.

A NARRATIVE, etc.
ON Wednesday the Twenty-Ninth Day of June, 1785, late in the Evening, a large
Company of armed Men passed the House, on their Way to Kentucky; some Part of
whom encamped within two Miles. Mr. Scott living on a Frontier Part, generally
made the Family watchful; but on this calamitous Day, after so large a Body of
Men had passed, shortly after Night, he lay down in his Bed, and imprudently
left one of the Doors of his House open; the Children were also in Bed and
asleep. Mrs. Scott was nearly undressed, when, to her unutterable Astonishment
and Horror, she saw rushing in through the Door that was left open, painted
Savages with presented Arms, raising a hideous Shriek; -- Mr. Scott being
awake, instantly jumped out of his Bed, but was immediately fired at: He forced
his Way through the Middle of the Enemy and got out of the Door, but fell a few
Paces from thence. An Indian seized Mrs. Scott and ordered her to a particular
Spot and not to move; others stabbed and cut the Throats of the three youngest
Children in their Bed, and afterward lifted them up and dashed them down on
the Floor, near the Mother; the eldest, a beautiful Girl of eight Years old,
awoke and escaped out of the Bed, and ran to her Parent, and, with the most
plaintive Accents, cried, 'O Mamma! Mamma! save me!' The Mother, in the deepest
Anguish of Spirit and with a Flood of Tears, entreated the Savages to spare her
Child; but with a brutal Fierceness, they tomahawked and stabbed her in the
Mother's Arms. Adjacent to Mr. Scott's Dwelling House, another Family lived, of
the name of Ball. The Indians also attacked them at the same Instant they did
Mr. Scott's; but the Door being shut, the Enemy fired into the House through an
Opening between two Logs, and killed a young Lad, and then essayed to force the
Door open; but a surviving Brother fired through the Door, and the Enemy
desisted and went off: The remaining Part of the Family ran out of the House
and escaped. In Mr. Scott's House were four good Rifles well loaded, and a
great Quantity of Clothing and Furniture, Part of which belonged to People
that had left it on their Way to Kentucky. The Indians loaded themselves with
the Plunder, being thirteen in Number, then speedily made off, and continued
traveling all Night; next Morning their Chief allotted to each Man his Share
and detached Nine of the Party to steal Horses from the Inhabitants on Clinch.

The Eleventh Day after Mrs. Scott's Captivity, the four Indians that had her
in Charge stopped at a Place of Rendezvous, and to hunt, being now in great
want of Provisions. Three went out, and the Chief, being an old Man, was left
to take Care of the Prisoner, who, by this Time expressed a Willingness to
proceed to the Indian Towns, which seemed to have the desired Effect of
lessening her Keeper's Vigilance. In the Daytime, as the old Man was graining
a Deer Skin, the Captive, pondering on her Situation, and anxiously looking for
an Opportunity to make her Escape, took the Resolution, and going to the Indian
carelessly, asked Liberty to go a small Distance to a Stream of Water, to wash
the Blood off her Apron, that had remained besmeared since the fatal Night of
the Murder of her little Daughter. He said to her in the English Tongue, "Go
along;" she then passed by him, his Face being in a contrary Direction from
that she was going, and he very busy. She, after getting to the Water,
proceeded on without Delay, made to a high barren Mountain, and traveled until
late in the Evening, when she came down to the Valley, in search of the Track
she had been taken along; hoping thereby to find the Way back, without the
Risque of being lost, and perishing with Hunger in uninhabited Parts.

On coming across the Valley to the Riverside, supposed to be the Easterly
Branch of Kentucky-River, she observed in the Sand, Tracks of two Men, that had
gone up the River, and had just returned. -- She concluded these to have been
her Pursuers, which excited Emotions of Gratitude and Thankfulness to Divine
Providence for so timeous a Deliverance. Being without any Provisions, having
no kind of Weapon or Tool to assist her in getting any, and being almost
destitute of Clothing, also knowing that a vast Tract of rugged high Mountains
intervened, between where where she was and the Inhabitants Eastwardly; and the
Distance of the Kentucky Settlements unknown, and she almost as ignorant as a
Child of the Method of steering through the Woods, excited painful Sensations.
-- But certain Death, either by Hunger or by wild Beasts, seemed preferrable,
rather than to be in the Power of Beings who had excited in her Mind such
Horror. She addressed Heaven for Protection, and taking Courage, proceeded
onward. After traveling three Days she had nearly met with the Indians, as she
supposed, that had been sent to Clinch to steal Horses, but providentially
hearing their approach, concealed herself among the Cane, until the Enemy had
passed. This giving a fresh Alarm, and her Mind being filled with
Consternation, she got lost, proceeding backwards and forwards for several
Days: At length she came to a River, that seemed to come from the East*
concluding it was Sandy-River, she resolved to trace it to its Source, which is
adjacent to the Clinch Settlement. After proceeding up the River several Days,
she came to where the River runs through the Great Laurel Mountain, where is a
prodigious Water-Fall, and numerous high craggy Clifts along the Water-Edge;
that Way seemed impassable, the Mountain steep and difficult: However, our
mournful Traveller concluded that the latter Way was the best. She therefore
ascended for some Time, but coming to a Range of inaccessible Rocks, she turned
her Course toward the Mountain and the Riverside; after getting into a deep
Gulley, and passing over several high steep Rocks, she reached the Riverside,
where to her inexpressible Affliction, she found that a perpendicular Rock, or
rather one that hung over, of Fifteen or Twenty Feet high, formed the Bank.
Here a solemn Pause took Place; she essayed to return, but the Height of the
steep Rocks she had descended over prevented her. She then returned to the Edge
of the Precipice, and viewed the Bottom of it as the certain Place to end all
her Troubles, or remain on the Top to pine away with Hunger, or be devoured by
wild Beasts. After serious Meditation, and devout Exercises, she determined on
leaping from the Height, and accordingly jumped off. Although the Place she had
to alight on, was covered with uneven Rocks, not a Bone was broken; but being
exceeding-stunned with the Fall, she remained unable to proceed for some Space
of Time. The dry Season caused the River to be shallow -- she traveled in it,
where she could, by its Edge, until she got through the Mountain, which, she
concluded was several Miles. After this, as she was traveling along the Bank
of the River, a venomous Snake bit her on the Ankle: She had Strength to kill
it, and knowing its Kind, concluded that Death must soon, overtake her. By this
time Mrs. Scott was reduced to a mere Skeleton, with Fatigue, Hunger and Grief;
probably this State of her Body was the Means of preserving her from the
Effects of the Poison; be that as it may, so it was, that very little Pain
suceeeded the Bite, and what little Swelling there was fell into her Feet.

Our Wanderer now left the River, and after proceeding a good Distance, she
came to where the Valley parted into two, each leading a different Course. Here
a painful Suspense again took Place: A forlorn Creature almost exhausted and
certain, if she was far led out of the Way, she should never see a human
Creature. During this Soliloquy, a beautiful Bird passed close by her,
fluttering along the Ground, and went out of Sight up one of the Valleys. This
drew her Attention, and whilst considering what it might mean, another Bird of
the same Appearance, flattered past her, and took the same Valley the other had
done. This determined her Choice of the Way; and, in two Days, which was on the
Eleventh Day of August, she reached that Settlement on Clinch called
New-Garden: Whereas (she has since been informed by Woods-Men) had she taken
the other Valley, it would have led her back to the Ohio. Mrs. Scott relates,
that the Indians told her, that the Party was composed of four different
Nations, two of whom she thinks they named Delawares and Mingoes.

She further relates, that, wandering from the Tenth of July to the Eleventh of
August, she had no other Subsistence but chewing and swallowing the Juice of
young Cane-Stalks, Sassafras-Leaves, and some other Plants she did not know the
Name of; that, on her Journey, she saw Buffaloes, Serpents, Elks, Deers, and
frequently Bears and Wolves; not one of which offered her the least Harm. One
Day a Bear came near her, with a young Fawn in his Mouth, and, on discovering
her, he dropped his Prey and run off. Hunger prompted her to go and take the
Flesh and eat it; but, on Reflection, she desisted, thinking the Bear might
return and devour her: Besides, she had an Aversion to taste raw Flesh. -- Mrs.
Scott continues in a low State of Health, and remains inconsolable for the Loss
of her Family, particularly bewailing the cruel Death of her little Daughter.

A true and faithful NARRATIVE of the surprising CAPTIVITY and remarkable
DELIVERANCE of Captain ISAAC STEWART, who was taken Prisoner by the INDIANS
near Fort-Pitt, in the Year 1764, in Company with a great Number- of others, who
were all inhumanly and barbarously massacred and burnt alive by those cruel and
blood-thirsty SAVAGES. -- Together with a particular ACCOUNT of his Travels, in
Company with a Welchman and Spaniard, up the Missisippi and Red-Rivers, and
giving a Description of the Richness of that most beautiful Country, the Gold
found in Brooks, Rivulets, etc. etc. Taken from his own Mouth in the Year 1782.
I Was taken Prisoner about fifty Miles to the Westward of Fort-Pitt, about
Eighteen Years ago, by the Indians, and carried away by them to the Wabash,
with many more White Men, who were executed with Circumstances of horrid
Barbarity; it was my good Fortune to call forth the Sympathy of what is called
the Good Woman of the Town, who was permitted to redeem me from the Flames, by
giving, as my Ransom, a Horse.

After remaining two Years in Bondage amongst the Indians, a Spaniard came to
the Nation, having been sent from Mexico on Discoveries. He made Application to
the Chiefs for redeeming me, and another White Man who was in a like Situation,
a Native of Wales, named John Davey; which they complied with, and we took our
Departure in Company with the Spaniard, and traveled to the Westward, crossing
the Missisippi, near the River-Rouge, or Red-River, up which we traveled seven
Hundred Miles, when we came to a Nation of Indians remarkable white, and whose
Hair was of a redish Color, at least mostly so; they lived on the Banks of a
small River that empties itself into the Red River, which is called the
River-Post. In the Morning of the Day after our Arrival among these Indians,
the Welchman informed me that he determined to tarry with them, giving as a
Reason that he understood their Language, it being very little different from
the Welsh. My Curiosity was excited very much by this Information, and I went
with my Companion to the Chief Men of the Town, who informed him (in a Language
that I had no Knowledge of, and which had no Affinity to that of any other
Indian Tongue that I ever heard) that the Forefathers of this Nation came from
a Foreign Country, and landed on the East Side of the Missisippi, describing
particularly the Country now called West-Florida, and that on the Spaniards
taking Possession of Mexico, they fled to their then abode; and, as a Proof of
the Truth of what they advanced, they bro't forth Rolls of Parchment carefully
tied up in Otter-Skins, on which were large Characters written with blue Ink;
the Characters I did not understand, and the Welchman being unacquained with
Letters, even of his own Language, I was not able to know the Meaning of the
Writing. They were a bold, hardy, intrepid People, very warlike, and the Women
beautiful, when compared with other Indians.

We left this Nation, after being kindly treated, and requested to remain
amongst them, being only two in Number, the Spaniard and myself, and we
continued our Course up the Waters of the Red-River, until we came to a Nation
of Indians, called Windots, that had never seen a White Man before, and who
were unacquainted with the Use of Firearms. On our Way we came to a
transparent Stream, which we, to our great Surprise, found to descend into the
Earth, and, at the Foot of a Ridge of Mountains, disappeared; it was remarkable
clear, and near to it we found the Bones of two Animals, of such a Size that a
Man might walk under the Ribs, and the Teeth were very heavy.

The Nation of Indians that had never seen a White Man, lived near the Source
of the Red-River, and there the Spaniard discovered to his great Joy, Gold-Dust
in the Brooks and Rivulets, and being informed by the Indians that a Nation
lived further West, who were very rich, and whose Arrows were pointed with
Gold, we set out in hope of reaching their Country, and we traveled about five
Hundred Miles until we came to a Ridge of Mountains, which we crossed, and from
which the Streams run due West, and at the Foot of the Mountains the Spaniard
gave Proofs of Joy and great Satisfaction, having found Gold in great
Abundance. I was not acquainted with the Nature of the Ore, but I lifted up
what he called Gold-Dust from the Bottom of the little Rivulets issuing from
the Cavities of the Rocks, and it had a yellowish cast, and was remarkable
heavy; but so much was the Spaniard's Satisfaction, he relinquished his Plan of
a Journey, convinced he had found a gold Country.

On our return we took a different Rout and when we reached the Missisippi, we
went in a Canoe to the Mouth of Missouri, where we found a Spanish Post; there
I was discharged by the Spaniard, went to the Country of the Chickesaws, from
thence to the Cherokees, and soon reached Ninety-Six, in South Carolina.

It is impossible for me to give an adequate Description of the Country on the
South-West Side of the Missisippi; I was charmed with the Richness of the Land
on the North-East Side of that noble River, until I beheld the other Country;
the Luxuriance of the Soil, the Richness of the Herbage, the Majesty of the
Forests, and the Fertility of the Meadows, which in many Places are of amazing
extent, and covered with rich Grass and Clover, in Height at least three Feet;
the Woods are full of Deer, Elk, Buffalo, etc. and, in the Autumn, Grapes and
Apples are every where to be found; in short, every other that Country known in
Europe by the Name of Louisiana; the air is pure and serene, and the Climate as
healthy as any in the World; Nature has been wonderfully bountiful in
furnishing Water in the greatest Abundance, and in many Places Acres of ground
are covered with Salt-Rock, where Animals go at certain Seasons, and it is
extremely pleasing to observe the Marks of the Tongues of various wild Beasts
on the Surface of the Salt-Rocks.

No Country in the World is better calculated for the culture of Rice, Indigo
and Tobacco, when it is considered that, on the Banks of the Missouri and the
Red River Settlements, a Quantity of these Articles might be made sufficient to
supply all Europe; and, for 1000 Miles from the Confluence of each River, Ships
could be built, and for 3 Months of the Year, the current runs with such
Rapidity that they could go down the Stream 100 Miles in 24 Hours.


