AN ORATION, DELIVERED BEFORE THE AMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY, HELD IN
PHILADELPHIA ON THE 27th OF FEBRUARY, 1786; CONTAINING AN ENQUIRY INTO THE
INFLUENCE OF PHYSICAL CAUSES UPON THE MORAL FACULTY.

BY BENJAMIN RUSH, M. D. AND PROFESSOR OF CHEMISTRY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF
PENNSYLVANIA.

HUMAN KNOWLEDGE, under the present circumstances of our beings and
Constitutions, may be carried much further than it has hitherto been, if men
would employ all their industry, and labor of thought, in improving the means
of discovering truth.

MORALITY is the science, and business of mankind.

LOCK. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY CHARLES CIST. M,DCC,LXXXVI.

At a Meeting of the American Philosophical Society, February 27th, 1786.
On motion, Resolved unanimously, That the Thanks of the Society be given to
Dr. Benjamin Rush, for his Oration, On the Influence of Physical Causes on the
Moral Faculty, delivered before the Society this Evening, and that the
Secretaries be directed to request the Doctor to furnish them with a Copy of
the said Oration for Publication.

Extract from the Minutes, JAMES HUTCHINSON, Secretary.

TO HIS EXCELLENCY BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, ESQUIRE. PRESIDENT OF THE SUPREME EXECUTIVE
COUNCIL OF PENNSYLVANIA, THE FRIEND AND BENEFACTOR OF MANKIND, THE FOLLOWING
ORATION IS RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED, BY HIS GRATEFUL FRIEND, AND HUMBLE SERVANT,
THE AUTHOR.

PREFACE.
MOST of the facts, together with the principles contained in the following
Oration, were committed to paper above seven years ago. -- If, they have the
same operation upon the mind of the reader, that they had upon the mind of the
author, they will at first be doubted -- afterward believed, and finally they
will be propagated. He is so far from proposing physical influence, as a
substitute for religious, moral, or rational instruction, that he offers it
only as a reinforcement to the obligations of reason and religion; or rather,
as a neglected part of christianity. He is sensible that in this new, and
difficult enquiry, he has only performed the drudgery of a pioneer: Those who
come after him upon this subject, will find a way opened, for extensive and
important observations, and will probably enjoy with more certainty, than the
author, the fruits of their labors.

GENTLEMEN,
IT was for the laudable purpose of exciting a spirit of emulation and enquiry,
among the members of our body, that the founders of our Society, instituted an
annual oration. The task of preparing, and delivering this exercise, has
devolved, once more, upon me. I have submitted to it, -- not because I thought
myself capable of fulfilling your intentions, but because I wished, by a
testimony of my obedience to your requests, to atone for my long absence from
the temple of science.

THE subject upon which I am to have the honor of addressing you this evening,
is An enquiry into the influence of physical causes upon the moral faculty.

BY the moral faculty I mean a power in the human mind of distinguishing and
choosing good and evil; or, in other words, virtue and vice. It is a native
principle, and though it is capable of improvement by experience and
reflection, it is not derived from either of them. -- St. Paul, and Cicero,
give us the most perfect account of it that is to be found in modern or ancient
authors. For when the Gentiles, (says St. Paul) which have not the law, do by
nature the things contained in the law, these, having not the law, are a law
unto themselves; which show the works of the law written in their hearts, their
consciences also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing,
or else excusing one another Romans II. 14. 15.
.

THE words of Cicero are as follow -- Est igitur haec, judices, non scripta,
sed nata lex, quam non didicimus, accepimus, legimus, verum ex natura ipsa
arripuimus, hausimus, expressimus, ad quam non docti, sed facti, non instituti,
sed imbuti sumus. Oration pro Milone.
This faculty is often confounded with conscience, which is a distinct and
independent power of the mind. This is evident from the passage quoted from the
writings of St. Paul, in which conscience is said to be the witness that
accuses, or excuses us, of a breach of the law written in our hearts. The moral
faculty is what the schoolmen call the "regula regulans," -- the conscience is
their "regula regulata." Or, to speak in more modern terms, the moral faculty
performs the office of a lawgiver, while the business of conscience is to
perform the duty of a judge. The moral faculty is to the conscience, what taste
is to the judgment, and sensation to perception. It is quick in its operations,
and like the sensitive plant, acts without reflection, while conscience follows
with deliberate steps, and measures all her actions, by the unerring square of
right and wrong. The moral faculty exercises itself upon the actions of others.
It approves even in books, of the virtues of a Trajan, and disapproves of the
vices of a Marius, while conscience confines its operations, only to its own
actions. These two powers of the mind are generally in an exact ratio to each
other, but they sometimes exist in different degrees in the same person. Hence
we often find conscience in its full vigor, with a diminished tone, or total
absence of the moral faculty.

IT has long been a question among metaphysicians, whether the conscience be
seated in the will or in the understanding. The controversy can only be settled
by admitting the will to be the seat of the moral faculty, and the
understanding to be the seat of the conscience. The mysterious nature of the
union of those two moral principles with the will and understanding, is a
subject foreign to the business of the present enquiry. --

AS I consider virtue and vice to consist in action, and not in opinion, and as
this action has its seat in the will, and not in the conscience, I shall
confine my enquiries chiefly to the influence of physical causes upon that
moral power of the mind, which is connected with volition, although many of
these causes act likewise upon the conscience, as I shall show hereafter. --
The state of the moral faculty is visible in actions, which affect the
well-being of society. The state of the conscience is invisible, and therefore
removed beyond our investigation.

THE moral faculty has received different names from different authors. It is
the "moral sense" of Dr. Hutchison -- the "sympathy" of Dr. Adam Smith -- the
"moral instinct" of Rousseau -- and "the light that lights every man that
comes into the world" of St. John. I have adopted the term of moral faculty
from Dr. Beattie, because I conceive they convey with the most perspicuity, the
idea of a power in the mind, of choosing good and evil.

OUR books of medicine contain many records of the effects of physical causes
upon the memory -- the imagination -- and the judgment. In some instances we
behold their operation only on one, -- in others on two, -- and in many cases
upon the whole of these faculties. Their derangement has received different
names, according to the number or nature of the faculties that are affected.
The loss of memory has been called "amnesia" -- false judgment upon one subject
has been called "melancholia" -- false judgment upon all subjects has been
called "mania" -- and a defect of all the three intellectual faculties that
have been mentioned, has received the name of "amentia." Persons who labor
under the derangement, or want of these powers of the mind, are considered,
very properly, as subjects of medicine; and there are many cases upon record
that prove, that their diseases have yielded to the healing art.

IN order to illustrate the effects of physical causes upon the moral faculty,
it will be necessary first to show their effects upon the memory -- the
imagination -- and the judgment; and at the same time to point out the analogy
between their operation upon the intellectual powers of the mind, and the moral
faculty.

1. Do we observe a connection between the intellectual powers, and the degrees
of consistency and firmness of the brain in infancy and childhood? -- The same
connection has been observed between the strength as well as the progress of
the moral faculty in children.

2. Do we observe a certain size of the brain, and a peculiar cast of features,
such as the prominent eye, and the aquiline nose, to be connected with
extraordinary portions of genius? -- We observe a similar connection between
the figure and temperament of the body, and certain moral faculties. -- Hence
we often ascribe good temper and benevolence to corpulency, and irascibility to
sanguineous habits. Caesar thought himself safe in the friendship of the
"sleek-headed" Anthony and Dolabella, but was afraid to trust to the
professions of the slender Cassius.

3. Do we observe certain degrees of the intellectual faculties to be
hereditary in certain families? The same observation has been frequently
extended to moral qualities -- Hence we often find certain virtues and vices as
peculiar to families, through all their degrees of consanguinity, and duration,
as a peculiarity of voice -- complexion -- or shape.

4. Do we observe instances of a total want of memory -- imagination -- and
judgment, either from an original defect in the stamina of the brain, or from
the influence of physical causes? -- The same unnatural defect is sometimes
observed, and probably from the same causes, of a moral faculty. The celebrated
Servin, whose character is drawn by the Duke of Sully in his memoirs, appears
to be an instance of the total absence of the moral faculty, while the chasm,
produced thereby in his mind, seems to have been filled up by a more than
common extension of every other power of his mind. I shall beg leave to repeat
the history of this prodigy of vice and knowledge. -- Let the reader represent
to himself a man of a genius so lively, and of an understanding so extensive,
as rendered him scarce ignorant of any thing that could be known -- of so vast
and ready a comprehension, that he immediately made himself master of whatever
he attempted, -- and of so prodigious a memory, that he never forgot what he
once learned. He possessed all parts of philosophy, and the mathematics,
particularly fortification and drawing. Even in theology he was so well
skilled, that he was an excellent preacher, whenever he had a mind to exert
that talent, and an able disputant, for and against the reformed religion
indifferently. He not only understood Greek -- Hebrew -- and all the languages
which we call learned, but also all the different jargons, or modern dialects.
He accented and pronounced them so naturally, and so perfectly imitated the
gestures and manners both of the several nations of Europe, and the particular
provinces of France, that he might have been taken for a native of all, or of
any of these countries: and this quality he applied to counterfeit all sorts of
persons, wherein he succeeded wonderfully. He was moreover the best comedian,
and the greatest droll that perhaps ever appeared. He had a genius for poetry,
and had wrote many verses. He played upon almost all instruments -- was a
perfect master of music -- and sung most agreeably and justly. He likewise
could say mass, for he was of a disposition to do, as well as to know, all
things. His body was perfectly well suited to his mind. He was light, nimble,
and dexterous, and fit for all exercises. He could ride well, and in dancing,
wrestling, and leaping, he was admired. There are not any recreative games that
he did not know, and he was skilled in almost all mechanic arts. But now for
the reverse of the medal. Here it appeared; that he was treacherous -- cruel --
cowardly -- deceitful -- a liar -- a cheat -- a drunkard and a glutton -- a
sharper in play -- immersed in every species of vice -- a blasphemer -- an
atheist. -- In a word -- in him might be found all the vices that are contrary
to nature -- honor -- religion -- and society, -- the truth of which he himself
evinced with his latest breath; for he died in the flower of his age, in a
common brothel, perfectly corrupted by his debaucheries, and expired with the
glass in his hand, cursing, and denying God. Vol. III. p. 216. 217.


IT was probably a state of the human mind such as has been described, that our
Savior alluded to in the disciple, who was about to betray him, when he called
him "a devil." Perhaps the essence of depravity in infernal spirits, consists
in their being wholly devoid of a moral faculty. In them the will has probably
lost the power of choosing, Milton seems to have been of this opinion. Hence,
after ascribing repentance to Satan, he makes him declare, " Farewell remorse:
all good to me is lost,
" Evil be thou, my good." --
PARADISE LOST, Book IV.


as well as the inclination of enjoying moral good. It is true, we read of
their trembling in a belief of the existence of a God, and of their
anticipating future punishment by asking, whether they were to be tormented
before their time: But this is the effect of conscience, and hence arises
another argument in favor of this judicial power of the mind, being distinct
from the moral faculty. It would seem as if the Supreme Being had preserved the
moral faculty in man from the ruins of his fall, on purpose to guide him back
again to Paradise, and at the same time had constituted the conscience, both in
men and in fallen spirits, a kind of royalty in his moral empire, on purpose to
show his property in all intelligent creatures, and their original resemblance
to himself. Perhaps the essence of moral depravity in man consists in a total,
but temporary suspension of the power of conscience. Persons in this situation
are emphatically said in the scriptures to be "past feeling" -- and to have
their consciences seared, with a "hot iron" -- they are likewise said to be
"twice dead" -- that is, the same torpor or moral insensibility, has seized
both the moral faculty and the conscience.

5. Do we ever observe instances of the existence of only one of the three
intellectual powers of the mind that have been named, in the absence of the
other two? We observe something of the same kind with respect to the moral
faculty. I once knew a man, who discovered no one mark of reason, who possessed
the moral sense or faculty in so high a degree, that he spent his whole life in
acts of benevolence. He was not only inoffensive, (which is not always the case
with idiots) but he was kind, and affectionate to every body. He had no ideas
of time, but what were suggested to him by the returns of the stated periods
for public worship, in which he appeared to take great delight. He spent
several hours of every day in devotion, in which he was so careful to be
private, that he was once found in the most improbable place in the world for
that purpose, viz. in an oven.

6. Do we observe the memory, the imagination and the judgment, to be affected
by diseases, particularly by fevers, and madness? Where is the physician, who
has not seen the moral faculty affected from the same causes! How often do we
see the temper wholly changed by a fit of sickness! And how often do we hear
persons of the most delicate virtue, utter speeches in the delirium of a fever,
that are offensive to decency, or good manners! I have heard a well attested
history of a clergyman of the most exemplary moral character, who spent the
last moments of a fever which deprived him both of his reason and his life, in
profane cursing and swearing. I once attended a young woman in a nervous fever,
who discovered after her recovery, a loss of her former habits of veracity. Her
memory (a defect of which, might be suspected of being the cause of this vice)
was in every respect as perfect as it was before the attack of the fever, I
have selected this case from many others, which have come under my notice, in
which the moral faculty appeared to be impaired by diseases, particularly by
the typhus of Dr. Cullen, and by those species of palsy which affect the brain.
The instances of immorality in maniacs, who were formerly distinguished for
the opposite character, are so numerous, and well known* that it will not be
necessary to select any cases, to establish the truth of the proposition
contained under this head.

7. Do we observe any of the three intellectual powers that have been named,
enlarged by diseases? Patients in the delirium of a fever, often discover
extraordinary flights of imagination, and madmen often astonish us with their
wonderful acts of memory. The same enlargement, sometimes, appears in the
operations of the moral faculty. I have more than once heard the most sublime
discourses on morality in the cell of an hospital, and who has not seen
instances of patients in acute diseases, discovering degrees of benevolence and
integrity, that were not natural to them in the ordinary course of their lives?

8. Do we ever observe a partial insanity, or false perception on one subject,
while the judgment is sound and correct, upon all others? We perceive, in some
instances, a similar defect in the moral faculty. There are persons who are
moral in the highest degree, as to certain duties, who nevertheless live under
the influence of some one vice. I knew an instance of a woman, who was
examplary in her obedience to every command of the moral law, except one. She
could not refrain from stealing. What made this vice the more remarkable was,
that she was in easy circumstances, and not addicted to extravagance in any
thing. Such was her propensity to this vice, that when she could lay her hands
upon nothing more valuable, she would often, at the table of a friend, fill her
pockets secretly with bread. As a proof that her judgment was not affected by
this defect in her moral faculty, she would both confess and lament her crime,
when detected in it.

9. Do we observe the imagination in many instances to be affected with
apprehensions of dangers that have no existence? In like manner we observe the
moral faculty to discover a sensibility to vice, that is by no means
proportioned to its degrees of depravity. How often do we see persons laboring
under this morbid sensibility of the moral faculty, refuse to give a direct
answer to a plain question, that related perhaps only to the weather, or to the
hour of the day, lest they should wound the peace of their minds, by telling a
falsehood!

10. Do dreams affect the memory -- the imagination -- and the judgment? Dreams
are nothing but incoherent ideas, occasioned by partial or imperfect sleep.
There is a variety in the suspension of the powers of the mind in this state of
the system. In some cases the imagination only is deranged in dreams -- in
others the memory is affected -- and in others the judgment. -- But there are
cases, in which the change that is produced in the state of the brain, by means
of sleep, affects the moral faculty likewise; hence we sometimes dream of doing
and saying things when asleep, which we shudder at, as soon as we awake. This
supposed defection from virtue, exists frequently in dreams where the memory
and judgment are scarcely impaired. It cannot therefore be ascribed to the
desertion of those two powers of the mind.

11. Do we read in the accounts of travelers of men, who in respect of
intellectual capacity and enjoyments, are but a few degrees above brutes? We
read likewise of a similar degradation of our species, in respect to moral
capacity and feeling. Here it will be necessary to remark, that the low degrees
of moral perception, that have been discovered in certain African and Russian
tribes of men, no more invalidate our proposition of the universal and
essential existence of a moral faculty in the human mind, than the low state of
their intellects prove, that reason is not natural to man. Their perceptions of
good and evil are in an exact proportion to their intellectual powers. But I
will go further, and admit with Mr. Lock, Essay concerning the Human
Understanding. Book I. Chap. III.
that some savage nations are totally devoid of the moral faculty, yet it will
by no means follow, that this was the original constitution of their minds. The
appetite for certain aliments is uniform among all mankind. Where is the nation
and the individual, in their primitive state of health, to whom bread is not
agreeable? But if we should find savages, or individuals, whose stomachs have
been so disordered by intemperance, as to refuse this simple and wholesome
article of diet, shall we assert, that this was the original constitution of
their appetites? -- By no means. As well might we assert, because savages
destroy their beauty by painting, and cutting their faces, that the principles
of taste do not exist naturally in the human mind. It is with virtue as with
fire. It exists in the mind, as fire does in certain bodies in a latent or
quiescent state. As collision renders the one sensible, so education renders
the other visible. It would be as absurd to maintain, because olives become
agreeable to many people from habit, that we have no natural appetites for any
other kind of food, as to assert that any part of the human species exist
without a moral principle, because in some of them, it has wanted causes to
excite it into action, or has been perverted by example. There are appetites
that are wholly artificial. There are tastes so entirely vitiated, as to
perceive beauty in deformity. There are torpid and unnatural passions. Why,
under certain unfavorable circumstances, may there not exist also a moral
faculty in a state of sleep, or subject to mistakes?

THE only apology I shall make, for presuming to differ from that justly
celebrated oracle, who first unfolded to us a map of the intellectual world,
shall be, that the eagle eye of genius often darts its views beyond the notice
of facts, which are accommodated to the slender organs of perception of men,
who possess no other talent, than that of observation.

IT is not surprising, that Mr. Lock has confounded this moral principle with
reason, or that Lord Shaftsbury has confounded it with taste, since all three
of these faculties agree in the objects of their approbation, notwithstanding
they exist in the mind independent of each other. The favorable influence which
the progress of science and taste has had upon morals, can be ascribed to
nothing else, but to the perfect union that subsists in nature between the
dictates of reason -- of taste -- and of the moral faculty. Why has the spirit
of humanity made such rapid progress for some years past in the courts of
Europe? It is because kings and their ministers have been taught to reason upon
philosophical subjects. -- Why have indecency and profanity been banished from
the stage in London and Paris? It is because immorality is an offense against
the highly cultivated taste of the French and English nations.

IT must afford great pleasure to the lovers of virtue, to behold the depth and
extent of this moral principle in the human mind. Happily for the human race,
the intimations of duty and the road to happiness are not left to the slow
operations or doubtful inductions of reason, nor to the precarious decisions of
taste! Hence we often find the moral faculty in a state of vigor, in persons in
whom reason and taste exist in a weak, or in an uncultivated state. It is
worthy of notice likewise, that while second thoughts are best in matters of
judgment, first thoughts are always to be preferred in matters that relate to
morality. Second thoughts, in these cases, are generally parlies between duty
and corrupted inclinations. Hence Rousseau has justly said that a well
regulated moral instinct is the surest guide to happiness.

IT must afford equal pleasure to the lovers of virtue to behold, that our
moral conduct and happiness are not committed to the determination of a single
legislative power. -- The conscience, like a wise and faithful council of
revision, performs the office of a check upon the moral faculty, and thus
prevents the fatal consequences of immoral actions.

AN objection, I foresee, will arise to the doctrine of the influence of
physical causes upon the moral faculty, from its being supposed to favor the
opinion of the materiality of the soul. But I do not see that this doctrine
obliges us to decide upon the question of the nature of the soul, any more than
the facts which prove the influence of physical causes upon the memory -- the
imagination -- or the judgment. I shall however remark upon this subject, that
the writers in favor of the immortality of the soul have done that truth great
injury, by connecting it necessarily with its immateriality. The immortality of
the soul depends upon the will of the Deity, and not upon the supposed
properties of spirit. Matter is in its own nature as immortal as spirit. It is
resolvable by heat and mixture into a variety of forms; but it requires the
same Almighty hand to annihilate it, that it did to create it. I know of no
arguments to prove the immortality of the soul, but such as are derived from
the christian revelation. "Life and immortality are brought to light only
through the Gospel." 2 Timothy I. 10.
It would be as reasonable to assert, that the basin of the ocean is immortal,
from the greatness of its capacity to hold water; or that we are to live for
ever in this world, because we are afraid of dying, as to maintain the
immortality of the soul, from the greatness of its capacity for knowledge and
happiness, or from its dread of annihilation.

NOR let it be supposed, from any thing that has been said, that I entertain an
idea of the necessary influence of physical causes upon the freedom of the
will. I believe in the prescience of the Deity, because I conceive this
attribute to be inseparable from his perfections; and I believe in the freedom
of moral agency in man, because I conceive it to be essential to his nature as
a responsible being. In those cases where the moral faculty is deprived of its
freedom, by involuntary diseases, I conceive that man ceases as much to be a
subject of moral government, as he does to be a subject of civil government,
when he is deprived by involuntary diseases, of the use of his reason.

I REMARKED in the beginning of this discourse, that persons who were deprived
of the just exercise of memory -- imagination -- or judgment, were proper
subjects of medicine; and that there are many cases upon record which prove,
that the diseases from the derangement of these faculties, have yielded to the
healing art.

IT is perhaps only because the disorders of the moral faculty, have not been
traced to a connection with physical causes, that medical writers have
neglected to give them a place in their systems of nosology, and that so few
attempts have been hitherto made, to lessen or remove them by physical as well
as rational and moral remedies.

I SHALL not attempt to derive any support to my opinions, from the analogy of
the influence of physical causes upon the temper and conduct of brute animals.
The facts which I shall produce in favor of the action of these causes upon
morals in the human species, will, I hope, render unnecessary the arguments
that might be drawn from that quarter.

I AM aware, that in venturing upon this subject, I step upon untrodden ground.
-- I feel as AEneas did, when he was about to enter the gates of Avernus, but
without a Sybil to instruct me in the mysteries that are before me. I foresee,
that men who have been educated in the mechanical habits of adopting popular or
established opinions, will revolt at the doctrine I am about to deliver --
while men of sense and genius will hear my propositions with candor, and if
they do not adopt them, will commend that boldness of enquiry, that prompted me
to broach them.

I SHALL begin with an attempt to supply the defects of nosological writers, by
naming the partial or weakened action of the moral faculty, MICRONOMIA. The
total absence of this faculty, I shall call ANOMIA. By the law, referred to in
these new genera of vesaniae, I mean the law of nature written in the human
heart, and which we formerly quoted from the writings of St. Paul.

IN treating of the effects of physical causes upon the moral faculty, it might
help to extend our ideas upon this subject, to reduce virtues and vices to
certain species, and to point out the effects of particular causes, upon each
particular species of virtue and vice, but this would lead us into a field too
extensive for the limits of the present enquiry. I shall only hint at a few
cases, and have no doubt but the ingenuity of my auditors will supply my
silence, by applying the rest.

IT is immaterial, whether the physical causes that are to be enumerated, act
upon the moral faculty through the medium of the senses -- the passions -- the
memory -- or the imagination. Their influence is equally certain, whether they
act as remote, predisposing, or occasional causes.

1. THE effects of CLIMATE upon the moral faculty claim our first attention.
Not only individuals, but nations, derive a considerable part of their moral,
as well as intellectual character, from the different portions they enjoy of
the rays of the sun. Revenge -- levity timidity -- and indolence, tempered with
occasional emotions of benevolence, are the moral qualities of the inhabitants
of warm climates, while selfishness tempered with sincerity and integrity, form
the moral character of the inhabitants of cold countries. The state of the
weather, and the seasons of the year also, have a visible effect upon moral
sensibility. The month of November, in Great Britain, rendered gloomy by
constant fogs and rains, has been thought to favor the perpetration of the
worst species of murder, while the vernal sun, in middle latitudes, has been as
generally remarked for producing gentleness and benevolence.

2. THE effects of DIET upon the moral faculty are more certain, though less
attended to, than the effects of climate. Fullness of bread, we are told, was
one of the predisposing causes of the vices of the cities of the plain. The
fasts so often inculcated among the Jews, were intended to lessen the
incentives to vice; for pride -- cruelty -- and sensuality, are as much the
natural consequences of luxury, as apoplexies and palsies. But the quality as
well as the quantity of aliment, has an influence upon morals; hence we find
the moral diseases that have been mentioned, are most frequently the offspring
of animal food. The elegant prophet Isaiah seems to have been sensible of this,
when he ascribes such salutary effects to a temperate and vegetable diet.
Butter and honey shall he eat, says he, that he may know to refuse the evil,
and to choose the good. -- But we have many facts which prove the efficacy of a
vegetable diet upon the passions. Dr. Arbuthnot assures us, that he cured
several patients of irascible tempers, by nothing but a prescription of this
simple and temperate regimen.

3. THE effects of CERTAIN DRINKS upon the moral faculty are not less
observable, than upon the intellectual powers of the mind. Fermented liquors of
a good quality, and taken in a moderate quantity, are favorable to the virtues
of candor, benevolence and generosity; but when they are taken in excess, or
when they are of a bad quality, and drank even in a moderate quantity, they
seldom fail of rousing every latent spark of vice into action. The last of
these facts is so notorious, that when a man is observed to be ill-natured or
quarrelsome in Portugal, after drinking, it is common in that country to say,
that "he has drank bad wine." While occasional fits of intoxication produce ill
temper in many people, habitual drunkenness (which is generally produced by
distilled spirits) never fails to eradicate veracity and integrity from the
human mind. Perhaps this may be the reason why the Spaniards, in ancient times,
never admitted a man's evidence in a court of justice, who had been convicted
of drunkenness. -- Water is the universal sedative of turbulent of passions --
it not only promotes a general equanimity of temper, but it composes anger. I
have heard several well attested cases, of a draught of cold water having
suddenly composed this violent passion, after the usual remedies of reason had
been applied to no purpose.

4. EXTREME HUNGER produces the most unfriendly effects upon moral sensibility.
It is immaterial, whether it acts by inducing a relaxation of the solids, or an
acrimony of the fluids, or by the combined operation of both those physical
causes. The Indians in this country what their appetites for that savage
species of war, which is peculiar to them, by the stimulus of hunger; hence, we
are told, they always return meagre and emaciated from their military
excursions. In civilized life we often behold this sensation an overbalance for
the restraints of moral feeling; and perhaps this may be the reason, why
poverty, which is the most frequent parent of hunger, disposes so generally to
theft; for the character of hunger is taken from that vice -- It belongs to it
to break through stone walls. So much does this sensation predominate over
reason and moral feeling, that Cardinal De Retz suggests to politicians, never
to risk a motion in a popular assembly, however wise or just it may be,
immediately before dinner. -- That temper must be uncommonly guarded, which is
not disturbed by long abstinence from food. One of the worthiest men I ever
knew, who made his breakfast his principal meal, was peevish and disagreeable
to his friends and family, from the time he left his bed, till he sat down to
his morning repast, after which, cheerfulness sparkled in his countenance, and
he became the delight of all around him.

5. I HINTED formerly, in proving the analogy between the effects of DISEASES
upon the intellects, and upon the moral faculty, that the latter was frequently
impaired by fevers and madness. I beg leave to add further upon this head, that
not only fevers and madness, but the hysteria and hypochondriasis, as well as
all those states of the body, whether idiopathic or symptomatic, which are
accompanied with preternatural irritability -- sensibility -- torpor -- stupor
-- or mobility of the nervous system, dispose to vice, either of the body or of
the mind. It is in vain to attack these vices with lectures upon morality. They
are only to be cured by medicine, -- particularly by exercise, -- the cold
bath, -- and by a cold or a warm atmosphere. The young woman, whose case I
mentioned formerly, that lost her habit of veracity by a nervous fever,
recovered this virtue, as soon as her system recovered its natural tone, from
the cold weather which happily succeeded her fever.

6. IDLENESS is the parent of every vice. It is mentioned in the old testament
as another of the predisposing causes of the vices of the cities of the plain.
LABOR of all kinds, favors and facilitates the practice of virtue. The country
life is a happy life; chiefly, because its laborious employments are favorable
to virtue, and unfriendly to vice. It is a common practice, I have been told,
for the planters in the Southern States, to consign an house slave, who has
become vicious from idleness, to the drudgery of the field, in order to reform
him. The Bridewells and workhouses of all civilized countries prove, that LABOR
is not only a very severe, but the most benevolent of all punishments, in as
much as it is one of the most suitable means of reformation. Mr. Howard tells
us in his history of prisons, that in Holland it is a common saying, "Make men
work, and you will make them honest." And over the rasp and spin-house at
Groeningen, this sentiment is expressed (he tells us) by a happy motto --
"Vitiorum semina -- otium -- labor exhauriendum."
The effects of steady labor in early life, in creating virtuous habits, is
still more remarkable. The late Anthony Benezet of this city, whose benevolence
was the sentinel of the virtue, as well as of the happiness of his country,
made it a constant rule in binding out poor children, to avoid putting them
into wealthy families, but always preferred masters for them who worked
themselves, and who obliged these children to work in their presence. If the
habits of virtue, contracted by means of this apprenticeship to labor, are
purely mechanical, their effects are, nevertheless, the same upon the happiness
of society, as if they flowed from principle. The mind, moreover, when
preserved by these means from weeds, becomes a more mellow soil afterward, for
moral and rational improvement.

7. THE effects of EXCESSIVE SLEEP are intimately connected with the effects of
idleness, upon the moral faculty, -- hence we find that moderate, and even
scanty portions of sleep, in every part of the world, have been found to be
friendly, not only to health and long life, but in many instances to morality.
The practice of the Monks, who often sleep upon a floor, and who generally rise
with the sun, for the sake of mortifying their sensual appetites, is certainly
founded in wisdom, and has often produced the most salutary moral effects.

8. THE effects of BODILY PAIN upon the moral, are not less remarkable than
upon the intellectual powers of the mind. The late Dr. Gregory of the
university of Edinburgh, used to tell his pupils, that he always found his
perceptions quicker in a fit of the gout, than at any other time. The pangs
which attend the dissolution of the body, are often accompanied with
conceptions and expressions upon the most ordinary subjects, that discover an
uncommon elevation of the intellectual powers. The effects of bodily pain are
exactly the same in rousing and directing the moral faculty. Bodily pain, we
find, was one of the remedies employed in the old testament, for extirpating
vice and promoting virtue: and Mr. Howard tells us, that he saw it employed
successfully as a means of reformation, in one of the prisons which he visited.
If pain has a physical tendency to cure vice, I submit it to the consideration
of parents and legislators, whether moderate degrees of corporal punishments,
inflicted for a great length of time, would not be more medicinal in their
effects, than the violent degrees of them, which are of short duration.

9. Too much cannot be said in favor of CLEANLINESS, as a physical mean of
promoting virtue. The writings of Moses have been called by military men, the
best "orderly book" in the world. In every part of them we find cleanliness
inculcated with as much zeal, as if it was part of the moral, instead of the
levitical law. Now, it is well known, that the principal design of every
precept and rite of the ceremonial parts of the Jewish religion, was to prevent
vice, and to promote virtue. All writers upon the leprosy, take notice of its
connection with a certain vice. To this disease gross animal food, particularly
swine's flesh, and a dirty skin, have been thought to be predisposing causes --
hence the reason, probably, why pork was forbidden, and why ablutions of the
body and limbs were so frequently inculcated by the Jewish law. Sir John
Pringle's remarks, in his Oration upon Capt. Cook's Voyage, delivered before
the Royal Society in London, are very pertinent to this part of our subject. --
Cleanliness (says he) is conducive to health, but it is not so obvious, that it
also tends to good order and other virtues. Such (meaning the ship's crew) as
were made more cleanly, became more sober, -- more orderly, -- and more
attentive to duty, Mr. Addison, whose observations are seldom false, and never
trifling, tells us, that several vices, destructive both to body and mind, are
inconsistent with the habit of cleanliness. Spectator, No. 631.
The benefit to be derived by parents and schoolmasters from attending to these
facts, is too obvious to be mentioned.

10. I HOPE I shall be excused in placing SOLITUDE among the physical causes
which influence the moral faculty, when I add, that I confine its effects to
persons who are irreclaimable by rational or moral remedies. Mr. Howard informs
us, that the chaplain of the prison at Liege in Germany assured him, that the
most refractory and turbulent spirits, became tractable and submissive, by
being closely confined for four or five days. -- In bodies that are predisposed
to vice, the stimulus of cheerful, but much more of profane society and
conversation, upon the animal spirits, becomes an exciting cause, and like the
stroke of the flint upon the steel, renders the sparks of vice both active and
visible. By removing men out of the reach of this exciting cause, they are
often reformed, especially if they are confined long enough to produce a
sufficient chasm in their habits of vice. Where the benefit of reflection, and
instruction from books, can be added to solitude and confinement, their good
effects are still more certain. To this philosophers and poets in every age
have assented, by describing the life of a hermit as a life of passive virtue.

11. CONNECTED with solitude, as a mechanical means of promoting virtue,
SILENCE deserves to be mentioned in this place. The late Dr. Fothergill, in his
plan of education for that benevolent institution at Ackworth, which was the
last care of his useful life, says every thing that can be said in favor of
this necessary discipline, in the following words. To habituate children from
their early infancy, to silence and attention, is of the greatest advantage to
them, not only as a preparative to their advancement in a religious life, but
as the groundwork of a well cultivated understanding. To have the active minds
of children put under a kind of restraint -- to be accustomed to turn their
attention from external objects, and habituated to a degree of abstracted
quiet, is a matter of great consequence, and lasting benefit to them. Although
it cannot be supposed, that young and active minds are always engaged in
silence as they ought to be, yet to be accustomed thus to quietness, is no
small point gained toward fixing a habit of patience, and recollection, which
seldom forsakes those who have been properly instructed in this entrance of the
school of wisdom, during the residue of their days.

FOR the purpose of acquiring this branch of education, children cannot
associate too early, nor too often with their parents, or with their superiors
in age -- rank -- and wisdom.

12. THE effects of MUSIC upon the moral faculty, have been felt and recorded
in every country. Hence we are able to discover the virtues and vices of
different nations, by their tunes, as certainly as by their laws. The effects
of music, when simply mechanical, upon the passions, are powerful and
extensive. But it remains yet to determine the degrees of moral ecstasy, that
may be produced by an attack upon the ear. the reason, and the moral principle,
at the same time, by the combined powers of music and eloquence.

13. THE ELOQUENCE OF THE PULPIT is nearly allied to music in its effects upon
the moral faculty. It is true, there can be no permanent change in the temper,
and moral conduct of a man, that is not derived from the understanding and the
will; but we must remember, that these two powers of the mind are most
assailable, when they are attacked through the avenue of the passions; and
these, we know, when agitated by the powers of eloquence, exert a mechanical
action upon every power of the soul. Hence we find in every age and country,
where christianity has been propagated, the most accomplished orators have
generally been the most successful reformers of mankind. There must be a defect
of eloquence in a preacher, who with the resources for oratory, which are
contained in the old and new testaments, does not produce in every man who
hears him, at least a temporary love of virtue. I grant that the eloquence of
the pulpit alone, cannot change men into christians, but it certainly possesses
the power of changing brutes into men. Could the eloquence of the stage be
properly directed, it is impossible to conceive the extent of its mechanical
effects upon morals. The language and imagery of a Shakespeare, upon moral and
religious subjects, poured upon the passions and the senses, in all the beauty
and variety of dramatic representation! -- Who could resist, -- or describe
their effects?

14. ODORS of various kinds have been observed to act in the most sensible
manner upon the moral faculty. Brydone tells us, upon the authority of a
celebrated philosopher in Italy, that the peculiar wickedness of the people who
live in the neighborhood of AEtna and Vesuvius, is occasioned chiefly by the
smell of the sulphur and of the hot exhalations which are constantly discharged
from those volcanos. Agreeable odors, seldom fail to inspire serenity, and to
compose the angry spirits -- Hence the pleasure, and one of the advantages of a
flower garden. The smoke of tobacco is likewise of a sedative nature, and tends
not only to produce what is called a train in perception, but to hush the
agitated passions into silence and order. -- Hence the propriety of connecting
the pipe or segar and the bottle together, in public company.

15. IT is to be lamented, that no experiments have as yet been made, to
determine the effects of all the different species of AIRS, which chemistry has
lately discovered, upon the moral faculty. I have authority, from actual
experiments only, to declare, that DEPHLOGISTICATED AIR, when taken into the
lungs, produces cheerfulness -- gentleness -- and serenity of mind.

16. WHAT shall we say of the effects of MEDICINES upon the moral faculty? --
That many substances in the materia medica act upon the intellects, is well
known to physicians. Why should it be thought impossible for medicines, to act
in like manner upon the moral faculty? May not the earth contain in its bowels,
or upon its surface, antidotes to all our moral, as well as natural diseases?
-- Let those, who refuse to follow me in this conjecture, recollect, that moral
evil was introduced into our minds -- as well as natural evil into our bodies
-- by eating an apple.

LET it not be suspected from any thing that I have delivered, that I suppose
the influence of physical causes upon the moral faculty, renders the agency of
divine influence unnecessary to our moral happiness. I only maintain, that the
operations of the divine government are carried on in the moral, as in the
natural world, -- by the instrumentality of second causes. I have only trodden
in the footsteps of the inspired writers; for most of the physical causes I
have enumerated, are connected with moral precepts, or have been used as the
means of reformation from vice, in the old and new testaments. To the cases
that have been mentioned I shall only add, that Nebuchadnezzar was cured of his
pride, by means of solitude and a vegetable diet. -- Saul was cured of his evil
spirit, by means of David's harp -- and St. Paul expressly says, I keep my body
under, and bring it into subjection, left that by any means, when I have
preached to others, I myself should be a cast away. But I will go one step
further, and add in favor of divine influence upon the moral principle, that in
those extraordinary cases, where bad men are suddenly reformed, without the
instrumentality of physical -- moral -- or rational causes, I believe that the
organization of those parts of the body, which form the link that binds it to
the soul, undergoes a physical change St. Paul was suddenly transformed from a
persecutor, into a man of a gentle and amiable spirit. The manner in which this
change was effected upon his mind, he tells us in the following words --
Neither circumcision avails any thing, nor un-circumcision, but the new
creature. -- From hence forth let no man trouble me; for I bear in my body, the
marks of our Lord Jesus. Galatians, VI. 15. 17.
; and hence the expressions of a "new creature," which are made use of in the
scriptures to denote this change, are proper in a literal, as well as a
figurative sense. It is probably the beginning of that perfect renovation of
the human body, which is predicted by St. Paul in the following words -- For
our conversation is in heaven, -- from whence we look for the Savior, who
shall change our VILE BODIES, that they may be fashioned according to his own
glorious body.

I CANNOT help remarking under this head, that if the conditions of those parts
of the human body, which are connected with the soul, influence morals, the
same reason may be given for a virtuous education, that has been admitted for
teaching music and the pronunciation of foreign languages, in the early and
yielding state of those organs, which form the voice and speech. Such is the
effect of a moral education, that we often see its fruits in the advanced
stages of life, after the religious principles which were connected with it,
have been renounced. Just as we perceive the same care in a surgeon in his
attendance upon his patients, after the sympathy which first produced this
care, has ceased to operate upon his mind. -- The boasted morality of the
Deists, is I believe, in most cases, the offspring of habits, produced
originally by the principles and precepts of christianity. -- Hence appears the
wisdom of Solomon's advice -- Train up a child in the way he should go, and
when he is old he will not -- I had almost said, -- he cannot "depart from it."

THUS have I enumerated the principal causes, which act mechanically upon
morals. If, from the combined action of physical powers that are opposed to
each other, the moral faculty should become stationary, or if the virtue or
vice produced by them, should form a neutral quality, composed of both of them,
I hope it will not call in question the truth of our general propositions. I
have only mentioned the effects of physical causes in a simple state.

IT might help to enlarge our ideas upon this subject, to take notice of the
influence of the different stages of society -- of agriculture, and commerce --
of soil and situation -- of the different degrees of cultivation of taste, and
of the intellectual powers -- of the different forms of government -- and
lastly of the different professions and occupations of mankind, upon the moral
faculty; but as these act indirectly only, and by the intervention of causes
that are unconnected with matter, I conceive they are foreign to the business
of the present enquiry. If they should vary the action of the simple physical
causes in any degree, I hope it will not call in question the truth of our
general propositions, any more than the compound action of physical powers,
that are opposed to each other. There remain only a few more causes which are
of a compound nature, but so nearly related to those, which are purely
mechanical, that I shall beg leave to trespass upon your patience, by giving
them a place in my oration.

THE effects of IMITATION -- HABIT -- and ASSOCIATION upon morals, would
furnish ample matter for investigation. Considering how much the shape,
texture, and conditions of the human body, influence morals, I submit it to the
consideration of the ingenious, whether in our endeavors to imitate moral
examples, some advantage may not be derived, from our copying the features and
external manners of the originals. What makes the success of this experiment
probable is, that we generally find men, whose faces resemble each other, have
the same manners and dispositions. I infer the possibility of success in an
attempt to imitate originals in the manner that has been mentioned, from the
facility with which domestics acquire a resemblance to their masters and
mistresses, not only in manners, but in countenance, in those cases where they
are tied to them, by respect, and affection. -- Husbands and wives also, where
they possess the same species of face, under circumstances of mutual
attachment, often acquire a resemblance to each other.

FROM the general detestation in which hypocrisy is held both by good and bad
men, the mechanical effects of HABIT upon virtue, have not been sufficiently
explored. There are, I am persuaded, many instances, where virtues have been
assumed by accident, or necessity, which have become real from habit, and
afterward derived their nourishment from the heart. Hence the wisdom of
Hamlet's advice to his mother -- Assume a virtue, if you have it not,
That monster, custom, who all sense does eat,
Of habits evil, is angel, yet in this,
That to the use of actions fair and good,
He likewise gives a frock or livery,
That aptly is put on -- Refrain tonight,
And that shall lend a kind of easiness,
To the next abstinence; the next more easy,
For use can almost change the stamp of nature,
And master even the devil, or throw him out,
With wondrous potency.


THE influence of ASSOCIATION upon morals, opens an ample field for enquiry. It
is from this principle, that we explain the reformation from theft and
drunkenness in servants which we sometimes see produced by a draught of spirits
in which tartar emetic had been secretly dissolved. The recollection of the
pain and sickness excited by the emetic, naturally associates itself with the
spirits, so as to render them both equally the objects of aversion. It is by
calling in this principle only, that we can account for the conduct of Moses,
in grinding the golden calf into a powder, and afterward dissolving it
(probably by means of hepar sulphuris) in water, and compelling the children of
Israel to drink of it, as a punishment for their idolatry. This mixture is
bitter and nauseating in the highest degree. It could not be remembered
therefore, by them, without being associated with an equal abhorrence of their
folly and wickedness. The benefit of corporal punishments, when they are of a
short duration, depends in part upon their being connected by time and place,
with the crimes for which they are inflicted. Quick as the thunder follows the
lightning, if it were possible, should punishments follow crimes, and the
advantage of association would be more certain, if the spot where they were
committed, were made the theater of their expiation. It is from the effects of
this association, probably, that the change of place and company produced by
exile and transportation, has so often reclaimed bad men, after moral --
rational -- and physical means of reformation had been used to no purpose.

AS SENSIBILITY is the avenue to the moral faculty, every thing which tends to
diminish it, tends also, to injure morals. -- The Romans owed much of their
corruption to the sights of the contests of their gladiators, and of criminals,
with wild beasts. For these reasons, executions should never be public. Indeed,
I believe there are few public punishments of any kind, that do not harden the
hearts of spectators, and thereby lessen the natural horror which all crimes at
first excite in the human mind.

CRUELTY to brute animals is another means of destroying moral sensibility. The
ferocity of savages has been ascribed in part to their peculiar mode of
subsistence. Mr. Hogarth points out in his ingenious prints, the connection
between cruelty to brute animals in youth, and murder in manhood. The Emperor
Domitian prepared his mind by the amusement of killing flies, for all those
bloody crimes which afterward disgraced his reign. I am so perfectly satisfied
of the truth of a connection between morals, and humanity to brutes, that I
shall find it difficult to restrain my idolatry for that legislature, that
shall first establish a system of laws, to defend them from outrage and
oppression.

IN order to preserve the vigor of the moral faculty, it is of the utmost
consequence to keep young people as ignorant as possible of those crimes, that
are generally thought most disgraceful to human nature. Suicide, I believe, is
often propagated by means of newspapers. For this reason, I should be glad to
see the proceedings of our courts kept from the public eye, when they expose,
or punish monstrous vices.

THE last mechanical method of promoting morality that I shall mention, is to
keep sensibility alive, by a familiarity with scenes of distress from poverty
and disease. Compassion never awakens in the human bosom, without being
accompanied with a train of sister virtues -- hence the wise man justly
remarks, that By the sadness of the countenance, the heart is made better.

A LATE French writer in his prediction of events that are to happen in the
year 4000, says That mankind in that era shall be so far improved by religion
and government, that the sick and the dying, shall no longer be thrown together
with the dead, into splendid houses, but shall be relieved and protected in a
connection with their families and society. For the honor of humanity, an
institution A public dispensary.
destined for that distant period, has lately been founded in this city, that
shall perpetuate the year 1786 in the history of Pennsylvania. Here the feeling
heart -- the tearful eye -- and the charitable hand, may always be connected
together, and the flame of sympathy, instead of being extinguished in taxes, or
expiring in a solitary blaze by a single contribution, may be kept alive, by
constant exercise. There is a necessary connection between animal sympathy and
morals. The priest and the levite, in the new testament, would probably have
relieved the poor man who fell among thieves, had accident brought them near
enough to examine his wounds. The unfortunate Mrs. Bellamy was rescued from the
dreadful purpose of drowning herself, by nothing but the distress of a child,
rending the air with its cries for bread. It is probably owing in some measure
to the connection between morals and sympathy, that the fair sex in every age,
and country, have been more distinguished for virtue, than men -- for who ever
heard of a woman, devoid of humanity? --

LASTLY, ATTRACTION, COMPOSITION, and DECOMPOSITION, belong to the passions as
well as to matter. Vices of the same species attract each other with the most
force -- hence the bad consequences of crouding young men (whose propensities
are generally the same) under one roof, in our modern plans of education. The
effects of composition and decomposition upon vices, appear in the meanness of
the school boy, being often cured by the prodigality of a military life, and by
the precipitation of avarice, which is often produced by ambition and love.

IF physical causes influence morals in the manner we have described, may they
not also influence religious principles and opinions? -- I answer in the
affirmative; and I have authority, from the records of physic, as well as from
my own observations, to declare, that religious melancholy and madness, in all
their variety of species, yield with more facility to medicine, than simply to
polemical discourses, or to casuistical advice. -- But this subject is foreign
to the business of the present enquiry.

FROM a review of our subject, we are led to contemplate with admiration, the
curious structure of the human mind. How distinct are the number* and yet how
united! How subordinate, and yet how coequal are all its powers! How wonderful
is the action of the soul upon the body! -- Of the body upon the soul! -- And
of the divine spirit upon both! What a mystery is the mind of man to itself! --
O! nature! -- Or to speak properly, -- O! THOU, GOD OF NATURE! -- In vain do we
attempt to scan THY immensity, or to comprehend THY various modes of existence,
when a single particle of light issued from THYSELF, and kindled into
intelligence in the bosom of man, thus dazzles and confounds our
understandings! --

THE extent of the moral powers and habits in man is unknown. It is not
improbable, but the human mind contains principles of virtue, which have never
yet been excited into action. We behold with surprise the versatility of the
human body, in the exploits of tumblers and ropedancers. Even the agility of a
wild beast has been demonstrated in a girl in France, and an amphibious nature
has been discovered in the human species, in a young man in Spain. We listen
with astonishment to the accounts of the memories of Mithridates, Cyrus, and
Servin. -- We feel a veneration bordering upon divine homage, in contemplating
the stupendous understandings of Lord Verulam and Sir Isaac Newton; and our
eyes grow dim, in attempting to pursue Shakespeare and Milton in their
immeasurable flights of imagination. -- And if the history of mankind does not
furnish similar instances of the versatility and perfection of our species in
virtue, it is because the moral faculty has been the subject of less culture
and fewer experiments than the body, and the intellectual powers of the mind.
From what has been said, the reason of this is obvious. Hitherto the
cultivation of the moral faculty has been the business of parents,
schoolmasters and divines. The people commonly called Quakers and the
Methodists, make use of the greatest number of physical remedies in their
religious and moral discipline, of any sects of christians -- and hence we find
them every where distinguished for their morals. There are several excellent
physical institutions in other churches; and if they do not produce the same
moral effects, that we observe from physical institutions among those two
modern sects, it must be ascribed to their being more neglected by the members
of those churches.
But if the principles, we have laid down, be just, the improvement and
extension of this principle should be equally the business of the legislator --
the natural philosopher -- and the physician; and a physical regimen should as
necessarily accompany a moral precept, as directions with respect to air --
exercise -- and diet, generally accompany prescriptions for the consumption,
and the gout. To encourage us to undertake experiments for the improvement of
morals, let us recollect the success of philosophy in lessening the number, and
mitigating the violence of incurable diseases. The intermitting fever, which
proved fatal to two of the monarchs of Britain, is now under absolute
subjection to medicine. Continual fevers are much less fatal than formerly. The
smallpox is disarmed of its mortality by inoculation, and even the tetanus and
the cancer have lately received a check in their ravages upon mankind. But
medicine has done more -- It has penetrated the deep and gloomy abyss of death,
and acquired fresh honors in his cold embraces. -- Witness the many hundred
people, who have lately been brought back to life, by the successful efforts of
the humane societies, which are now established in many parts of Europe, and in
some parts of America. Should the same industry and ingenuity, which have
produced these triumphs of medicine over diseases and death, be applied to the
moral science, it is highly probable, that most of those baneful vices, which
deform the human breast and convulse the nations of the earth, might be
banished from the world. I am not so sanguine as to suppose, that it is
possible for man to acquire so much perfection from science, religion, liberty
and good government, as to cease to be mortal; but I am fully persuaded, that
from the combined action of causes, which operate at once upon the reason, the
moral faculty, the passions, the senses, the brain, the nerves, the blood and
the heart, it is possible to produce such a change in the moral character of
man, as shall raise him to a resemblance of angels -- nay more, to the likeness
of GOD himself. -- The State of Pennsylvania still deplores the loss of a man,
in whom not only reason and revelation, but many of the physical causes that
have been enumerated, concurred to produce such seize in moral
excellency, as have seldom appeared in a human being. This amiable citizen,
considered his fellow creature, man, as God's extract, from his own works; and
whether this image of himself, was cut out from ebony or copper -- whether he
spoke his own, or a foreign language -- or whether he worshipped his Maker with
ceremonies, or without them, he still considered him as a brother, and equally
the object of his benevolence. Poets and historians, who are to live hereafter,
to you I commit his panegyric; and when you hear of a law for abolishing
slavery in each of the American States, such as was passed in Pennsylvania, in
the year 1780 -- when you hear of the kings and queens of Europe, publishing
edicts for abolishing the trade in human souls -- and lastly, when you hear of
schools and churches, with all the arts of civilized life, being established
among the nations of Africa, then remember and record, that this revolution in
favor of human happiness, was the effect of the labors -- the publications --
the private letters -- and the prayers of ANTHONY BENEZET. This worthy man was
descended from an ancient and honorable family that flourished in the court of
Lewis the XIV. With liberal prospects in life, he early devoted himself to
teaching an English school; in which, for industry, capacity, and attention to
the morals and principles of the youth committed to his care, he was without an
equal. He published many excellent tracts against the African trade, against
war, and the use of spirituous liquors, and one in favor of civilizing and
christianising the Indians. He wrote to the queen of Great Britain, and the
queen of Portugal, to use their influence in their respective courts to abolish
the African trade. He also wrote an affectionate letter to the king of Prussia,
to dissuade him from making war. The history of his life affords a remarkable
instance how much it is possible for an individual to accomplish in the world;
and that the most humble stations do not preclude good men from the most
extensive usefulness. He bequeathed his estate (after the death of his widow)
to the support of a school for the education of negro children, which he had
founded and taught for several years before he died. He departed this life in
May 1784, in the 71st year of his age, in the meridian of his usefulness,
universally lamented by persons of all ranks and denominations.
--

I RETURN from this digression, to address myself in a particular manner to
you, VENERABLE SAGES, and FELLOW CITIZENS in the REPUBLIC of LETTERS. -- The
influence of philosophy, we have been told, has already been felt in courts. To
increase, and complete this influence, there is nothing more necessary, than
for the numerous literary societies in Europe and America, to add the SCIENCE
of MORALS to their experiments and enquiries. The godlike scheme of Henry the
IV. of France, and of the illustrious Queen Elizabeth of England, for
establishing a perpetual peace in Europe, may be accomplished without a system
of jurisprudence, by a confederation of learned men, and learned societies. It
is in their power, by multiplying the objects of human reason, to bring the
monarchs and rulers of the world, under their subjection, and thereby to
extirpate war -- slavery -- and capital punishments, from the list of human
evils. Let it not be suspected that I detract by this declaration, from the
honor of the christian religion. It is true -- christianity was propagated
without the aid of human learning; but this was one of those miracles, which
was necessary to establish it, and which, by repetition, would cease to be a
miracle. They misrepresent the christian religion, who suppose it to be wholly
an internal revelation, and addressed only to the moral powers of the mind. The
truths of christianity afford the greatest scope for the human understanding,
and they will become intelligible to us, only in proportion as the human genius
is stretched by means of philosophy, to its utmost dimensions. Errors may be
opposed to errors: but truths, upon all subjects, mutually support each other.
And perhaps one reason, why some parts of the christian revelation are still
involved in obscurity, may be occasioned by our imperfect knowledge of the
phenomenon, and laws of nature. The truths of philosophy and christianity,
dwell alike in the mind of the Deity, and reason and religion are equally the
offspring of his goodness. They must, therefore, stand and fall together. By
reason, in the present instance, I mean the power of judging of truth, as well
as the power of comprehending it. Happy era! -- When the divine and the
philosopher shall embrace each other, and unite their labors, for the
reformation and happiness of mankind! --

ILLUSTRIOUS COUNCILLORS and SENATORS of Pennsylvania! His excellency the
president, and supreme executive council, and the members of the general
assembly of Pennsylvania, attended the delivery of the oration, in the hall of
the university, by invitation from the philosophical society.
I anticipate your candid reception of this feeble effort to increase the
quantity of virtue in our republic. It is not my business to remind you of the
immense resources for greatness, which nature and Providence have bestowed upon
our state. Every advantage which France has derived from being placed in the
center of Europe, and which Britain has derived from her mixture of nations,
Pennsylvania has opened to her. But my business at present, is to suggest the
means of promoting the happiness, not the greatness of the state. For this
purpose, it is absolutely necessary that our government, which unites into one
all the minds of the state, should possess, in an eminent degree, not only the
understanding, the passions, and the will, but above all, the moral faculty,
and the conscience of an individual. -- Nothing can be politically right, that
is morally wrong; and no necessity can ever sanctify a law, that is contrary to
equity. VIRTUE is the living principle of a republic. To promote this, laws for
the suppression of vice and immorality will be as ineffectual, as the increase
and enlargement of goals. -- There is but one method of preventing crimes, and
of rendering a republican form of government durable, and that is by
disseminating the seeds of virtue and knowledge through every part of the
state, by means of proper modes and places of education, and this can be done
effectually only, by the interference and aid of the legislature. I am so
deeply impressed with the truth of this opinion, that were this evening to be
the last of my life, I would not only say to the asylum of my ancestors, and my
beloved native country, with the patriot of Venice, "Esto perpetua," -- But I
would add, as the last proof of my gratitude and affection for her, my parting
advice to the guardians of her liberties, To establish and support PUBLIC
SCHOOLS in every part of the state.


