DIRECTIONS FOR THE USE OF THE MINERAL WATER AND COLD BATH, AT HARROGATE, NEAR
PHILADELPHIA.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by MELCHIOR STEINER, in Race-street, between Second and
Third-streets, 1786.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE following directions were drawn up at the request of the Proprietor of the
Mineral Spring and Bath, at Harrogate, whose laudable disposition to promote
the health of his fellow-citizens, at the risk of his property, merits the
encouragement of every friend of humanity. Those directions, which relate to
the use of the mineral water, are extracted chiefly from an essay read before
the Philosophical Society in the year 1773, by the author, on the mineral
waters of Philadelphia, Abington and Bristol, and afterward published in a
pamphlet. The analysis of the water at Harrogate will be laid in due time
before the Society. It will be sufficient for the patients, who use it for the
present, to know that it is very light, and that it contains a small quantity
of iron, with a large quantity of air, which has lately received the name of
hepatic air, and from which its offensive smell and taste are derived.

The directions for the use of the Cold Bath will derive their principal merit
from their according with the opinions and advice of the most approved writers
upon that subject.

BENJAMIN RUSH.
Chesnut-street, 18th July, 1786.
DIRECTIONS FOR THE USE OF THE MINERAL WATER.
THE different stages of society, like the different ages of the human body,
have their peculiar diseases. -- In the infancy of all societies diseases are
simple and few in number, but in proportion as they advance in arts and
opulence, which always bring along with them the refinements of luxury,
diseases multiply, and are complicated in such a manner, as to require more
powerful aids than the simple preparations of plants and metals. These aids
have been sought for from a variety of sources, but from none oftener than
mineral waters. These waters, which have flowed for many years unnoticed by our
ancestors, have of late attracted the attention of the public, and have now
become a very important part of the Materia Medica.

The mineral water, which is to be the subject of the following directions,
when taken into the body, is gently stimulating and tonic, promotes the urinary
secretion, and perspiration, and sometimes gently opens the bowels.

OF THE DISEASES IN WHICH THIS MINERAL WATER IS PROPER.
1. THIS water is proper in the HYSTERIA. -- This disorder shows itself in a
variety of shapes. It is known by attacking the female more than the male sex;
especially such as are of a delicate habit, by being accompanied with
flatulencies, contractions of the muscles of the belly, and a sense of
something resembling a ball rising in the throat. -- It prevails most in warm
climates and seasons; and lastly, it is always subject to exacerbations from
any cause that suddenly affects and disturbs the mind.

2. It is proper in the PALSY, whether of part or of the whole of the body,
when the pulse is not full, and when the symptoms of a plethora are wanting; it
is always a strong presumption of the propriety of using these waters, where
the disease has continued a long time, without any remarkable change in the
symptoms.

3. In the EPILEPSY, when it arises from an affection of the stomach, or the
womb, or from a general weak habit of body, this water is proper.

4. It may be drank with advantage in a certain stage of the GOUT, particularly
when it comes on in the decline of life. -- The constitution then exhibits
various marks of great debility; the gouty affection in consequence of this,
instead of appearing in the feet, shows itself in a weakness, nausea and
acidity of the stomach. These symptoms are generally accompanied with
costiveness and flatulency of the bowels.

5. It is useful in an old obstinate Diarrhoea or an habitual purgings, when
not accompanied with a griping or a discharge of blood mixed with the stools.
Sailors returning from long voyages, or from warm climates, are most subject to
this disorder.

6. It affords the most certain relief in all cases of a WANT OF APPETITE, when
it originates from a defect in the stomach. The appetite may be distroyed by
causes which operate directly or indirectly upon the stomach. Those which
operate directly are tea, spirituous liquors, and bitters taken in an
immoderate quantity, or at improper times, too full meals, strong vomits, and
warm drinks of all kinds; the causes which operate indirectly on the stomach
are all sedative passions of the mind, such as, grief, fear, love, etc.
together with whatever weakens or disorders the other parts of the system.

We shall hereafter point out what kind of diet should be joined with the
mineral water, in this disorder.

7. It is proper in all those COLICS, which arise from mere weakness of the
bowels, and particularly in that species, which is accompanied with an
overflowing of the bile, a disease this to which the inhabitants of warm
climates are most subject.

8. Besides these diseases, in which the nervous system is chiefly affected,
this mineral water is useful in all OBSTRUCTIONS OF THE LIVER AND SPLEEN,
whether they are brought on by indolence, intemperance, or intermitting fevers,
and whether they show themselves in a mere ^^elling and hardness, or a
jaundice, a cough or a dropsy. If the dropsy it should be given only while it
continues to operate by urine or stool; for this purpose it should be drank not
in the usual manner, but in large quantities.

9. It is proper in all cases of CHRONIC RHEUMATISM. It will be more
efficacious in this disorder if the flesh brush be used at the same time.

10. It is very useful in the PILES, especially when they occur in that stage
of life in which the artereal plethora yield to the venous. This seldom happens
till the thirty-fifth or thirty-sixth year of life,

11. In all FEMALE OBSTRUCTIONS and weaknesses, which are accompanied with
general languor and debility of the whole system, this water affords
considerable relief.

12. It may be given with advantage to children afflicted with WORMS. Here it
acts like bark, rhubarb, aloes and bitters of all kinds indirectly upon the
worms, by giving a proper tone to the bowels. Among the many substances which
destroy them directly, there are few more powerful than sugar, honey, salt and
ripe summer-fruits; all children show a fondness for these things. The appetite
in this early period of life is not corrupted by habit or vitiated by disease,
and may therefore be listened to as the voice of nature. These substances
should be given upon an empty stomach, and the patient should not eat any thing
for an hour afterward.

13. It is proper in all CUTANEOUS DISEASES and foul ulcers of long standing,
whether they be of scorbutic or scrophulous nature. -- The part affected should
be washed with the mineral water twice a day.

14. It is useful in diseases of the KIDNEYS and BLADDER, when a difficulty or
obstruction in making water arises from relaxation or small calculi in these
organs.

15. It has been used with success in obstinate GLEETS, after the most powerful
astringent medicines have been used to no purpose.

Let us next enquire in WHAT DISEASES THIS WATER IS HURTFUL.

1. In the HYPOCHONDRIAC DISORDER it is an improper remedy. -- Although this
disorder is sometimes joined with Hysteria, yet it is distinct from it in its
nature, and requires a very different treatment. -- It is known by its
attacking the male more than the female sex, by its prevailing most in cold
seasons and climates, and by its being accompanied with acidity, flatulency,
costiveness or a diarrhoea, an entire want of, or an inordinate appetite, pain
in the stomach and breast after eating, a vomiting, an unusual discharge of
spittle from the mouth, colic, etc. In this disorder all preparations of iron
have been found hurtful. It is a little extraordinary, that a draught of warm
water, will sometimes create an appetite in this disorder, after bitter and
aromatic medicines have been administered to no purpose.

2. It has sometimes been recommended in the PHTHESIS PULMONALIS or consumption
of the lungs. -- But I doubt much whether a chalybeate water ever cured or
relieved a true consumption, whether brought on by an abcess, tubercles, or
ulcers.-In every state of the human body, when the inflammatory diathesis
prevails, this water is improper -- that it prevails in the consumption we
infer from the hard pulse and sizy appearance of the blood.

This water we said is improper in all diseases, when an inflammatory diathesis
prevails.

3. It is hurtful therefore in most cases of HEMORRHAGY, or praeternatural
discharges of blood from the body. Hemorrhagies are either active or passive:
the former happen before, the latter after the thirty-fifth or thirty-sixth
year of life. It is in the former in which the inflammatory diathesis chiefly
prevails. They are known by an increase of tone and action of the arterial
system, and by all the common symptoms of plethora.

4. This water is likewise hurtful for the same reason in the ACUTE RHEUMATISM
and GOUT. This latter disease resembles the former a good deal, in its seat,
symptoms and methods of cure, when it attacks in the early period of life. It
appears at the usual seasons of inflammatory disorders, and is accompanied with
a degree of inflammatory diathesis. It is now called the tonic gout, to
distinguish it from that which comes on in the decline of life, and which, from
the irregularity of its seat, times of accession, and symptoms, is called the
anomalous or atonic gout.

THE MANNER OF USING THIS WATER
The quantity to be drank daily of this water must be determined by the
constitution and disease of the patient. Too large a draught at first has
sometimes produced very disagreeable effects, which have discouraged patients
from giving it a fair trial. They should be guarded against this, and in some
cases, when the use of it is clearly indicated, they should be encouraged to
look upon its harsh operation at first as a presage of its doing much good. The
best method for people of delicate habits, is to begin with a gill or half a
pint and increase it gradually to five or six half pints in a day. Formerly the
chalybeate water was drank in a much larger quantity, but experience has taught
us that three pints or two quarts at most in a day is sufficient to produce all
the salutary effects we have reason to expect from it.

The patient has always drank too much, if he becomes feverish and perceives an
uneasy sense of heat in his breast, immediately after taking the water.

He should drink it if possible at the fountain head, as its virtue is much
impaired by being deprived of its air. -- The best time for drinking it is
early in the morning, at noon and in the evening, upon an empty stomach. -- The
patient should always walk or ride, or use some gentle exercise immediately
after drinking it. When we want to promote perspiration, it should be drank
just before the patient goes to bed, -- In some diseases, which require these
waters, the stomach is oftentimes so weak as to reject them even in the
smallest quantity; when this is the case, the water should be mixed with a
little cinnamon or mint water, or the stomach should be prepared for it by some
grateful aromatic tincture. I have heard of a Lady who could retain a
chalybeate water on her stomach only when she drank it in bed, and remained
there an hour or two afterward; it relieved her of the complaint for which she
drank it.

If the water should not keep the bowels gently open, the patient should make
use of such laxative medicines as will best suit his disorder.

It may be drank for several months in any season of the year, especially in
the spring, summer and autumn; it is a good practice to intermit it now and
then for a few days, lest it should lose its efficacy by habit.

It would encroach too much upon our plan, to mention the particular diet,
which the several diseases, we have mentioned, require. The patient should
observe the most strict regard to the quantity of his food. This caution is the
more necessary, as the water sometimes excites an artificial appetite, which it
is by no means safe to gratify fully. Four or five small, are better than one
or two full meals in a day for valetudinarians, upon the account of their being
less stimulating.

In all cases of indigestion, acidity, flatulency, etc. in the stomach,
patients should abstain from vegetables, and live as much as possible upon an
animal diet. Beef and mutton will be found much easier of digestion in these
cases than what are commonly called the white meats. The younger an animal is,
the more it possesses of a vegetable nature, and of course the less it is
disposed to corruption. In proportion as it grows old, it looses its vegetable
nature, and tends to alkalescency, and hence it becomes more susceptible of
putrefaction. By the strength of the organs of mastication, digestion, etc. in
full grown animals, vegetable food is completely animalized. Madame
Darconville's history of putrefaction.




This diet should not be continued too long. In proportion as the stomach
recovers its tone, the patient should gradually return to the use of vegetables
or to mixed aliment. What Dr. Cadogan says of milk, we may say of vegetables,
that it is generally a sign the stomach requires them, when it cannot bear them.

In all cutaneous and scorbutic diseases, foul ulcers, etc. the patient should
live entirly upon vegetables, provided he is not very old or of a weak habit.

There can be no other objection to patients drinking this water with all their
meals, than the danger of loosing their efficacy by too constant a use. The
ingenious female author of "The history of putrefaction," has proved by
experiment, that chalybeate waters hasten the dissolution and putrefaction of
aliment.

After all that has been said upon this subject, we must acknowlegde, that
mineral waters, like most of our medicines, are only substitutes for temperance
and exercise in chronic diseases. An angel must descend from heaven and
^^^uble this chalybeate pool, before we can expect any extraordinary effects
from its use alone. There is a great resemblance between the fate of medicine
and religion. In every age and country an article of faith or a mode of worship
have usurped the place of the precepts of morality. Thus in medicine we find a
variety of remedies such as mercury, bark, steel, woodlice, tar, lime and
mineral waters of all kinds, pine buds, ginseng, etc. have been put in the
place of temperance and exercise. The fashion of the former passes away, but
the effects of the latter, like the obligations of morality, endure forever.

DIRECTIONS FOR THE USE OF THE COLD BATH.
It would be an easy task to collect a variety of facts in favor of the
antiquity and usefulness of the Cold Bath, and to show that it has been
recommended by the Physicians, used by the Philosophers and praised by the
Poets of every age and country, both as the means of health and pleasure; but
this would be foreign to the simple design of the present essay.

Before I proceed to deliver directions for the use of the cold bath, I shall
take notice in a few words of its usual effects upon the body, and mention the
diseases, in which it is a proper or a doubtful and improper remedy.

The first effect of the cold bath is, to wash off impurities of all kinds from
the skin, and thereby to promote a free and equal perspiration.

2d. By its pressure it drives the fluids from the surface to the internal
parts of the body. Hence the quick and and sometimes difficult respiration
which is generally felt after plunging into cold water.

3d. It braces the animal fibers, and thereby increases their tone and
strength. And

4th. It stimulates the whole nervous system, and thereby favors the more easy
action of the vital, animal and natural functions of the body.

The first advantage of the cold bath, which I shall mention, is that it
prevents the diseases of warm weather. By its tonic action upon the nervous
system, it diminishes its sensibility to heat, and thereby secures the
constitution from the painful as well as morbid effects of the summer months.
Children therefore (who suffer so generally from warm weather) and persons
subject to fevers or nervous complaints, should use the cold bath, in the
Months of June, July and August.

2d. In the chronic Rheumatism and atonic Gout the cold bath is a safe and
powerful remedy.

3d. In diseases attended with a relaxation of the nervous system, the cold
bath promises relief. Those diseases may be reduced to the following heads: The
Epilepsy, The Hysteria, Palpitation of the heart, Asthma, St. Vitus's dance,
Rickets, Headache, Palsy of the limbs, Periodical pains, The Colic, The
Diarrhoea, The Cramp, The whooping Cough, A defect of seeing or hearing from
causes that are not obvious, Madness accompanied with debility, Melancholy or
partial infanity, A defect or decay of the intellectual powers not produced by
old age, and lastly The locked Jaw.


The good effects of the cold bath in the last named disorder have lately been
fully ascertained by Dr. Wright of the island of Jamaica.

4th. In those obstructions of the liver and spleen, which follow autumnal
fevers, and which are not attended with inflammation, the cold bath may be used
with advantage.

5th. The excess and defect of that evacuation which is connected with the
health of the female constitution, have both been relieved by the cold bath. It
not only cures these diseases, but frequently removes barrenness, and prevents
abortion. Its agreeable effects upon female beauty, would furnish materials for
many pages, but these are foreign to the subject of the present essay.

6th. In eruptions and diseases of the skin of all kinds, the application of
cold water in the form of a bath, has often produced the most salutary effects.

I shall now point out those constitutions and diseases in which the use of the
cold bath is doubtful or improper.

1st. In very old people, and in habits, where the powers of nature have been
exhausted by intemperance, or long and wasting diseases, the cold bath is a
doubtful remedy.

2d. In full habits, where from the manner of life, or from the peculiar make
of the body, or from previous diseases, we have reason to suspect a disposition
to Apoplexy or Palsy, the cold bath should be used with great caution, and
never till previous evacuations have been made from the bowels or the blood
vessels.

3d. In a Plethora of the lungs whether it manifests itself by pain, a
difficulty of breathing, or by a spitting of blood, the cold bath is never
proper. It has seldom been used with advantage or even safety, in consumptive
cases. How far an union of the cold bath with other remedies that determine
powerfully to the skin, might prove useful in the consumption of the lungs,
remains to be determined hereafter by bold experiments and accurate observations

OF THE TIME AND MANNER OF USING THE COLD BATH.
The best time for using the cold bath, is in the morning before breakfast. A
short walk, or a moderate degree of exercise, is sometimes necessary to prepare
the body for the action of the cold water upon it, especially in the middle of
summer, when the heat of a close room and a feather-bed Patients, who use the
cold bath, will find its good effects more certain, if they at the same time
sleep upon a mattress.
the proceeding night, are so apt to increase relaxation, or promote weakening
sweats. The sooner the water is applied to the whole body the better. The head
should be exposed to the coldness and pressure of the water, as nearly as
possible at the same instant, with the other parts of the body. The
inconveniences arising from wetting the hair, may be obviated by the patients
covering his head, before he goes into the bath, with an oiled cloth or bladder
cap. From one to three minutes will be long enough in most cases, to remain in
the bath.

A patient may always know when he has used the bath improperly or staid too
long in the water, when he feels a chilliness or pains in his head or breast,
which do not soon yield to the warmth of the air, or to gentle exercise; on the
contrary, it is a promising sign of future benefit from the bath, when a
patient, upon coming out of the water feels a sudden glow of heat diffuse
itself over the whole body, accompanied with a cheerful and animated tone of
mind.

The good effects of the bath will be increased, by the patients employing a
friend or a servant to rub the body for a quarter or half an hour with a
flesh-brush, or where this cannot be had, with a piece of flannel or coarse
linen cloth, immediately after he comes out of the bath. As soon as he is
dressed he should devote from half an hour to an hour to gentle exercise,
either by walking or riding on horseback, or in a carriage, according to the
degrees of his strength, or the nature of his disorder.

To preserve health, it will be sufficient to use the cold bath from once a day
to three times a-week. To restore health in most diseases it should be used
every day, but in diseases of an obstinate nature, or that have been of a long
duration, it should be used every morning and evening. It will only be
necessary to add here, that when a patient uses the bath twice in a day, he
should avoid going into it too soon after dining, and should not use it so late
in the evening, as to prevent his taking the exercise formerly recommended
after it.

I consider the shower bath as a substitute for the plunging bath. It was
invented only to gratify the weak and indolent. I do not condemn it; on the
contrary, I think it may be used with advantage in cases of great weakness,
where the plunging bath is improper. In diseases too, where the use of the
plunging bath is of doubtful issue, it should always be prefered. Perhaps in
most cases, where there exists a dread of the shock from the weight or coldness
of the water, the mind as well as the body may be prepared to sustain them
both, by the use of the shower bath for a few days.


