A SYNOPSIS OF A COURSE OF LECTURES, ON THE THEORY AND PRACTICE OF MEDICINE.

IN FOUR PARTS.

PART THE FIRST.

BY B. WATERHOUSE, M. D. PROFESSOR OF THE THEORY AND PRACTICE OF PHYSIC IN THE
UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE, AND OF NATURAL HISTORY IN THE COLLEGE OF RHODE ISLAND.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY ADAMS AND NOURSE, COURT-STREET. M,DCC,LXXXVI.

TO THE STUDENTS OF NATURE, IN THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE.
GENTLEMEN,
IF one of the most celebrated Professors CULLEN in his preface.
of the age had reason to say, that to deliver a system of the doctrines and
rules proper for directing the practice of Physic, was an undertaking attended
with such great difficulty, that after an experience of forty years, as well as
much reading and reflection, it was with great diffidence he entered upon such
a work. -- With how much more diffidence ought one to appear who cannot boast
of either?

I always intended to present my hearers with a Synopsis of my Course of
Lectures, when years and more experience should give me sufficient confidence;
but several circumstances concurring at this time, induce me to offer you the
FIRST PART of my design, crude and imperfect as it is.

Prejudices have operated against our Medical Institution in general; and
although the preliminary or auxilliary branches, Anatomy, Botany, Chemistry and
Natural Philosophy, are allowed to be not altogether useless or void of
entertainment, yet the THEORY AND PRACTICE OF PHYSIC, which comprehends and
connects them all, is represented as neither useful nor entertaining, and if
necessary, easier collected from books than lectures. Although every thing in
nature has a reference to the human person, yet the Physician may observe that
some things here treated of, or rather the view in which they are exhibited,
can hardly be called medical. -- This will be sufficiently explained when it is
known that hitherto far the greatest part of my hearers mean not to pursue
physic as a profession; but, in imitation of several illustrious characters,
wish only to fill up their liberal leisure in that most useful of all studies,
the knowledge of themselves. It has been lamented that those who have studied
the philosophy of the human mind, have been little acquainted with the
structure of the human body and the laws of the animal economy;
notwithstanding the mind and the body are so intimately connected, and have
such a mutual influence on one another, that the constitution of either,
examined a part, can never be thoroughly understood. Dr. Gregory.


In consideration of your various pursuits, we have gone one step further, and
encouraged you to study man in relation to other animals and things; and
glancing at the wondrous chain of universal existence, have called your
attention to some of its links; and this in order that you might view this
"goodly frame" in the light of a large and well regulated family, all
subservient to each other in proper subordination, -- all contributing in their
proper places to the perfection and happiness of the whole. In contemplating
the principle of animation through the innumerable species of beasts, birds,
fishes and insects, 'till we reached the vegetable, we have been led on to
enquire, whether these two tribes of organized beings do not form (instead of
two distinct kingdoms) one immense family?

Thus, without neglecting the doctrine of diseases, and their remedies, have we
endeavored to give you a more pleasing picture of man and his relations, than
what mere medical lectures afford; and I was glad of such an opportunity to
combat certain prejudices: for when I reflected how all the sciences commonly
taught in Universities were linked together, I felt a repugnance to the idea of
physic being insulated, and wished to suggest to you that the art of medicine,
when properly pursued, actually comprehended more of the sciences than any
other branch of knowledge you could name, -- that man, placed at the head of
the visible series, was an Epitome or compendium of the great world, and
included within himself all the powers and properties of nature, vegetable,
mineral, animal and intellectual, -- that such a knowledge of him was so
essential to the human race, that without it the great Linnaeus seems to doubt
whether any other characters be sufficient to entitle one to be ranked among
mankind; for says he, " Haec si noveris HOMO es, et a reliquis animalibus
distinctissimum genus."

Natural History is not introduced here barely to amuse, but with a hope that
by cultivating a taste for the works of nature some solid advantages may arise.
The American may possibly be reminded, in his researches, that while factitious
wealth is dug up from the bowels of the earth, our only true and solid riches
must be drawn from its upper stratum, from thence man receives a reward of his
honest industry by a kind of perpetual miracle wrought in his favor.

Should we not, moreover, encourage the natural curiosity of our countrymen to
read that sacred scripture written by the finger of the DEITY himself, upon
every animal, every plant, and every mineral? An uncorrupted scripture this! A
kind of second revelation! The GREAT BOOK OF NATURE, which comprehends the
objects of every science, is peculiarly inviting in this country; its ample
pages strike all who have eyes to see and hearts to feel!

SOME have said, these subjects, though curious, are foreign to the medical
profession -- but they are mistaken. Where did HIPPOCRATES, and other Princes
of the art, study? Wherever there were men, and the concomitants of humanity,
disease and death, -- AIR, EARTH and WATER, -- all that surrounded them were
the pages they studied.

The utility of a SYNOPSIS need not be dwelt on. Method is the soul of science;
by it a confused heap of facts may be so ranged and disposed, that the judgment
may act with freedom, and perform its office with advantage. See preface to
Novum Organ,
After the subject of an enquiry is fixed on, and well defined, it should be
divided into particular heads of enquiry: then the order of the things
themselves are to be ranged and digested into the form of regular tables, so
that the mind may act upon them in just order and with regularity; the whole to
be so constructed as to admit of being transposed, added to, or corrected. See
preface to Novum Organ,


The SYNOPSIS is divided into four parts. The FIRST PART is in your hands.

Although most of the subjects here mentioned have been treated of by men of
eminence, the Physician will however see that we have taken a different view of
the same subject from what is found in authors, and as far as I know among
lecturers. Whole aphorisms are inserted upon some subjects, where we knew of no
book that could serve as a guide to the pupil. The aphorisms on the Vis vitalis
may serve as an example. The obscurity in which the process of digestion was
involved till very lately, will serve to explain the length of that section;
the same may be said of the Lymphatic system, while the well established
doctrine of the circulation will explain the brevity of that subject. Under
this head, some entire sentences are taken from Fordyce and Haller to comment
on, and wherever we have taken the same liberty with any author, it is
mentioned in the margin in general, and in the lectures in particular.

The SECOND PART treats of the more obvious causes of diseases, -- the
atmosphere -- the situation -- the diet -- and then of particular ACUTE
DISEASES; which will be treated of according to the plan first suggested by
SYDENHAM, namely, arranged like the subjects of natural history into classes,
orders, genera and species. By such an assistance the student of nature is led
as it were by an Ariadne's clue, through the turnings and labyrinths of the
three kingdoms of nature, and without a similar one, the student of medicine
could scarcely retain the description of diseases, or remember how they are
treated.

The THIRD PART treats of CHRONIC DISEASES, beginning with the most simple, and
ending with the most complicated.

The FOURTH PART considers the OPERATION OF MEDICINES, and treats of the
METHODUS CONCINNANDI FORMULAS MEDICAMENTORUM.

In the execution of our plan, we wish not to hold up what we have to offer to
you as our own self-created knowledge, but rather what we have collected from
the writings of approved authors, from lectures, and from the communications of
eminent men. Neither shall we endeavor to stamp a dignity on any of our
inventions by the triumphs of confutation, the citation of antiquity, or the
mask of obscurity, Novum Organ.
but try to lead you on to things and their relations; and avoiding as much as
possible all technical terms, we shall endeavor to express ourselves in so
plain and simple a style, as to require no other preparation than common sense,
and an unprejudiced mind.

BOSTON, May, 1786.
SYNOPSIS OF A COURSE OF LECTURES.
CHAPTER I. History of SCIENCE in general, and MEDICINE in particular.
THE intentions of our forefathers in founding this College. The idea the
Romans had of education evident from the origin of that word. The difference in
the minds of men, not so much the effect of organization as education. The
aptitude to understanding is a dead power in man, when not vivified by
passions. The passion of glory, the commonly exciting cause. All men are
susceptible of it in countries where glory conducts to power. See Helvetius.
Reflections on the progress of civilization from the naked savage to polished
humanity. Times and countries have their wastes and deserts. What form of
government, and at what period most favorable to learning. Computation of the
numbers of the human species destroyed in building up tyranny, by Sesostris, by
Semiramis, by Xerxes, by Alexander, the Romans, the Sicilians, by Mithridates,
the Goths and Vandals, the Crusadors, and by the Europeans on this continent.

The arts and sciences commonly flourish immediately after civil wars and
commotions. Some of the most distinguished benefactors of mankind, when and
where they lived -- of those few who have aggrandized the human mind by
cultivating their own.

Distribution of knowledge into particular sciences. PHILOSOPHY divided into
the doctrine of the Deity -- of Nature -- and of Man. The doctrine of MAN
divided into the doctrine of the body, and of the mind -- and the doctrine of
the union.

Of the intimate connection of all the sciences -- the propriety of making the
Muses all sisters.

The universe affords nothing so deserving our consideration and wonder as
ourselves. -- The human body, of all created things, most capable of relief;
yet this relief most liable to err.

A classical investigation of the origin of the Healing Art. The fables of the
ancients pregnant with wisdom.

The ancient poetry divided into (1) The Narrative -- (2) The Dramatic -- (3)
Allegorical. From the allegorical the origin of medicine must be drawn. How the
sciences were first taught by signs and symbols. As hieroglyphics preceded
letters, so allegories preceded arguments, -- various examples. This mode of
teaching still among the Chinese, and in some degree among our Indians. The
importance of a clue to these allegories, they having nature for their basis.
How the symbols of ideas came to be taken for ideas themselves, truth came
mixed with falsehood, human things with divine. Among all the ruder nations,
the Priest, the Conjuror and Physician, were united in one man -- other sources
of superstition and nonsense -- some traces discernable still in the Materia
Medica.

Explanation of the allegory of Apollo or Phoebus: -- Why called the God of
Physic. The sagacity of the poets in making AEsculapius and Circe, brother and
sister, and both children of Apollo.

An account of some of the Grecian Philosophers and Physicians who flourished
during the period of Grecian liberty. Marcus Cato's opinion of them in his day.

Of HIPPOCRATES, why called the father of the Medical art -- a specimen of his
doctrine -- a criterion by which his genuine works may be known -- imitated by
several, equalled by none -- reflections on the age of the polished world, from
the rich treasure of knowledge found in his writings -- who first differed from
Hippocrates -- when and how Physicians were divided into sects -- of the
Dogmatic, Emperic and Methodic sects -- account of Asclepiades, and his
innovations in practice -- his arts to acquire popularity and fortune.

An account of GALEN, wherein he did more harm than good to medicine, and
acquired more fame than he deserved.

A short history of the various sects that flourished from this period to the
time the Western Empire was overran by the Goths, and the Eastern by the Arabs.

How a northern swarm of barbarians extinguished the small light of learning
that then remained, burning the libraries, universities and cities. Concerning
Mahomet's conquests. From the 9th century to the 12th, the Arabians engrossed
the province of physic, how far they enlarged its boundaries. In the 15th
century Constantinople was sacked, the Greeks driven out, and forced to take
refuge in Europe. The writers from this time called Moderns. Hence there
appears three periods or revolutions of learning; one among the GREEKS, another
among the ROMANS, and a third among the WESTERN nations of Europe.

MEDICINE, long cultivated on the coast of Malabar, derives its origin
according to them, from the supreme God, and handed down for myriads of ages
through the successive orders of inferior Deities; -- reflections thereon, -- a
specimen of their theory. Of the state of physic in Mexico and Peru: their
method of acquiring a knowledge of the healing-art more wise than any
unlettered people yet known.

The revival or resurrection of letters. The nobles of all nations flocking to
the holy war, admired the art and cultivation of the Greeks and Romans, shrunk
back at their own barbarity -- the consequences thence arising. How for several
centuries the admiration of the knowledge of former ages retarded the
advancement of science.

Elogium on ROGER BACON.

The discovery of the ARS ARTIUM OMNIUM CONSERVATRIX, the Art of Printing, and
its immediate consequences.

The two systems of PHILOSOPHY prevalent at this period, viz. -- The Philosophy
of Aristotle, and the Philosophy of Plato: the first occupied the universities
and cloisters. The poets, sentimental philosophers, and some others, were
disciples of Plato. These two systems more or less discernable in all the
writings of this period.

A great revolution in the theory and practice of Physic, by the introduction
of Chemistry. An account of Paracelsus and his followers.

A short history of Medical Chemistry, in contradistinction to that very
ancient art of smelting, refining and tempering of metals.

New diseases and new remedies, in consequence of a great part of the earth
being discovered unknown to the ancients, viz. America, -- the southern parts
of Africa, -- China and Siberia, -- together with a vast number of islands.

In the 17th century HARVEY demonstrated the Circulation of the blood, which,
together with the discovery of the Receptacle of the Chyle and of the
Thoracic-Duct, overturned the whole system of Galen and the theory of the
Chemists. GALILEO now introduced mathematical reasoning, and BACON his new mode
of induction. This the era of experiment in which several great men
flourished. -- Societies established for promoting and diffusing experimental
philosophy in several parts of Europe with princes for their patrons. -- Posts
or conveyances by letter established. -- Anatomy now prosecuted with juster
views than before the discovery of the circulation. -- Injections of colored
liquors first introduced. -- The Microscope applied to investigate the more
subtle parts of the body.

A catalogue of the most important anatomical discoveries from that time to the
present.

General account of Theories from HARVEY to the time of HOFFMAN.

1. The Mathematical or Mechanical Theory, in which the blood was considered as
the primum mobile of the whole body. How the consequences of this doctrine
destroyed the principles on which it was founded.

2. The Theory of STAHL, who maintained that the rational and immaterial soul
itself was the source of all the motions of the body.

3. The Theory of BOERHAAVE.

4. HOFFMAN's Theory, who maintained that so far was the body from depending on
a state of the fluids as Boerhaave imagined, that the crasis of the fluids
themselves entirely depended on the nervous power, and that the greatest part
of diseases were affections of the nervous system.

General reflections on the foregoing history, -- why it appears the history of
opinions rather than of a progressive art.

An account of the few eminent authors in physic, in comparison of whom the
rest are mere compilers. -- Fewer books written on physic than any other branch
of science of its extent.

On the simplicity of the medical art at present, compared with a century ago.
By injections and microscopes, obscure things now rendered conspicuous, minute
things magnified, and from confusion reduced to order and simplicity.

The more we know of any science, the greater number of particulars are we able
to resolve into general ones, and consequently we shall be able to reduce its
principles within narrower bounds. Priestley.
This opinion verified by the present state of medicine.

The almost endless catalogue of diseases that afflict mankind a principal
discouragement to students -- how remedied.

SYDENHAM was the first who suggested the idea of reducing diseases to a
certain determinate species, in imitation of botanic writers. Sauvages the
first who attempted it. -- Linnaeus -- Vogel -- Sagar and Cullen, the greatest
improvers.

All scholastic teaching is classification, -- exemplified in the division of
the works of creation, first into the four elements, then into the three
kingdoms. The animal kingdom divided into six classes, comprehending all
animated nature; these classes divided into orders, each order into genera,
each genus into species.

The CLASSES are marked by certain symptoms and circumstances which are common
to each; the orders all agree in having the same marks with the class to which
they belong, together with some additional ones peculiar to the order; the
genera have all the marks and circumstances of the class and order, and besides
have some which distinguish the genus; and the species have all the marks and
tokens of class, order and genus, with the still further addition of symptoms
or circumstances which give the specific character. See Encyclop. Brit. -- also
Lock on Human Understanding, vol. 1, p. 357, 8 vo. and vol. 2, chap. 3, on
general terms.

All the known diseases that afflict mankind reduced to four classes, and these
to 150 genera. See part the second.


The MATERIA MEDICA less advanced than any other branch of the art; the
instinctive principle more exercised in what we take into the stomach than the
rational, one cause. False Criteria another, -- these reduced to eight heads.
See part the fourth


Mercury -- Antimony -- Opium -- Peruvian-Bark, a few other Vegetables -- Fire,
Exercise and Water, include near all the physicians instruments.

Enumeration of the principal Desiderata in Anatomy -- in the doctrine of the
Animal economy -- in Surgery -- and in the Therapeutica.

A view of the Data and Quoesita in the art of physic.

The general problem which comprehends the whole art is, --

Having the symptoms given to find the remedy; or thus divided,

(a.) Having the symptoms given to find the deviations of the body from its
natural state.

(b.) Having this deviation given to find the remedy.

It is useful to invert these problems, and enquire,

(a.) Having the deviations given, what the symptoms must be.

(b.) Having the manner of operation of a successful remedy given, what the
deviation must be. (See Hartley, vol. 1st.)

BOERHAAVE's method of studying physic -- his idea of a consummate physician.

HOFFMAN's method, considered under four heads.

A rehearsal of Dr. CULLEN's objections to the Boerhaavian system. -- How far
he has supplied its deficiencies.

The out-lines of Cullen's Physiology, wherein he differs from all other
medical teachers.

Elogium on BOERHAAVE.

General reflections on the various methods recommended in studying physic. Of
the remarkable simplicity observable in the writings of the most successful
enquiries after truth -- several instances adduced.

Where did HIPPOCRATES, and other PRINCES in the art, study? -- Wherever there
were men and the concomitants of humanity, diseases and death, air, earth and
water, all that surrounded them were the pages they studied!

CHAP. II.
SECTION I.
MAN, the object of our enquiries, includes within himself all the powers and
qualities of nature, viz. -- the mineral, vegetable, animal and intellectual;
therefore has been called the Microcosmos.

Of the Res Macrocosmae, or every thing but man. These distinguished into (1.)
Aliments, (2.) Medicines, and (3.) Poisons.

Concerning simple matter; -- its astonishing divisibility, illustrated
chemically and mechanically. The infinite divisibility of matter a mathematical
truth, but a physical falsehood? A little of the middle of nature known, its two
extremes out of sight.

What led some philosophers to believe that all nature was animated. The
imperceptible translations of inert matter to organized -- from a vegetating
body to the lowest order of animals.

Of the Zoophytes, or that class of beings which connects, animated and
insensible nature.

On the SCALE of BEINGS.

The Universe a system whose very essence consists in subordination.

SYSTEMA NATURAE of Linnaeus briefly explained.

A connection between all ranks and orders by subordinate degrees necessary
toward sustaining the magnificent fabric of the world. Wide distinctions made
in the dignity and perfections of animals, little or none in their happiness.
Concerning the various degrees of perfection, beauty, strength and
understanding.

The animal produced by a cutting as in the Zoophytes, is but one degree above
a vegetable, -- that produced from an egg is a step higher, -- that class of
animals which is brought forth alive, still more exalted, -- and of these, such
as bring forth one at a time, the most complete, the foremost of which stands
the great master of all, Goldsmith.


MAN, -- The knowledge of him reduced to six heads, -- (1.) Physiologice, (2.)
Diaetetice, (3.) Pathologice, (4.) Naturaliter, (5.) Politice, and (6.)
Theologice. "Haec si noveris Homo es, et a relinquis animalibus,
distinctissimum genus." LlNNAEUS.

"Man is a machine," Des Carts.

Wherein the meanest animal is essentially superior to the most perfect result
of human workmanship.

In proportion to the degradation of the animal in the scale of existence, the
living and renovating principle is proportionably vigorous, various examples
adduced; the same law observed in vegetables.

An effort toward a perpetuity of existence distinguishes the works of the
Supreme Creator from the works of art.

Analogy between the instinctive or preserving principle in animals, and that
approximating principle which binds together the terrestial globe, which guides
the revolving planets in their courses, and keeps the material system from
dissolution. Jennings.


Man is a being compounded of body, spirit and soul, or Corpus, Vis Actuosa et
Men's.

The BODY first offers itself to view -- considered collectively as one mass,
consists of (1.) Earth, (2.) Oil, (3.) Water, (4.) Salt, (5.) Phlogiston, and
(6.) Mephitic air. Considered entire, and particularly its exquisite form and
wonderful faculties, place it at the head of the visible series. Amidst the
exact harmony of parts and actions, there exists a perpetual conflict; by this
conflict the body is supported; that action which is the life of the body is
also the cause of its death.

From which view this inference is unavoidable, namely, the most perfect being
we know of, depends on a SUPERIOR BEING who created and supports its existence.

SECTION II.
THE actions of the human body distinguished into VOLUNTARY, INVOLUNTARY and
MIXED.

The involuntary, or instinctive movements, are exercised in preserving the
body, and are, more strictly speaking, the animal economy.

The appetites and actions on which our very existence depends, are not left to
the fallible reason, or caprice of man.

The instinctive actions varying in different stages and circumstances of life,
are strong in proportion to their importance: -- various instances adduced.

All this depends on a principle which some call VIS ACTUOSA, others IMPETUM
FACIENS, others ARCHAEUS. This power is innate, and is that, by which man
lives, it forms him, it nourishes him, refreshes him, pathetically affects him,
moves him, animates him; by it he feels, he desires, refuses, sleeps and wakes:
nevertheless it is totally different from the mind, for,

In the body, guarded by the Autocratea, or VIS MEDICATRIX NATURAE is found
something of quite a different nature from what has been mentioned; -- a power
of thinking, reflecting, comparing, choosing, and representing to itself past,
present, and to come. This power in relation to its several operations, is
termed comprehension, understanding, reason, mind, will, freedom, or
collectively by the single word SOUL.

This immaterial thinking part of man, is so connected with the material and
corporeal part of him, and particularly with the nervous system, that motions
excited in this, give occasion to thought; and thought, however occasioned,
gives rise to new motions in the nervous system. This mutual influence we
assume with confidence as a fact, but the mode of it we do not understand.
Cullen's Physiology.


The opinion of THALES concerning the immaterial thinking part of Man -- of
PLATO -- of PATHAGORAS and of HIPPOCRATES.

The Cartesian Hypothesis -- the opinion of some of the Chemists, of the
THEOSOPHI, particularly MALBRANCHE. The system of LEIBNITZ and WOLF, -- of
BAXTER and PRIESTLEY. -- All abounding with unsurmountable difficulties. While
the Divine ought to consider Man as made up of two distinct essences, and as
possessing an immortal soul after the image of his Maker, the Physiologist in a
humbler walk, is bound by the rigid rules of phylosophizing, to consider him as
possessed of an amazing fabric, on whose perfect, or imperfect state, its
functions and faculties seem to depend. All the knowledge the Physiologist
pretends to, he derives from Experiment, or the use of his senses.


SECTION III.
ON the original construction of the animal Solids. -- Do they consist of
straight fibers or threads, as Boerhaave taught; or fibers and laminae forming
the Tela Cellulosa, as Haller supposed? Or are they spiral, convoluted and
interwoven with one another?

The construction, extent, and nature of the Tela Cellulosa. -- On the living,
or vital Solids.

All the organical parts of the human body maintained in the power, or fitness
for acting either successively, or simultaneously by two forces or springs,
viz. (1.) The BRAIN and it is appendages the nerves. (2.) The HEART and it is
appendages the Blood Vessels, mutually exciting each other like the main-spring
and regulator in a Watch. -- These movements, in order to be perpetual and
regular, require to be as perpetually and regularly wound up, and this is done
by the FOOD taken into the stomach and there digested.

The Brain and Nerves may be considered as forming one system. The Heart and
Blood Vessels another. The Stomach, Intestines and assistant Chylopoetic
Viscera form a third. The Lacteals, the common Lymphatics, and the
Conglobate-Glands form a fourth. May not the Systema spiritale pneumonicum be
considered as a fifth?

From these five fountains all the actions of the body, and all the power which
it exerts, are derived.

Although each organ or system of the human body, has an action peculiar to
itself, yet are they all actuated by one individual life. In some Animals, Life
is divisible, as in the Zoophytes:


Human life or health, is the sum or aggregate of all these actions and
functions, which cannot therefore be derived from the brain alone, or heart, or
stomach -- or absorbent system -- or the pneumonic, but from the conspiration
of all of them; hence emerges the sympathy of parts. See Dissertatio de
Sympathia partium corporie humani, etc. printed at Leyden, in 1780.


These subjects are so involved in each other, that it is impossible to begin
any where on clear ground, or so as to proceed from the Data, to the Quaesita:
begin where we will, we always find some things necessary to be premised, which
are not as yet demonstrated.

CHAP. III. Of particular Organs and Functions.
SECTION I. Of the Heart and Blood Vessels.
THE heart of man consists essentially of two cavities, there being two hearts,
strictly speaking, joined together in the human body, serving for two
circulations of the blood, one through every part of the body, and one through
the lungs. Fordyce Natural History of human Body.


Of the AURICLE.

Of the VENTRICLE.

Of the VALVES.

Origin, general structure, and distribution of the Aorta.

From the ultimate branches of the Aorta arise tubes which terminate in the
heart, joining together as they go on toward it, forming principally two large
tubes, which open into the right Auricle: -- these are called, Ibid.


VEINS, -- their general structure.

In all the veins perpendicular to the horizon, excepting the Uterus and Porta,
there are small valves, but none in the deep running vessels of the Viscera --
none in the Lungs, Brain, Liver, or the whole system of the Vaena Portarum --
nor in any blood vessels, less than the twelfth of an inch, diameter. Haller's
Physiology.


How do the veins begin? There is a structure between the veins and arteries
little understood. See Malpigh and Ruysch.


The blood vessels in a live animal are always full.

When an animal dies, the Arteries and Veins loose their cylindrical form and
are flattened, and the capillaries contain less blood, so that the blood
sufficient to fill the vessels when the animal was alive, is not capable of
filling them after he is dead; therefore the arteries, veins and capillaries of
the living animal, are commonly contracted to a greater degree than they can be
by their elasticity. Fordyce.


The elasticity is commonly endeavoring to distend them, but is always
overpowered by the contractile power depending on life, which adapts the size
of the vessels to the quantity of blood contained in them.

If the vessels are emptied to such a degree that they cannot adapt themselves
to the blood, and continue cylindrical, the animal dies. Ibid.


On the Vis Vitalis.
APHORISM I. ALL the living parts of the body have, besides those attributes
common to all bodies, as solidity, extension and gravity, a peculiar something
which distinguishes the living from a dead body.

A muscular fiber will contract, and that not by the power of gravitation,
cohesion, chrystallization, (electricity?) magnetism, or chemical attraction.

APH. II. This property in animal bodies has been in a great measure overlooked
by some teachers of great reputation, and totally neglected by others.

APH. III. Whatever by its contact with an animal fiber, excites in it a
contraction or oscillation, we call a Stimulus.

APH. IV. That state of an animal fiber in which a contraction or oscillation
is produced by the contact of a stimulus, we call Irritability.

APH. V. That principle in animals, on which sensation, motion, and all the
animal powers depend, we call the VIS VITALIS.

APH. VI. If by the application of a stimulus to the solids, a perception is
excited in the mind, this effect we call sensation or facultas sentiendi.

APH. VII. By the action of stimuli on the solids, the Vis Vitalis is excited
and preserved; when diminished, it may be increased, and when totally
suspended, it may be restored.

APH. VIII. Without heat as an exciting and preserving stimulus, vegetable and
animal life cannot be supported. Thus the hatching of eggs is the effect of the
application of a particular degree of heat, without which the egg remains
inanimate. The same application to an animal, or part of an animal consolidated
by frost, will re-animate it, or restore the Vis Vitalis.

APH. IX. Different animals, and the various parts of the same animal, have
different degrees of irritability.

APH. X. The denser, or more compact the solids of an animal, or parts of an
animal, the stronger and less irritable is the animal or parts of the animal.
Thus the muscles are in a great degree irritable, but their irritability
lessens as they become tendinous, and is in a manner lost when ossified.

APH. XI. On the contrary, when by inflammation the fibers of the least
sensible parts are elongated, and the cohesion of their constituent corpuscles
diminished, their irritability and sensibility is proportionably increased
until it arrives at the extreme, when the sensibility and irritability
diminishes until it is lost, and a dissolution takes place.

APH. XII. Experiment teaches us, that the Heart is endowed with irritability
above most other parts. Even when the heart is taken out of the body, and in
some animals though it be cut in pieces, it can be excited to motion by proper
stimuli These Aphorisms, which are meant to be the foundation of a particular
work, will be continued in another part of the Synopsis.
.

SECTION III.
Nature and Properties of the Blood.
THE various substances used for food, are converted by the organs of digestion
into chyle, and afterward into blood.

FROM this red mass all the other fluids are formed. The constituent parts of
the blood unknown till the time of Monsieur Senac.

THE blood consists of (1.) The serum. (2.) Coaguable Lymph. (3.) The red part,
and (4.) The superfluous water. The nature, properties, and mode of mixture in
each. Little or nothing to be known from the chemical analysis of the red mass.

Leuwenhock's idea of the red gloubles erroneous. Necessary to know the
fallacies of optics before their shape can be determined.

Is the blood an inanimate fluid, or is it a live?

Must the blood be converted into a solid part of the body, before it can feel?

Where is the first communication between body and mind?

Does the albuminous fluid incessantly passing through the Lacteals into the
blood, only require the heat of the blood vessels to vivify it like incubation,
by the warmth of the Hen; or is its animation reserved for the lungs?

Arguments for and against the celebrated J. Hunter's hypothesis of the life of
the blood.

The red part of the blood, soluble in water, but not in serum, capable of
undergoing the putrefactive fermentation; this fermentation, distinguished into
three stages; the process described, part of the blood goes to form the various
fluids; part to repair the waste of the solids; and part is destroyed and
thrown out.

The fluids of animals are formed and destroyed by fermentation. What we mean
by FERMENTATION.

Putrefaction defined -- consists of two fermentations.

A portion of the blood is constantly destroying. Is it by what we call
putrefaction?

The evident evacuations from the blood, are (1.) From the skin by evaporation.
(2.) From the surface of the lungs. And (3.) by the kidneys.

Of the grand Antiseptic of Animal Bodies.

Some uses of the blood, besides those commonly noticed.

Of the actions of the small vessels when divided by a small wound. How in
consequence of a slight inflammation, they throw out a new fluid, in order to
effect a reunion. This uniting medium, that part of the blood called the
Coaguable Lymph.

Is not inflammation a process of the animal economy, to supply an injured
part with Coaguable. Lymph? Several phenomena related to countenance this idea.

On the formation and use of Pus.

What is the alteration in the vessels of an inflamed part, producing pus? How
far is it a regular secretion.

Of the gloubles of pus, as they appear through the microscope.

The opinion that the solids go to the formation of pus, erroneous.

The intention of pus is not to destroy, but to defend and preserve the parts.

Of the motion and circulation of the blood, and of the several organs and
actions employed in supporting it.

Of the circulation in the Foetus -- in Amphibious Animals, and in Scaly-Fishes.

Of the Lungs.
Anatomical Description of that set of vessels in the Lungs, which contain AIR,
and those which contain BLOOD.

Is the blood in the pulmonary arteries incapable of nourishment, or must its
yet crude chyliferous particles complete the circle of the system, before it
can nourish?

Of the secretions from the vessels of the Lungs -- of the nerves of the Lungs,
with their peculiarities.

How respiration is performed in Man -- how in Birds -- in some Reptiles, and
in Insects. The reason Snakes can live in an exhausted receiver, and Insects
exist in compact bodies. -- How respiration is performed in amphibious Animals
and Scaly-Fishes.

How the blood circulates in the Child in the Womb.

Nature and properties of the AIR we commonly breathe.

On the PULSE. -- Scarce any two authors use the same terms to express the same
pulse. Several passages of Hoffman, Silvius, Etmuller, Decker, Scheldhammar,
Bellini, Boerhaave and Prosper Alpinus, compared.

SECTION IV. On the Heat of the Human Body.
HOW far does the heat of animals depend on the motion of the blood? Is the
heat owing to the nervous fluid, or Ether, or Electricity, or Phlogiston?

The power, whatever it may be, which produces, maintains and regulates the
heat of the human body in health, produces HEAT when the surrounding substances
are heated to a less degree than 98 degrees of Farenh thermometer; and COLD,
when they are heated to a greater degree Fordyce.
.

SECTION V.
Of the Stomach and assistant Chylopoetic-Viscera.
ANATOMICAL description of the Stomach and alimentary Canal; peculiarity in the
distribution of the vessels of the Stomach and Intestines.

The Stomach performs two distinct offices; the first, digesting the food; the
second, communicating fresh life and vigor to the remotest parts of the
system. HIPPOCRATES opinion of this wonderful organ. -- The opinion of ARETAEUS
CAPPADOX, of HELMONT, of SYDENHAM, of FOTHERGILL.

No organ merits so much attention as the Stomach, -- no function of such
importance to the Physician, as digestion. -- The feeling and affections
attributed to the heart, belong to the Stomach. No part of the body capable of
so many different feelings. On the Stomach in a great measure depends the whole
man, -- various examples adduced.

Of the consent between the skin and the Stomach.

A state of distention or erection in the ultimae vasculae or villi of the
nerves necessary to free perspiration -- this distended or collapsed state is
somehow connected with a sound or unsound Stomach?

On Digestion.
Systems relative to this function.

(1.) BOERHAAVE's, which supposes two principal agents, viz. -- the different
fluids collected in the Stomach -- and its mechanical action. The secondary
agents are, (1.) heat, (2.) air, (3.) the nervous fluid, and (4.) an incipient
fermentation.

(2.) SIR JOHN PRINGLE's and DR. M'BRIDE's theory, who suppose it a
fermentative process. Fermentation divided into three stages. Chemical Analysis
of the gastric fluid; found to be neither acid, nor alcaline, but neutral.

Experiments in Papin's Digester, not applicable to the human Stomach. -- The
amazing power in the cold Stomach of some Fishes, sufficient to overturn the
system that supposes heat the grand instrument of digestion.

The amazing pressure of the Stomach as calculated by DR. PITCAIRN and others,
entirely without foundation.

The Experiments of SPALLANZANI.

How digestion is performed in animals with muscular Stomachs, as common fowls,
turkeys, pigeons, etc. Their food triturated previous to digestion, by muscles
called gizzards. The action of the gizzards upon sharp pointed metallic bodies.
-- Anatomical description of the Oesophagus and gizzards of fowls. -- Of the
Crop, its glands, cartilaginous coat and excretory ducts.

How digestion is performed in animals with intermediate stomachs; what we are
to understand by intermediate stomachs. Experiments proving that in such
animals, digestion is owing to the gastric fluid alone.

How digestion is performed in the reptile tribe; quicker accomplished in
warmer seasons. During their torpid state, flesh may remain in their stomachs
for months without putrefying.

How digestion is performed in scaly fishes. -- Anatomical description of their
stomach and intestines. Their stomachs remarkably cold, with no possibility of
triture. Some fish digest crabs, lobsters, shells and all. The bottom of their
stomachs digests substances sooner than the upper part. This solvent power
greater in the stomachs of fishes than any other creature we know of; few
animals can digest an entire live animal. In fishes the gastric fluid alone
dissolves the small live fish they swallow.

The process of digestion in sheep, oxen, and other ruminating animals; --
wherein their stomach and bowels differ from man's. How digestion is performed
in birds of prey -- anatomical description of their digestive organs, their
stomachs approach near to the human; have a double pancreas.

Result of experiments on the gastric juice of birds of prey; it will not
dissolve vegetables, even if boiled, yet their stomachs dissolve the hardest
bones. Digestion in birds of prey proved to be owing to the gastric fluid alone.

General observations on the gastric fluid of animals. Does not freeze so soon
as a solution of salt, or of simple water. The human gastric juice exposed for
weeks in the hottest seasons, suffers no change of color, taste or smell. The
gastric juice of birds of prey, dissolves flesh out of the body, sooner than
the process of putrefaction.

Flesh given to a sick bird of prey, found unaltered. -- Teeth given to the
same class of birds, the fangs dissolved, the enamel untouched! Horns and
tanned leather indissoluble -- the Tendo Achillis of an ox dried, perfectly
soluble. Raw flesh and other substances, dissolved when tied up in a linen, and
even in a broad-cloth bag, and thrown into the stomach of an eagle.

The process of digestion in animals with membranous stomachs. This class
comprehends the inhabitants of salt and fresh water; Amphibious animals, as the
tortoise, frog, water-snake, etc. Reptiles, as the viper, land-snake, etc.
Quadrupeds, as the horse, ox, cat, dog, etc. Also, birds of prey, as the eagle,
owl, etc. And lastly, MAN himself.

Of the advantages of comparative anatomy and analogical reasoning. Analogical
arguments probable, but not conclusive. How plausible inferences from well
known facts in brutes, occasioned many errors respecting man.

In some animals trituration of the food is necessary -- in man it is done by
the teeth -- in gallinaceous fowls, by the gizzards.

In frogs, serpents, birds, and fish of prey, no trituration takes place.

Wherein man's digestive faculties differ from all other animals.

Man is OMNIVOROUS.

Of the coaguable liquor of the human stomach -- Of the runnet in calves -- The
inner coat of the stomach of gallinaceous fowls, has the same property -- Those
with intermediate stomachs possess it likewise. The stomachs of various
reptiles, and several scaly fishes, have the faculty of curdling milk.

Is this coagulating property inherent in the internal coat, or is it owing to
the gastric fluid!

To imagine that nothing but acids coagulate milk, is to measure nature by our
own narrow prejudices? The blood of a certain animal will not coagulate milk,
but pieces of the heart, liver, lungs, and some other parts of the same animal,
will.

RECAPITULATION. The succus gastricus differs from all known solvents of art or
nature. It is at once, an antiseptic and solvent. In some quadrupeds, in some
birds of prey, it actually sweetens putrid flesh in less than two hours.

Wherein the succus gastricus essentially differs from the Saliva; hence the
fallacy attending Pringle and M'Bride's conclusions. The result of various
experiments made by Reaumur, Spallanzani, J. Hunter, Stevens, and others, only
confirms the opinion advanced two thousand years ago, by HIPPOCRATES.

If digestion is well performed, the chyle is proper, be the food ever so
various; the blood from the chyle natural -- the secretions -- nutriment -- and
excretions, regular; -- health, strength, and activity, will ensue -- disease
vanish. If digestion languish, the contrary happens, be the food what it may,
unless the injured faculties of digestion, be restored to their pristine and
natural state. Fothergill.


On the food of Man.
ALL the food used by mankind consists of farinaceous, or mucilaginous
vegetable substances or native vegetable acid -- or sugar or expressed oil, or
animal solids, or animal fluids, containing a mucilaginous matter -- all traced
ultimately to vegetables and water.

A view of the TERRAQUEOUS GLOBE. Of the CIRCULATION between the ocean, the
atmosphere, and earth. The whole terraqueous globe, sea as well as land,
together with the whole region of the atmosphere, happily contrived to afford
sweet and running waters, all of which have a reference to the original food of
man, VEGETABLES.

VEGETATION traced from the sowing of the seed, to the formation of the root --
the trunk -- the branch -- the flower -- the fruit -- and last of all, to the
seed again.

THE SEXUAL SYSTEM OF BOTANY, briefly explained.

Analogy of vegetables to animals.

CHAP. IV. Structure, Course, and Economy of the VALVULAR LYMPHATIC SYSTEM.
THE ABSORBENT SYSTEM consists of (1.) the Lacteals. (2.) The Common Lymphatic
Vessels. (3.) The Thoracic Duct. And (4.) the Glands, (...)

A Lymphatic, is a fine pellucid tube nearly cylindrical, divided by valves, so
as to have the resemblance of joints. Fordyce.


History of their discovery.

The Lacteals begin from the intestinal tube, and may with propriety be called
the Lymphatics of the Intestines, they begin with open mouths, in almost every
part of the body, as they do in the intestines.

The fluid they contain is colorless, like water; the course of their fluid is
from the extreme parts of the body to its center.

The coats of the Lymphatics have in common with other parts, arteries, veins,
and nerves.

The Lymphatic System in most animals, (...) found in the lymphatics of scaly
fishes,
but particularly in man and quadrupedes, is full of valves.

Description of the Conglobate or Lymphatic Glands. The Thoracic Duct, is a
lymphatic of the largest order: it begins near the Diaphragm, and commonly
terminates in the left subclavian vein; to it, as the common receptacle, the
whole lymphatic system tends.

In passing on toward the heart, the lymphatics enter the conglobate glands --
the manner described. Haller's opinion of the absorbing veins, erroneous. As
the arteries are evidently connected in structure and office with the Lacteals
or Lymphatics of the intestines, may they not in like manner with all the rest
in the system? Experiments rendering it highly probable that the Thoracic Duct
is not the general or only termination of the Lymphatics. Has the Brain
Lymphatics? Arguments for and against this opinion. Absorbent glands found in
the foramen caroticum in the basis of the skull. Why are the glands of the neck
more numerous in man than in any other animal?

On the action of the absorbents: objections to their acting on the principle
of Capillary, tubes according to Haller and others -- a particular stimulus
required. (See Vis Vitalis, p. 21.)

An explanation of their action attempted -- The probability of every living
body absorbing.

THE USE OF THE ABSORBENT OR LYMPHATIC SYSTEM.

The Lymphatics are the Modulators of the nutritive or arterial system. The
Lymphatics and arteries are perpetually counteracting each other. See part
second, on Dropsy.

For a particular description of the course of the Lymphatics, see System of
Anatomy, from Monro,-Winslow, and Innes, Edinburgh, 1784.




The Lymphatics take in our food -- They prepare several secreted liquors. The
Lymphatic glands, guard the system from poison by their inflammation and pain.

The Lymphatics take up the solids as well as the fluids of the body, proved by
experiment -- they eat off the roots of teeth in children, and absorb the
alveolar processes after the teeth drop out in old men. The separation of a
mortified part is by means of the absorbents. Their action further illustrated
in diseases of the bones. The absorbents regulate the quantity and quality of
the chyle.

Does the lymphatic system in certain diseases, where the patient cannot take
food into his stomach, absorb the fat to support the system? Observations on
animals that sleep all winter.

On favorable and unfavourable surfaces for absorption: An ulcer more
favorable to absorption than an inflammed part.

Does the presence of one infectious matter prevent the absorption of another?
See Cruiksh.


On the good effects of introducing morbific matter by a different rout from
what it would naturally take, as in inoculation. Can two infectious diseases
act on the body at the same time? See Cruiksh.


The absorbent system more active after sleep.

Miscellaneous observations.

CHAP. V. Nervous System.
THE BRAIN is that soft whitish mass which sills the cavity of the skull, and
is immediately surrounded by two membranes, called Meninges by the Greeks, and
Matres by other ancients: one is very strong, and lies contiguous to the skull;
the other is very thin, and immediately touches the brain. The first is called
Dura Matter, the last Pia Matter.

The brain is furnished with blood vessels in the same manner as the other
parts, excepting that larger arteries anastomose, and the smaller veins enter
more suddenly into a larger trunk, whose sides are of a firmer texture Fordyce.
.

In the more perfect or complicated animals, it is contained in the cavity of
the skull: -- in the less perfect, it is diffused all over the body.

In man, the brain is in a larger proportion to the whole body than any other
quadruped, or any bird, or fish hitherto known Fordyce.
.

From the white part, masses of fibers arise, which go to every part of the
body. These are called Nerves Fordyce.
.

But so ignorant are we of the origin of the nerves, that the lowest in the
spinal marrow may, for ought we know, come from the top of the brain.

One large mass passes down through the cavity of the spine, and is called the
spinal-marrow Fordyce.
.

The brain, spinal-marrow and nerves, are covered with membranes of a very firm
texture. The nerves sent to the organs of the senses, there lose their firm
coats, and terminate in a pulpy substance.

Of the connection and dependence of the nerves on the Hydraulic part of the
machine.

A general view of the Nervous System From Cullen's Physiology.
.
The nervous system, as the organ of sense and motion, is connected with so
many functions of the animal economy, that the study of it must be of the
utmost importance, and a fundamental part of the study of the whole economy.

The nervous system consists of the medullary substances of the brain,
cerebellum, medulla oblongata and spinalis, and of the same substance continued
into the nerves, by which it is distributed to many different parts of the body.

The whole of this system may be distinguised into four parts --

I. The medullary substance contained in the cranium and vertebral cavity; the
whole of which seems to consist of distinct fibers, but without the several
fibers being separated from each other by any evident enveloping membranes When
we speak of functions, which are, or may be in common to every part of this
portion of the nervous system, we shall speak of the whole under the title of
the Brain: but when it is necessary to distinguish particular parts, we shall
take care to avoid ambiguity. Cullen.
.

II. Connected with one part or other of ( I.) are the nerves, in which the
medullary substance is contained; but here more evidently divided into fibers,
each of which are separated from the others by an enveloping membrane derived
from the Pia Matter.

III. Parts of the extremities of certain nerves ( II.) in which the medullary
substance is divested of the enveloping membranes from the Pia Matter, and so
situated as to be exposed to the action of certain external bodies, and perhaps
so framed as to be affected by the action of certain bodies only: these we call
the sentient extremities of the nerves.

IV. Certain extremities of the nerves ( II.) so framed as to be capable of a
peculiar contractility; and in consequence of their situation and attachments,
to be by their contraction capable of moving most of the solid and fluid parts
of the body. These are named moving or muscular fibers.

That muscular fibers are a continuation of the medullary substance of the
brain and nerves, has not been shown by Anatomists, nor universally admitted by
Physiologists; but we now suppose it, and hope afterward to render it
sufficiently probable.

Are the Ganglions of the nerves to be considered as a part of the nervous
system distinguished by a peculiar function?

These several parts of the nervous system, are every where the same continous
medullary substance, which we suppose to be the vital solids, so constituted in
living animals, and in living systems only, as to admit of motions being
readily propagated from one part to every other part of the nervous system, so
long as the continuity and living state of the medullary substance remains.

In the living man there is an immaterial thinking substance or MIND; and every
phoenomenon of thinking is to be considered as an affection or faculty of the
mind alone. But this immaterial and thinking part of man, is so connected with
the material and corporeal part of him, and particularly with the nervous
system, that motions excited in this, give occasion to thought; and thought,
however occasioned, gives rise to new motions in the nervous system.

It is probable that the motions excited by the application of stimuli to a
moving and irritable part, or to the nerve going to a moving part, do not arise
in the brain, but immediately in the nerves, or in the part; the brain, in this
case, only keeping up the life of the part, and rendering it capable of motion
Fordyce.
.

A substance may act on one part as a stimulant or sedative, and have a less
effect, or none at all, when applied to another, although otherwise equally
irritable. Such stimuli are called specific See part fourth, on the action of
Medicine.
. (See the aphorisms on the Vis Vitalis.)

It has been conjectured by some, that motion was communicated to parts by a
fluid flowing through the nerves as tubes; by others, that it was communicated
by vibrations See Hartley, on Man.
, and by others, that it arises from electricity.

Is a nerve a better conductor of electricity than any other part in the same
state of moisture? By a moderate pressure the nervous influence is intercepted.

Natural History of the Torpedo. -- The organ which is said to collect the
electricity in this animal is not its brain, which is remarkably small.

Reason and Instinct compared.
REASON is a self-improving power or faculty of the mind.

INSTINCT is that discretion which in different degrees is diffused through
every animal, directing them to choose what is good, and to avoid what would be
destructive to them. It attains its perfection at once, and is most apparent
where reason is weakest.

On Custom and Habit.
Custom is the frequent repetition of any application to the body, capable of
affecting the sensible or irritable parts; or it is the repetition of any
action or motion of the body Fordyce.
.

Habit is the effect of such repetition.

On EXERCISE, REST, and SLEEP.

CHAPTER VI. On the PRIMORDIA OF ANIMALS.
THE GENERATION of animals has excited the curiosity of Philosophers and
Physicians from the time of ARISTOTLE to the present; still it is involved in
impenetrable darkness.

There are facts sufficient to entirely destroy the two famous systems of the
Epigenosists, and the Vermiculists. It is, moreover, a vain and useless
speculation: the two extremes of nature, the very great, and the very small,
are out of sight; from the grandeur of the one, and the subtilty of the other,
Admiration itself is soon overpowered, and sinks into undiscerning amazement!

Quomodo ignoras quod venti vestigium, qualia sint in Proegnantis Utero ossa:
sic DEI opus ignoras qui facit omnia! ECCLESIASTES, chap. xi. ver. 5.

END OF PART THE FIRST.
In page 5, line 7, of the Introduction, read, " this goodly frame the EARTH."


