A TREATY OF AMITY AND OF COMMERCE BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, AND
HIS MAJESTY, THE KING OF PRUSSIA.

1786.

Wednesday, May 17, 1786.
CONGRESS took into Consideration a Treaty of Amity and Commerce between his
majesty the King of Prussia and the United States of America; and adopted and
ratified the same, nine states being present, in the manner following:

The United States of America, in Congress assembled:
To all to whom these presents shall come, Greeting:

WHEREAS a treaty of Amity and Commerce, between his majesty the king of
Prussia, and the United States of America, was concluded and signed by the
plenipotentiaries of the said United States, and by the plenipotentiary of his
said majesty, duly and respectively authorized for that purpose, at the places
of their respective residence, and at the dates expressed under their several
signatures; which said treaty, written both in the American and French
languages, is (in the American) in the words following, to wit,

A TREATY of AMITY and COMMERCE between his Majesty the King of Prussia, and
the United States of America.
HIS majesty the king of Prussia, and the United States of America, desiring to
fix, in a permanent and equitable manner, the rules to be observed in the
intercourse and commerce they desire to establish between their respective
countries, his majesty and the United States have judged that the said end
cannot be better obtained than by taking the most perfect equality and
reciprocity for the basis of their agreement.

With this view his majesty the king of Prussia has nominated and constituted
as his plenipotentiary the baron Frederick William de Thulemeier, his privy
counselor of embassy, and envoy extraordinary, with their high mightinesses
the States General of the United Netherlands; and the United States have, on
their part, given full powers to John Adams, esquire, late one of their
ministers plenipotentiary for negociating a peace, heretofore a delegate in
Congress from the state of Massachusetts, and chief justice of the same, and
now minister plenipotentiary of the United States with his Britannic Majesty;
doctor Benjamin Franklin, late minister plenipotentiary at the court of
Versailles, and another of their ministers plenipotentiary for negociating a
peace; and Thomas Jefferson, heretofore a delegate in Congress from the state
of Virginia, and governor of the said state, and now minister plenipotentiary
of the United States at the court of his most Christian Majesty: Which
respective plenipotentiaries, after having exchanged their full powers, and on
mature deliberation, have concluded, settled, and signed the following articles.

ARTICLE I.
There shall be a firm, inviolable, and universal peace and sincere friendship
between his majesty the king of Prussia, his heirs, successors, and subjects,
on the one part, and the United States of America, and their citizens on the
other, without exceptions of persons or places.

ARTICLE II.
The subjects of his majesty the king of Prussia may frequent all the coasts
and countries of the United-States of America, and reside and trade there in
all sorts of produce, manufactures, and merchandise; and shall pay within the
said United States no other or greater duties, charges, or fees, whatsoever,
than the most favored nations are or shall be obliged to pay; and they shall
enjoy all the rights, privileges, and exemptions, in navigation and commerce,
which the most favored nation does or shall enjoy; submitting themselves,
nevertheless, to the laws and usages there established, and to which are
submitted the citizens of the United States, and the citizens and subjects of
the most favored nations.

ARTICLE III.
In like manner the citizens of the United States of America may frequent all
the coasts and countries of his majesty the king of Prussia, and reside and
trade there in all sorts of produce, manufactures, and merchandise, and shall
pay, in the dominions of his said majesty, no other or greater duties, charges,
or fees whatsoever, than the most favored nation is or shall be obliged to pay;
and they shall enjoy all the rights, privileges, and exemptions, in navigation
and commerce, which the most favored nation does or shall enjoy; submitting
themselves nevertheless to the laws and usages there established, and to which
are submitted the subjects of his majesty the king of Prussia, and the subjects
and citizens of the most favored nations.

ARTICLE IV.
More especially each party shall have a right to carry their own produce,
manufactures, and merchandise, in their own or any other vessels, to any parts
of the dominions of the other, where it shall be lawful for all the subjects or
citizens of that other freely to purchase them; and thence to take the produce,
manufactures, and merchandise of the other, which all the said citizens or
subjects shall in like manner be free to sell them, paying in both cases such
duties, charges, and fees only, as are or shall be paid by the most favored
nation. Nevertheless the king of Prussia and the United States, and each of
them, reserve to themselves the right, where any nation restrains the
transportation of merchandise to the vessels of the country of which it is the
growth or manufacture, to establish against such nation retaliating
regulations; and also the right to prohibit, in their respective countries, the
importation and exportation of all merchandise whatsoever, when reasons of
state shall require it. In this case the subjects or citizens of either of the
contracting parties shall not import nor export the merchandise prohibited by
the other; but if one of the contracting parties permits any other nation to
import or export the same merchandise, the citizens or subjects of the other
shall immediately enjoy the same liberty.

ARTICLE V.
The merchants, commanders of vessels, or other subjects or citizens of either
party, shall not, within the ports or jurisdiction of the other, be forced to
unload any sort of merchandise into any other vessels, nor to receive them into
their own, nor to wait for their being loaded longer than they please.

ARTICLE VI.
That the vessels of either party loading within the ports or jurisdiction of
the other, may not be uselessly harassed or detained, it is agreed that all
examinations of goods required by the laws, shall be made before they are laden
on board the vessel, and that there shall be no examination after; nor shall
the vessel be searched at any time, unless articles shall have been laden
therein clandestinely and illegally, in which case the person by whose order
they were carried on board, or who carried them without order, shall be liable
to the laws of the land in which he is, but no other person shall be molested,
nor shall any other goods, nor the vessel be seized or detained for that cause.

ARTICLE VII.
Each party shall endeavor, by all the means in their power, to protect and
defend all vessels and other effects belonging to the citizens or subjects of
the other, which shall be within the extent of their jurisdiction, by sea or by
land; and shall use all their efforts to recover, and cause to be restored to
their right owners, their vessels and effects which shall be taken from them
within the extent of their said jurisdiction.

ARTICLE VIII.
The vessels of the subjects or citizens of either party, coming on any coast
belonging to the other, but not willing to enter into port, or being entered
into port, and not willing to unload their cargoes or break bulk, shall have
liberty to depart, and to pursue their voyage without molestation, and without
being obliged to render account of their cargo, or to pay any duties, charges,
or fees whatsoever, except those established for vessels entered into port, and
appropriated to the maintenance of the port itself, or of other establishments
for the safety and convenience of navigators; which duties, charges, and fees
shall be the same, and shall be paid on the same footing, as in the case of
subjects or citizens of the country where they are established.

ARTICLE IX.
When any vessel of either party shall be wrecked, foundered, or otherwise
damaged on the coasts, or within the dominion of the other, their respective
subjects or citizens shall receive, as well for themselves as for their vessels
and effects, the same assistance which would be due to the inhabitants of the
country where the damage happens, and shall pay the same charges and dues only
as the said inhabitants would be subject to pay in a like case; and if the
operations of repair shall require that the whole or any part of their cargo be
unladed, they shall pay no duties, charges, or fees on the part which they
shall relade and carry away. The ancient and barbarous right to wrecks of the
sea shall be entirely abolished, with respect to the subjects or citizens of
the two contracting parties.

ARTICLE X.
The citizens or subjects of each party shall have power to dispose of their
personal goods within the jurisdiction of the other, by testament, donation, or
otherwise; and their representatives, being subjects or citizens of the other
party, shall succeed to their said personal goods, whether by testament or ab
intestato, and may take possession thereof, either by themselves or by others
acting for them, and dispose of the same at their will, paying such dues only
as the inhabitants of the country wherein the said goods are shall be subject
to pay in like cases; and in case of the absence of the representative, such
care shall be taken of the said goods, and for so long a time, as would be
taken of the goods of a native in like case, until the lawful owner may take
measures for receiving them. And if question shall arise among several
claimants, to which of them the said goods belong, the same shall be decided
finally by the laws and judges of the land wherein the said goods are. And
where, on the death of any person holding real estate within the territories of
the one party, such real estate would by the laws of the land descend on a
citizen or subject of the other, were he not disqualified by alienage, such
subject shall be allowed a reasonable time to sell the same, and to withdraw
the proceeds without molestation, and exempt from all rights of detraction on
the part of the government of the respective states. But this article shall not
derogate in any manner from the force of the laws already published or
hereafter to be published, by his majesty the king of Prussia, to prevent the
emigration of his subjects.

ARTICLE XI.
The most perfect freedom of conscience and of worship is granted to the
citizens or subjects of either party, within the jurisdiction of the other,
without being liable to molestation in that respect, for any cause, other than
an insult on the religion of others. Moreover, when the subjects or citizens of
the one party shall die within the jurisdiction of the other, their bodies
shall be buried in the usual burying-grounds, or other decent and suitable
places, and shall be protected from violation or disturbance.

ARTICLE XII.
If one of the contracting parties should be engaged in war with any other
power, the free intercourse and commerce of the subjects or citizens of the
party remaining neuter with the belligerent powers shall not be interrupted. On
the contrary, in that case as in full peace, the vessels of the neutral party
may navigate freely to and from the ports, and on the coasts of the belligerent
parties, free vessels making free goods, insomuch that all things shall be
adjudged free which shall be on board any vessel belonging to the neutral
party, although such things belong to an enemy of the other; and the same
freedom shall be extended to persons who shall be on board a free vessel,
although they should be enemies to the other party, unless they be soldiers in
actual service of such enemy.

ARTICLE XIII.
And in the same case of one of the contracting parties being engaged in war
with any other power, to prevent all the difficulties and misunderstandings
that usually arise respecting the merchandise heretofore called contraband,
such as arms, ammunition, and military stores of every kind, no such articles
carried in the vessels, or by the subjects or citizens of one of the parties,
to the enemies of the other, shall be deemed contraband, so as to induce
confiscation or condemnation, and a loss of property to individuals.
Nevertheless it shall be lawful to stop such vessels and articles, and to
detain them for such length of time, as the captors may think necessary to
prevent the inconvenience or damage that might ensue from their proceeding,
paying, however, a reasonable compensation for the loss such arrest shall
occasion to the proprietors: And it shall further be allowed to use, in the
service of the captors, the whole or any part of the military stores so
detained, paying the owners the full value of the same, to be ascertained by
the current price at the place of its destination. But in the case supposed, of
a vessel stopped for articles heretofore deemed contraband, if the master of
the vessel stopped will deliver out the goods supposed to be of contraband
nature, he shall be admitted to do it, and the vessel shall not in that case be
carried into any port, nor further detained, but shall be allowed to proceed on
her voyage.

ARTICLE XIV.
And in the same case where one of the parties is engaged in war with another
power, that the vessels of the neutral party may be readily and certainly
known, it is agreed, that they shall be provided with sea-letters, or
passports, which shall express the name, the property, and burden of the
vessel, as also the name and dwelling of the master, which passports shall be
made out in good and due forms (to be settled by conventions between the
parties whenever occasion shall require); shall be renewed as often as the
vessel shall return into port; and shall be exhibited whenever required, as
well in the open sea as in port. But if the said vessel be under convoy of one
or more vessels of war belonging to the neutral party, the simple declaration
of the officer commanding the convoy, that the said vessel belongs to the party
of which he is, shall be considered as establishing the fact, and shall relieve
both parties from the trouble of further examination.

ARTICLE XV.
And to prevent entirely all disorder and violence in such cases, it is
stipulated, that when the vessels of the neutral party, sailing without convoy,
shall be met by any vessel of war, public or private, of the other party, such
vessel of war shall not approach within cannon-shot of the said neutral vessel,
nor send more than two or three men in their boat on board the same, to examine
her sea-letters or passports. And all persons belonging to any vessel of war,
public or private, who shall molest, or injure, in any manner whatever, the
people, vessels, or effects of the other party, shall be responsible in their
persons and property for damages and interest, sufficient security for which
shall be given by all commanders of private armed vessels before they are
commissioned.

ARTICLE XVI.
It is agreed that the subjects or citizens of each of the contracting parties,
their vessels and effects, shall not be liable to any embargo or detention on
the part of the other, for any military expedition, or other public or private
purpose whatsoever. And in all cases of seizure, detention, or arrest, for
debts contracted or offenses committed by any citizen or subject of the one
party, within the jurisdiction of the other, the same shall be made and
prosecuted by order and authority of law only, and according to the regular
course of proceedings usual in such cases.

ARTICLE XVII.
If any vessel or effects of the neutral power be taken by an enemy of the
other, or by a pirate, and retaken by that other, they shall be brought into
some port of one of the parties, and delivered into the custody of the officers
of that port, in order to be restored entire to the true proprietor, as soon as
due proof shall be made concerning the property thereof.

ARTICLE XVIII.
If the citizens or subjects of either party, in danger from tempests, pirates,
enemies, or other accident, shall take refuge, with their vessels or effects,
within the harbors or jurisdiction of the other, they shall be received,
protected, and treated with humanity and kindness, and shall be permitted to
furnish themselves, at reasonable prices, with all refreshments, provisions,
and other things necessary for their sustenance, health, and accommodation, and
for the repair of their vessels.

ARTICLE XIX.
The vessels of war, public and private, of both parties, shall carry freely
wheresoever they please the vessels and effects taken from their enemies,
without being obliged to pay any duties, charges, or fees to officers of
admiralty, of the customs, or any others; nor shall such prizes be arrested,
searched, or put under legal process, when they come to, and enter the ports of
the other party, but may freely be carried out again at any time by their
captors, to the places expressed in their commissions, which the commanding
officer of such vessels shall be obliged to show. But no vessel which shall
have made prizes on the subjects of his most Christian Majesty the king of
France, shall have a right of asylum in the ports or havens of the said United
States; and if any such be forced therein by tempest, or dangers of the sea,
they shall be obliged to depart as soon as possible, according to the tenor of
the treaties existing between his said most Christian Majesty and the said
United States.

ARTICLE XX.
No citizen or subject of either of the contracting parties shall take from any
power with which the other may be at war any commission or letter of marque for
arming any vessel to act as a privateer against the other, on pain of being
punished as a pirate; nor shall either party hire, lend, or give any part of
their naval or military force to the enemy of the other, to aid them
offensively or defensively against that other.

ARTICLE XXI.
If the two contracting parties should be engaged in war against a common
enemy, the following points shall be observed between them.

1st. If a vessel of one of the parties, retaken by a privateer of the other,
shall not have been in possession of the enemy more than twenty-four hours, she
shall be restored to the first owner for one-third of the value of the vessel
and cargo; but if she shall have been more than twenty-four hours in possession
of the enemy, she shall belong wholly to the recaptor.

2d. If in the same case the recapture were by a public vessel of war of the
one party, restitution shall be made to the owner for one thirtieth part of the
value of the vessel and cargo, if she shall not have been in the possession of
the enemy more than twenty-four hours, and one tenth of the said value where
she shall have been longer, which sums shall be distributed in gratuities to
the recaptors.

3d. The restitution in the cases aforesaid shall be after due proof of
property, and surety given for the part to which the recaptors are entitled.

4th. The vessels of war, public and private, of the two parties, shall be
reciprocally admitted with their prizes into the respective ports of each: but
the said prizes shall not be discharged nor sold there, until their legality
shall have been decided according to the laws and regulations of the states to
which the captor belongs, but by the judicatures of the place into which the
prize shall have been conducted.

5th. It shall be free to each party to make such regulations as they shall
judge necessary for the conduct of their respective vessels of war, public and
private, relative to the vessels which they shall take and carry into the ports
of the two parties.

ARTICLE XXII.
Where the parties shall have a common enemy, or shall both be neutral, the
vessels of war of each shall upon all occasions take under their protection the
vessels of the other going the same course, and shall defend such vessels as
long as they hold the same course, against all force and violence, in the same
manner as they ought to protect and defend vessels belonging to the party of
which they are.

ARTICLE XXIII.
If war should arise between the two contracting parties, the merchants of
either country, then residing in the other, shall be allowed to remain nine
months to collect their debts and settle their affairs, and may depart freely,
carrying off all their effects, without molestation or hindrance: And all women
and children, scholars of every faculty, cultivators of the earth, artizans,
manufacturers, and fishermen, unarmed and inhabiting unfortified towns,
villages, or places, and in general all others whose occupations are for the
common subsistence and benefit of mankind, shall be allowed to continue their
respective employments, and shall not be molested in their persons, nor shall
their houses or goods be burnt, or otherwise destroyed, nor their fields wasted
by the armed force of the enemy into whose power, by the events of war, they
may happen to fall; but if any thing is necessary to be taken from them for the
use of such armed force, the same shall be paid for at a reasonable price. And
all merchant and trading vessels employed in exchanging the products of
different places, and thereby rendering the necessaries, conveniences, and
comforts of human life more easy to be obtained, and more general, shall be
allowed to pass free and unmolested, and neither of the contracting powers
shall grant or issue any commission to any private armed vessels, empowering
them to take or destroy such trading vessels, or interrupt such commerce.

ARTICLE XXIV.
And to prevent the destruction of prisoners of war, by sending them into
distant and inclement countries, or by crouding them into close and noxious
places, the two contracting parties solemnly pledge themselves to each other,
and to the world, that they will not adopt any such practice; that neither will
send the prisoners whom they may take from the other into the East Indies, or
any other parts of Asia or Africa, but that they shall be placed in some part
of their dominions in Europe or America, in wholesome situations; that they
shall not be confined in dungeons, prison-ships, nor prisons, nor be put into
irons, nor bound, nor otherwise restrained in the use of their limbs; that the
officers shall be enlarged on their paroles within convenient districts, and
have comfortable quarters, and the common men be disposed in cantonments, open
and extensive enough for air and exercise, and lodged in barracks as roomy and
good as are provided by the party in whose power they are for their own troops;
that the officers shall also be daily furnished, by the party in whose power
they are, with as many rations, and of the same articles and quality, as are
allowed by them, either in kind or by commutation, to officers of equal rank in
their own army; and all others shall be daily furnished by them with such
ration as they allow to a common soldier in their own service; the value
whereof shall be paid by the other party on a mutual adjustment of accounts for
the subsistence of prisoners at the close of the war; and the said accounts
shall not be mingled with, or set off against any others, nor the balances due
on them be withheld as a satisfaction or reprisal for any other article, or for
any other cause, real or pretended, whatever; that each party shall be allowed
to keep a commissary of prisoners of their own appointment, with every separate
cantonment of prisoners in possession of the other, which commissary shall see
the prisoners as often as he pleases, shall be allowed to receive and
distribute whatever comforts may be sent to them by their friends, and shall be
free to make his reports in open letters to those who employ him; but if any
officer shall break his parole, or any other prisoner shall escape from the
limits of his cantonment, after they shall have been designated to him, such
individual officer, or other prisoner, shall forfeit so much of the benefit of
this article as provides for his enlargement on parole or cantonment. And it is
declared, that neither the pretense that war dissolves all treaties, nor any
other whatever, shall be considered as annulling or suspending this and the
next preceding article, but on the contrary, that the state of war is precisely
that for which they are provided, and during which they are to be as sacredly
observed as the most acknowledged articles in the law of nature or nations.

ARTICLE XXV.
The two contracting parties grant to each other the liberty of having each in
the ports of the other consuls, vice-consuls, agents, and commissaries of their
own appointment, whose functions shall be regulated by particular agreement
whenever either party shall choose to make such appointment; but if any such
consuls shall exercise commerce, they shall be submitted to the same laws and
usages to which the private individuals of their nation are submitted in the
same place.

ARTICLE XXVI.
If either party shall hereafter grant to any other nation any particular
favor in navigation or commerce, it shall immediately become common to the
other party, freely, where it is freely granted to such other nation, or on
yielding the compensation where such nation does the same.

ARTICLE XXVII.
His majesty the King of Prussia, and the United States of America, agree that
this treaty shall be in force during the term of ten years from the exchange of
ratifications, and if the expiration of that term should happen during the
course of a war between them, then the articles before provided for the
regulation of their conduct during such a war shall continue in force until the
conclusion of the treaty which shall re-establish peace; and that this treaty
shall be ratified on both sides, and the ratifications exchanged within one
year from the day of its signature.

In testimony whereof, the plenipotentiaries before mentioned have hereto
subscribed their names, and affixed their seals, at the places of their
respective residence, and at the dates expressed under their several signatures.

F. G. de Thulemeier, a la Hage, le 10 Septembre, 1785. (L. S.)
(L. S.) Tho. Jefferson. Paris, July 28, 1785. (L. S.) B. Franklin. Passy, July
9, 1785. (L. S.) John Adams. London, August 5, 1785.
NOW KNOW YE, That we the said United States in Congress assembled, having
considered and approved, do hereby ratify and confirm the said treaty, and
every article and clause therein contained. In testimony whereof, we have
caused our seal to be hereunto affixed. Witness the hon. Nathaniel Gorham, our
chairman in the absence of his excellency John Hancock, our president, the
seventeenth day of May, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and
eighty-six, and of our independence and sovereignty, the tenth.

On the question to agree to this ratification, the yeas and nays being
required by Mr. King: New Hampshire, Mr. Long ay * Massachusetts, Mr. Gorham ay
ay Mr. King ay Mr. Dane ay Rhode Island, Mr. Manning ay * Connecticut, Mr.
Johnson ay ay Mr. Mitchell ay New York, Mr. Haring ay ay Mr. Smith ay
New Jersey, Mr. Symmes ay ay Mr. Hornblower ay Pennsylvania, Mr. Pettit ay ay
Mr. Bayard ay Mr. St. Clair ay Mr. Wilson ay Delaware, Mr. Patten ay ay Mr.
Rodney ay Maryland, Mr. Hindman ay ay Mr. Harrison ay Virginia, Mr. Grayson ay
ay Mr. Monroe ay North Carolina, Mr. Blount ay ay Mr. Bloodworth ay Mr. White
ay South Carolina, Mr. Pinckney ay * Georgia, Mr. Few ay * So it was
unanimously resolved in the affirmative.


