AN ESSAY ON CREDIT, In which the Doctrine of BANKS Is CONSIDERED, And some
Remarks are made on the present State OF THE BANK OF NORTH AMERICA

By a Citizen of PHILADELPHIA.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by ELEAZER OSWALD, at the Coffee-House. M,DCC,LXXXVI.

AN ESSAY on CREDIT, etc.
CREDIT is the confidence which mankind place in the virtue and good character
of its object; so when we say of a man, he is a person of credit and
reputation, the meaning is, that he is a man in whose virtue and good character
people in general place confidence.

CREDIT, in a commercial sense, is the confidence which people place in a man's
integrity and punctuality, in fulfilling his contracts, and performing his
engagements. When we speak of a merchant of credit, we mean a merchant, in
whose ability, integrity, and punctuality, in fulfilling his contracts and
engagements, people have confidence, i. e. a man of integrity and truth, who is
fit to be believed and trusted; the contrary or reverse of this, i. e. a man of
no credit is a man of no integrity in his dealings, who will quibble and
shuffle, evade his contracts, violate his word and truth, delay his payments,
disappoint his creditors, use deceit, chicanery and falsehood, etc. i. e. is not
sit to be believed or trusted. -- From this view of the matter, it appears that
credit is a most valuable thing in society, it gives hearts ease, it gives
wealth, it is a nurse of every social virtue, it makes a soil suitable for the
growth of public spirit and every public virtue; the worth and value of this
may perhaps be best illustrated by comparing it or viewing it in contrast, with
its contrary; how much better do we feel? how much richer do we grow? how much
more easy, safe and satisfied do we enjoy ourselves? when we live among
citizens to whom we can give full credit, in whom we can have safe confidence,
and whom we can trust, than when we find ourselves among people to whom we can
give no credit, in whom we can have no confidence, and whom we cannot trust,
and where every concern or contract we make with them is attended with anxiety,
uneasiness and fear, and commonly followed by deceit, loss and disappointment;
in this case, I desire, I can need no better argument, no better proof, no
better explanation of my subject, than an appeal to the instant feelings of my
fellow-citizens.

BUT however valuable and excellent in society, however profitable and
haypyfying, however soothing to our warmest wishes credit public or private may
be, it is in vain to hope for it, or even to imagine the possibility of its
existence, without its proper object, which is honesty or integrity, it can no
more be forced by laws, it can no more be obtruded by authority, however high
and puissant, than an article of faith can be forced on the understanding,
without proper proof or evidence. -- Credit and honesty are in their nature
correlatives, and must and forever will imply and support each other. Integrity
will generate credit and confidence the moment it is known in any part of the
world, and the moment that integrity or honesty is observed to cease, the
credit or confidence which was generated by it, instantly ceases too; it dies,
it can never be brought to draw another breath, after the integrity which
generated it, and supplied all its vital motions, is gone.

IT IS here to be noted, that however necessary and even essential integrity is
to credit, yet in a commercial sense, i. e. as far as it relates to trade,
money or wealth, it is not the only thing necessary, power or ability must be
added, for however clear and plain it is, that an honest man will never
contract beyond his power of performance, yet it often happens that his power
of performance may be much lessened between the time of contract and the time
of fulfillment, by many incidents, which may and do often take place, which at
once lessen his credit, or the confidence of his neighbors in his engagements;
these incidents often affect honest merchants so deeply, as to occasion their
failure or bankruptcy, and their failure often produces another in their
creditors, that a third and that a fourth, etc. This succession of failures
often originates in a swindler or rascal, who knowingly contracts vastly beyond
his ability of performance, and of course ruins not only himself, but a
numerous succession of honest men. This affords us one instance of the vast
mischief which a community may and often does suffer from one dishonest man
residing among them; very many others might be produced of like mischief,
effected in a great variety of ways, and to such a degree that a national
character may be deeply stained by the iniquity and knavery of a few. This
shows that it is of most serious consequence to every state, to use every
possible means, not only to preserve the national credit and character of their
state in good purity and honor, but also to introduce as far as may be, habits
of integrity and honor among their citizens, and extirpate, as far as can be
done, all such villainous and scandalous practices, as naturally tend to
disgrace the national character, and ruin the fortunes of private citizens.

THESE observations will appear with greater force and advantage, if we recur
for a moment, to what I just now mentioned, viz. the great ease, satisfaction,
and convenience of living in a state where the public finance is so managed,
that all private citizens can safely rely on the justice and punctuality of the
public engagements, and where the habits of honesty and integrity are so
general among the private citizens, that they may safely trust one another, so
that credit and mutual confidence in each other may prevail through the
community. Thus circumstanced, every man may safely employ his stock in any
business of advantage, either of merchandise, mechanism, or husbandry; whereas
if he lived in a state, and among citizens of contrary character, he would be
afraid to let his stock go out of his own keeping, least it should fall into
hands either public or private, which would retain it from him, so that he
could not recover it again, though the advantages of improvement both to the
public and himself, might be very great and inviting. -- In a state, and among
citizens so happily disposed, any man, with industry and economy, though his
means were small, might live very easy and comfortable, and the man of fortune
might improve his estate very safely and happily, to the great advantage both
of the public and himself. Strangers would have every encouragement to flock in
to such a state, and thereby increase the population, and of course the
commerce, manufactures, and husbandry of it.

FROM this view of the subject it appears strikingly evident, that credit, both
public and private, and the mutual confidence of citizens in the public
justice, and in each other, is of most momentous advantage, of most capital
convenience, both to the public and to the individual members of it, it
contributes most decidedly and essentially to the internal establishment,
security and safety of the government, and to the ease, wealth and happiness of
private citizens, therefore it follows, that it is the high interest, and great
duty of every state to adopt and pursue every practicable method of securing,
enlarging and extending to the utmost degree, all the advantages and blessings
which can result from such public and private credit, and the mutual confidence
of the subjects of the state, in the public and in each other.

THE wisest and richest nations of Europe, long before we were born, have seen
this subject and its most momentous importance, in a light so strong and
glaring, as induced them to adopt every practicable method in their power, to
secure to themselves such invaluable advantages. -- In their practice we have
an example, and in their success we have encouragement, and very strong
inducement to imitate it.

FOR this purpose the richest trading cities of Europe, long since adopted the
plan of establishing public banks; this plan they formed upon the most
deliberate consideration; they had the greatest opportunities of information,
had the greatest experience in the subject; they knew the importance, operation
and effects of both cash and credit, the best of any men then in the world, as
their trade and wealth were then the greatest of any in the world. -- It is not
to be supposed that their first essays reached the perfection of the subject,
but they found advantages enough in their first trial, to induce them to
continue the practice ever since.

Genoa was the first state in Europe which established a public bank; their
bank of St. George was established in 1407, by a public act of that republic.
The plan was soon followed by Venice, whose bank, which continues to this day
with the greatest advantage to the state, as well as to their private citizens,
and has ever been in the highest reputation and credit both at home and through
all Europe, was established by a public act of their state. The city of
Amsterdam long after followed their example, and their present bank received a
public establishment by an act of their States General, in 1609. The cities of
Rotterdam and Hamburgh adopted the same practice; and England, who is always
phlegmatic and late in adopting the example of the other European states,
instituted and established its bank in 1694; and France, whose attention in
those days was little turned to improvements in trade, came later into it,
their royal bank at Paris was established by public authority in 1718, besides
these, very many other banks of less extent and consequence, both public and
private, are now established in the trading cities of Europe, and banks are
become the great receptacles of the cash of Europe, and almost all mercantile
receipts and payments are made through them.

THE bank of Genoa indeed failed in 1746, after that republic had for a great
length of time enjoyed most signal and capital benefits from it, but its ruin
was not brought on by any defect of its principle, or mismanagement of its
Directors, but by the madness of the rulers of that state; they were not mad
enough indeed to decry it as a useless or dangerous institution, but they
adopted the contrary extreme, they magnified its strength and power too much,
and compelled the Directors to make advances to the state, beyond what their
funds would bear.

THE other banks have continued to this day, and with such incredible and most
acknowledged benefit to the several states in which they are established, that
their credit or decline has generally been considered as a sort of sure
criterion of the strength or weekness of the state in which they are
established. When nations are at war, they ever have thought it a sure way to
bring on fatal embarrassments on an enemy, if they can by any possible means
shake the credit of their bank, and every state has always been ready to go
great lengths to support their bank, if by any turn of affairs it has happened
to be in distress.

IT must therefore be very absurd to suppose, that such an institution can be
hurtful or even useless, that has stood the test of such extensive and durable
trial and practice, among so many nations of the greatest experience, and most
accurate knowledge of the subject; an institution through which not only the
cash of private merchants, but of the greatest and richest trading companies,
and even the treasure of nations, has been so long negociated, and which,
through so great a length of time up to this very hour, supports its credit,
and character of vast utility, by the universal suffrage of nations, through all
ranks of people, from crowns and the most dignified assemblies of statesmen,
and the most wealthy companies of merchants, down to the lowest dealer.

BUT all this notwithstanding people may be found little acquainted with the
subject, and wholly unexperienced in it, who will give their opinion that such
an institution is injurious to a state, and incompatible with the safety of it.
This may be considered as an instance and proof of that height of absurdity,
which people may arrive at, who grow zealous and positive in things they do not
understand.

BUT however well the nature of banks may be understood in Europe, and however
immense the advantages and profits which are derived from them, may be, yet the
thing is new in America, and by many people thought unfavorably of.

THE BANK of North America, though established by act of Congress (December 31,
1781) which is the highest authority of the union, and recognized expressly by
many of the states, and implicitly by them all, is nevertheless treated by many
people here, as a most dangerous and injurious thing, utterly incompatible with
the safety of the state, and of course they think it ought to be demolished
without ceremony, and that the common forms of dissolution are unnecessary, as
people are not very nice in the manner, or delicate in the choice of means of
hunting down a beast of prey, or destroying a common enemy.

BUT as I suppose my fellow-citizens will ever be willing to hear before they
condemn a thing that has once saved them, and very often afforded many of them
a material convenience, I apprehend a short dissertation, showing the nature of
a bank, will not be unacceptable.

A BANK is a large repository of cash, deposited under the direction of proper
officers (say a President and Directors) for the purpose of establishing and
supporting a great and extensive credit, to be made use of in every case where
an established credit will answer in exchange or payment, as well as cash, or
better than cash, as in many circumstances will manifestly and undoubtedly be
the case; for instance, suppose this state should erect and establish a bank,
and order all the revenues of the state to be paid into it, and should direct
that all the debts of the state should be paid in bank-bills of the same bank,
payable to the owner or bearer, which bearer should have liberty, whenever he
pleases, to carry his bill to the bank, and receive cash for it, and should
direct further, that if such bank-bills, in any circumstance, happen to suit
any citizen better than cash, he should be at liberty to carry his cash to the
bank, and take out bank-bills for it.

THIS would be a public or state-bank, because the stock of it would be the
money of the public, and the officers of it would be appointed by the public,
i. e. by the General Assembly, or President and Council.

THE effect or operation of such a bank, when its credit becomes established
(i. e. when the people at large believed with full confidence, that the fund or
stock was sufficient, and the management fair and upright) I say the operation
or effect of such a bank would be, that very few of the people who should be
possessed of such bank-bills, would carry them into the bank, and receive cash
for them, because the bills would answer by far ^he greatest part of the
purposes of cash as well as cash, i. e. they would purchase any kind of
commodities, and pay any kind of debts as well as cash, as we find is the case
of the bank-bills of the bank of North America, at this time.

FURTHER such bills would not only be as good as cash for almost every purpose,
where cash is used or needed, but on many accounts they would be better than
cash, as any sum of them is easier and more certainly counted than cash; the
danger of counterfeits would be less* the carriage would be easier; they would
be less exposed to thefts and robberies than cash, (for a man can conceal from
a thief a thousand dollars in bills, or run from a robber with them, easier
than with a thousand dollars of silver); in case they are destroyed by fire,
water, or other accident, they are not lost, but on proof made at the bank,
they may be replaced, etc.

THE advantages would be still greater, if instead of bank-bills, the owner
should take a bank credit, and draw checks on the bank, whenever he needed his
money; this would enable him to pay any sum exactly, without the trouble of
making change, he would be able in any future time to prove his payments, if he
kept his checks which he received cancelled from the bank, as every man ought
to do; this would at once free him from all danger of loss by fire, robbers,
mislaying, dropping them on the road, etc etc. This practice is found by
experience to be so very convenient, that it is almost universally adopted by
people who keep their cash in our present bank.

THESE and many other advantages which bank-bills or bank credit have beyond
what cash can have, would doubtless induce most people to prefer bills or bank
credit to cash, and of course very few possessors of either would demand cash
at the bank, the consequence of which would be, that at the end of the year
much of the cash would remain in the bank, though the whole amount of the
bank-stock should have been paid out in bills, and been constantly circulating
among the people, with every advantage that cash could have, and many other
very valuable advantages that cash could not have, as has been just now shown.

THE benefits or uses of the bank when thus e^^^^lished, are various: 1, The
bank gains all the ^^^^^per, i. e. all such bank-bills as are lost (where (...)
cannot be proved) and of course can never be br^^^ (...) the bank for redemption
or payment. 2, The bank can on any public emergency emit bank-bills, beyond the
amount of the cash or stock in the bank, and of course can have the benefit of
a considerable sum to circulate or use for the public benefit, without paying
interest, or having it known to an enemy that they are embarrassed or in debt.
Or 3, if the exigencies of the state-should not require this, they may
accommodate their citizens with discounts or loans on interest, to the great
increase of the bank-stock or public revenue, as well as doing great favor to
individuals, and increasing the trade, manufactures and husbandry of the state;
this is the best and perhaps the only proper way of supporting a public
loan-office in a state. And 4, if the revenues should increase beyond the
expenditures of the state, the bank-stock will accumulate 'till the amount may
be very great, and a rich state, like a rich individual, derives many and great
advantages from wealth, and even from the reputation of wealth.

THESE advantages have been found by experience to be much greater, vastly
greater, than a sanguine speculator, upon a bare view of the nature of the
subject, would imagine. The force and energy of credit, perfectly well
established and permanent, is vast almost beyond conception, it is found by
experience to supply the place of cash, and much better than cash, in almost
all transactions, except in small expenses, where small change is necessary,
such as traveling expenses, market-money, etc. it is also found by experience,
that any sum of money in the stock of a bank, well regulated and managed, is
sufficient to support the credit of double or treble its amount in bank-bills,
whilst each of those bills is indisputably as good as cash, because the
possessor may at any time exchange them at the bank for solid hard money,
whenever, either through distrust of the bank, or his own convenience, he may
chose to do it; it follows then 5th, that a ^^od bank may increase the
circulating medium of a (...) double or treble the quantity of real cash,
without ^^^^easing the real money, or incurring the least danger of a
depreciation. And 6, a good bank will receive no money but good coin of
standard weight and fineness, and this will naturally and unavoidably keep the
current coin, cash, or medium good, or discover its defects; for if by any
means a debased or light coin, or public bills of depreciated value, should
gain a currency in any state (all which have often happened) the standard of
the bank will discover their defects, and an exchange or agio of such
depreciated money and that of the bank, will at once determine the true or real
value of such depreciated currency. 7, Another capital use and advantage of a
bank is, that it makes one of the best repositories for money, that is designed
to lie for any great length of time, on interest, as it affords a much better
security than can be found in the hands of any private man, and the half yearly
dividends are more than equal to any profit that can be derived from them, when
put to interest on mortgage, and the punctuality of payment better secured, and
the trouble of collection much less.

SUCH moneys as are here intended, are legacies or any other provision which is
made for young children, to be paid to them with the interest, at their full
age; any provision which a man may wish to make for himself or wife, against
old age; the funds of public institutions of religion or charity, such as
churches, hospitals, poor-houses, widows fund, sea-captains fund, etc. any
accumulation of cash, which a man may chose to prepare, in order to complete
some great payment, or accomplish some great purchase at a future day, such as
a house, a farm, etc. etc. And as bank-stock of a good bank can at any time be
sold for cash, the bank becomes the surest fund to produce the principal cash
reposited in it, when needed, and also the interest in the mean time, which may
be used if needed, when it is paid in, or may be added to the principal in the
bank. This will (...) to be a very important use of a bank, if we (...) to the
subject a little, especially to the case of orph^^^^ (...) infants, and see in
how many ways they are defrauded, or somehow deprived of the cash, which their
parents have carefully laid up for them, whilst their infancy prevents their
taking care of it themselves. 8. Another great use of a good bank is, that it
probably may very much promote economy and industry, as particularly in many
of the forementioned instances, viz. when a man is engaged in accumulating any
sum of money for any capital purpose, such as making provision for his infant
children, or himself in old age, or for a heavy purchase, or any other design,
which lies near his heart, he will be very industrious, and his economy will
be very good, 'till he has made up his heap, or got the necessary sum together,
and by that time he may perhaps have acquired such habits of industry and
economy, that he may not stop at the acquirement of the sum first proposed,
but may be induced to keep on and enlarge it beyond the original design. The
bank gives a sure operation to such a scheme, at least in point of safe
keeping, and punctual payment. Neighbors may see the example and its
advantages, and fall into it themselves, and so on 'till the instances of such
accumulations, and of course of such economy and industry, may become general
among monied men through the state, to the ^reat advantage and strength of the
state, the bank and themselves.

THESE are only a few of the benefits derived from a ^ank, which our short
experience will enable us clearly to understand, and which in point of fact or
reality a^e demonstrated by the same experience so clearly and fully, as to put
the matter beyond a doubt. I don't pretend to comprehend the great subject
enough to explain all the infinite uses and advantages which the long
experience of the greatest cities of Europe, have ^^^nd resulting from banks,
or the still greater advan^^ (...) which a further experience may discover
either to (...) to us, but these are certainly sufficient to in^^^^ (...)
friend to the integrity, wealth and honor, interest and genuine resputability
of his country, to think favorably of the subject, and to exert all proper
endeavors to participate of its uses.

BUT to pursue the matter further, I will consider another instance, suppose a
number of private citizens form a bank, each of whom puts in one or more
shares, and raise in that way a bank-stock of any proper sum, (say a million of
dollars) for a fund to support a large and extensive credit, for the purpose of
deposits, loans and discounts, and appoint proper officers to manage the same,
and obtain a public establishment by a charter, or other public act of the
government; this will be a private bank, because the stock of it is the money
of private men, and the officers or directors are appointed by private
stockholders, but it may in some sense be deemed public, both on account of its
extensive utility and public importance, and the public patronage and
establishment it receives from government.

THIS bank will have a nature and operation similar to the other, and will
afford the same kind of convenience to the citizens who chose to be concerned
in it, and in both cases the particular profits of the bank will go to the
stockholders, i. e. in the first instance to the public or state, which is the
great and sole stockholder of it, in the other case to the private
stockholders, whose contributions compose the stock.

OF this kind is the BANK of North America, and has a much greater capital
(about mine hundred thousand dollars) than any state bank can have in the
present condition of our finances, and its operation, effects and uses are much
more extensive, and its accommodations to the citizens, and even to the state,
much greater than a state bank could have; this may afford one answer to an
objection which some (...) raise against the present bank, viz. that it would
(...) ^^ter to discontinue the present bank, and erect a (...) public bank in
its stead; another answer may be, that no plan of this sort can be so sure of a
proper management under the state, as it would be under the direction of its
own proprietors. A bank is a sort of mercantile institution, or at least has
such a close connection with the whole mercantile interest, that it will more
naturally and properly fall under the direction of merchants, than that of any
other sort of men less acquainted with its nature and principles, and less
interested in its success. Another reason is, that a bank, whose stock is made
up by the subscription of private men, and managed by the stockholders, is the
surest antidote or preservative against tyranny in the government, that can be
named; its owners are the rich men of the state, who will never be concerned in
needless popular clamours or sedition against the government, but at the same
time have both influence and inducement eno' to be a check and restraint on
government, when it becomes oppressive, and really verges toward tyranny; the
rich have an interest in their poor fellow-citizens, and (as some men use their
wives) however tyrannical they may be themselves, they will not suffer any body
else to tyrannize over them. Trade and banks cannot flourish in a despotic
government, and of course, where they do exist, they will keep despotism, as
far as possible, out of the state. The stockholders are too numerous, too much
scattered, of sentiments and connections too different, to admit any danger of
becoming tyrants themselves. I never heard an instance of a state whose
government was corrupted by its bank.

BUT a state bank, if we could possibly suppose that it would be well managed
and grow rich, would tend immediately and directly to tyranny in the
government, because it would give the minister or ruler the command of a vast
sum of money; and I never knew a rich c^^^^^^ry at the command of a minister,
whose head was n^^ ^^^ned by it, and the insanity never fails to take a
di^^^^^on toward tyranny.

THE better way, I should think, would be to join both together, so as that all
the state revenues may be paid into the bank, and all public payments be made
by checks on the bank, and let the state become stockholders as far as they
please, and take sums out of the bank to the amount of their stock, whenever
it is necessary. This will answer every purpose of the state as well as a state
bank, will increase the stock of the present bank, and, of course, extend the
power and energy of it so much, that it will be able to supply the necessities
of the state with any loans of cash, which (without the most violent
convulsions) can ever be necessary; and, at the same time would be able to
afford most ample accommodations to private citizens or companies, to the vast
benefit and increase, not only of private fortunes, but of our trade,
manufactures and husbandry in general.

THE present funds of the BANK of North America, or the cash which supports it,
is first, the bank stock, or the money paid in by the stockholders, which is
about nine hundred thousand dollars: And second, the money deposited by men of
all descriptions, who may draw it out by checks on the bank whenever they
please. These sums are variable indeed, but always very considerable, as no
person ever draws checks beyond his deposit, very few ever draw quite up, and
very many people have large sums there, because their cash lies in the bank,
not only more secure, but is more convenient for payments there, than it could
be in the keeping of its owner.

SOME objections have been made to the present bank, which it may be proper to
consider. -- 1, such vast sums of money are hoarded up in the bank, that cash
is became scarce in town and country. I answer this is not true, in fact. 1.
Because, the bank circulates dai^^ more cash than it has in the bank, and of
course makes (...) plentier than it would be if we had no bank. A^ (...) A very
great part of the bank stock, on the strength of which the bank issues and
supports the circulation it gives out, belongs not ot this state or its
neighborhood, but to people who live in distant parts, to whom it must be
remitted if the bank should be broke up.

2. ANOTHER objection is, that monied men find a greater advantage in
purchasing bank stock than in letting their money on interest to people in the
country, as formerly was done, and of course, though the monied men in town may
gain by the bank, yet the country people suffer by it. -- This is a strange
sort of sentiment to appear in form of an objection; because, the bank inhances
the value, or increases the use of cash or any other property, so that the
purchaser is compelled to give more for it than before; therefore the bank is
hurtful. The same cause (i. e. the bank) raises the price of wheat and flour,
to the benefit of the country farmer indeed, but to the damage of the merchant
in town, who must pay more for them than before; if our country produce was all
consumed in the state, these mischiefs and benefits would balance one another;
because, what one citizen lost another would gain, but a very considerable part
of our produce is exported and paid for by foreigners; and therefore the higher
the price, the greater is the benefit to the state.

BUT this evil complained of does not originate in the bank, but in quite
different causes, many monied men who used to lend money on interest, have lost
their money by the war, by the enemy, or by the depreciation of money, or by
evasions of payment which have been introduced since, and, of course, have no
money to lend; and all that have any, have found the danger of letting it in
the old way so great, that few will venture into it again; and lastly, the
objection is hardly true in fact; because any man in the country who has credit
enough in town to get a good indorser, can have money out of the bank, as ^ell
as a merchant of the city.

3. ANOTHER objection to the bank is, that the discounts of the bank, make
money of such easy acquirement, that it induces merchants to overtrade their
stocks, and dissipating young fellows to spend money faster, than they would
do, if it was harder to get it. I believe this is all true, and not only arises
from, but is an actual proof of, the great convenience and public utility of
the bank: It Is just of the nature of all other objections against a good thing,
because, it may be made an ill use of, and will prove that a good farm is worse
than a bad one, because, it makes the farmer lazy, inasmuch as a little work on
good land, will raise his bread; good victuals and drink are wose than bad,
because gluttons and drunkards will eat and drink to excess; a loving wife is
worse than a cross one, because, her husband will be apt to lie in bed too long
with her; and riches are worse than poverty, because they introduce luxury,
etc. etc. But I cannot be made to believe that blessings ought to be driven out
of the state, because some people will make an ill use of them. I shall ever
believe that it is easier living in a place where a man can raise a sum of ready
cash on any emergency, without delay or difficulty, than where such a thing
cannot be obtained without great delay, trouble or perhaps selling property to
great disadvantage for it. Such a facility is an advantage which I think is not
to be despised, or easily parted with.

4. ANOTHER objection is, that all the benefits of the bank center in the city,
and near confines of it, but the country reaps no advantage from it. I answer,
suppose this was true (which cannot well be admitted) as it costs the country
nothing, why do they begrudge the advantages of it to the city. I dare say the
inhabitants of the city would all rejoice most heartily to see the country in
full enjoyment of every advantage and co^venience of life, that could be
derived from natu^^^ art; but it is very evident that the country deri^^^ (...)
great advantage from the bank, for the richer the ^^^chants are, and the
greater their trade, the better market they afford for the produce of the
country. This is a particular of capital consequence to the country, for their
husbandry is animated and supported by their market; indeed the husbandman and
the merchant ever mutually support and benefit each other: And it is scarcely
possible that either of them should be benefitted or hurt, but the other will
be affected by it.

5. ANOTHER objection is, that the great wealth of the bank will give it an
undue influence on the government. There is no doubt but wealth creates
influence; but it is that sort of influence which has ever been found safe to
the state. Our bank is a sort of mercantile institution, and the influence of
merchants is the safest of any that can affect a government. The parson lives
on the sins of the people, the doctor on their diseases, and the lawyer on
their disputes and quarrels (and I suppose they all think they ought to pray
for their daily bread) but the merchant lives on the wealth of the people. He
never wishes for a poor customer or a poor country; the richer his customers
are, the more they can purchase, and the better payments they can make to him.
The merchant has every inducement to seek, and promote the wealth of the state.

WEALTH rarely begets sedition; that baneful production generally springs from
poverty, vice, and disappointment. These are the characters which find an
interest in fishing in troubled waters. We have perhaps no instance of a nation
ruined by its merchants. I never heard of a state distressed by its bank, but
instances are plenty enough of states served and saved by their bank. -- On the
whole I think it absurd to banish wealth from a state for fear it should gain
too much influence in government, or generate faction in the state; but of all
kinds of wealth, a bank would be the least likely (...) ^roduce these effects,
because the stockholders of the (...) are made up of all parties, and are as
likely to balance each others influence there, as in any other part of the
state. It would, in my opinion, be much more politic, to make a levelling act,
to prevent the great wealth of individuals, who are much more likely to become
dangerous to the state than any aggregate bodies of men, however wealthy they
may be.

6. ANOTHER objection is, that the general benefits of a bank depend on the
integrity of the directors, who may, in many ways, by a corrupt or partial
management destroy these uses or make the whole stock of the bank subservient
to the interests of a few favorites, and of course, the great body of the
people must be excluded from the advantages of it. I answer, this is an
objection that may be made with equal force against every institution on earth,
none of which are so good and beneficial, but their uses may be lessened or
destroyed by corrupt management; and when our directors are called upon to
vindicate themselves against any such charge, it will be time enough to think
of an answer: In the mean time the present internal strength and good condition
of our bank, demonstrate that the management of the directors has been
conducted with great prudence.

I HERE beg leave to subjoin a short history of the bank of North America, with
an account of some great difficulties it has had to struggle with from its
first commencement (four years ago) down to this time, and to make some remarks
on its present state.

1. I SHALL attempt to give a short history of our bank. It being observed that
the finances of the wisest and best regulated states of Europe, have for a long
time been negociated through their banks, or at least been so closely connected
with them as to derive the most capital benefits and assistances from them. Mr.
Morris, in 1781, when our finances were, in a (...) almost desperate; I say, Mr.
Morris being then (...) ^cier-General, adopted the scheme of forming a public
bank in America, which was proposed to and approved by Congress, to which a
thousand shares of 400 dollars each, were soon subscribed, and application was
made to Congress for a charter of incorporation, which was granted by their
public ordinance of December 31, 1781. It appears by the preamble of said
ordinance, that Congress approved and adopted the scheme from a conviction of
the support which the finances of the United States would receive from a
national bank, and that the exigencies of the United States made it
indispensably necessary that such a bank should be incorporated.

THOUGH this act of incorporation passed in Congress 31st December, 1781, yet
it was no new or sudden thought; for the Financier-General had laid the plan of
a national bank before them as early as May 17 preceding, and on the 26th day
of the same month Congress approved the same, and engaged to grant an act of
incorporation, as soon as the subscription should be full; nor was the thing
new to any of the ^^ates, for the scheme of the bank, and the resolution of
Congress of 26th of May, were published in all the states, and subscriptions
were publicly opened in them all.

IN the resolution last mentioned, Congress recommended to all the states to
make all necessary laws for support of the BANK, and in particular to make it
felony to counterfeit the bank notes, seal of the bank, etc. etc.

ALL the states recognized the act of Congress for incorporating the bank, many
of them most explicitly, the rest implicitly, as none of them objected to it,
but all made use of the bank and participated of the be^^^^^^ of it, as far as
their opportunity and conveni^^^^ prompted them.

THE state of Pennsylvania recognized not only the said recommendations, by
their act of 18 th March, 1782, against counterfeiting bank bills, etc. but by
another act of April 1, 1782, counting upon the act of Congress, incorporating
the bank, did grant an act of incorporation to the bank, similar to, and in the
same words of, that of Congress, enacting THAT THOSE WHO ARE AND THOSE WHO
SHALL BECOME SUBSCRIBERS TO THE SAID BANK, BE, AND FOREVER HEREAFTER SHALL BE,
A CORPORATION AND BODY POLITIC, BY THE NAME AND STYLE OF THE PRESIDENT,
DIRECTORS AND COMPANY OF THE BANK OF NORTH AMERICA.

BY these public acts, the subscribers to the bank consider themselves and
their property in the bank forever, under the most solemn and sacred sanction
and protection of the law, and guarantied in the most effectual manner
conceivable by the public faith, pledged to them both by Congress and the
state; for it is not possible that the public faith can be plighted more
solemnly and more effectually by any supreme or subordinate authority, than by
a formal public act.

UNDER this sacred sanction of the law, and fully confiding in the honor,
justice, and even contract of our Legislature, the Directors, in January, 1784,
resolving to make their institution as extensive and useful as possible, opened
their books for new subscriptions. Under the inducement and encouragement of
these firm establishments, very many persons both citizens and foreigners
became subscribers, and placed their money in our bank, the amount of the new
subscriptions, after the charter of this state was obtained, was above half a
million of dollars. Old men placed the money designed for the support of their
old age in the bank; -- the money of widows and orphans likewise was lodged
there, as well as the moneys of the merchants, (...) every other description of
men.

THE amount of the old and new subscriptions arose up to the vast sum of nine
hundred thousand dollars, which is the present amount of the stock of the bank,
a vast sum indeed for the new beginnings of America, though small when compared
with the immense stock of some European banks -- With the deposits and this
great capital stock (which was permanent and not liable to be withdrawn by the
proprietors as the deposited moneys were) with the deposits and the permanent
stock, I say the bank was in condition with great safety to make such extensive
negociations as could afford very capital accommodations, both to the public
and to private citizens, whenever their occasions and exigences made the
assistance of the bank necessary to them; and so great was its success, and so
amazing were its effects, that it appears by the bank books, that its cash
account in one year, viz. from January 1, 1784, to January 1, 1785 (the third
year of its operation) amounted to the almost incredible sum of 59,570,000
mexican dollars; and though the attacks upon the bank, and many other
difficulties which much diminished its negociations in the succeeding year,
were so great as seemed almost fatal; yet such was its great internal strength,
and the energy of its very nature, that its transactions from January 1, 1785,
to January 1, 1786, amounted to about 37,000,000 dollars.

2. I NOW proceed to give some account of the difficulties which the bank has
had to struggle with, from its first beginning down to this time. 1. The first
difficulties arose from the novelty of the thing. The directors were engaged in
a bu^^ness in which they had no experience (nothing of the kind having ever
before been practiced in America) and though they acted with the greatest
consideration, care and caution possible, yet all this notwithstanding, it is
hardly supposable but some errors in management must have been committed. --
These (if any (...) happened) by experience will be discovered, and (...)
^^^dence may be corrected and avoided in future time, but they form no
conclusion against the principles of the bank or its natural utility. The same
novelty of the thing prevented a general confidence in the bank at first among
the people. -- 'Twas further unlucky, that the bank was first opened at a time
when the people had so often been disappointed and deceived in every species of
public propositions and engagements relative to money, that they knew not who
they could trust; they hesitated least they should be taken in by the bank, as
they had often been, by very numerous proposals to which their confidence had
been courted. But the fidelity of the Directors, and the perfect punctuality of
all payments at the bank, soon got the better of this diffidence, and the bank
gained an almost universal credit and confidence among the people, even among
its professed and bitterest enemies.

2. ANOTHER difficulty with the bank has ever been, that the balance of foreign
trade has been against America, ever since the bank was first established. This
has occasioned such great exportations of cash as render it scarce, and of
course embarrasses all cash business. This must deeply affect the bank, as it
is obvious at first fight to every one.

3. ANOTHER sort of difficulties arose from numerous enemies, who, from
different motives, embarrassed the operation of the bank much, they begun with
crying up the public utility of the institution and its great profits to the
stockholders, and thought that one set of men ought not to monopolize the
reputation and opportunity of doing so much good, and engrossing such great
profits to themselves, and withal, threw out hints, importing that the
Directors were haughty, partial, and not obliging enough, etc. to remedy all
which, in 1784, they set on foot a scheme for a new bank, by the name of the
Bank of Pennsylvania, got large subscriptions for a fund to begin with, and
petitioned the ^^sembly of this state for a charter, etc. not a wor^ (...)
heard all this time against the bank, as an institution hurtful to the states
or individuals, but its mischiefs were made to grow out of its great utility,
and salutary effects.

THE directors, with much trouble, put a stop to this plan, by strongly urging
the fatal consequences arising from two capital banks operating in one city,
which might, perhaps, act in opposition to each other, and of course, destroy
each other. They finally persuaded the subscribers to the new bank, to
relinquish their scheme, and join the old bank, and add their subscriptions to
it, which they at last agreed to, and so that difficulty was got over.

BUT the bank did not rest long, for soon after this last mentioned difficulty
subsided, there arose a pretty numerous party in the state who adopted the
scheme of paper money to be issued by our General Assembly. All the difficulty
was to make it pass equal to hard money, and they had little hopes of this,
unless the bank would give it a currency, which every body see plain enough
that the Directors could not do. The bank therefore and the scheme for paper
money, were considered as inconsistent with each other, and one or the other,
of course, must fall. The party for paper money determined at once, that the
bank must be sacrificed and united with all its other enemies, to decry it as
an institution injurious to the state, and incompatible with the public safety.
They raised (and declaimed upon) many objections to it, the most material of
which (that I heard of) I have considered already in the foregoing pages of
this essay. The matter was carried so far, that an act of the legislature of
this state was obtained, and passed September 13, 1785, repealing the act of
April 1, 1782, which granted the state charter to the bank, and also the act of
March 18, 1782, which ^ade it felony to counterfeit the bank bills, etc. and
(...) stands the matter at present.

3. I NOW proceed to make some remarks on the present state of the bank.

1. NOTWITHSTANDING all the difficulties above mentioned, the bank is now in
good condition; its internal strength is not weakened; its funds are not
diminished, though its energy and extent of operation has been indeed somewhat
lessened, as was observed before.

THE present funds or wealth of the bank, consists in, 1. the bank stock, about
900,000 Mexican dollars. 2. In the discounted bills now in the bank and payable
to it. 3. The cash deposited in the bank for safe keeping, and which the owners
may draw out whenever they please. 4. The furniture and utensils of the bank,
and any small profits which may have lain over or arisen since the last
dividend.

THE debts of the bank to be paid out of their stock are, 1. All the bank bills
now in circulation. 2. All the bank credits or balances due to such persons as
have deposits in the bank; N. B. When both these are deducted from the stock,
they leave a balance of about 900,000 dollars in favor of the bank.

3. THE legal establishment of this bank is derived from the charter of
Congress, of December 31, 1781; from the charter of the state of
Massachusetts Bay, of March 9, 1782; from the charter of Delaware state of Feb.
2, 1786; from the recognizance of the charter of Congress, publicly made by the
state of Pennsylvania, in their act of March 18, 1782, and their charter of
incorporation of the bank, by their act of April 1, 1782: But it is to be
observed that these (...) last mentioned acts of the state of Pennsylvania,
were repealed by their act of September 13, 1785. This repeal of the said two
acts of the legislature of ^^^^sylvania, has given rise to several very import^
(...) ^tions.

Question 1. WHETHER Congress has a right to establish a national bank, so as
to make it such a legal institution as the laws of the states of the union are
obliged to acknowledge or recognize?

1. I ANSWER, this objection is grounded principly on the second article of the
confederation, viz. "Each state retains its sovereignty, freedom and
independence; and every power, jurisdiction and right, which is not expressly
delegated to the United States in Congress assembled." But the answer is easy,
for, 1. A power of incorporating a national bank never did exist in any of the
states. They might erect banks, or any other corporation, and call them by what
name they pleased, but their authority, like that of all their other laws, must
be limited by the bounds of the state, and could not extend beyound them. Nor,

2. DOES this act of Congress limit the power of any of the states, they still
retain and may exercise every power, jurisdiction and right of incorporating
banks, as fully as ever they had them: For, 3. the said second article of
confederation, does not restrain Congress from having or exercising any
sovereignty, power, jurisdiction or right, whatever; it only restrains them
from exercising it in such manner as to deprive the states of it.
Notwithstanding all the sovereignty and power of Congress, they shall ever be
so limited, that each state shall retain its own sovereignty, power, etc.
concurrent jurisdictions often exist together without the least restraint of
each other.

2. THE act of Congress incorporating the bank, is an act of finance, they
considered it most expressly as a means, a very important means of finance,
which is a branch of power that most undoubtedly falls within their authority
or jurisdiction. They are not expressly ^mpowered, indeed, to appoint a
Financier, give him ^^^^ructions, receive his plans, or form a bank. But, as
all those were necessary means of promoting the general interest, the liberties
and general welfare of the states, which are the grand and most acknowledged
objects of the confederation, they are doubtless comprehended within its powers.

3. THE confederation (article 9) empowers Congress to borrow money on the
credit of the states, and this certainly implies a power to find or procure
somebody who will lend it to them, and this they effected to a great degree by
incorporating the bank, which supplied them to a very large amount -- They owed
the bank, at one time 400,000 Mexican dollars, for money lent them by the bank,
and all the moneys lent at different times to Congress, and to the different
departments under their direction, amounted to above two million of Mexican
dollars; and these loans were of such capital and essential service in that
most deranged and weak state of the public finances, that (in the opinion of
those best acquainted with the matter) the war could not have been continued
without them.

THE bank also lent at different times to this state for its defense and other
public purposes, above 130000 dollars, which certainly proves that the bank was
very convenient to the public, and very necessary to the general welfare and
general interest of it, and therefore must be comprehended in the powers
granted to Congress, to manage the general interest, and secure the liberties,
defense and general welfare of the states.

4. THE independence, defense, and almost the very existence, of our present
political establishments, depend (...) the bank, in case of an invasion of an
enemy, for it is v^ry certain that in such case, due and necessary op^^sition
and defense could not be made by a depreciatin^ currency; nor do I think it
would be possible for (...) Congress or states to borrow elsewhere, moneys
(...) ^cient, and in season, for our defense, or to (...) bills enough for that
purpose, which would not depreciate. -- I apprehend I shall not be called on
for any proof of this; I therefore go on to infer, that Congress, who are
expressly empowered to secure the defense, liberties, welfare and general
interests of the states, are, of course, empowered to institute a bank, which
is so apparently and essentially necessary to all these great purposes -- It
follows then, that those who oppose the bank, oppose the essential means of our
defense, and, of course, lay us open to destruction, the first time any enemy
shall invade our country.

5. IF we should admit that there was a defect in the powers of Congress to
incorporate the bank, yet that defect is amply supplied by the subsequent
recognizance of the states, their acquiescence in the institution, and
participation of the benefits of it for a course of years; for a subsequent
consent of the principal, is as good as a previous order, to every purpose of
establishment or legitimation of any act of a substitute.

ON the whole then, I conclude that the bank of North America, by the ordinance
of Congress for its incorporation, is a well established and legal institution,
and as such ought to be considered and recognized by all the states, both in
their laws and all judicial proceedings, as far as the same may affect the said
bank.

QUESTION II. What is the weaning, energy and operation of the act of this
state of March 18, 1782, making it felony to counterfeit the seal or bills of
the bank? I answer,

1. IT carries in it the strongest recognizance or ac^^owledgment of the legal
establishment of the bank, and, of course, the authority and lawful force of
the ^^dinance of Congress for its incorporation, on which (...) the legality of
the bank then depended; for it is (...) it is ridiculous, it is infamous to
suppose that the legislature of this state would by a most solemn act, make it
felony, i. e. death, to counterfeit the seal and bills of any number of men,
who had no legal right to make a seal, issue bills, or assume to themselves any
other powers, liberties or privileges of a corporate body.

2. THAT act implies the most solemn consent of this state to the aforesaid
ordinance of Congress, and carries in it further, the nature and energy of a
solemn stipulation and compact of this state with Congress, i. e. with all the
states, to support that public measure of the union, with all the weight and
authority which this state could give to it, in all the particulars or clauses
mentioned or enacted in the said law. The public and vigorous support of the
particular states, gives great force to an act of Congress, though it might be
considered as fully legal without it, gives confidence in the public measures,
and is a good reason and strong inducement to engage the public councils of the
particular states, as well as individuals, strongly to exert themselves and
risk their fortunes therein. Therefore,

3. THAT act cannot, of right, be repealed by this state, without consent of
Congress, i. e. of the other states of the union. It is a part of that support
of a public measure of the union, on which the other states have, and ought to
have, dependence and confidence. Mutual confidence is the end of the union, as
that alone can produce defense and other exertions for the public welfare; all
the states have therefore an interest in that support, a very great interest
indeed, and cannot be deprived of it, without violating the union -- it is a part
of that band of union, which holds the states together; to take it (...) way
therefore, is to weak^n the union, and, of co^^^^ to lessen its power of
operation, and the benefi^^ ^^sulting from it. Indeed, if this state can repeal
the sa^^ act, without consent of the other states, I do n^^ (...) why they may
not go on to repeal all the acts the (...) ever made in support of the union,
and all (...) ^ers of it, even up to that act of theirs which consented to, and
adopted the confederation itself.

QUESTION III. What is the meaning, energy and effect of the act of this state
of April 1, 1782, incorporating the bank? I answer, 1. It carries in it the
most public and full acquiescence and satisfaction of our legislature in the
act of Congress for incorporating the bank; because it counts upon that act,
without the least censure, but with most apparent approbation of it.

2. IT imports their approbation, because they show a readiness to give it all
the support which the authority of this state could give, and add to its
establishment the further sanction of a charter of this state, conceived in the
very words of Congress.

3. THOUGH, as I take it, this state charter did not add any thing to the
legality of the bank's establishment under the charter of Congress, yet it
served to obviate and satisfy the prejudices of many people, who had formed an
opinion, that it would be safer to trust their property in the bank, with a
state charter, than without one, and on that account withheld their
subscriptions till the state charter was made. I never heard that any body, at
that time, disputed or called in question the legal authority of Congress to
give a charter to the bank; but the public faith, plighted by Congress,
relating to money, had been at that time so often and recently violated, that
very little confidence was placed, by many people, in their public acts or
resolutions of any sort, and therefore thought themselves more secure under a
state charter, than they should be under a charter of Congress, without such
^^^^ort: And this I take to be the true reason why ^he president and directors
of the bank applied to our ^^^^^bly for a state charter, which manifestly
removed (...) prejudices and obstacles which operated against (...), as it was
plain that subscriptions to it were offered faster, and bank stock was more
coveted after the state charter was obtained than before; therefore, I think it
very evident that,

4. THIS act operated by way of strong inducement and encouragement to very
many citizens, as well as strangers, to subscribe to the bank, and trust their
property in it; and that the act was purposely made with intention that it
might have this operation and effect, and therefore ought to secure the
proprietors from any disappointment, as far as the whole force of the act can
do it; for certainly it cannot be justifiable in any state to hold out
encouragement to the people, to draw them into a snare, and then leave them in
the lurch.

5. WHATEVER might be the effect of this act on the bank, by way of aiding the
legality of its establishment, or giving it support as a continental
institution, there is no doubt but it had this one perfect effect, viz. It
incorporated the subscribers to the bank into a legal company, and instituted a
complete, established, and legal bank of Pennsylvania, though by the name of
the president, directors and company of the bank of North America, for any
state may give what name or title they please to their corporations, though
they cannot extend their authority or privileges beyond their own jurisdiction.
This act therefore undoubtedly brought the bank under the cognizance of the
laws of Pennsylvania, and entitled the company, and every proprietor of it, to
the full protection of these laws. Whither this put them into any better
condition than th^^ were before, made their establishment any more lega^ or
increased their right to the protection of the law (...) Pennsylvania, or not,
may be a question; but it (...) be no question, that very many people were of
this ^pinion, and governed their conduct by it. It Is ^ther certain that this
state charter may event (...) prove of most capital service to the stockholder
(...) it is possible that Congress may repeal their (...) for incorporating the
bank, or by some other act of sovereignty, may vacate its charter (for strange
things happen sometimes) or the union of the thirteen states, may, by some
means or other, be dissolved (which I think would soon happen, if each state
should withdraw its supports) and by that means the authority of all their acts
might cease, and of course their charter of the bank might fall with the rest.
Yet, I say (all these mishaps, notwithstanding) tinder the charter of
Pennsylvania, the bank would continue to be a legal state establishment, and
might go on with its negociations, and in short pursue the whole business,
which the great interests of the concern might make necessary.

QUESTION 4. Can the act of 18th March, 1782, (making it felony to counterfeit
bank bills, etc.) and that of April 1, 1782 (incorporating the bank) I say, can
these acts of right be repealed by our legislature, without consent of the
parties interested -- I give my answer in the negative, and for this my opinion
I beg the reader's candid attention to the following reasons, which appear to
me to deserve great consideration, even by those who may not think them of
sufficient force to justify my conclusion.

1. THESE acts vest a right, privilege and interest, i. e. a valuable property
in all the stockholders of the bank, and therefore cannot, of right, be repealed
by any act of the legislature, without the consent of the stockholders. These
acts are of the nature of bargains or contracts between the legislature and the
stockholders, in which the sti^ulations were, that in consideration that the
stock^^^ders had, or should, put their money into the bank, ^^e legislature
would give such support and legal esta^^ishment to the bank, as should enable
them to make (...) enjoy all the advantages and profits which should (...) from
it, under the firm protection of the law; (...) encouragement, the stockholders
held or placed their fortunes in the bank, and the legislature passed the said
acts in support of it, and so the bargain was finished. I take it that, when
the act of the legislature vests in, or grants to, any individual or company of
men, on valuable consideration (i. e. for which the grantee pays his money) any
valuable right, privilege, interest or property, the grantees instantly become
legally seized of such right, which thereby becomes as much guarantied or
warranted to them by the law of the land, as is any other property whatever,
which they may or can possess, and therefore they cannot be divested or deprived
of it by any act of the legislature, any more than of their lands, cattle,
furniture or any other estate, of which they are lawful owners, and which they
hold under the full protection of the law.

THE sort of acts of the legislature, which I here mean (that vest a right or
interest in any individual or company of men) are such as these, viz. An act
granting a commission of sewers to owners of meadows, who expend much money in
banking and ditching them, to make them useful to the public and their owners.
-- An act granting toll to persons who shall build a bridge, for which they
contribute their money. -- An act granting wild lands to people who will
cultivate and improve them, and who expend their money for that purpose. Any
acts for supporting and incorporating the subscribers of a bank, in
consideration of large sums of money subscribed, or contributed to it, and in
prospects of gr^^^ be^efits resulting from it, both to the public and (...) the
stockholders. -- An act for incorporating churches, universities, hospitals,
schools, etc. in consideration of money paid, or to be paid by the
contributors, etc. ^c.

I CONCEIVE that all acts of this kind, (...) rights, privileges or interests
in the grantees (wh^ (...) by gain such protection of the laws in the (...) of
them) that they cannot be divested or depri^ (...) act of repeal of the charters
or acts which ^ive (...) or by any other act of the legislature whatever (...)

2. THE 2d great reason of this is, that the declaration of rights (which is
part of the constitution of this state) gives every citizen a right to be
protected in the enjoyment of his property -- It knows but two ways by which
the subject can be divested of his lawful property. 1. By crime and forfeiture,
and 2. By his own contract or consent; if his property is challenged or
demanded of him, in either of these ways, or any other way, let the controversy
be of what nature soever, respecting property, he is entitled to a fair trial
by jury. (See articles 8.9 and 11) This can be had no where but in a judicial
court. The General Assembly are not such a court -- they have the legislative,
but not the executive or judicial power of the state; they can neither impannel
a jury, or make a judicial decision without one, much less can they deprive any
individual or company of subjects of any of their legal rights, interests,
property or privileges, without any trial, summons or examination at all, by
any act or repeal of acts whatever, which they can make.

3. I TAKE it, that the declaration of rights is of superior authority to any
act which the General Assembly can make, and will control, and even render
totally null and void any act of the assembly which infringes it, and will, and
ought to be considered so by the judges of our court whenever the same may be
pleaded before them: For, when two contradictory laws are pleaded before a
court, it is impossible but the one or the other must be judged void; and if one
of these laws appears to be grounded on a superior authority to that of the
other, there can be no doubt but the superior authority must control the
lesser.

I CONSIDER the assembly as the mere creatures of their constituents, and
acting merely by a substituted power; and the declaration of rights, I consider
as the (...) instructions which they receive from their con^ (...), by which
they are bound to regulate their conduct, and by which their power and
authority is altogether limited. This doctrine ought to be brought into full
view, and to be recognized by every subject, in its whole importance and
energy, whenever we see our assembly infringing the declaration of rights, in
so capital and alarming an instance, as to make any act whatever, which will in
its operation, unavoidably and eventually deprive any subject, or number of
subjects, of any right, interest or property, without trial by jury.

THE very persons whose wishes or prejudices may be gratified by such acts of
the legislature ought to tremble at their consequences, for the two edged
sword, which has one edge turned against our enemy, has another which may be
turned against ourselves, i. e. it can cut both sides alike, and is equally
qualified to wound both parties, whenever it may be applied to them.

CHARTERS (or rights of individuals or companies, secured by an act of the
state) have ever been considered as a kind of sacred things, not to be vacated
by a bare holding up a few hands, and soiling a page of paper, without any
further previous or subsequent forms or ceremonies; but in all wise states,
have ever been considered as securities of such capital consequence, that any
attempts to destroy them have ever excited a general alarm, and have rarely
happened but in times of great corruption of government and dangerous
encroachments of arbitrary power. -- I think it, on the whole, very manifest,
that a legislature, which for valuable consideration paid, has by public act
sold and granted certain valuable rights, privileges or interest^ (...) any
individual or company of men; I say, such legislature have no more right by
repeal of their act (...) ^cate the title and destroy the estate of such
grantees (...) to release themselves, than any private contractor ha^ to
release himself and refuse to execute his own (...) ^tract, whenever he grows
sick of his bargain* (...) I think the sacred force of contracts binds stronger
in an act of state, than in the act of an individual, because the whole
government is injured and weakened by a violation of the public faith, but the
vacillation of a private man, can produce no more than private damages; but, as
public faith is an old threadbare topic of argument, and is as much out of
fashion as going to church or reading the bible, and has been dined in the ears
of some folks till, like the doctrine of repentance to sinners, it rather
nauseates than convicts, I will forbear pressing it further at this time, as I
wish not to disgust but to persuade.

4. THE ordinance of Congress for granting the Charter of the bank, is a
measure of the union, solemnly recognized by this state (in the two repealed
acts) in which all the states are interested, and is therefore of such high
authority as controuls our states to such a degree, that any attempts of this
state (by an act of repeal, or any other act) to withdraw their support, and
thereby weaken and embarrass such measure of the union, must be void, ipso
facto, in itself; for, I take it, that every act of Congress appointing or
directing any measure of the union, when recognized by the states, either by
their overt act of approbation, or by long acquiescence and practice, is of
superior authority to any act of any of the states, nor does it remain in the
power of any particular state to withdraw their support from it, or to release
and discharge themselves from their obligations to it, or make any act which
shall, in its operation, lessen the energy and effect of it. But I have touched
on this before, and so need not enlarge on it further in this place.

5. THE act of repeal (September 13th last) deprives a great number of our
citizens and strangers of their rights, privileges and property to a vast
amount, and the utter ruin of many families -- rights, privileges and property
which were guarantied and secured to them forever by the most solemn act of our
legislature, and of course by the whole force and power of the law; and that
too by an act of mere sovereignty, without so much as alleging against them
any crime by which they have forfeited, or contract by which they have
alienated them, and without any summons, or trial, or judgment of court, or
verdict of jury. This is so directly in the very face of our declaration of
rights, as manifestly infringes it, and of course renders the act void. -- This
is indeed rather an epitome of what I said before than a new argument, but the
immensity of the loss or damage occasioned by the said act of repeal, may,
perhaps, engage the reader's attention, and set the subject in a stronger light
of importance, than it might appear in, were the consequences less fatal and
ruinous both to the union in general, to each of the states and all the
individuals who are concerned in the bank.

BUT admitting that the act of 13th September last, for repealing the said acts
of March 18, 1782, and of April 1, 1782, is to all intents and purposes valid
in law, and of course that the bank is thereby deprived of all the support and
legal establishment which it once received from the said laws, when they were
in force, there arises another qustion, viz.

QUESTION 5. In what condition does the said act of repeal leave the bank? I
answer, 1. In point of its leg^^ity, the said act of repeal leaves the bank
just where (...) said repealed acts found it when they were first m^ (...) the
repeal takes away no more than the acts them (...) gave, and of course if the
bank was a legal estab^^^hment before these acts were made, it continues (...)
after the repeal of them: Therefore, 2. The pre^^^^^t, directors and company of
the bank remain a l^ (...) ^porate body, under the charter of Congress, (...)
do all acts as such in the same manner as be^ (...) said repealed acts of this
state were made.

UPON the whole matter, I think it (...) the supreme authority of all states
under all forms of government, whether monarchical, oligarchal or democratical
(a theocrary only excepted) is lodged in the body of the people; 1. Because the
rights to be secured by, and which are the sole end of all civil government,
are vested in them; and 2. Because the great force, or strength, which must
support all civil governments is lodged in them, and of course all pacta
conventa or capital constitutions established by them, do bind and control all
authorities whatever, which act under them, and of course it appears, that the
legislature of this state have not an original but a derived authority, which
of course is not absolute but limited; it is limited 1, by the laws of God, 2,
by the constitution of this state, and 3, by the confederation or union of the
thirteen states, and of course by every legal act of Congress under that union,
for the general welfare of the states; therefore, if our legislature should
make an act to repeal the ten commandments, or to infringe the constitution, or
to destroy or weaken the union, or any legal measures of Congress, it would of
course, be ipso facto void; further, I take it, that our General Assembly are
limited and tied down to the sort or kind of authority which is given to them;
all acts proper for a legislative body, they are empowered to do, subject to
the aforesaid limitations, but they cannot assume to themselves, or exercise
the judicial or executive powers of government; these powers are totally out of
their commission or jurisdiction, and they can no more intrude on, or exercise
the authority of these departments, than a sheriff can obtrude himself on the
judge's seat, or a chief justice serve a writ; therefore, it follows that if
the legislature should pass an act which, by its operation, takes away the
life, liberty or lawful rights, privileges or property of any subject, i. e.
such as the subject holds under the protection and sanction of the law, it must
be void; for if any thing of this sort is to (...) done in the state, or if any
controversy or question (...) ^t is to be decided, the constitution has
ordained a (...) method, a quite different court or authority, in and by which
it must be done. It is no objection to this, to say, that much and many
important things must be left to necessity and the discretion of the assembly,
for such necessity must exist before it can operate or justify any act grounded
on it, and because much is left to the discretion of the assembly, it does not
follow, that they have a right to throw by all descretion and act without any.

BUT waiving all questions of law, I beg to consider the bank one moment in the
light of prudence* supposing the bank and all its operations could be broke up
and entirely stoped on March 1 next, what would be the consequence? 1. The
great and usual circulation of cash (through which 37,000,000 dollars were
negociated last year) would at once be stopped. 2. All discounted bills must
immediately be paid or sued, which would ruin very many, I think I may say,
scores of substantial families; and their failures would occasion, 3. A great
loss to the bank, and of course to the stockholders. And 4. The stockholders
must lie out of their money till the bank accounts could be settled, which
would probably be some years. 5. All the moneys belonging to subscribers out of
the state, must be carried out of it, as fast as they could be collected; and
6. A most fatal wound would be given to our credit, as well as to all our
trade, and every kind of business which depends on the circulation of cash. --
Who but an enemy would wish for such calamities, or promote the means of them?

I will conclude my essay on this very important and interesting subject, with
only observing, that I have stated the facts with all care, and the best
information, and I believe, with exactness and truth; should I have erred, I am
ready to submit to better information; the sentiments and reasonings are open
and obvious to every one, and, I wish, may be received and considered in the
^^^e light of importance in which they appear to (...). I have no interest in
the subject distinct from that of my fellow citizens, and as I would not be
willing to be misled myself, so neither do I wish to lead them into error.
Magna est veritas and praevalebit.

Philadelphia, February 10, 1786.
FINIS.

